Mr. Rojas Lopez (Costa Rica)(interpretati0n from Spanish): My country is taking part in this ministerial level
meeting of the Security Council on the situation in Africa
with particular interest and motivation. Sweden's acclaimed
leadership and its traditional solidarity with the causes of
the developing world have encouraged and spurred on the
members of this Council to take a broad and constructive
position in support of Africa. Likewise, our Secretary-
General's firm commitment to this question has been a
constant source of inspiration for a creative and determined
approach to ways and means of lending international
support to Africa.

In the year of work that has elapsed, the Security
Council and the international community have advanced
and developed a substantial common core of ideas in their
View of the situation in Africa. First of all, we would note
that our common approach is based on a comprehensive,
concerted and committed consideration of the question.
Secondly, we would highlight the happy fact that Africa's
regional leadership in this regard is proving itself
indispensable and decisive.

With respect to the comprehensive nature of the
approach, the international community has understood that
the problems in Africa are not isolated or unconnected.
That has led us to see that in Africa the question of peace
and security transcends traditional concepts and embraces
a wide range of economic and social questions - above
all, those relating to the observance of human rights. Any
interpretation of the situation in Africa that tries to ignore
or fragment this reality is simply unsound and baseless.

With respect to the importance of the concerted
approach, no one can deny that dialogue must be the
basic two-way instrument in solving Africa's problems.
The sad lessons of daily life have taught us that violence
has not resolved the disputes in Africa. No one could
reasonably assert that resort to force has solved any of the
serious problems besetting the peoples of the continent.

Quite the opposite, it is wars that have aggravated
and spotlighted in all its starkness the human tragedy that
millions of men and women of the region have had to
face and survive. However, it has been and remains the
Africans themselves who have demonstrated, with their
own experience and commitment, that cooperation is a
valid and legitimate instrument for solving problems and
reconciling conflicting positions in shared ideals and
objectives. There are myriad examples in that intractable
region. Allow me to say that we in Costa Rica are
learning from those Africans who have believed that it is
possible, through concerted action, to solve the most
pressing problems of developing societies.

In addition, this shared vision of the issues means
that the international community cannot seek to impose
outside solutions on African countries that are alien to
their national and regional lives and experience. It is
African men and women who, through their structures,
must define and establish their own models for securing
peace, development and respect for freedoms and rights.

On this basis, my country believes that it is essential
to stress the need for cooperating countries and the
international financial institutions to take new approaches
in their relations with Africa. I do not need to dwell on
the reasons why a new Vision is needed for African
countries that would take into account their exceptional
situation and their own priorities and would seek to
promote the building of genuine and sustainable peace.

 

In emphasizing this great future of understanding
through cooperation, Costa Rica notes its concern about the
abuse of the argument of self-defence to justify military
actions against other African States. In this respect, Costa
Rica agrees with the criteria by which, as expressed in
other cases by the International Court of Justice, self-
defence is a legitimate right only when military action is
taken by one State, either directly or through armed groups
with substantial support from that State, against another.
The conceptual heritage that the Security Council has
developed this year also embraces the fundamental element
of commitment. In connection with Africa, we all
understand that the time for bombastic rhetoric is over and
that what is needed is genuine commitment, allowing the
development and implementation of specific proposals,
mechanisms for action defined with the firm aim of
responding to the great challenge of peace, development
and coexistence with respect for fundamental guarantees.

In these months of tremendous political and technical
work, the Security Council and the Secretariat have been
able to identify specific responses to some of the important
and pressing questions that we asked together on 25
September 1997. At this stage, we can affirm that our
Organization possesses sufficient political will and
commitment to tackle the challenge of supporting Africa.
We know that this in itself is not enough and that we must
now get down to work. This is our great challenge and the
primary objective in the short and medium terms.

In this sense, Costa Rica wishes to stress the fact that
the traditional concept prevailing in this Organization of the
nature and character of peacekeeping missions, seen from
the purely military point of view, has been stretched and
expanded into a wider-reaching concept that includes
political and humanitarian components. All of this should
be seen from the standpoint that peace and security can be
achieved, maintained, built upon and strengthened only
through integrated, all-encompassing endeavours that go
beyond the monitoring of cease-fires and include other
elements vital to the process of transition from conflict to
peace and democracy.

Having established the parametres for the role of the
international community Vis-a-Vis Africa, it is also
necessary to establish that, in this respect, regional
leadership is the key political factor in the conduct of this
great joint undertaking.

The magnitude of the problems to be resolved and the
challenges to be faced requires African leaders to assume
a creative, responsible and unbiased attitude. This is
particularly true for the questions of importance to the
Africans themselves: ensuring respect for all human
rights, in particular for fundamental guarantees; the
promotion of pluralistic and representative democracy; the
rule of law; the existence of autonomous and efficient
judicial institutions; the primacy of civilian power based
on free and fair elections; demilitarization and the
reduction of military spending; the promotion of
sustainable human development, with particular emphasis
on fighting poverty; and the development of broad
educational models designed to achieve social mobility
and to promote the genuine equality of men and women.

Within this vast undertaking, my delegation wishes
to focus particular attention on the question of human
rights and the issue of demilitarization and the reduction
of military expenditure, matters that we have consistently
stressed during the past two years of our Security Council
membership.

With respect to human rights, we affirm that
achieving the observance of and full respect for these
must become a fundamental political objective, since
Violations lie at the heart of the conflicts besetting the
African continent. These considerations are not alien to
Africa's realities, precisely because Africa is a region of
the developing world that has established one of the best
legal frameworks in this regard.

We must say, rather, that respect for these rights
should be the constant concern of the political leadership.
That is why we applaud the recent decision of the
Council of Ministers of the Organization of African Unity
to begin negotiations on establishing regional
jurisdictional institutions in this regard. Our own
experience in Latin America has taught us that such
structures are fundamental factors for guaranteeing respect
for these rights, which are inherent in the human
condition.

At the same time, my delegation believes that the
Security Council must focus at this meeting on the
question of demilitarization and the reduction of military
spending. I do not raise this matter lightly, but because it
arises from our own national experience, which has taught
us that a resolute policy to strengthen civilian power,
based on free and pluralistic electoral processes and
accompanied by clear decisions to reduce arms
expenditures, yields only benefits because it bolsters
democratic institutions and releases resources from state
budgets that can be devoted to education, health,

 

housing - in short, to social investment, which is the best
promoter of peace and security, understood from a broad
civilian and democratic perspective. The right innovative
approach to support and international cooperation could
serve to stimulate African countries to move in that
direction.

My delegation has taken an active part in the
tremendous amount of work done by the Working Group
established pursuant to Security Council resolution 1170
(1998). Over these months, the Group has generated
significant results and carried out its functions in the
context of an evolving process. From this standpoint, we
can claim to have completed an important stage, in which
we have taken noteworthy decisions on such matters as
support for regional and subregional initiatives;
strengthening cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations in the areas of
conflict prevention and peacekeeping; the effective
enhancement of the sanctions regimes imposed by the
Security Council; and the means available to Africa for
peacekeeping.

Costa Rica will insist that that Group continue to work
with the same intensity on the outstanding matters that it
has itself defined. In particular, we attach priority to the
questions relating to illicit arms-trafficking, security in
refugee camps and zones and the means available to the
Security Council to monitor the activities that it has
authorized and that are carried out by Member States. We
trust that in the remaining months of this year we shall be
able to achieve tangible results in these areas and others.

At this crucial time, my delegation appeals to the
international community to give its full support to the
achievement of what the Council has resolved in the last
few days on the question now before us. But we also ask
the countries of Africa themselves to take responsibility and
to show by deeds, as many have already done, their resolve
and commitment to firm and lasting peace, true democracy
and genuine human development.

