President Calderon Hinojosa (spoke in Spanish): Mexico enthusiastically welcomes the
convening by the United States of this very special
meeting of the Security Council on nuclear
disarmament and the non-proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction. Mexico is convinced that global
peace and security cannot be built on the accumulation
of nuclear arsenals. It is very encouraging that the
United States and Russia, as we have heard, are
negotiating a new strategic arms reduction treaty,
precisely because the United States and Russia control
some 90 per cent of the approximately 25,000 nuclear
warheads in existence. We believe that the ultimate aim
should be the complete elimination of nuclear
weapons.

My country also welcomes the decision of the
United States to resume the legislative process for the
ratification of the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban
Treaty because that decision and the willingness to
review deterrence models proposed in the recent past
serve as an example that should inspire other countries
to follow suit. We also appreciate the decision to
reconsider projects that only generate fear and doubt in
humankind.

We cannot accept the paralysis of the multilateral
negotiations in the Conference on Disarmament. The
time has come to act. The resolution that was
negotiated in recent days in the Council and adopted at
this meeting should be the first step of a new
movement in favour of disarmament.

A growing number of States have developed
nuclear weapons or have the capacity to produce them,
ignoring the desires of humankind and of those
countries that have established vast nuclear-weapon-
free zones, such as that in Latin America and the
Caribbean. The security of the entire planet is
weakened to the extent that the number of possessors
of such weapons is growing.

Mexico supports the right of every State to avail
itself of nuclear energy for peaceful uses under the full
supervision of the relevant international entities, such

as the International Atomic Energy Agency, which is
represented here today. Given both the gradual
exhaustion of fossil fuels and their effect on global
warming, nuclear energy represents an opportunity for
sustainable development. However, only the
exclusively peaceful use of nuclear energy can allow us
to hope that those who covet nuclear arms will
abandon their intentions to acquire and use them.

There is the danger that terrorist groups could
acquire the equipment and technology to manufacture a
nuclear device. If we are to avoid that, it is of
fundamental importance that all States comply with
resolution 1540 (2004). To demonstrate its
commitment, Mexico has taken steps to join some of
the international export control regimes, beginning
with the Nuclear Suppliers Group. States should step
up their efforts in favour of disarmament and non-
proliferation without ceasing to promote the peaceful
use of nuclear energy.

Although nuclear disarmament is the central topic
of this meeting of the Security Council, Mexico should
also like to draw attention to the proliferation of
conventional weapons. Every day, the traffic in small
arms and light weapons causes approximately 1,000
deaths and 3,000 injuries worldwide. Mexico urges the
members of the Security Council to seek ways to curb
this illicit trade without prejudice to the right of each
State to buy the weaponry necessary for its legitimate
defence and the protection of its citizens. My country
considers the negotiation within the United Nations of
an arms trade treaty to be of great urgency.

The Mexican Alfonso Garcia Robles was awarded
the Nobel Peace Prize for his work as architect and
promoter of the world's first nuclear-weapon-free
zone - that of Latin America and the Caribbean -
through the Treaty of Tlatelolco. He held that our
children have the right to demand that their parents
leave them a world free of nuclear threats. Sixty-four
years later, we cannot burden the coming generation
with that responsibility. It is time to move ahead not
only towards non-proliferation but towards general and
complete nuclear disarmament. There is no other way;
that is the path we must take.

