Mr. Mahbubani (Singapore): Please allow me to
begin with some brief words of welcome. First, I would
like to welcome Mr. Wolfgang Petritsch. Secondly, I
would like to welcome Ambassador Noureddine
Mejdoub of Tunisia, my neighbour on my left, and to
congratulate him on his maiden appearance and speech.
And finally, I would also like to welcome the new
Permanent Representative of Bosnia and Herzegovina;
I am pleased to see him here, as I have not had the
pleasure of meeting him before today.

We also welcome this opportunity to examine
progress made in efforts to rebuild Bosnia and
Herzegovina, which remains a major challenge for the
United Nations and for the international community -
a challenge that is clearly far from over.

In this regard, we would like to thank
Mr. Wolfgang Petritsch for the candid and
comprehensive briefing that he gave us this morning. I
can say that I, personally, learned a lot from the
briefing he gave us. We also want to join our
colleagues in commending Mr. Petritsch and his
colleagues for the progress that has been made in
implementing the Peace Agreement.

However, in our remarks today, we would like to
step back a little and look at the issue from what is
perhaps a slightly different perspective. As you know,
Mr. President, it has been more than five years since
the Dayton Accords. We re-read the records of the most
recent meeting of the Security Council on the situation
in Bosnia and Herzegovina, which took place on 12
December 2000, shortly before the fifth anniversary of
the signing of the Dayton Accords. On reading the
record, we were struck by the note of optimism-
albeit cautious optimism- sounded by a majority of
the members of the Security Council. But we were
even more profoundly struck by what appeared to be
the dissenting opinion of Ambassador Peter van
Walsum of the Netherlands, and I would like to quote
him. He said,

"Five years after Dayton we can only
conclude that despite generous foreign aid, to the
tune of $5 billion, both the political and the
economic situations of Bosnia and Herzegovina
are disconcerting Bosnia is at peace. Well,
there is no more fighting, and the security
situation is generally good. But the animosity
among the three population groups has hardly
subsided since Dayton. People are daily reminded
of the war in a country where the borders of the
entities reflect the military frontlines of 1995."
(S/PV4245, p. 16)

We believe that those words of Ambassador van
Walsum describe the fragility of the situation in Bosnia
and Herzegovina, and perhaps in the region as a whole,
if the recent events in the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia are anything to go by. Indeed, as I listened
to the opening remarks of Mr. Petritsch earlier today, I
heard him say that the sounds of gunfire have again
returned to the region. As I listened to his statement, it
struck me that there were grounds for both optimism
and pessimism for the region as a whole.

Given this backdrop, perhaps the question for us
is whether the time has come for the Security Council
to re-examine the approach that it is taking to Bosnia
and Herzegovina. We are not, of course, suggesting
that we abandon the Dayton Accords. But we should
note that even the key architect of the Dayton Accords,
Ambassador Richard Holbrooke, contemplated the
necessity of modifying the approach at a conference on
Dayton held in Sarajevo to mark the fifth anniversary
of the Accords. Ambassador Holbrooke, in fact,
described Dayton as "a living document that must
adapt to new realities and confront new challenges as
Bosnia grows and matures." He added, "We must not
only fully implement it, we must seek to correct those
flaws and defects which have become apparent."

For example, one key aspect of Dayton that
Ambassador Holbrooke highlighted as needing change
was the establishment of a united army, instead of the
current forces divided between the Serbs, Croats and
Bosniacs. Indeed, his words might now prove to have
been prescient in the light of concerns over the
activities of the Bosnian Croat army units following the
threat of the Croatian Democratic Union (HDZ) to
proclaim self-rule in Bosnian Croat majority areas,
which has, we believe, been described as the sharpest
challenge to the authority of the international
community in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

Against this backdrop - and following on from
the point that Ambassador Stewart Eldon made earlier,
that we should make this into an interactive meeting at
which we try to solicit new information from
Mr. Petritsch -I thought that I would pose a few
questions.

My first question relates to whether the recent
moves by the Bosnian Croats to establish a
self-governing council in Bosnia mean that the
nationalist genie is once again out of the bottle. IfI
heard Mr. Petritsch correctly, I believe he hinted that
such moves are only the dying gasp of old forces
whose time has passed. But even if this is so, what are
the measures being taken to bring the Bosnian Croats
back onto the Dayton track? How can the Council
complement his efforts?

The second question is a more general one, and it
is related to Ambassador Holbrooke's remarks that I
quoted earlier. Can Mr. Petritsch inform the Council
whether there are any elements of the Dayton
Agreements that should be modified or amplified to
better meet the objectives of establishing enduring
political stability in Bosnia and Herzegovina?

When we recently had a discussion here in the
Council on Kosovo, we noted the paradoxical results of
democracy: the successful democratic elections in
Yugoslavia, which we all welcome, led to increased
tensions in Kosovo because they dampened the hopes
of Kosovars who wanted independence. My third
question, therefore, is whether the elections in
Yugoslavia had any ripple effects in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, and, if so, whether these ripple effects
were positive or negative. I believe that the Permanent
Representative of Bangladesh, Ambassador
Chowdhury, raised a similar question in that regard.

