Mr. Martinez Blanco (Honduras) (interpretation from Spanish): My delegation wishes to thank the Secretary-
General for presenting his fifteenth progress report on the
United Nations Observer Mission in Liberia (UNOMIL),
which contains his observations on the peace process in that
country and his recommendations on a possible extension
of UNOMIL's mandate.

We also wish to welcome the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Liberia and thank him for taking part in the work
at the Security Council today.

In September last year, my delegation, like the rest of
this Council, welcomed the fact that following the
conclusion of the Abuja Agreement, the leaders of the three
Liberian factions had assumed their positions in the
Transitional Government. At that time, we welcomed the
fact that a cease-fire had been restored and the process of
separation of forces had begun.

We also believed at that time that the establishment of
the Transitional Government, known as the Council of
State, as part of a new agreement aimed at ending the civil
war - which had persisted for six years, had taken tens of
thousands of lives, had internally displaced many persons
and had created refugee flows to neighbouring countries -
was an encouraging development that allayed our concerns
about the Liberian factions' lack of determination to honour
their commitments.

But recent events in Liberia - the armed incidents in
the town of Tubmanburg against contingents of the
Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS)
Monitoring Group (ECOMOG), the fighting in the area of
Kle, the looting in the city of Robertsport and other parts
of the country by forces of the United Liberation
Movement of Liberia for Democracy (ULIMO) - make us
doubt the political will of the parties to meet the
commitments set out in the Abuja Agreement.

These new developments, as the Secretary-General
rightly points out in his report, threaten the peace process
in Liberia. To be sure, the establishment of the Council of
State marked a new level of progress towards putting an
end to the war. But many of the past differences between
the parties, including the difficult elements of
disarmament and demobilization have not yet been
resolved.

Although the National Patriotic Front of Liberia
(NPFL) and the United Liberation Movement of Liberia
for Democracy are nominally controlled by their leaders,
there are sub-factions that could resume the struggle;
moreover, new factions could appear on the scene and
demand that the Agreement be revised or that they be
included in the process.

Even if the country were to be disarmed and restored
to peace, the legislative and presidential elections
scheduled for August this year would still pose a serious
challenge. There remains the danger that any faction
dissatisfied with the preparations, with the process or with
the results of the elections could decide to take up arms
once again. We believe that even with a democratically
elected government in place, Liberia will continue to face
enormous obstacles, since its infrastructure has been
largely destroyed, tens of thousands have died in the
conflict, and hundreds of thousands have left the country.

Nevertheless, my delegation considers that the
successful implementation of the Abuja Agreement is
essential for the future of Liberia. This may be the last
chance for the country to attain lasting peace. Resumption
of the struggle would only bring about condemnation by
the international community, which could limit or
withhold its support for the peace process. It is therefore
important for the faction leaders to show that they are
fully determined to support the process. As the Secretary-
General has indicated, the factions cannot expect the
Economic Community of West African States and the
international community to support the peace process in
Liberia indefinitely, in the absence of clear political will
on their part to respect and comply with the commitments
they have undertaken.

Once again, and with reference to the
28 December 1995 armed incident in the town of
Tubmanburg, we believe that the situation with regard to
ECOMOG and to the United Nations Observer Mission in
Liberia (UNOMIL) requires no further clarification.
ECOMOG and UNOMIL have worked together to
facilitate the implementation of the military aspects of the

 

Cotonou Agreement and are now working to implement the
Abuja Agreement and to bring about the most important
aspects of disarmament and demobilization. In other words,
they are factors in the peace process in Liberia. The
December incident, caused by mistrust between the two
wings of ULIMO, was unjustifiable, and certainly, as the
report of the Secretary-General indicates, was a serious
setback for the peace process and delayed the deployment
of ECOMOG and UNOMIL forces, which still lack
guarantees of safety for their personnel.

We believe that to improve the security situation in
Liberia the factions must abide by the cease-fire, make
clear progress in the separation of forces, withdraw from
the checkpoints, permit the donors of humanitarian aid to
go about their work freely, cooperate with ECOMOG and
UNOMIL on disarmament and demobilization, and enable
UNOMIL to enjoy total freedom of movement throughout
Liberia in conformity with its mandate and with its status
as agreed with the Transitional Government. We hope that
the Liberian parties will show this willingness to fulfil their
commitments.

My delegation considers that internal stabilization and
progress in the implementation of the Abuja Agreement are
the most important aspects of the peace process in Liberia.
On that basis, we shall support the Secretary-General's
recommendation that the Security Council should extend the
mandate of UNOMIL for a further four months.

Let me conclude by thanking the Governments of
Ghana and Nigeria for their important cooperation in the
peace process, through their participation in ECOMOG.

