Mr. Leon: I am grateful for the opportunity to
brief the Council today on the situation in Libya at
this critical juncture. Let me begin by expressing my
condolences and sympathy to all the families of the
victims of terrorism and extremism in Libya. I condemn
in the strongest possible terms the horrific and brutal
acts we have witnessed in Libya in recent days and
weeks. No words can express my outrage and revulsion
at the beheading of 21 men, including 20 Egyptian
nationals who were targeted for no other reason than
their religious belief and nationality.

The scale of this atrocity should not eclipse the
barbarity of other acts committed by extremist groups,
including the Islamic State and Ansar al-Sharia.
In November, three young activists were beheaded
in Derna. Towards the end of December, a young
Egyptian doctor and his wife, also Copts, were brutally
murdered at their home in Sirte; their daughter, who
was abducted, was found dead on the city's outskirts the
next day. These are but a few of the countless incidents
that every day affect thousands of civilians, who bear
the brunt of war and displacement and are victims of
serious violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law, especially in areas like Benghazi.
The savage terrorist acts highlight once again the
imminent danger confronting Libya, its people and the
wider region unless there is a swift agreement among
the main parties in the country on resolving the political
crisis and bringing an end to the military and political
conflict.

Since my last briefing to the Council (see S/PV.7264), we have witnessed blatant disregard by
Islamic State elements for Libya's sovereignty and
state institutions. The capture of public installations in
Sirte and the attack last month on the Corinthia Hotel
in Tripoli reflect a growing ability and determination
on the part of the Islamic State to exploit the political
crisis and consequent security vacuum to consolidate
its presence and influence across Libya.

Recent incidents, including the attacks on
the oilfields in Mabruk and south of Sidra clearly
demonstrate the increasing ability of the Islamic State
and other terrorist groups to operate in different parts
of the country, whether in Derna, Benghazi, Sirte or
Sabratha. Extremist groups with radical ideologies
associated with Al-Qaida have been on the rise since
the end of the armed conflict in 2011, with Ansar
al-Sharia's strongholds in Benghazi and Derna already
constituting a serious terrorist challenge in the context
of the Libyan crisis. These have served as platforms for
mobilizing support for the Islamic State.

The Islamic State has already shown its potential
for destruction in Iraq and Syria. Operating across
borders, it has mobilized recruits and significant
financial resources, including through the use of
social media. In Libya, the Islamic State has found
fertile ground in the growing post-revolution political
instability, capitalizing also on the weakness of State
institutions and the State security sector. The steady
influx of foreign nationals has bolstered its ranks and
now threatens to introduce yet another dimension to the
conflict in Libya. We should be gravely concerned by
this turn of events and firmly oppose the ideology and
terrorist practices of the Islamic State. These radical
forces must be confronted at every turn. No strategy
will be successful without strong regional cooperation
and an empowered Libyan State and authorities.

We must not lose sight of the complexities of Libya's
crisis, its weak and fragmented State institutions,
their current political polarization, the predominance
of armed groups seemingly oblivious to the national
interest, media incitement and inflammatory rhetoric,
and corruption. These are all factors that have
contributed to the current breakdown of basic State
functions and the disruption of the country's economy
and of its social fabric.

Since my last briefing to the Council, we have
made considerable headway in bringing the main
parties to the negotiating table. We have progressively
structured a political dialogue along five mutually
reinforcing tracks, bringing together representatives
from a broad spectrum of the Libyan political, military
and social landscape. The objective ofthe dialogue is to
bring Libya out of the chaos that is providing terrorism
with fertile ground to breed further violence and
destruction. In January, the United Nations hosted two
rounds ofpolitical talks in Geneva in which discussions
were focused on reaching agreement on a national unity
Government and security arrangements, to include a
comprehensive ceasefire.

Within Libya, reactions to the talks have been
overwhelmingly positive and appear to have injected a
new ray of hope regarding the possibility of a peaceful
resolution of the political crisis and military conflict.
Notwithstanding the hard-line positions initially
adopted by some of the parties, the fact that all the
major stakeholders now recognize the gravity of the
situation and the need for a political resolution is and
must be seen as a positive sign.

On this note, I am pleased to report that a week
ago I was in Ghadames where, for the first time, all
the parties joined the United Nations-facilitated
political dialogue. No doubt, this marks an important
breakthrough towards an inclusive political agreement,
which remains the only avenue for a sustainable way out
of the crisis. I am hopeful that a political agreement can
be reached soon. The differences among the parties are
not insurmountable, and I am confident that their sense
of responsibility for the fate of the Libyan people and
the national unity, democracy and territorial integrity
of the Libyan State will prevail over their differences.
Yesterday marked the anniversary of a revolution
intended to realize these values, which look so far away
today.

We are also making progress, slow but steady, in
trying to de-escalate the situation on the military front.
These efforts have intensified following a string of
attacks in the oil crescent region towards the end of
December, and except for the attack by Islamic State
elements in the Mabruk oilfield on 3 February, there
has been a relative truce in hostilities Nonetheless, the
overall situation remains fragile and there is much work
to be done. The overall situation in Benghazi remains
dire, and only yesterday we received reports of aerial
attacks on Zintan in the west.

The images of the brutal acts of terror that we
have witnessed in Libya in recent months have shaken
our collective conscience. We must capitalize on this
sense of urgency and, today more than ever, we must
stand firmly behind the political process. Given the
sense of urgency, I have called for the next meeting of
the political dialogue in order to finalize discussions
initiated in Geneva on the formation of a Government
of national unity and security arrangements to pave
the way for a formal and comprehensive cessation of
hostilities.

Defeating terrorism in Libya can be achieved only
through the political and institutional determination
of a united Libyan Government, which will need the
strong and unequivocal support of the international
community in confronting the myriad challenges
facing Libya. First and foremost, this will require the
development of a coherent and comprehensive strategy
to combat terrorism, as well as the identification of
the needs and support required from the international
community.

It is our shared responsibility to build consensus
among the Libyan counterparts. It is crucial for the
international community as a whole to maintain a unity
of purpose through coherent messaging and actions.
Our efforts to counter terrorism in a sustainable manner
cannot be a series of isolated acts and we should not
allow terrorism to disrupt the political dialogue. Allow
me to take this opportunity to remind all parties that
nothing in their actions or decisions at this critical time
should be allowed to provide space or the opportunity
for terrorist groups to further consolidate their presence
or influence. I urge them to intensify their engagement
towards a political resolution of the crisis. The window

of opportunity is rapidly closing, and no effort must be
spared.

It is only through a strong Government of national
unity based on a solid consensus that Libyans, with the
support of the international community, can aspire to
put in place an effective strategy to combat the growing
threat posed by terrorist groups such as the Islamic
State. I would like to thank all the Governments of
the region and international actors for their support
to United Nations efforts. I would also like to call on
all Member States to spare no effort in support of a
political resolution of the Libyan crisis.

Finally, I take this opportunity to reiterate the
commitment of the United Nations to Libya's democratic
transition, and to say that our engagement in Libya will
continue to be guided by our utmost respect for Libya's
sovereignty, national unity and territorial integrity.

