Ms. Lodhi (Pakistan): At the outset, I wish to thank
you, Mr. President, for convening today's thematic
debate. It underscores the pivotal importance of the
issue, especially as civilians have come to represent the
ever-increasing proportion of victims in ongoing armed
conflicts - in an era that the Secretary-General recently
aptly portrayed as one of mega-crises. My delegation
also appreciates the insightful briefings by the Deputy
Secretary-General and by the Vice-President of the
International Committee of the Red Cross.

The suffering ofcivilians caught in the line of fire in
conflict situations is unspeakable. Tens of thousands of
people, including women, children and the elderly, have
become tragic victims of conflicts not of their making.
Civilian casualties have mounted, and so has the need
for humanitarian assistance. The United Nations report
released today reveals that in Iraq's ongoing conflict
nearly 19,000 civilians were killed between 1 January
2014 and 31 October 2015, with more than 36,000
wounded. Those are indeed staggering numbers.
Millions have been dislodged from their homes, driven
out by bloody and unremitting conflict and unending
turmoil or persecution. Many who managed to flee
have seen their perilous journeys of escape become
journeys of death.

The protection of civilians is a core system-wide
responsibility, but host countries bear the primary
responsibility for the protection of all civilians without
discrimination. A normative framework is in place,
and the international community keeps urging all
parties to comply with their obligations and abide by
international humanitarian law and human rights law.
But compliance, unfortunately, is sporadic at best, and
defiance remains rampant, especially, but not only, on
the part of non-State actors. As recent examples attest,
starvation has been used as an instrument of a siege
strategy, and indiscriminate bombing campaigns have
been undertaken with no regard for the loss of civilian
lives. The destruction of hospitals and attacks on
medical workers has been the most egregious example
of such impunity. All that has presented formidable
obstacles to legitimate humanitarian access to affected
populations and resulted in death and destruction,
which could have been avoided. We would therefore
fully support efforts to strengthen compliance and
accountability measures.

The attention given to the subject in the report of the
High-level Panel on Peace Operations (see S/2015/446)
is also timely. We support its recommendations for
better training of peacekeepers and closer trilateral
dialogue and collaboration. We do, however, believe
that the fundamental principles of peacekeeping are
not an impediment to protection-of-civilians mandates.
The Security Council establishes those mandates, and
the use of force in defence of those mandates is an
integral part of those principles. The report also urges
extreme caution when mandating enforcement tasks.

Pakistan, as one of world's top troop-contributing
countries, has proudly and conscientiously undertaken
the task of proactively protecting civilians, when
mandated by the Council. We have demonstrated that
this can be done by a robust deterrence posture and
without resort to the actual use of force. Action by
Pakistani troops in the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur offers an example of the
active protection of civilians while adhering to the
principles of peacekeeping.

While we appreciate the acknowledgement in the
Secretary-General's report that Pakistan's counter-
terrorism operations involves "better advance planning
to limit the effect on civilians" (S/2015/453, para. 20),
my delegation reiterates that these are law enforcement
actions and do not constitute a situation of armed
conflict. We of course strongly condemn the deliberate
targeting of civilians in conflict situations. We have
even temporarily relocated civilians to protect them
from deliberate targeting by terrorists in areas where
law enforcement operations are taking place. As has
been demonstrated time and again, terrorists are not
bound by any consideration of humanity. The have not
even spared schoolchildren, as the cowardly attack on a
school in Peshawar demonstrated a year ago, underlining
the new and appalling levels of inhumanity to which
violent extremists have sunk. Even so, the response of
States to combat terrorism must be measured, well-
planned and carefully targeted to protect civilias and
uphold human rights. Anything less would play into the
hands of terrorists and would be counter-productive.

Finally, the goal of the protection of civilians is best
served, as other speakers before me have also pointed
out, by preventing the outbreak of armed conflicts in
the first place, addressing the root causes of conflicts
and finding inclusive and peaceful political solutions to
disputes and conflicts. That, we believe, is the strategy
that will lead us to sustained and enduring peace and
security.

