Mr. Llewellyn (United Kingdom): We thank the
Presidents of the two Tribunals - Judge Pocar of the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) and Judge Mose of the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) -
and the two Prosecutors - Carla Del Ponte of the
ICTY and Hassan Bubacar Jallow of the ICTR - for
their presentations this morning.

Let me begin with the ICTR. The United
Kingdom strongly supports the ongoing work of the
ICTR. We welcome the specific measures taken by the
various organs of the ICTR to ensure that the work of
the Tribunal proceeds in a timely fashion. We
encourage the Tribunal to keep up that momentum in
accordance with its completion strategy. We emphasize
the need to bring to justice those indictees who remain
at large, including Felicien Kabuga, and we call on all
States to fulfil their obligation to arrest and transfer
indictees and emphasize that that obligation is, of
course, established by the Security Council in its
resolutions.

The United Kingdom supports extending the
terms of judges until 2008. Continuity of the judges is
clearly central to keeping the completion strategy on
target. We stress, however, that this does not set a
precedent, and that any future requests of this kind by
either Tribunal would need to be considered on their
own merits.

Turning to the ICTY, we welcome the reported
progress on the ICTY caseload since the last report, in
December 2005. The United Kingdom, of course, is a
strong supporter of the ICTY. Those most responsible
for genocide, war crimes and crimes against humanity
must be brought to justice. We share the concerns of
others regarding the risks of slippage in the timetable
to 2009, including the financial implications. The
Tribunal must maintain maximum effort to rationalize
its working methods and increase its efficiency. We
recognize the efforts of all of the Tribunal's organs to
do just that, as illustrated in the reports, and we look
forward to seeing the benefits of those improvements. I
would just mention that we support the various rule
changes that the Tribunal adopted, I think, just last
week.
Turning to the matter of indictees at large and
cooperation, let me observe that full cooperation
remains an ongoing obligation of all States, including
those in the region. We call on the States concerned to
comply with their responsibilities to the international
community under resolutions 1503 (2003) and 1534
(2004), which others have mentioned. Full cooperation
is a fundamental requirement if the countries of the
region are to make progress towards the European
Union and NATO.

It is imperative that impunity be brought to an
end and that those who bear the greatest responsibility
for genocide, war crimes and crimes against humanity
be transferred to the Tribunal. We call in particular on
the authorities of Serbia and Montenegro and Bosnia
and Herzegovina - in particular the Republika
Srpska - to commit themselves wholeheartedly and
unambiguously to the swift arrest and transfer to The
Hague of all outstanding fugitive indictees, notably
Mladic and Karadzic. Close cooperation between those
countries remains crucial to achieving that result, and
we would appeal in particular to the Government of
Serbia and Montenegro not to squander its European
future for the sake of a lack of cooperation over those
two indictees.

As to the question of Montenegro's
independence, the European Union has noted
Montenegro's 3 June declaration of independence and
will address that matter further at its ministerial
meeting on 12 June. This is an important moment in
the history of Montenegro, and it is vital that the
authorities in Podgorica ensure full cooperation with
the ICTY. Our firm expectation is that this will be a
non-negotiable requirement for progress towards the
European Union and NATO.

Turning to the question of Dragan Zelenovic, we
were grateful to the Russian Ambassador this morning
for his explanation of the current position, and we hope
that the Russian authorities will continue to make
every effort to resolve the difficulties so that Zelenovic
can quickly be transferred to The Hague.

We also heard this morning also that the ICTY
Prosecutor believes that Vlastimir Djordjevic may also
be in Russia, and we look forward to the Russian
authorities' continuing to do all they can to trace his
whereabouts and, if he is located, to arrange for his
immediate transfer to The Hague.

The early end to the trial of Mr. Milosevic with
no final outcome was, of course, regrettable, and we
welcome Judge Parker's report into the death and
President Pocar's statement this morning that he has
set up a working group to implement the various
reports' recommendations and to improve trial
management. Mr. Milosevic's death should not present
an obstacle to the necessity of cooperation by all States
with the ICTY and has underlined the importance for
the ICTY to apply the lessons learned to the successful
prosecution of remaining indictees, including Karadzic
and Mladic.

Finally, on the question of transfers to the region,
the transfer of lower-level and intermediate cases to the
national jurisdictions is, of course, key to the ICTY's
completion strategy. That should not, of course, be at
the expense of fair trials, and we will remain interested
in hearing the Tribunal's assessment, in conjunction
with that of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe, of national proceedings.

We note that, so far, six individuals have been
transferred to the jurisdiction of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. The United Kingdom remains supportive
of the Bosnia War Crimes Chamber within the context
of judicial sector reform in Bosnia. We have, to date,
formally committed £2.6 million to the project, as well
as providing additional ad hoc assistance. We would

join in Judge Pocar's appeal this morning to other
donors to make similar commitments.

