Mr. Yousfi (Algeria) (spoke in French): First of
all, allow me to thank Mr. Michael Williams for his
briefing on the situation and the latest developments in
the Middle East region in the grip of endless conflicts
and tensions that are sharpening daily.

My delegation associates itself fully with the
statements made by the representatives of Yemen, Cuba
and Pakistan on behalf of the countries members of the
Arab Group, the N on-Aligned Movement and the
Organization of the Islamic Conference, respectively.

It is clear from Mr. Williams' statement that
peace and stability have unfortunately not found their
way in this tormented and torn region, the consequence
of decades of occupation and repression of populations
desperately seeking emancipation, liberty and dignity.
Equally clear to us is the correlation that exists
between the situation in the occupied Palestinian
territories and the other Arab lands occupied by Israel,
and the climate of instability and tension in the region.

The heart of the problem, and its Gordian knot, is
nothing other than the Israeli-Palestinian conflict,
which, through its regional extension, has disturbed
existing balances by maintaining hotbeds of tension
throughout the Middle East.

Part of the problem can also be found in the
approach that is aimed at delinking purely security
aspects from the incomplete political process, and that
has considerably delayed the resumption of the positive
dynamic that had been sketched out in favour, in
particular, of the reactivation last March of the Arab
peace plan.

Algeria remains in solidarity with the fraternal
Palestinian people in their struggle to regain their
historical, inalienable and fundamental rights, in
particular that of seeing the return of its refugees
scattered far and wide.

We also support unreservedly the objective of a
comprehensive, just and lasting peace in the Middle
East, with the first stone of the global edifice being the
creation of a sovereign, independent and viable
Palestinian State with a territory with a single owner
coexisting with Israel in peace and security.

This labour of peace that we all wholeheartedly
call for is, however, fundamentally threatened at its
roots and throughout its reach because of the repeated
attempts by Israel to cause this march of time to
deviate from its initial trajectory in order to maintain
the status quo. If that is not the case, how else can one
explain Israel's energetic undermining of even the
slightest attempts at institution-building within a
Palestinian Authority by presenting it as the cause of
the freeze in the peace process, if it is not through its
avowed will to put off indefinitely any configuration of
a future agreement on the final status of a future
Palestinian State.

The proposal by the American Government to
reactivate the Israeli-Palestinian peace process by
convening an international conference on peace in the
Middle East in an attempt to consider as a whole the
factors for the freeze seems to us, by itself, to be a wise
approach, as long as it does not become a court judging
whether the Palestinian Authority has the ability to
establish democratic institutions and as long as it lays
out in clear terms the outlines of definitive solution for
this conflict that has lasted too long.

In order to be effective and lasting, this peace
will also have to be found through an in-depth
consideration of the means likely to put an end to the
crisis resulting from the occupation of Iraq, with
respect for its sovereignty, its territorial integrity and
its unity. We also think that the cessation of violence in
that fraternal country should be accompanied by a clear
political timelines, with a clear and respected deadline
for withdrawal.

Moreover, Algeria feels that the initiative would
gain credibility if it involved all the parties directly
concerned and were accompanied by a firm
commitment by the international community to exert
pressure on Israel to induce it to cooperate actively
with the international community. The initiative in
question should not make us forget that similar
attempts in the past have failed when confronted with
Israel's determination to impose systematically and by
force its vision of peace and its interpretation of the
map of the Middle East. It is instructive to note in this
respect the fate of the various laboriously negotiated
peace plans that received broad support from the
international community but that came up against the
intransigence of Israel and its delay tactics. The
example of the Arab Peace Initiative, which involves a
strict application of international law and of United
Nations resolutions, is indicative of Israel's lack of
political will to seek peace. Indeed, although this plan
has been described as an essential basis for any future
solution to the Israeli-Arab conflict, its positive
momentum has given way, five years after its adoption
in Beirut, to a disturbing pessimism.

Algeria calls on the international community to
display greater coherence, to do everything possible to
put the peace process back on track and to encourage
Israel to abandon its intransigence and its policy of fait

accompli by embarking upon serious negotiations with
its Arab neighbours. We must acknowledge that there
cannot be security without peace and that there is no
peace under colonization.

