Mrs. Ashipala-Musavyi (Namibia): Allow me to
congratulate your delegation, Mr. President, for taking the
initiative to convene this open meeting on the item
"Maintaining peace and security: Humanitarian aspects of
issues before the Security Council". We thank you, Sir,
for presiding over this important meeting. Let me also
take this opportunity to express our gratitude to the
Secretary-General for his very important statement, which
will indeed contribute immensely to our deliberations
today.

The questions posed by the Secretary-General are
valid and in our view warrant further and deep thought,
without which we may not get it right.

Before making my remarks on today's topic, allow
me to briefly touch on another humanitarian issue
although it is not directly under consideration by the
Security Council. The sheer magnitude of the problems
and the fact that the country in question is in the process
of post-conflict reconstruction compels me to do so.

I am talking about the immensely difficult time the
people of Mozambique are going through as a result of
the devastating cyclone Eline. We note with appreciation
the pronouncement by the Security Council, in solidarity
with the people of Mozambique, seeking support from the
international community to enable the people of that

 

country to overcome the devastating effect of the floods. In
this regard, we warmly welcome the decision of the
Government of the United Kingdom and the Government of
Portugal to write off all of the Mozambican debt. This is a
very important and encouraging gesture by those two donor
countries, and we appeal to all other States to do likewise.
Mozambique needs all the assistance it can get at this very
difficult time.

The holding of this debate provides us with an
opportunity to reiterate once again the critical and
indispensable role the Council can play in alleviating the
plight of the war-affected populations on the one hand and
the strengthening of the United Nations in the areas of
peace-building, peacemaking and peacekeeping on the
other.

Humanitarian assistance to war-affected populations
has become an important and integral part of recent United
Nations operations. Hence, recent peacekeeping operations
have included various humanitarian components, such as
the protection of children, demobilization and teaching
respect for human rights and international humanitarian law.
It should be emphasized that the Council's tardy
authorization of the deployment of peacekeeping missions
with the appropriate mandates, as well as the lack of
adequate financial resources, continues to be one of the
serious constraints to effective peacekeeping in some parts
of the world. This has led to the continued suffering of
innocent civilians - particularly women and children and
other vulnerable groups affected by armed conflict. The
case of the Sierra Leone conflict is a classic example in
many respects.

Therefore, while recognizing that the consideration of
humanitarian elements in peace negotiations is crucial, we
wish to emphasize that where peace agreements have been
secured, the Security Council must act swiftly to assist in
consolidating the peace by facilitating the implementation
of those agreements. By so doing we can avert
humanitarian catastrophes and enhance peacekeeping and
post-conflict peace-building.

Furthermore, my delegation would like to underscore
the importance of cooperation from all the parties to a
given conflict in facilitating the safety and security of
humanitarian personnel.

Let me now turn to the issue of prevention. Natural
disasters are difficult to prevent, but the same cannot be
said about man-made disasters. We strongly believe that the
prevention of armed conflict is an important element of
the Council's work in addressing humanitarian issues.

In his report on the work of the Organization, the
Secretary-General rightly stated,

"Taking prevention more seriously will help to
ensure that there are fewer wars and less
consequential disasters to cope with in the first
place." (A/54/l, para. 21)

Therefore, early warning is the best way to avert tragedies
in different parts of the world. The Security Council must
continue to work to preserve peace at all times,
irrespective of the fragility of the peace or the
geographical location.

In order to prevent conflict, a sound understanding
of the underlying factors is necessary. For example, in
Africa, illicit trafficking in, inter alia, small arms and
light and heavy weapons needs to be prevented. The
relevant recommendations contained in the
Secretary-General's report on the causes of conflicts and
the promotion of durable peace and sustainable
development in Africa (A/52/871) need to be
implemented.

Another critical area is that of strengthening the
coordination mechanisms among the relevant United
Nations organs and agencies, regional bodies, other
intergovernmental and international organizations and
other humanitarian actors. This will ensure correct
approaches and complementary programming and avoid
the duplication of efforts. It is in this connection that my
delegation would appreciate it if the effective cooperation
envisioned here could be extended to the host
Governments.

My delegation fully agrees with the notion of
ensuring the safe and unhindered access of humanitarian
agencies to war-affected populations, as this will ensure
the prompt and effective delivery of assistance to the
needy. However, it is absolutely necessary - in a spirit
of transparency and respect for the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of the State concerned - that the
humanitarian agencies work in close cooperation with the
host Governments, whose primary responsibility is the
security and protection of their citizens. This is not only
a confidence-building measure, but will help improve the
coordination, management and utilization of scarce
resources.

 
Finally, let me say that it is indispensable that United
Nations humanitarian organizations be supported with
adequate financial resources. In this regard, the United
Nations consolidated appeals should be funded adequately.

We look forward to the adoption of the presidential
statement later today.

