Mr. Wilson (United Kingdom): I would like to
thank Special Representative Honore for her briefing
this morning, and to join others in expressing my
condolences to Egypt for the terrible attacks that took
place there on Palm Sunday. Our thoughts and prayers
are with them.

At the outset, I think it is important to point to the
progress that Haiti has made over the past 13 years. In
these meetings we often discuss the most pressing and
recent developments, and that can occasionally mean
that we lose sight of the overall trajectory of countries
on our agenda. For Haiti, that trajectory is upwards.
We have seen the professionalization and reform
of the Haitian National Police, and we have seen the
improvement in the security section. We have witnessed
credible and fair elections, as the Special Representative
just outlined, which have led to a peaceful transfer of
power and a return to constitutional order. We were all
shocked when Haiti was struck by natural disasters, but
we have also seen the resilience of the Haitian people
and the process of rebuilding.

Clearly this is not a story of uninterrupted
progress. There is much more to be done, especially
where protecting human rights, empowering women,
widening access to justice and, of course, achieving
long-term development are concerned. Along with
many others in this Chamber today, the United Kingdom
is gravely concerned about the continued presence of
cholera in the country. We have contributed more than
$600,000 to the United Nations Haiti Cholera Response
Multi-Partner Trust Fund. I urge others to step up and
make what contributions that they can so that together
we can rid Haiti ofthat horrific disease once and for all.

Despite those challenges, Haiti in 2017 is a different
country than that of 2004, the year in which the
mandate of the United Nations Stabilization Mission
in Haiti (MINUSTAH) began. As President Moise said
in his inauguration speech in February, it is time for
MINUSTAH to go. A great deal has been achieved
by the Mission during those 13 years. On behalf of
the United Kingdom, I want to offer our thanks to
everyone involved in MINUSTAH and the United
Nations country team for their hard work in securing
that outcome.

I would like to particularly express my thanks to
Sandra Honore for her services as Special Representative
for almost four years.

We want to see a phased withdrawal over the next
six months and a successor Mission continue some
of MINUSTAH's work. To be effective, that mission
must have access to the most appropriate personnel
and equipment. It should be underpinned by high-
quality training and skilled leadership alongside clear
accountability for underperformance and misconduct.
The successor to MINUSTAH, like all peace operations
mandated by the Council, must have a clear exit
strategy. That exit strategy should be established at the
beginning of the mission, not at its end, and include
clear benchmarks covering a two year-year period.

Joint analysis and planning with the United Nations
country team are critical, as is the gradual but steady
handover of responsibilities to Haiti's Government and
national institutions. A two-year exit strategy should
safeguard Haiti from the risk of a sudden and hastily
planned withdrawal or, quite differently, the quagmire
of a mission that never ends. That does not signify the
end of the United Nations commitment to Haiti, and it is
not an end of the United Kingdom's commitment, either.

Even with the leadership and the resilience of its
people, Haiti will still require development support
from the international community for peace to be
sustained. The decisions that we make in the Council
are critical to that goal. We need to select the right
United Nations tools to provide the right support, and
we need to show the courage and discipline to let Haiti
stand on its own.

