Judge Jorda (spoke in French): I am deeply
honoured to be addressing the Council again as
President of the International Tribunal. As members are
aware, a short while ago my colleagues once more
displayed their confidence in me, and I will endeavour
to show myself worthy. I am also pleased to have at my
side President Pillay and the Prosecutor, Ms. Del
Ponte, as we report to the Council on the situation of
the International Tribunal over which I preside in The
Hague, and inform the Council about our concerns
regarding the continuation of our activity in the years
to come.

In the eighth annual report of the International
Tribunal, which I had the honour of presenting to the
General Assembly yesterday, members will find a
comprehensive statement of the activity and reforms
we undertook last year.

Today I would like to draw the Council's
attention more specifically to two questions which I
believe merit in-depth reflection. The first is as
follows: in the light of the upheavals recently
witnessed both in the States of the former Yugoslavia,
which are now more inclined than before to try their
nationals themselves, and on the international scene,
where the fight against terrorism - as the Council
knows better than I - has become a new priority for
the Member States, must we not reflect in concert on
the future directions to give to the International
Tribunal? The second - which unfortunately is not a
new one 4 may be put thus: how can all the high-
ranking political and military officials still at large
who, through their crimes, allegedly jeopardized peace
and security in the Balkans be arrested at the earliest
possible opportunity?

These two questions deserve to be raised, as I see
it, at this juncture when the judges of the Tribunal,
which is of course an ad hoc institution, are embarking
on their third mandate after already eight years of
activity and are reflecting legitimately on the
continuation and accomplishment of their work.

Yet, before sharing with the Council these two
matters of concern, allow me to give a brief overview
of the current status of the International Tribunal and
the reforms undertaken in the period under
consideration.
The structural and operational reforms of the
International Tribunal are producing their initial effects
and leading to a substantial increase in its activity.

The year 2000-2001 will undeniably have been
marked by the implementation of four major reforms of
the structures and operations of the International
Tribunal.

Briefly, I will remind the Council that the first
reform seeks mainly to expedite the proceedings. It
gives the judge a more active role during both the pre-
trial phase and the trial itself. Through the use of ad
litem judges, it also makes it possible to increase the
International Tribunal's trial capacity. This is in
accordance with internal reforms.

At this point, I would like to offer the Council my
special thanks for having acted so rapidly in support of
this reform that is essential for the future of the
Tribunal, and for having adopted resolution 1329
(2000) of 30 November 2000 to this end.

The second reform, which is currently being
implemented, seeks to improve the organization and
operations of the two International Tribunals' Appeals
Chambers, which will soon be faced with a significant
increase in workload as a result of the expanding
activities of the Trial Chambers. This is a matter of
consistency: in reforming the Trial Chambers, we are
reforming the Appeals Chambers as well.

The purpose of the third reform is to provide the
International Tribunal with a genuine defence organ.
Ensuring that the trials are balanced has been one of
the everyday concerns of the judges since the Tribunal
was established. Beyond counsel actually being in
court, such balance requires that there be a defence
counsel organization guaranteeing counsel's
independence and professional ethics. The bar - a sort
of international bar - should come into being in 2002
once the necessary consultation has been completed, in
particular with defence counsel.
The fourth reform, which has already been
carried out, concerns the three organs of the
International Tribunal: the Chambers, the Office of the
Prosecutor and the Registry. So that these organs
coordinate more closely in setting the judicial priorities
and so that the resources of the International Tribunal
are better managed, a Coordination Council and a
Management Committee were instituted in January
2001, and they have met several times since.

With the adoption of these reforms, the judicial
activity of the International Tribunal has increased. As
of September 2001, following the adoption of the
Security Council resolution, the first six ad litem
judges began to serve in three new trials. Thus, for the
first time in its history, the International Tribunal is
hearing four trials at once. As of January 2002, three
new ad litem judges will serve at the International
Tribunal. The Trial Chambers will be holding six
simultaneous trials on a daily basis, which will make it
possible for the International Tribunal to double its
trial capacity, as I promised the Council last year. This
will enable us - with the reservations I will present
later to complete the Trial Chamber proceedings in
2007-2008. Of course, to achieve that objective, the
accused must continue to be arrested and to surrender
voluntarily at a sustained rate. The necessary resources
must also be granted to us in order to sustain
particularly the work of the ad litem judges. That is a
target that at this time would seem to me difficult given
the imminent adoption of the 2002-2003 budget. It is
my duty to recall that. Nonetheless, it is a target that
we will try to achieve: carrying out these six trials
simultaneously beginning in January 2002.

The increase in judicial activity would not have
been possible had it not been for the Member States'
closer cooperation with the International Tribunal and
their increased participation in arresting the accused
and gathering evidence. I would underscore the change
of political regime in the Republic of Croatia, which
resulted in enhanced cooperation with the International
Tribunal. The arrest of Slobodan Milosevic' and his
transfer to The Hague likewise constituted a historic
turning point.

However, this new spirit of cooperation - the
Prosecutor will address this better soon - is still too
inconsistent, and it must be continued with respect to
all the accused, particularly Mr. Karadzic and General
Mladic, who are still on the run more than six years
after having been charged. I must recall that. This is

just one example. We have 29 fugitives. The Council
should know that. It is obvious - and the Prosecutor
will speak to the Council about this state of
cooperation - that I would not hesitate, since I have
received the Prosecutor's report on this, to officially
bring to the Council's attention, in view of the powers
conferred on me by the statute and the rules of
evidence and procedures, the failure of the States
concerned. That cooperation should also be broadened
with respect to the enforcement of sentences, as
envisaged by the statute. I will return to this in a
moment.

It is against this international backdrop, now
more favourable towards the Tribunal, that the number
of people who have been arrested or who have
voluntarily surrendered has multiplied in the last few
months, bringing the number of accused detained in
The Hague to 50. The activity of the Trial Chambers
has greatly increased: six judgements affecting 17
accused were issued, and several hundred decisions
were issued during proceedings. The Appeals Chamber
has issued some 30 interlocutory decisions and three
judgements on merits for seven of the accused.

However, I wish to inform the Council today
about my second concern, which, in my view, is the
most critical one. The Tribunal is fully operational -I
believe that I have demonstrated that today - thanks
to the Council's unfailing support for us. But the
Tribunal is facing a new reality. Should not its
priorities not be rethought?

The political upheavals recently witnessed in the
Balkans have gradually changed the perception of the
International Tribunal held by the States of the region.
However, should these upheavals not also lead us to
change our own view as to the ability of these States to
try some of the war criminals in their territory? From
this perspective, should we not, for example, further
promote the new national reconciliation processes the
Balkan States are setting up, such as the truth and
reconciliation commissions?

On the international scene, where other priorities
are gradually, and legitimately, taking centre stage for
Member States, particularly the fight against world
terrorism, the International Tribunal must more than
ever accomplish its mission in an expeditious and
exemplary fashion. This is especially so given that
public opinion challenging the legitimacy and the
credibility of the International Tribunal that is called
on to try crimes, some dating back over 10 years, is
beginning to make itself heard.

Admittedly, as I indicated yesterday to the
General Assembly, we can still introduce other internal
reforms in order to expedite the proceedings further,
and I will actively devote myself to so doing. Yet it
must be acknowledged that the proceedings have
already been substantially transformed by the four
major reforms I have just mentioned and can no longer
be appreciably amended without interfering with the
fundamental features of an international criminal trial
as defined by the Council in the statute.

For this reason, we should think together about
new directions to assign to the International Tribunal
for the years ahead. Allow me to try to outline them.

The judges of the two International Tribunals,
who met last September in Dublin in the presence of
the Secretary-General's representative, Mr. Hans
Corell, reflected on the priorities to assign to the
International Tribunal for the years to come. In
examining the results and prospects of their mission
after eight years of activity, they first discussed
whether - as called for in Security Council resolution
1329 (2000) of 30 November 2000, which provided us
with support so that we were able to expedite
proceedings - the International Tribunal should not
focus more on prosecuting crimes constituting the most
serious breaches of international public law and order,
primarily those committed by high-ranking military
and political officials. After all, it is mainly those
crimes that jeopardize international peace and security.
Ms. Del Ponte, whose responsibility it is to initiate
prosecutions and to whom I would like to pay tribute at
this point, shares many of our concerns on this issue.

The cases of lesser importance for the Tribunal ~
although, as we would all agree around this table, all
criminal matters are important - could, under certain
conditions, be relocated; that is, tried by the courts of
the States created out of the former Yugoslavia. This
solution would have the advantage of considerably
lightening the International Tribunal's workload,
thereby allowing it to complete its mission even earlier.
Moreover, it would make the trial of the cases referred
to the national courts more transparent to the local
population and make a more effective contribution to
reconciliation among the peoples of the Balkans.

However, let us understand clearly that in order
for the International Tribunal to further focus its
activity on prosecuting and trying the major military
leaders and high-ranking officials, the States must
participate even more actively in arresting and
transferring them to The Hague. As the Council is
aware, some of them still reside with total impunity in
the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, while others have
taken refuge in the territory of the Republika Srpska. If
these great leaders are arrested on 15 December 2007,
we will certainly not be able to finish our work on 31
December 2007. That is obvious.

For it to be possible to relocate the cases of lesser
importance for the Tribunal, the judicial systems of the
States of the former Yugoslavia must be reconstructed
on democratic foundations. The national courts must be
in a position to accomplish their work with total
independence and impartiality and with due regard for
the principles of international humanitarian law and the
protection of human rights. This would suppose,
among other things, that, under the aegis of the
representatives of the international community in the
Balkans, for example, judges or international observers
would be sent to participate in or be present at the trials
of war criminals and that the training programmes for
local judges already set up would be expanded.

I am aware that the process of judicial
reconstruction is making good progress, and I wish to
emphasize that the International Tribunal is prepared to
make its contribution. I would also like to state that we
are prepared to reflect on what amendments to the rules
of procedure and evidence would be implied by a
redefinition of the relationship between the
International Tribunal and national courts or, indeed,
the other processes of reconciliation.

I will conclude by stressing that we have
implemented almost all the reforms we have
considered vital and that they are beginning to produce
the desired results. It nonetheless remains that to
complete the work of the International Tribunal within
a time frame compatible with the mission conferred on
it by the Council, fresh reflection f and this is my
own View - must be undertaken, in particular on the
basis ofthe various observations I have just set out.

For my part, and within the strict limits of my
authority, I remain at the Council's disposal to
collaborate in this exercise of reflection and, indeed, in
any ensuing action. I believe that after eight years of
intense activity, this process of reflection is both
appropriate and crucial. Upon it hangs the ultimate
success of an unprecedented undertaking that the
Council has instigated, one whose role as a forerunner
will undeniably be decisive for the International
Criminal Court, whose opening is now more imminent
than ever.

