Mr. Mnatsakanyan (Armenia): We thank the
Bolivian presidency for the inclusion of this important
agenda item in the programme of work of the Security
Council and for the comprehensive concept note.

Armenia attaches great importance to the effective
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) and has
been submitting regular reports on the measures
taken by national authorities to the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004). An important development in strengthening the
implementation of, and compliance with, the provisions
of that resolution was the adoption of resolution 2325
(2016), in December 2016, which we co-sponsored
together with other 76 States. We also commend the
initiative of Spain to establish a Group of Friends of
resolution 1540 (2004).

There is widespread recognition of the threat
of proliferation of weapons of mass destruction by
terrorists and non-State groups, heightened by the
rapid advances in science, technology and international
commerce that could give rise to a risk of the misuse of
scientific developments.
Capacity-building and the strengthening of
institutional arrangements at the national level are
the necessary prerequisites to address the existing
and emerging threats associated with the proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction and to counter the
growing risk of weapons of mass destruction falling
into the hands of terrorists and non-State groups.

The Government of Armenia has been consistent
in reinforcing the implementation of the provisions of
resolutions 1540 (2004) and 2325 (2016) at the national
level. We have been enacting a broad range of legislative
and administrative measures aimed at safeguarding
radioactive and nuclear material, strengthening border
security against the smuggling of hazardous materials
and enhancing capacities to investigate andprosecute any
such incidents. Rigid legislative safeguards have been
put in place for the licensing and physical protection of
nuclear and radioactive material. The criminal code has
been amended with a view to significantly increasing
the term of sentences for the illicit trafficking, import,
export or re-export of chemical, biological, radiological
or nuclear materials.

Significant steps have also been taken in the field
of biological security. In particular, in 2016 Armenia
adopted a national programme on the implementation
of the Biological Weapons Convention. The programme
aims at increasing awareness among the population,
ensuring the accreditation of existing laboratories in
accordance with international standards, establishing
a network of such laboratories, as well as securing
adequate professional competence of employees
working with biological agents. Furthermore, the
Government has set up an inter-agency working group
to ensure the implementation of the provisions of
the Convention.

In November 2016, Armenia also adopted a
national strategy related to chemical, biological,
radiological materials, which outlines the threats and
risks in the field and respective measures to address the
emerging challenges.

With a view to strengthening the international legal
framework in combating the proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction, Armenia has supported the initiative
to establish an international legal instrument for the
suppression of acts of chemical and biological terrorism.

We encourage the 1540 Committee to continue its
cooperation with relevant international and regional
organizations based on comparative advantages
and best practices developed on the ground. In that
respect, an effective response to the specific needs
of States, upon their request, could bring together the
efforts of all actors on the ground, including donor
States. We recognize and support the role of regional
organizations and multilateral initiatives in promoting
the comprehensive implementation of resolution 1540
(2004). The Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe in particular has been instrumental in
facilitating the implementation of resolution 1540
(2004) by its participating States.

The Global Initiative to Combat Acts of Nuclear
Terrorism, as a partnership of 88 States to promote
global nuclear security, has been an important and
useful platform to facilitate cooperation aimed at
nuclear detection, nuclear forensics, response and
mitigation of threats.

We condemn the use of chemical weapons by anyone
and in any part of the world and highlight the importance
of verifiable, transparent and internationally mandated
investigation of any alleged use of chemical substances
banned under international law.

