Mrs. DiCarlo (United States of America): I thank
Mr. Ging for his briefing.

As a result of the ongoing violence in eastern
Ukraine, thousands of Ukrainians have had to flee
their homes. Many have been subjected to harassment,
arbitrary detention and killing at the hands of Russian-
supported separatists. The general environment of
insecurity and instability has contributed to a growing
number of internally displaced persons (IDPs) inside
Ukraine and in those seeking refuge outside of Ukraine.

To address the serious situation, the Government
and the people of Ukraine have undertaken important
steps to provide humanitarian assistance to internally
displaced persons throughout the country. We commend
the quick response of the Ukrainian Government in
the areas recently liberated from separatists' control.
Electricity and water services are coming back on,
pensions are being paid again and rebuilding has
already begun.

For those who have not yet been able to return
home, a rapid, coordinated effort by Ukraine and the
international humanitarian community is essential to
identify and respond to the urgent needs of the most
vulnerable. To that end, we encourage Ukraine to
coordinate quickly a comprehensive IDP registration
system, ensure the harmonization of assistance efforts
and assist in disseminating information on registration
procedures and services.

Doing so will allow for the targeted delivery of
assistance, to which international donors can more
effectively respond. It will also pave the way for a
calibrated response to the unique needs of IDPs. We
commend the United Nations for mobilizing so quickly
to support the Government of Ukraine's efforts.

Regarding Russia's call for a humanitarian
mission in Ukraine, United Nations agencies and
non-governmental organizations are already on
the ground carrying out assessment missions and
providing assistance to vulnerable, conflict-affected
persons, particularly those in liberated areas. Those
organizations are standing by and are ready to provide
more assistance to conflict areas if permitted greater
access and security guarantees by Russia-backed
separatists.

When addressing the humanitarian situation, we
cannot lose sight of one underlying fact: Russia can
stop all of this. The surest way to end the violence is
for Russia to stop the flow of fighters, weapons and
money from Russia into eastern Ukraine. Russia has
the ability to get the separatists it supports to lay down
their arms, sit at the negotiating table and work to
implement President Poroshenko's peace plan. Russia
must also respect Ukraine's sovereignty and territorial
integrity and end its occupation of Crimea.

Yet instead of positive steps, Russia has nearly
doubled the number of its battalions near the Ukrainian
border. Equally troubling is Russia's plan to conduct a
large military exercise near the Ukrainian border, which
will only serve to escalate tensions. We again demand
that Russia halt any and all destabilizing actions.

We understand that Russia has expressed its
concern over the plight of displaced persons and
refugees. Therefore, we call on Russia to allow an
independent assessment of humanitarian needs within
Russia and along the Ukrainian border so that the
international community can better understand the
scale of the issue and so that assistance can be made
available. Otherwise, there is no way to verify the scale
of the outflow to Russia.

I want to note that nearly a month has passed
since the Council agreed to support in every way a
full, thorough and independent investigation into the
downing of Malaysia Airlines Flight 17. We commend
the Government of Ukraine for its cooperation with the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe,
the International Civil Aviation Organization, the
Netherlands, Australia and Malaysia in coordinating
the investigation and allowing Dutch, Australian and
Malaysian police to secure the crash site. We also hold
all sides accountable for the commitment they made on
31 July to protect the integrity of the site and secure
safe access for international investigators. Bodies
remain unaccounted for and there are personal effects
that still need to be retrieved.

Finally, we appreciate the ability of the Secretariat
to arrange emergency briefings on short notice. There
are times when such urgency is merited. We question
whether the situation we are discussing today meets the
standard ofurgency, especially as we will be discussing
the overall situation in Ukraine on Friday.

