Mr. Tidjani (Cameroon): Madam President,
Cameroon would like to join previous speakers in
commending your Government's timely initiative to
convene this important and useful workshop. The
Mano River Basin is, regrettably, one of the most
unstable subregions on our continent. As Africans, we
in Cameroon welcome and deeply appreciate the
support and solidarity extended to the Governments
and peoples of the Mano River Union countries
towards the attainment and consolidation of sustainable
peace and stability in the area.

Much progress has been achieved, at great cost,
on the Sierra Leone front, but the job is far from being
completed, as the unfortunate developments taking
place next door, on the Liberian front, confirm. The
three Mano River Union States are connected by more
than geography alone. They share deep bonds of
history, and culture and socio-economic
interrelationships which make it difficult, if not
impossible, to treat developments in one country as
isolated or limited to that country alone.

That is why we fully support the approach taken
by the present workshop to address the challenges
facing the three Mano River Union countries from a
subregional angle. That is the right way to go.

That is why Cameroon believes that, even as the
international community rightfully rejoices over the
successes registered in Sierra Leone, we should resist
any temptation to become complacent. Not only does
the overall situation inside that country remain fragile
and volatile, the subregional neighbourhood is
increasingly turbulent as a result of the worsening
crisis in Liberia. We feel that the continued policy of
containment against Liberia runs the risk of prolonging
the suffering of the civilian population. How can the
international community strike a fair balance between
pressing the Liberian Government to comply with the
Security Council's demands under the sanctions and
making Liberia a contributing factor to peace and
stability in the entire Mano River Union subregion?
Given the fact that the situations in Sierra Leone and
Liberia are interconnected, peace consolidation efforts
in Sierra Leone will not be sustained unless similar
efforts are made to stabilize Liberia. That is an issue
we need to address squarely.

As we collectively reflect on the way forward in
the Mano River Union countries, Cameroon would like
to put the following questions on the table. What is the
fate of the Liberian soldiers and members of other
armed groups who fled the fighting in Liberia and
crossed over into Sierra Leone? Is there any risk of
seeing them regroup into a vanguard force allied with
disgruntled Sierra Leonean elements to destabilize
Sierra Leone? What are the prospects for convening a
follow-up to the Rabat summit of heads of State of the
Mano River Union countries? How do we best
harmonize the Rabat dialogue process and the peace
efforts of the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS)? What action has been taken so far
by the ECOWAS committee of three on Liberia in
implementing the Yamoussoukro peace plan on
Liberia? How does ECOWAS intend to engage
Liberians United for Reconciliation and Democracy
(LURD) and the Liberian Government to seek a
peaceful settlement of the ongoing conflict? Should
ECOWAS fail to deploy a peacekeeping force in
Liberia, what role should the United Nations play in
that regard? As both the African Union and ECOWAS
have banned unconstitutional changes of Government,
should the United Nations go on record as taking a
similar stance with regard specifically to the current
stand-off in Liberia? Should the Security Council
emulate the Secretary-General's example by
condemning any attempt by any armed group in Liberia
to take power by force? What role should key
international actors, including members of the Security
Council and bilateral and multilateral partners, be
prepared to play to promote dialogue, national
reconciliation and stability in Liberia? Could they
envisage forming a forum for forging a coherent
approach to the challenges facing the Mano River
Union subregion, in particular Liberia?

