Mr. Vieira (Brazil): I thank China for convening
this very important debate. I also thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Ms. Sandra
Honore Braithwaite, for her briefing and reiterate
my Government's appreciation for her leadership.
I also welcome the contribution of the Permanent
Representative of Haiti, Ambassador Denis Re'gis.

Iwould like to start by commending Haitian political
actors for their visible efforts to work together on a joint
legislative agenda that includes more than 50 draft laws
to reinforce State functions, ensure better territorial
planning and improve the business environment in the
country. The "Caravane du changement" initiative,
aimed at revitalizing the agricultural, environmental
and transport sectors, is a good example ofhow a broad-
based national dialogue can forge a common vision
around reform priorities that address the most pressing
socioeconomic and political challenges. Brazil joined
the Economic and Social Council's Ad Hoc Advisory
Group on Haiti in its annual visit to Washington, DC,
and to Port-au-Prince in order to examine ways to
strengthen the partnership between the Government
and the international community in support of the
country's economic recovery and development. The
importance of a responsible transition from the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH)
to the United Nations Mission in Support of Justice in
Haiti (MINUJUSTH), based on realistic planning and
Haitian ownership, was one of its main findings.

Brazil is fully committed to a smooth security
transition in Haiti. Last month, the Brazilian component
concluded the handover of security tasks to the national
police in the commune of Cite Soleil, Port-au-Prince,
in close coordination with MINUSTAH's police
component and while sharing the lessons learned in
more than 10 years of operations in that area.

Although the Haitian National Police capacities have
improved in recent years, it is important to highlight the
considerable remaining challenges that this relatively
young institution faces. The number of police officers
is still insufficient, corresponding to only half of world
standards for public security. Training and management
also need significant improvement and support. We
believe that the successful implementation of the
Haitian National Police strategic plan for the period
2017-2021, just adopted by the Haitian Government,
will be crucial during the transition from MINUSTAH
to MINUJUSTH.

We concur with the observation in the Secretary
General's report (S/2017/604) that MINUJUSTH's
success will largely depend upon its ability to
quickly forge a relationship of partnership, mutual
understanding and cooperation with the Government
on priority challenges that need to be addressed in the
country. Bold Government leadership will be vital to
consolidating the progress made thus far.

The reference to a "two-year mandate horizon"
for MINUJUSTH in the Secretary General's report is
not the exact language adopted in Council resolution
2350 (2017), which reads "a projected two-year
timeframe" - a more flexible decision that is line with
the conditions on the ground. Pre-empting the closure
of a mission that has not been established yet may
jeopardize its functioning and the implementation of
its mandate.

We are glad to see that the Secretary General's report
acknowledges the importance of quick-impact projects
implemented by MINUSTAH in support of the Haitian
National Police in recent months. We believe that this
important tool should also be present in the section
which describes the operations of MINUJUSTH. The
planning under way should duly reflect and implement
Council resolution 2350 (2017), including paragraph 11,
which

"[D]ecides that the rule of law efforts of
MINUJUSTH, including community violence
reduction efforts and quick impact projects,
as appropriate, will be part of a strategy
towards a continued, progressive transition to
development actors".

Those projects have played an important role in

supporting core stabilization objectives and will
certainly be crucial to the consolidation of the rule of
law in Haiti.

Brazil noted with appreciation the Council's visit
to Haiti last month, which aimed at renewing support
to the Haitian Government and people and gathering
first-hand elements for a successful transition from
MINUSTAH to MINUJUSTH. The 30 June briefing on
the visit (see S/PV.7994) made it clear that, for several
stakeholders, the fact that MINUJUSTH has been kept
under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations
fails to recognize the significant progress that has
been achieved in Haiti during MINUSTAH'S 13 years
of operations.

Besides that, we could not help but notice that the
issue of cholera was mentioned at every meeting as a
serious concern that required attention. MINUJUSTH
should be empowered to support the implementation of
the new United Nations approach to cholera in Haiti.
Brazil's own support to that approach remains steadfast.
We will continue to collaborate with the health sector
in Haiti, including through bilateral initiatives, such
as the three hospitals and the rehabilitation centre that
the Brazilian Government has supported with a budget
totalling $90 million to date. As the United Nations
reconfigures its presence in the country, we believe
that Haiti could also benefit from the support of the
Peacebuilding Commission and its Peacebuilding Fund.

I would like to conclude by reaffirming Brazil's
long-term commitment to, and solidarity with, Haiti,
as well as our confidence in the Haitian people's
persistence and their determination to succeed in their
quest for stability, democracy and prosperity.

