Mr. Errezuriz (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): Chile
thanks the United Kingdom, in its capacity as President
of the Security Council for November, for having
convened this debate on such an important subject as
the protection of civilians in armed conflict. We also
thank the Secretary-General for his report (S/2010/579)
and welcome the briefings we have heard from
representatives of the United Nations and the
International Committee of the Red Cross on this issue.
3
Chile associates itself with the statement to be
made by the representative of Costa Rica on behalf of
the Human Security Network.

More than a decade has passed since the first
peacekeeping operation was deployed in Sierra Leone
with an explicit mandate to protect civilians. Through
these years, we have accumulated important experience
and, at the same time, established a broad legal
framework through the Council's thematic resolutions
on the protection of civilians and other historic
resolutions. We have also made significant progress in
peacekeeping operations, virtually all of which are now
involved in activities related to the protection of
civilians and eight of which have specific physical
protection mandates.

In that context, peacekeeping operations have
become multidimensional and have distinct
components linked to the protection of civilians, such
as the monitoring of human rights, humanitarian
assistance, capacity-building, the restoration of
infrastructure and services, and security sector reform,
among others. Chile believes that a comprehensive
approach is the most effective way to address and
respond to threats to the human security of civilian
populations in armed conflict.

However, despite the greater attention that has
been paid by the Council and the aforementioned
progress, the prevalence of civilian casualties and the
number of people affected by armed conflict continue
to be overwhelming. This is noted by the Secretary-
General in his eighth report. We also continue to see
the challenges that he noted in his report of 29 May
2009, in which he stressed the importance of

"enhancing compliance by parties to conflict with
international law...; enhancing compliance with
the law by non-State armed groups; enhancing
protection through more effective and better
resourced peacekeeping and other relevant
missions; enhancing humanitarian access; and
enhancing accountability for violations of the
law" (5/2009/277, para. 5).

Chile condemns the recurring attacks on camps
for refugees and internally displaced persons and on
humanitarian personnel. We also reject the use of
sexual violence and forced displacement as tactics of
war, the widespread recruitment of children, the
proliferation in the illicit traffic and undue use of small
arms and light weapons, and the danger represented by
anti-personnel landmines and unexploded ordinance
left over from warfare. We also deplore the use of
civilians as human shields.

Chile welcomes both the normative measures that
have been adopted and practices on the ground itself
aimed at preventing and attenuating the effects of
violence against civilians in armed conflict, as pointed
out by the Secretary-General in his report.

Chile also commends the establishment in the
Security Council of the informal Expert Group on the
Protection of Civilians. We appreciate its excellent
work. We believe this to be an example to be
duplicated in other instances, such as in the area of
peacebuilding.

We also acknowledge the importance of including
civilian protection as a component of the mandates of
peacekeeping operations, including clear guidelines
and intervention standards to effectively implement
that aspect of the mission. That must be done without
prejudice to the primary responsibility of host
Governments to protect their own civilians.

Increasing interaction between host countries, the
Security Council, troop-contributing countries and the
Secretariat could also help to narrow the gap between
the decision-making process and real implementation
on the ground. We were pleased to note the
independent study by the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs and the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations with regard to the
implementation civilian protection mandates in
peacekeeping operations.

Respecting and implementing international
humanitarian law are inextricably linked to combating
impunity. Eradicating impunity should be seen as part
of a comprehensive focus on seeking sustainable peace,
justice, truth and national reconciliation. Concerted
efforts are required in cooperating with national
judicial mechanisms in order to develop their
capacities and ensure that perpetrators are brought to
justice and tried in accordance with international
standards.

Restoring the rule of law, security sector reform
and transitional justice mechanisms are key areas in
which national systems should be strengthened and
supported through effective international cooperation.
The International Criminal Court and other "mixed"
tribunals and courts have an important complementary
function in trying persons suspected of having
committed international crimes. It is of the utmost
importance that national and international criminal
justice institutions have all the necessary support on
the ground. Chile supports all measures aimed at
combating impunity, both at the national and
international levels.

Civilians affected by violence in armed conflicts
have a right to reparations and compensation. In that
regard, we should not ignore the value of symbolic
reparations as a way to heal society's wounds in post-
conflict countries.

I should like to conclude by once again
emphasizing that States have the primary responsibility
to protect civilians.

