Mr. Danforth (United States of America): Today,
I will provide the Security Council with an update on
the situation in Iraq, in accordance with Security
Council resolution 1546 (2004). This oral report will
summarize the more detailed written report that we are
releasing today.

First, on behalf of the multinational force, I thank
the Secretary-General and his Special Representative
for their report which we found to be thorough and
encouraging. Also, I express thanks to the members of
the United Nations team working on the Iraqi elections.
While the security situation in Iraq remains difficult,
the increase in United Nations staff and support is
essential to Iraq's political transition process. The
United Nations presence is critically important to
successful elections next 30 January and beyond, and
to economic development and reconstruction.

The multinational force consists of over 150,000
troops and support personnel from over 30 countries. It
remains in place at the invitation of the Iraqi
Government with the goal of contributing to security
and stability and of assisting the Iraqis in building a
democracy. The force, in conjunction with the Iraqi
Government and international and national non-
governmental organizations, provides extensive
humanitarian assistance and highly specialized
reconstruction resources. And, of course, the force
works aggressively to isolate and neutralize those who
threaten the security of the Iraqi people. Members of
the force continue to work bravely and tirelessly
alongside their Iraqi counterparts to combat terrorism,
destroy weapons that threaten Iraq's stability, gather
intelligence and wage combat operations against
insurgents and terrorists. While the opponents of peace
and security are tenacious, the multinational force has
made progress in creating conditions that will allow for
free and fair elections and a transition to democracy.

Multinational force units devoted to
reconstruction and public welfare repair bridges, ports,
roads and railroads. They construct and repair schools,
hospitals, post offices and other public buildings
throughout Iraq. They provide medical treatment and
vaccinations for civilians. Multinational force units
devoted to security have continued to dispose of
thousands of tons of ammunition and mines that could
otherwise be used by insurgents to destabilize the
Government.

Resolution 1546 (2004) welcomes ongoing
efforts by the Interim Iraqi Government to develop its
own security forces. The multinational force is helping
to build this capability through the recruiting, training,
equipping and mentoring of Iraqi security forces. The
Iraqi security forces - which include the police,
border enforcement, army, national guard, intervention
force, special operations force, air force and coastal
defence force - currently number roughly 116,240
trained and equipped people, almost three times the
number of troops from the last reporting period. While
the trends are positive, much work remains before
Iraq's forces can take full responsibility for the
country's security.

Until Iraqi forces are fully trained and operational
and insurgents cease terrorizing the country, security
will remain a serious concern. In the months since our
last report to the Council, we have witnessed
significant attacks against the multinational force and
the Iraqi people with small arms and rocket-propelled
grenades, mortars and explosive devices. Insurgents
have attacked Iraqis who work for their Government,
as well as workers from outside the country, in efforts
to disrupt the rebuilding of the country.

The multinational force understands United
Nations concerns about the safety of its brave and
dedicated people and is committed to providing
security for the growing United Nations staff in Iraq.
As we provide that security, we urge the United
Nations to put additional personnel on the ground.
Additional United Nations support is essential to the
future of Iraq, and especially to the success of next
month's elections.

Resolution 1546 (2004) authorized a distinct
entity to provide security for United Nations personnel
in Iraq. In its absence, United States troops have done
that work. We are encouraged that several
Governments have recently confirmed their intent to
contribute to the distinct security entity authorized by
the resolution, and we are hopeful that the group will
be operational by January 2005, in time for the
elections. Also, the United Nations is taking important
steps to provide for its own security by including a
substantial formed guard unit and personal security
details for its personnel. Security for the United
Nations in Iraq will be a key issue for some time, and
we urge donors in the strongest possible terms to step
forward with donations of forces and finances.

It is with great hope that we anticipate Iraq's
elections on 30 January. The elections will be not the
end of a process, but rather a beginning - an
important step in the development of a democratic
nation. With perseverance and a steadfast commitment
to the effort, and with a strong partnership of the Iraqi
people, the multinational force and the United Nations,
a free and democratic Iraq will emerge from the
tyranny and terrorism that have plagued the country for
so long. That day will be a great one for Iraq, for the
United Nations and for the world.

A longer, written version of this report will be
provided for circulation as a document of the Council.

