Mr. Ramirez Carreflo (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We want to thank
Ambassador Roman Oyarzun Marchesi for his
presentation of the quarterly report of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1737 (2006). Similarly, we would like to express to him
and his team our gratitude for the efforts undertaken
to promote and fulfil the Committee's programme of
work.

The consideration by the Security Council of
the Iranian nuclear issue is at a critical transitional
phase. The Security Council's unanimous support
for the agreement adopted in resolution 2231 (2015)
has helped to lay the groundwork for the successful
implementation of the Joint Comprehensive Plan
of Action and the promotion and maintenance of
the international non-proliferation regime. The
achievement of that important diplomatic agreement
demonstrates once again that, through dialogue and
negotiation, peaceful solutions can be found to disputes
that affect international peace and security.

The adoption of the Joint Plan has had a positive
impact on the start of a new chapter in diplomatic
relations between Iran and some very influential
members of the international community. The brotherly
country of Iran is a key partner in the search for political
and negotiated solutions to the serious conflicts that
afflict the roiled region of the Middle East, solutions
that require the taking into account of Iran's views
and interests. In that context, we welcome the fact that
dialogue and cooperation has continued between Iran
and the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA).
We also welcome the recent reports submitted by that
multilateral institution that indicate that monitoring
and verification activities are being carried out without
any setbacks, and with the support and facilitation of
the Iranian authorities. We encourage the parties to
intensify their efforts so that by the end of 2015 all
outstanding issues between the IAEA and Iran can
be resolved. We acknowledge the role played by the
Agency in resolving all issues related to the Iranian
nuclear programme, and hope that cooperation will
grow stronger with a view to moving forward with the
measures related to the implementation of the Plan.

The Islamic Republic of Iran, an important
member of the Non-Aligned Movement, has given
tangible evidence of its commitment to comply with
its obligations undertaken with the framework of the
agreements reached with all the parties involved in the
process. In that respect, we urge taking advantage of
this political juncture to focus on resolving differences
on the basis of dialogue and negotiation. Moreover, it is
important to underscore that, once the IAEA informs
the Security Council that the Islamic Republic of
Iran has completed the implementation of the initial
measures related to its nuclear programme as set out in
resolution 2231 (2015), a significant change is expected
to take place with regard to the sanctions regime
applied to that country. The definitive lifting of the
Security Council sanctions regime and the unilateral
coercive measures implemented illegally against both
Iran, as well as against other countries in relation to
their cooperation with Iran, should be the next step
once implementation day takes place, in accordance
with the Plan of Action. We therefore hope that the end
of the sanctions regime will facilitate, on the basis of
mutual respect, the development of full relations in the
economic, trade, financial, technological and energy
sectors between Iran and the other members of the
international community interested in strengthening
ties with it.

In that context, Venezuela once again invokes
the sovereign right of developing countries to use
nuclear energy for peaceful purposes in accordance
with article IV of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons. To that end, Venezuela believes
that, in addressing the issues on the agenda of the 1737
Committee, it is important to bear the current political
context in mind as we move through this crucial phase
of the implementation of the Joint Comprehensive
Plan of Action. Under the current circumstances, the
Committee should focus its efforts on contributing to
the smooth implementation of the Joint Comprehensive
Plan of Action and play a constructive role so as to
ensure a definitive and comprehensive solution to the
Iranian nuclear issue, while carrying out its work in a
balanced manner in order to avoid any measures that
could impact or hinder the implementation of the Plan.

With regard to the cases presented in the report ofthe
Chair of the 1737 Committee, we encourage the parties
to settle those differences in an atmosphere of respect
and dialogue and based on objective investigations
in the relevant bodies. We urge the Committee, in
accordance with its mandate, to investigate and consider
the information on cases and to take appropriate action
with the consent of all its members, including the
country concerned itself.

We would like to reiterate that the most important
task at this stage is to move forward with the
implementation of the Joint Comprehensive Plan of
Action. My country reaffirms its full support for the
implementation of this historic undertaking. We also
encourage all Member States to respect and comply
in good faith with the provisions adopted in this
comprehensive agreement.

In conclusion, we would like to reiterate that,
once the Iranian nuclear issue is resolved, the Security
Council and the international community should devote
themselves to continuing to work on the denuclearization
of other regions of the world, in particular the Middle
East.

