Mr. Li Baodong (China) (spoke in Chinese): The
Chinese delegation wishes to thank you, Sir, for having
convened today's meeting. We also thank the High
Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina, Mr. Inzko,
for his briefing and for his efforts to achieve progress
in the political process in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

I welcome the presence at today's meeting of the
Chairman of the Presidency of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Mr. Haris Silajdzie, and thank him for his
statement.

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina has
remained generally stable of late. Reforms in the area
of the Constitution, the rule of law and national
defence have contributed to some progress.
Preparations are under way for the general elections
scheduled for October, and economic reform has
achieved some results.

At the same time, Bosnia and Herzegovina is
confronting challenges that merit the due attention of
all parties. These challenges have been exacerbated by
attempts to hinder the implementation of the Dayton
Peace Agreement, which threaten to undermine State
sovereignty and authority, as well as existing
legislation. The integrity of the State is under threat.

In Bosnia and Herzegovina, economic
development has slowed, hampered by the international
economic crisis, while social problems have been
exacerbated, which is a cause of concern. China
respects the independence and territorial integrity of
Bosnia and Herzegovina and the right of its various
ethnic groups to choose their own paths to
development. We sincerely hope that all parties
concerned in Bosnia and Herzegovina will strive to
implement the Dayton Peace Agreement and work
actively for dialogue to strengthen the political and
reconciliation process, to ensure the success of the
general elections to be held in October, to achieve
further progress in the political and economic areas,
and to bring peace, stability and prosperity to Bosnia
and Herzegovina and the entire Balkan region.

We support the efforts of the international
community to strengthen its mediation with a view to
attaining high-level dialogue and concrete results. We
hope that the International Monetary Fund will duly
address the dire consequences of the economic and
political situation in the region and pursue vigorous
measures to improve it.
China welcomes the intention of the European
Union (EU) to continue to play an active role in
maintaining security and stability and promoting socio-
economic development in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
The EU Force in Bosnia and Herzegovina has begun to
extend military assistance to the Bosnian army, which
will help to safeguard State sovereignty. China and
Bosnia and Herzegovina share a long-standing
friendship and have seen their relations thrive.
Mr. Nikola Spiric', Chairman of the Council of
Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina, recently
concluded a successful visit to China, and we are doing
our utmost, alongside the international community, to
contribute to sustainable peace and development in his
country.

