Mr. Percaya (Indonesia): Let me begin by
thanking you, Mr. President, for having convened this
open debate of the Security Council. I would also like
to thank the Secretary-General for his comprehensive
briefing.

I wish to focus my statement on the question of
Palestine.

This debate comes amid the rapidly worsening
situation in the Gaza Strip. The horrible and
indiscriminate attacks upon the Palestinian civilian
population, especially in Shujaiya and Khan Younis,
along with the similar violence unfolding in the
occupied Palestinian territory in the past several weeks,
have shocked the people of Indonesia.

It is particularly saddening to consider that those
brutal attacks are taking place during Ramadan, the
holy month during which the blessings of the Almighty
have been promised to us. Rather than focusing on
the blessings of the Almighty, the reality is that the
Palestinian people is forced to endure a brutal and
inhumane assault by Israel. In that regard, Indonesia
strongly condemns Israel's indiscriminate killings and
its excessive as well as disproportionate use of force.

Indonesia is encouraged by the Secretary-General's
recent words on the Israeli offensive in Gaza, which
stressed that "there can be no military solution to
this conflict". We certainly welcome the initiatives of
the relevant parties and key countries in pursuit of a
ceasefire, as well as the engagement of the Secretary-
General through his travel to the region. Indonesia
hopes that those actions will strongly encourage the
Security Council to act.

Israel's military aggression in Gaza must stop
immediately, and it is the responsibility of the Council
to act decisively to bring it to a halt. For Indonesia,
the Israeli aggression is yet another test of whether
the Security Council will live up to its responsibilities
towards international peace and the protection of
vulnerable populations under the Charter of the United
Nations. Should the Council again fail to act, that
would not only represent a failure of the Organization,
but also the defeat of peace and humanity.

The loss ofcivilians on both sides ofthe Palestinian-
Israeli conflict is not only deeply disturbing, it also
prolongs the animosity and resentment between the
two communities. So long as the violence continues,
the prospects for ajust and lasting peace between Israel
and its neighbours will remain on the distant horizon.
Despite that obvious fact, Israel persists in its acts of
defiance, ignoring the fact that its occupation is the
root cause of the violence. It is obvious that stopping
the madness of the Israeli aggression is only the first
step towards peace. Without Israel's withdrawal from
all of its occupied territories, the world will continue
to witness violence, not only in Palestine but in Israel
itself. Ireiterate: it is Palestine that is occupied by Israel.
It is Palestine that is struggling for its sovereignty and
independence. Suppression of that legitimate struggle is
not self-defence, but a blatant violation of international
law.

I would like to reiterate that the need for a
comprehensive, just and lasting peace in the Middle
East, based on the two-State solution, is now more
pressing than ever. The world is witness to the fact
that the might of the Israeli armed forces has only
strengthened the tenacity and determination of the
Palestinian people. Therefore, again echoing the words
of the Secretary-General, there can be no military
solution to the conflict. Only the establishment of an
independent State of Palestine, with East Jerusalem
as its capital, can yield what we all yearn for: peace
between Israel and Palestine.

To conclude, I wish to express once again Indonesia's
unwavering support for the Palestinian people and their
legitimate struggle for self-determination. I would also
like to call again on the Council to act immediately
and decisively to stop the Israeli aggression, to ensure

unhindered access to humanitarian assistance for all
victims and to bring all parties back to the negotiating
table.

