Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): I would like to thank Under-Secretary-General Lowcock and Special Envoy Griffiths for their briefings. It is not often that we start Yemen discussions with reasons to hope, so let me begin by welcoming the news of the prisoner release. The first flights happened today following the agreement, on 27 September, by the parties to release 1,081 prisoners. I particularly applaud the efforts of the International Committee of the Red Cross in that regard. Today's news is not just about that specific confidence-building measure; it also demonstrates that dialogue can lead to positive outcomes. That momentum now needs to be carried into the political tracks. The parties must urgently agree to the United Nations joint declaration. On the Riyadh agreement, I welcome the leadership of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia towards achieving a resolution, and urge the parties to rapidly form a Government. As we mark the twentieth anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000) this month, I want to echo what Mr. Griffiths said about the importance of the inclusion of women in political processes, including in Yemen. I also welcome his assessment that the violence in Ma'rib has decreased recently, and echo his call for it to stop completely. That violence has entered its sixth month and has had an untold cost on the lives of many Yemenis - young and old, men and women. The fighting that has now opened up in Al-Hudaydah is not only in clear breach of the Hodeidah Agreement, but is needless and will only lead to further instability in a country that is staring down the barrel of disease and famine. Today, I call for renewed and urgent engagement with the United Nations Mission to Support the Hodeidah Agreement and the Special Envoy in order to reach a ceasefire. I stress that the Yemeni parties - which means the Government of Yemen just as much as it means the Houthis - should cooperate with the Special Envoy to agree to his joint declaration proposals as soon as possible. I want to reiterate the United Kingdom's full confidence in the United Nations-led process and in Special Envoy Griffiths. On 22 September, Brigadier General Shekarchi, a spokesman for the Iranian armed forces, admitted that Iran had provided technical assistance and training to the Houthis. That represents an evident breach of the arms embargo. It is deeply concerning and reaffirms our concerns about Iran's destabilizing activities in Yemen and the wider region. We call on Iran to cease such activities, which risk escalating the conflict, and to support a political solution to the conflict in Yemen. We must prevent Yemen from tipping into famine. We welcome the recent positive steps taken by some donors to provide humanitarian funding, including new commitments from the United States, Kuwait and some European Union member States, as well as Saudi Arabia signing agreements with United Nations agencies. The United Kingdom itself recently announced over $65 million in additional funding, taking us to over $250 million this year and building on $300 million last year. Funding levels remain alarmingly low at 42 per cent, however, with less than half the level of funding compared to this time last year. Meanwhile, severe access constraints - some in the south, but mainly in Houthi areas - continue to prevent the delivery of life-saving assistance. That is recklessly driving up the risk of famine. As of 27 September, 94 non-governmental organization (NGO) projects, with a cumulative budget of $218 million, remained unimplemented, largely due to Houthi restrictions. All barriers to humanitarian access in the country, no matter where, must immediately be removed and the Houthis must give the United Nations and NGOs the permissions they need to operate and save lives across the north. Mr. Lowcock welcomed the reopening of Sana'a airport for humanitarian cases. I agree with him and say that it is essential that Sana'a airport and Al-Hudaydah port be kept open and that both parties come to an immediate agreement on fuel imports, as Mr. Griffiths laid out. If we are to avoid famine, it is also essential that the Central Bank of Yemen be swiftly provided with external financial assistance so that it has sufficient hard currency to sustain food imports and stabilize prices. Food affordability, rather than availability, seems to be the main driver of hunger at present. The exchange rate in the south has reached its lowest level since the conflict began and food security is rapidly deteriorating. The proportion of people unable to find sufficient amounts of food increased from 28 per cent in May to 43 per cent in August. The Government of Yemen has a critical role to play here, too. It urgently needs to develop a credible and transparent economic plan that reassures donors of its ability to implement economic reform. Finally, I want to welcome the tentative news that the United Nations Office for Project Services and the Houthis appear to have agreed, in principle, to a mission to conduct an assessment and subsequent light repairs. I understand that it could take well over a month for the experts' work to be completed, so any unnecessary delay must be avoided. I look forward to next month's briefing and hope that we will have news then that the mission is under way. I also want to thank Germany, the Netherlands and France for joining the United Kingdom and Saudi Arabia in providing funding for the initial mission.
