Mr. Mbabazi (Uganda): Allow me, Sir, to join
my colleague, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Uganda, in congratulating the People's Republic of
China on its assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of April 2006.

My colleague talked about the relationship
between the establishment of the joint monitoring
committee to deal with the emergency humanitarian
situation and the need for a regional security
mechanism on the Lord's Resistance Army (LRA) as a
threat to regional peace and security in Uganda, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Sudan.

It is a great honour for me to address the Security
Council on the security situation in northern Uganda
and on the role that the international community,
especially the United Nations, can play to achieve the
complete eradication of the activities of terrorism
visited upon the population of northern Uganda by the
so-called Lord's Resistance Army. The Government of
Uganda appreciates the condemnation of the LRA and
its terrorist activities against the people of Uganda and
the region by the Council in its resolutions, especially
resolutions 1653 (2006) and 1663 (2006). We hope that
the Secretary-General, in his report to the Council on
the LRA, will present a comprehensive action plan to
totally eliminate the scourge of terrorism, of which our
country and the region have been victims for some
time.

I also wish to share with the Council our analysis
of the LRA as a threat to regional peace and security in
Uganda, the Sudan and the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and to outline our proposals on the way forward
to ensure the support of the international community
for the disarmament and demobilization of the LRA
and for the arrest of its leadership, which has been
indicted by the International Criminal Court.

Uganda's struggle against the LRA and other
foreign-supported negative forces - including the
Allied Democratic Forces (ADP) and the Popular
Resistance Army (PRA) - operating against Uganda
from the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
Sudan has been long and tedious. The LRA is part of
the tail end of our post-colonial history covering the
period of the Idi Amin and Milton Obote Governments.

Since the launch of Operation Iron Fist in 2002,
the Uganda People's Defence Force (UPDF) has
sustained military pressure against the LRA and has
degraded its strength from the approximately 5,000
personnel - between 2,500 and 3,000 of them
armed - who were in southern Sudan in March 2002
to an estimated current strength of about 500 - 120 to
150 of them armed - in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo under the command of Kony and his deputy,
Vincent Otti. There are also a few remnants in Uganda
scattered in the Acholi region in the mid-north. The
LRA has moved to the Democratic Republic of the
Congo as a fugitive force hiding from the UPDF in
Uganda and from the combined efforts of the UPDF,
the Sudan People's Liberation Army (SPLA) and the
Sudanese Armed Forces (SAF) in Eastern Equatoria,
southern Sudan.

We know that the LRA is now operating mainly
in the Garamba National Park of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, in the Faradje-Morobo-Aba
area. In a speech that I presented at a meeting held in
March with the core countries and other stakeholders, I
outlined the details of that area and the LRA's activities
from Garamba National Park. We will be distributing a
copy of that speech with a map showing the area I am
discussing. It is between Juba and Yei, in southern
Sudan, and Faradje-Morobo-Aba, in northern
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

Uganda's key concerns are the following. While
the LRA terrorist group has been severely degraded
and is on the verge of defeat at the hands of the UPDF,
Uganda is very concerned that the LRA is slowly
rebuilding its capacity, largely in this area. As I said,
when they left southern Sudan, they were really
running for dear life. But in Garamba National Park
they have had time to regroup, to rest and to recruit
afresh. Therefore, we are very concerned that the LRA
is using Garamba National Park in northern
Democratic Republic of the Congo as a safe haven to
achieve that. Kony has capacity; in fact he has started
recruiting through abductions as is his tradition -
not in Uganda this time, but in southern Sudan and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. Kony therefore can
grow, reorganize and become a stronger potential threat
to regional peace and security in Uganda, the Sudan,
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and possibly
even the Central African Republic.

The LRA is likely to link up with the Allied
Democratic Forces and other negative forces in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to attack Uganda.
As we have had occasion to say before, and as all
members know, Uganda would then be forced to act in
self-defence. The 1996 attack carried out in Uganda by
the ADF - which originated in the Sudan and was
built up and its forces in fact trained by Al-Qaida -
was the cause of Uganda's involvement in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo in 1997 and 1998,
as the Council is aware and as I have had occasion to
say here before.

 

We are therefore very concerned that if Kony is
allowed to rebuild his force, he will link up with all
these negative forces that are the remnants of the
forces that have remained in the Congo, which were
the reason for our participation in the war in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. We hope that that
will not happen. We have done everything possible to
engage the Governments of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and of the Sudan and the international
community to prevent that from recurring.

The United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC) has had
contact with the LRA. Initially, when the LRA went
into Garamba National Park, MONUC representatives
held a meeting with them and asked them to get out of
the Congo and to go back to the Sudan.
Representatives of the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo attended the meeting, and they
did in fact escort the LRA back to the border once it
had agreed to return to the Sudan. Unfortunately, the
LRA did not keep its word and went back to Garamba.
MONUC made an attempt to attack them, which led to
the unfortunate death of the eight Guatemalan
peacekeepers in January this year. Since that time,
MONUC has had two companies - two corps - in
that area, only about 50 kilometres away from the
location of the LRA forces, in Garamba Park. In
addition, the Government forces of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo have a battalion-sized force
located about 50 kilometres from where Kony and the
LRA are camped.

This is the situation as we speak. Kony, using this
as his base, has attacked a United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees compound and a camp in
southern Sudan, and he has continued, as I said earlier,
to use this as a base to recruit and build a force from
that area.

MONUC and the United Nations Mission in the
Sudan (UNMIS) have therefore not taken resolute
action against the LRA, based in both southern Sudan
and in northern Congo.

It is important, therefore, to develop combined
efforts by regional stakeholders, with the support of the
international community, to disarm, capture or arrest
the indicted LRA terrorist leaders and hand them over
to the International Criminal Court in The Hague.
Uganda would therefore propose the following
elements as a way forward.

First, the Governments of the Sudan and of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo should do all it
takes to ensure that the LRA terrorists are disarmed and
the indicted leaders arrested. Pressure should also be
brought to bear on all other parties and individuals
assisting the LRA to stop forthwith.

Secondly, a memorandum of understanding
should be concluded as soon as possible between
Uganda and the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
similar to the one Uganda reached with the Sudan,
according to which the UPDF would be allowed to
enter the territory of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and hand over LRA terrorists. Such operations
should be under the close supervision of international
bodies such as MONUC, which already has a presence
in the Congo, as I said earlier.

Thirdly, there should be strong coordination of
the operations carried out against the LRA by national
and international forces. We believe that the SPLA -
the forces of the Government of the Sudan - which
occupies the territory where Kony is operating;
UNMIS, which is in the Sudan; MONUC, which is in
the Congo; and the Government forces of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo must coordinate
operations against the LRA. We must develop a joint
operational plan in which we all are involved to get rid
of the LRA and its presence in the Congo.

Fourthly, a regional mechanism involving the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Uganda, the Sudan,
MONUC and UNMIS needs to be set up to address the
LRA problem. Uganda, on its part, has already set up a
team to be part of this proposed mechanism.

Fifthly, against that backdrop, MONUC and
UNMIS should be mandated to use all necessary means
to disarm LRA terrorists and arrest their indicted
leaders.

Sixthly, the possibility should be explored of
mandating a country or regional power and giving it
adequate capacity to deal with the question of the
LRA, as was the case with the French-led Artemis
operation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo in
2003 and the Australian-led force in East Timor, also
in 2003.

I wish to inform the Council that on 30 March
2006 we had a useful interaction in Kampala with the
members of the security group on the LRA, including
the core partners group, which includes the United
States of America, the United Kingdom, the
Netherlands, Norway and South Africa, and
representatives of United Nations Department of
Political Affairs, MONUC and UNMIS on the question
of the LRA. We hope to obtain the engagement of the
Governments of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and of the Sudan with respect to our proposals in the
very near future.

Finally, I wish to call upon the Security Council
to support strong measures, including adequate
mandates for MONUC and UNMIS to forcefully
disarm the LRA, and to send a clear message to LRA
supporters that any such support will not be tolerated
by the Council.

