Mr. Schulz (Germany): First of all, I would like
to thank Under-Secretary-General Nakamitsu for her
comprehensive briefing.

Under the Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces (INF)
Treaty, almost 3,000 ground-based intermediate-range
missiles were verifiably destroyed. The INF Treaty
was an important pillar and a real cornerstone of Euro-
Atlantic security and a contribution to disarmament in
the context of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons (NPT). Germany has followed the
recent demise ofthe INF Treaty with great concern. But
let us be very clear: the Russian Federation bears the sole
responsibility for the recent demise of the INF Treaty.
It is the Russian Federation that developed and fielded
a missile system - the 9M729 missile system - which
violated the INF Treaty and causes significant risk to
Euro-Atlantic security. This is extremely regrettable
because, in our view, we cannot afford an erosion of the
global disarmament architecture and need to redouble
efforts to preserve and strengthen it.

The future of global arms control concerns us all
and is a matter for the Security Council to discuss. The
United States test of a conventional cruise missile by
itself does not warrant the attention of the Council.

Russia's violation of the INF Treaty is part of a
broader pattern of behaviour in which Russia violates,
circumvents and avoids the implementation of a
number of its agreements in the area of arms control,
disarmament and non-proliferation. Russia's actions
have contributed to a disturbing development, namely,
the overall erosion of the arms-control architecture,
the development of new capabilities and serious
proliferation trends.

In spite of, and due, to these worrisome
developments, Germany is more than ever convinced
that the issues of non-proliferation, disarmament and
arms control need to be priority issues on the agenda
of the international community as a whole and at large.
Against this background, two things are needed, and
Foreign Minister Heiko Maas made these points on the
occasion of the Security Council meeting on the NPT
held in this Chamber on 2 April (see S/PV.8500).

First, tangible steps must be taken to reduce the
risk of inadvertent escalation. More transparency
and dialogue on nuclear doctrines, force postures in
military contexts, crisis-proof communication lines,
declaratory restraint and reduced ambiguity can all
significantly contribute to a more predictable and stable
security environment.

Secondly, we need a road map that will get us back
on track with disarmament by preserving and further
developing existing arms-control arrangements. The
contribution of the New Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty
to security and stability cannot be overestimated. In the
current security environment, it is essential to maintain
verified limitations ofthe biggest strategic arsenals and
to extend and build on that landmark Treaty. Russia and
the United States have a responsibility in that regard.

Before concluding, let me turn also to next
year's fiftieth anniversary of the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, the bedrock of
nuclear-disarmament and non-proliferation diplomacy.
The achievements made under that Treaty in five
decades are remarkable, but in 2020 we must build
on those achievements and lay the groundwork for its
future, which also requires a credible recommitment to
nuclear disarmament.

