Mr. Hart (Nigeria): The Nigerian delegation is
particularly delighted to see our sister country, Mali,
and you, Sir, our friend, Ambassador Moctar Ouane, in
the chair as President of the Security Council for the
month of December. We have implicit confidence in
your competence and ability to successfully guide the
work of the Council.

In the same vein, we would like to commend
Ambassador Patricia Durrant of Jamaica for the
effective manner in which she conducted the affairs of
the Council last month.

Today's debate on the report (S/2001/1072) of the
Panel of Experts on the Illegal Exploitation of Natural
Resources and Other Forms of Wealth of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo is greatly welcomed
by our delegation. This debate provides us with an
opportunity to share our views on the illicit
exploitation of the mineral resources that legitimately
belong to the people of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, and the consequent prolongation of the ethnic
conflicts in the Great Lakes region.

We note with interest the remark contained in
paragraph 10 of the report that the history of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, regardless of the
political system or governing authority in place, has
been one of systematic abuse of its natural and human
resources, such that a country noted for its vast natural
resources was reduced to being one of the poorest and
debt-ridden by the early 1990s. This is indeed
unfortunate. It is also true that most countries in Africa
endowed with such natural resources as gold, diamonds
and oil have also suffered a similar fate of the illegal
exploitation of their mineral wealth, to the
disadvantage of those countries and their peoples.

In some countries, like Sierra Leone, Angola and
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, available
natural resources which would have served as catalysts
for economic growth and development, are used as
rewards for warlords who wage wars to gain control of
those resources. These warlords have made enormous
profits through the indiscriminate granting of
concessions to their cronies to satisfy pressing political
needs and exigencies. Consequently, these countries
have become increasingly impoverished as a result of
persistent corruption, patronage and lack of
accountability.

In paragraph 56, the report of the Panel
establishes a link between the exploitation of resources
and the continuation of the conflicts in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. The emergence of various
splinter rebel groups, such as the Uganda People's
Defence Forces, the Mouvement de liberation
congolais and the Mayi-Mayi, has been linked to the
struggle for the control of such resources as coltan,
gold and diamonds in the Beni and Bafwasende areas,
as well as in other areas of the Congo.

However, what is more worrying is the fact that,
according to the report, some neighbouring countries
have been supporting these rebel groups, mainly
because of the attraction of winning concessions to
exploit those mineral resources.

My delegation is concerned about the revelations
in section V of the report, which discusses recent
developments and their implications, particularly those
relating to the stated roles of Zimbabwe and Rwanda in
the Congo and their possible effects on the security
concerns of Rwanda and Burundi, as well as on the
prolongation of the war. We want to state that such
developments - if confirmed - would not be in the
interests of our collective desire for peace in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

The problems in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo are multifaceted and cannot be dealt with in
isolation. The solution should take into account the
larger problems of general peace and security in the
entire Great Lakes region. We therefore believe that
concerted efforts should also be made to reassure
neighbouring countries like Uganda, Rwanda and
Burundi of their own security. It is only through such
collective action that the smuggling of mineral
resources along the porous borders could be checked.
In this regard, Nigeria supports the recommendation
contained in the report, which stresses the need for the
countries in the Great Lakes region to put in place
effective controls and legal mechanisms to address the
smuggling of resources.

My delegation also believes that the Bretton
Woods institutions and international donors should play
effective roles in helping to rebuild the economy of the
region by injecting investable funds for infrastructure
and general development. Accordingly, Nigeria
supports the Panel's call for international donors to
consider submitting to the Security Council, within the
shortest possible time, a comprehensive programme for
financing development in the region.

Nigeria favours the recommendation that a
moratorium be declared for a specific period of time on
the purchase and importation of precious products,
such as coltan, diamonds, gold, copper, cobalt, timber
and coffee, originating from areas where foreign troops
are presently located in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. This would be in addition to the standardization
of the certificates of origin for mineral resources from
these areas, to be monitored by the World Diamond
Council, the United Nations Forum on Forests and the
Convention on International Trade in Endangered
Species of Wild Fauna and Flora.

Finally, my delegation urges the Security Council
to consider the imposition of sanctions on any country
that violates the resolution on the exploitation of
mineral resources in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. As the brotherly people of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo anxiously look to the Security
Council for assistance, we urge the Council to give
urgent consideration to this matter with a view to
finding lasting solutions to the vexed issue of illicit
exploitation of the God-given wealth of these
countries.

