Mr. Ramirez Carrefio (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We would like to
reiterate first and foremost that the Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela condemns unequivocally and robustly the
genocide carried out in Srebrenica 20 years ago, as it
does any crime against humanity, wherever perpetrated
and irrespective of its motivation.

Seventy years after the collapse of Nazism and
fascism and that totalitarian ideology, after the

Holocaust carried out against the Jewish people and
the killing of Soviet Jews and other peoples that were
victims of fascism, the world continues to witness acts
of genocide and war crimes, as happened in Rwanda,
Srebrenica, Iraq and Palestine and at Sabra and Shatila.
All of this calls into question both the effectiveness of
international mechanisms established to prevent such
atrocities as well as our own human condition.

My country abstained in the voting on the draft
resolution in the belief that it was not a balanced
text, because it attributes full responsibility for what
happened to just one party to the conflict, omitting
the complexities of the situation. Venezuela believes
that one cannot single out an entire people for actions
carried out by extremist elements, motivated by hatred
and intolerance, that hide their actions behind the flag
of fervent nationalism.

In a similar vein, the aforementioned draft contains
elements that had not previously been agreed on and
are controversial in the United Nations, such as the
concept of the responsibility to protect, which detracts
from the primary responsibility of the State itself
for the promotion and respect of human rights and
undermines the principles enshrined in the Charter of
the United Nations, including respect for sovereignty.
We believe thatjustice needs to be built on a foundation
of truth, and that is why we welcome the work done by
the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia,
which is responsible for trying those responsible for
atrocities in the context of the conflict that took place
in the territories that made up the former Yugoslavia.

We also need to bear in mind that the proposed
draft resolution did not enjoy consensus support from
the authorities and the peoples of the region in question,
who are those who are responsible for advancing, with
the support of the international community, the process
of peacebuilding and ensuring political stability in the
region.

Given that, we believe that the draft, rather
than contributing to reconciliation, would serve to
exacerbate divisions between the Bosniak, Serb and
Croat communities, which live together in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and must work to build a common future
based on peace, solidarity, dialogue and respect for
human rights. The work of the United Nations should
be aimed at fostering understanding among the peoples

of the Balkans. It is for that reason that we are focusing
on reconciliation among the parties. In order to achieve
that, it is imperative to continue the work that was begun
in Dayton through the implementation of the General
Framework Agreement for Peace, which was the result
a political consensus among the parties involved.
