Mr. Mayoral (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
First of all, on behalf of my delegation, we would like
to thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Iraq, Mr. Ashraf Jehangir Qazi, for his
presentation and to take this opportunity to convey to
him our deep appreciation for his work and that of all
the personnel of the United Nations Assistance Mission
for Iraq, who are working in extremely difficult
conditions. I also thank Ambassador Bolton for his
presentation on behalf of the Multinational Force.

We regret to note once again that, in spite of the
conclusion of the political transition process and the
formation of a constitutional Iraqi Government, the
security and human rights situation in Iraq continues to
deteriorate. There is nothing to indicate that the
violence will not continue over forthcoming months,
and we believe that there have been serious warnings
regarding the risk of a civil war. We are convinced that

there are no military solutions to the many challenges
facing Iraq and that any strategy aimed at rebuilding
and stabilizing the situation in this country must
address the root causes of the crisis. The Government
of Iraq must work with a sense of urgency to overcome
the increasingly apparent divisions among Iraqi ethnic
and other groups.

The national reconciliation process is of utmost
urgency and priority. In this context, we reiterate our
support for the National Reconciliation Plan put
forward by Prime Minister al-Maliki. Likewise, we
support the initiative of the League of Arab States to
convene a conference on Iraqi national accord, which
unfortunately has been postponed on several occasions.

We also feel it is essential that the constitutional
review process be launched; and in this regard we also
have to note that almost four months after the
inauguration of the Government there has been no
progress. On this point, I would like to ask Mr. Qazi if
this delay will affect the time line envisaged in article
137 of the Iraqi constitution. I would like to know his
views on the prospects for constitutional reform, in
particular taking into account the latest developments
in the Iraqi Council of Representatives.

The main victims of violence in Iraq are innocent
civilians. As the Secretary-General highlights in his
report (S/2006/706), an average of 100 individuals are
killed per day, and Iraq has thus become one of the
most violent conflict zones in the world.

I would like to reiterate Argentina's serious
concern regarding the human rights situation in Iraq.
There is evidence of a pattern of generalized violations
of human rights throughout the territory of that
country. Sectarian violence is an increasing threat to
the people of Iraq and has reached alarming levels.
Armed militia activity is a cause for particular concern,
because it breeds a vicious cycle of attacks, reprisals
and revenge, which largely contribute to the current
climate of insecurity and fear among the civilian
population. The Government of Iraq should take
decisive measures to confront this problem and to
protect the lives of civilians. It should also foster an
environment conducive to the disarming,
demobilization and reintegration of all militias.
We recall what we have said on previous
occasions: the Multinational Force and the Iraqi
security forces bear primary responsibility for fully
respecting the provisions of human rights law and of
international humanitarian law. Thousands of detainees
are being held without due process, and conditions in
many prisons are unacceptable. We expect all these
matters to be fully investigated and those responsible
for these human rights violations to be brought to
justice.

Argentina also welcomes the progress that has
been made in developing the International Compact
with Iraq, and we hope that this will be formally
presented before the end of 2006. We also welcome the
Secretary-General's announcement of the conference to
take place on 18 September 2006.

To conclude, I would like to underline that, after
the conclusion of the transitional process, efforts aimed
at stabilizing the situation in Iraq have reached an
important juncture. The options are clear: either the
solid foundation is established for a democratic,
sovereign and unified Iraq at peace with itself, or we
may witness the disintegration of the Iraqi State and,
possibly, civil war. That would be extremely
detrimental not only to the Iraqi people but also to the
region and the international community in general.
Argentina will continue to support long-term solutions
in this respect that will help to prevent the latter
scenario from occurring.

