Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese):
Resolution 2397 (2017), adopted by the Security
Council today, reflects the unanimous position of the
international community in opposing the development
of nuclear and ballistic missile capabilities by the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea and in
maintaining the international nuclear non-proliferation
regime. China urges the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea to seriously heed the demands of
the international community, abide by and implement
the Security Council resolutions and refrain from
conducting any further nuclear and missile tests.

At the same time, the resolution underscores that
the nuclear issue on the Korean peninsula need to be
resolved peacefully by political and diplomatic means.
It also stipulates that the measures it contains are
not intended to have an adverse impact on economic
activities and cooperation, food aid or humanitarian
assistance. China hopes that all the parties will
implement the resolution fully and comprehensively.

At present, the situation on the Korean peninsula
is one of constant tension. While the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea has continued to conduct
nuclear tests and missile launches, in defiance of the
universal opposition by the international community,
the other parties concerned have continued to expand
military exercises and scale up their shows of force.
The escalation of tension on the Korean peninsula,
which has reached the point of risking spiralling out of
control, is not in the interests of any party.

The nuclear issue of the Korean peninsula has lasted
for more than two decades. Reviewing the evolution of
the nuclear issue of the Korean peninsula, We can see
that dialogue and negotiations have led to progress in
the denuclearization of the Korean peninsula and the
improvement of relations among the parties concerned,
while tough posturing and confrontation have impeded
denuclearization and resulted in deteriorating relations
among the parties concerned. It is imperative to learn
from past good practices and mistakes.

The nuclear issue on the Korean peninsula should
be solved peacefully and comprehensively. Security is at
the heart of the nuclear issue on the peninsula while the
fundamental solution rests on addressing the security
concerns of all parties, including the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea. There is no military
option for settling the nuclear issue on the peninsula.
Resorting to force will only lead to disaster. Sanctions
are only a means to an end. One should not expect to
settle the issue through unilateral sanctions or pressure.
History has proven that dialogue and negotiations are
the fundamental way in which to de-escalate tension
and promote denuclearization on the peninsula.

To that end, it is imperative to end immediately all
rhetoric and action that are detrimental to achieving
denuclearization, peace and stability on the peninsula.
In order to de-escalate the situation as soon as possible,
it is important to strictly follow the letter and spirit of
the relevant Security Council resolutions to arrive at an
acceptable settlement. All parties should shoulder their
respective responsibilities and effectively assume their
obligations. It is imperative to follow the overarching
direction leading towards a peaceful settlement and
resume dialogue and negotiations at an early date. Any
unilateral sanctions imposed outside the purview of the
Security Council would only undermine the Council's
unity and jeopardize the legitimate rights and interests
of other countries, and should therefore be rejected.

China has always advocated for denuclearization
of the peninsula, its peace and stability, and finding
a solution through dialogue and consultations. We are
opposed to turmoil and war on the peninsula. China has
made enormous efforts to reach settlements through
dialogue and negotiations, and has paid a higher price
than all other parties in implementing the relevant
Security Council resolutions.

In view of the situation on the peninsula, China
has proposed the suspension-for-suspension initiative,
which would entail the suspension by the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea of its nuclear and missile
activities along with the suspension by the United States
and Republic of Korea of large-scale military exercises.
We have also proposed the dual-track approach of
promoting parallel progress in denuclearization
efforts and the establishment of a peace mechanism
on the peninsula. Russia has also put forward the
idea of a phased approach for that purpose. Based on
those proposals, China and Russia have issued a joint
statement setting out a road map for resolving the
issue. The joint proposal of China and Russia is aimed
at peacefully settling the issue and the maintenance of
peace and stability on the peninsula. Accordingly, we
hope that the proposal will elicit responses and support
from the concerned parties.

If the situation on the peninsula is allowed to remain
stuck in the current Vicious cycle, the road will continue
to narrow. A peaceful settlement will be reached only
when the parties meet each other halfway, in dialogue
and consultations. The parties concerned should fulfil
their historical responsibilities and relaunch dialogue
and negotiations as soon as possible so as to settle the
issue appropriately and at an early date. China is ready
to join with the international community, persuade
the parties to return to the proper track of peaceful
settlement, and play a positive and constructive role in
achieving denuclearization, lasting peace and stability
on the peninsula.

Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in 
Russian): The Russian Federation understands the
critical importance of halting Pyongyang's nuclear and
missile programmes, which are unacceptable to us. The
launch of ballistic missiles without warning from North
Korean territory poses tremendous risks to maritime
and air transit in the region and a serious threat to the
lives of ordinary civilians. Such activity must stop
immediately. Notwithstanding, Russia calls on that all
parties remain open to genuine political dialogue.

We once again reject the methodology underlying
the adoption of resolution 2397 (2017) on the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea introduced by
the United States. Many hours are spent in the United
Nations and the Security Council in discussions, and
hundreds of documents are drafted in consideration of
the importance of crafting realistic and implementable
decisions that reflect the political concerns and mutual
responsibilities of the parties. When we addressed the
specific country situation in this case, such standards
were overlooked. Consequently, the agreement reached
comprises with artificial timetables while the wording
was amended only minutes before the voting.

The adoption of resolution 2397 (2017) was made
possible solely thanks to the fact that our concerns
were reflected and taken into consideration, although
unfortunately this occurred only at the very last minute
and at enormous effort. We stress that sanctions-based
measures do not apply to the activities of diplomatic
missions in the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea, the projects they undertake with the regime,
restrictions on Korean civilian aircraft, or the provision
of the relevant spare parts. Turning to the last-minute
insertion in paragraph 8 concerning the 24-month
period for the repatriation of North Korean workers,
that is the minimum acceptable time frame necessary
to address the logistical aspects of the issue.

Unfortunately, our call on stakeholders to avoid
further escalation of tensions and to revise the policy
of mutual intimidation was not heeded. We proposed
reasonable and realistic alternatives to the ultimatum-
based logic of sanctions. That has implications for the
implementation not only of the sanctions provisions
of resolution 2397 (2017), but also of those calling for
a peaceful, diplomatic and political settlement to the
situation through dialogue and talks, as well as those
provisions of all Security Council resolutions on
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea, without
exception. Such disregard constitutes a breach of the
consensus-based agreements reached on the Council.
Unity is of course important, but unity is important
with regard not only to favouring sanctions, but also
with to supporting a political settlement.

We stress once again that the normalization of the
situation on the Korean peninsula requires an approach
that demands both the cessation of nuclear missile tests
by the Democratic People's Republic of Korea and an
end to the build-up of military infrastructure and the
downsizing of manoeuvres. We must urgently create an
atmosphere of trust among States in the region. It is
important that both parties abandon obsolete formulas
for addressing the nuclear issue on the Korean peninsula
that have proven to be ineffective, and to resolve the
situation through creative approaches. Isolation and
pressure must be supplanted by dialogue and talks.

We call on the stakeholders once again to promptly
undertake practical measures aimed at de-escalating
tensions. Russia stands ready to promote such efforts
and is already doing so. We are in a position to closely
engage with all partners so as to expeditiously address
the host of issues on the Korean peninsula through the
only possible avenues, namely, mutually respectful
dialogue in a political and diplomatic format. That is
the specific goal of the Russian-Chinese road map for
resolving the issue, which remains a practical proposal
at our disposal.

We note the approach of the Secretary-General for
arriving at a political settlement to the problems on
the Korean peninsula. We advocate the development
of dialogue between the United Nations and the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea. Momentum
to that end was achieved by the political mission led
by Under-Secretary-General Feltman to Pyongyang.
It must be based upon a robust humanitarian track to
assist the 25 million people who are truly in need of
assistance. Urgent measures must be taken to engage in
political dialogue so as to avoid catastrophic scenarios
that could trigger horrific repercussions. The military
option is not viable. We are all duty-bound to provide
opportunities for diplomacy.

