Mr. Kawamura (Japan): At the outset, I would like
to express my deepest sympathies to all the innocent
civilians who have been killed or maimed by explosive
hazards. I would also like to applaud all those working
towards demining, including today's excellent briefers,
for their courage and professionalism.

Twenty years ago, in 1997, the momentous Ottawa
Convention was opened for signature. Since then,
we have seen significant advancements, including
the steady destruction of stockpiles and progressive
decreases ofminefields in most ofthe affected countries.
However, as we face global crises, such as the rise in
violent extremism and terrorism, the threat of explosive
hazards is far from declining. According to Landmine
Monitor, the number of landmine Victims jumped from
3,700 in 2014 to 6,500 in 2015, and the United Nations
is calling for a 50 per cent increase in funding for mine
action from $347 million in 2016 to $511 million in
2017. The needs are greatest in active conflict zones,
such as those in the Middle East and it must be our
shared concern. The fundamental challenge here is how
to implement concrete actions in conflict situations.

Humanitarian actions cannot be undertaken
without mine action, nor can displaced people return to
their homes. Mine action is therefore a prerequisite for
peace and security. In parallel with the peacekeeping
operations of the United Nations, strengthening the
national capacities of affected countries should be our
primary target. In addition to demining, providing
victim assistance and risk-reduction education to
affected communities is critical to making peace and
stability sustainable. Based on those ideas, Japan
keeps contributing to the Voluntary Trust Fund of the
United Nations Mine Action Service. We believe that it
improves the humanitarian situation around the world,
especially in the Middle East region, including Syria,
Iraq and Afghanistan, and enhances the resilience of
local communities.

Japan has long made assistance to mine action one
of its priorities, and we are proud to be the second-
largest contributing country, with total cumulative
contributions from 2011 to 2015 amounting to
$263 million. I should like to take this opportunity to
share several lessons learned from our own experiences,
which might be useful in terms of mine action.

First, we recognize that triangular cooperation
deserves to be promoted. Assistance to Cambodia
has been our longest commitment in that field. Based
on the knowledge and experience yielded from such
cooperation, Japan and Cambodia are now expanding
triangular technical cooperation with Colombia, Angola
and Laos through the Cambodian Mine Action Centre.

Secondly, a wide range of partnerships is of great
importance. Japanese private companies and civil
society organizations are involved in collective efforts.
For example, a high-tech clearance machine, produced
by a Japanese company, is capable of crushing cluster
munitions with its specialized bucket, and that company
lends machines to a non-governmental organization for
its activities in Laos.

Thirdly, gender mainstreaming should be
highlighted. There is no question that women's
participation enhances the quality of those activities.
That is particularly true when it comes to approaches
to women, children and victim assistance strategies.
Ms. Nathalie Ochoa Nifio's accomplishments are a
perfect testimony to it.

In 2014, we set a political goal to realize a
landmine-free world by 2025 under the framework of
the Ottawa Treaty. To achieve this goal, the international
community still has a lot to do. Japan will continue to
play an active role in mine action in collaboration with
the United Nations, Member States, private companies
and civil society organizations.

