Mr. Sangqu (South Africa): Let me start by
congratulating you, Sir, and Togo on your assumption
of the Council presidency for the month of February.
Please be assured of South Africa's full support.

The world is watching with great concern as the
crisis in Syria unfolds and degenerates by the day,
claiming civilian lives and injuring and displacing
many people, including children. As we have said
before, we remain deeply concerned about the
deteriorating political, security, socio-economic and
humanitarian situation in Syria. It continues to
deteriorate despite calls from the international
community on the Syrian Government and the armed
opposition to stop the violence and settle their
differences in a peaceful manner. We condemn the
violent loss of life in Syria and call for maximum of
restraint from all parties to the conflict. We urge the
parties to stop the violence immediately and commit
themselves to finding a peaceful, political solution
through a Syrian-led and owned, transparent and all-
inclusive political process that will fulfil the legitimate
aspirations of the Syrian people.

The political process will guarantee, among other
things, the people's fundamental political rights and
freedoms and restore their dignity through the delivery
of democracy, political reform, justice, human rights
and socio-economic development. We believe that such
a solution will indeed ensure long-term peace and
stability. We regret the slow progress in the
implementation of the reforms already announced, and
encourage the Syrian Government to implement these
reforms expeditiously. We urge the opposition to
commit to fully participating in the implementation of
these reforms.

South Africa believes that the efforts of the
League of Arab States, as the organization with
knowledge of and proximity to the situation in Syria,
should be supported and given the necessary political
space to find a solution to the Syrian crisis. South
Africa supports the efforts of the League of Arab States
to facilitate the Syrian-led political process, as stated in
the draft resolution. It is important that the Syrian
people be allowed to decide their own fate, including
their future leadership.
Fundamentally, no foreign or external parties
should interfere in Syria as its people engage in the

critical decision-making process on the future of their
country. Any solution must preserve the unity,
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Syria. We are
also satisfied that the final draft resolution (S/2012/77)
was not aimed at imposing regime change on Syria,
which would be against the purposes and principles of
the United Nations Charter.

We sincerely hope that the Syrian Government
and the opposition will continue to cooperate with the
League of Arab States in its efforts to assist them to
reach a peaceful political solution. We further call on
the international community to render support to this
process and refrain from actions and statements that
may polarize the parties and delay, or even paralyse,
the League ofArab States process.

The current political environment in the Middle
East, a region whose geopolitics cannot afford to have
a weak or conflict-ridden Syria, warrants us to act
responsibly in the interest of regional and international
peace and security. South Africa voted in favour of the
draft resolution today because we believe that it has the
potential to help facilitate a Syrian-led political process
and dialogue between the Syrian parties, and to bring
long-term peace and stability to the country, in
accordance with the aspirations of the Syrian people.

