Mr. Zinsou (Benin) (spoke in French): Allow me
at the outset, Mr. President, to tell you how pleased we
are to be participating in this open debate of the
Security Council, convened by your country as part of
your presidency. Please accept my heartfelt
congratulations. Last year our two delegations worked
very hard together to bring to a successful conclusion

the difficult negotiations on resolution 1612 (2005),
which established a monitoring and reporting
mechanism on children and armed conflict.

We express our deep appreciation to Ambassador
de La Sabliere, in his capacity as Chairman of the
Working Group on children and armed conflict, as well
as to the other members of the Council for the
significant progress made in the implementation of the
resolution. The mechanism is now operational and is
being strengthened thanks to the joint efforts of
Council members and of the new Under-Secretary-
General and Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Ms. Radhika Coomaraswamy. We commend
her for her vigorous efforts, and we would recall also
those made by her illustrious predecessor, Mr. Olara
Otunnu - a staunch defender of the cause of children
in armed conflict. We also welcome the contributions
of other agencies of the United Nations family that are
actively participating in the implementation of the
mechanism.

The international community's combat against
the phenomenon of the recruitment and use of children
in armed conflicts is now reflected in a wide-ranging
mobilization and in increased pressure on the parties
concerned so as to induce them to abide by
international norms for the protection of children in
armed conflict, by motivating them to make concrete
efforts to put an end to violations of all aspects of the
rights of children.

My delegation is particularly pleased at the
creativity shown by the Council in operationalizing the
Working Group in a manner that guarantees the
mechanism's universality. Benin attaches great
importance to this principle.

We are truly pleased to note the spontaneous
commitment of a number of countries that are not on
the Council's agenda to cooperate voluntarily with the
mechanism. We strongly hope that it will be expanded,
within the set time frames, to all countries affected by
this phenomenon. We call on all countries directly
concerned to associate themselves with the efforts
being made by the Security Council and the
international community in this area.

The work of the Security Council has,
fortunately, been supplemented by considerable efforts
on the part of international civil society and non-
governmental organizations, many of which are
working to implement resolution 1612 (2005). Their

operational activities in the countries concerned
strengthen the mechanism on the ground by helping to
promote the coordination of national monitoring and
reporting networks.

Thanks to civil society and to non-governmental
organizations, the Security Council can now focus its
attention on the most remote villages. The Council
must do everything in its power to determine ways and
means of helping to resolve the specific problems
identified by the mechanism's local and international
partnerships.

In that regard, we should focus in a sustained
manner on measures that could be taken to give the
mechanism's local partnerships the means that they
need to ensure the rapid reporting of information on
violations and to come to the assistance of the children
concerned; to speed up the reaction of the relevant
authorities with respect to actions to be taken to put an
end to the reported violations and to allow for the
prosecution of the perpetrators; and to increase the
level of protection of the mechanism's local
partnerships so as to shield them from reprisals.

In addition to the steps taken to demobilize child
soldiers and to rehabilitate them and reintegrate them
into their communities, the question of the violence
and sexual exploitation experienced by children and
young women merits particular attention. The heinous
crimes committed against them should motivate the
Council to contemplate coercive measures of
deterrence to prevent violations of the rights of
children. Increased cooperation with the International
Criminal Court would contribute to the credibility of
the Council's determination to put an end to impunity
in that area.

The Council should also strengthen its action
regarding related factors that have an impact on the
situation of children and young people in terms of
international peace and security. My delegation would
like to highlight in particular paragraphs 13 and 16 of
resolution 1612 (2005), which targets certain activities
such as the illicit movement of small arms, the illicit
trade in natural resources and other destabilizing cross-
border activities.

The Council should also take into greater account
the obvious correlation between the social problems of
children and young people and the proliferation of
internal armed conflicts, and it should also take steps
to find better ways of preventing and resolving them.

However, beyond a sectorial approach - which
is, of course, important - the Council's action would
be more effective if the United Nations were to
develop a comprehensive conflict-prevention strategy,
as called for by heads of State and Government
meeting at the September 2005 summit.

