Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to welcome Special Envoy Mr. Geir
Pedersen following his recovery from his illness, and to
thank him for his valuable briefing on the developments
on the Syrian political track. We also thank Mr. Mark
Lowcock, Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs, for his briefing on the humanitarian situation
in Syria.

We associate ourselves with the statement made by
the Permanent Representative of Belgium, Ambassador
Pecsteen de Buytswerve, a short while ago on behalf
of the penholders on the Syrian humanitarian situation,
namely, Germany, Belgium and Kuwait. I would like to
make the following observations in my national capacity.

We are weeks away from the one-year anniversary
of the signing of the memorandum of understanding
between Russia and Turkey in September 2018, which
at the end of last year and the beginning of this year
significantly contributed to de-escalating the situation
in the Idlib Governorate, where 3 million people live.
However, over the past few months there has been a
military escalation in north-western Syria, which has
led to the displacement of approximately half a million
people and the deaths of at least 500 civilians.

We reiterate our condemnation of the targeting of
innocent civilians, health centres and civilian facilities
by any party. We reiterate once again the need for all
sides to abide by international humanitarian law and
international human rights law. We emphasize that
counter-terrorism operations do not absolve any party to
a conflict from its obligations under international law,
including compliance with the principles of distinction,
proportionality, caution and the protection of civilians
and civilian targets.

We are concerned that the continued military
escalation in north-western Syria will have negative
repercussions on the efforts of the Special Envoy
and his team to revive the Syrian political process.
We stress the need for de-escalation and achieving a
ceasefire in order to stop the bloodshed of the brotherly
Syrian people, who have suffered greatly over the past
few years.

As stated by our colleague, the representative of
Belgium, the co-penholder on the Syrian humanitarian
situation will work, along with all other Council
members, to draw up a draft resolution that would
put an end to the deteriorating humanitarian situation
in Idlib.

We are closely following developments regarding the
formation of the long-awaited constitutional committee.
We heard what Mr. Pedersen said a while ago. Like
him, we hope that an agreement can be reached on the
formation of the committee before the opening of the
upcoming General Assembly session. We reiterate the
need for the constitutional committee to be balanced,
inclusive and credible. Moreover, the political process
must be supported by confidence-building measures,
most notably making progress on the issues of releasing
the detainees and prisoners and of the missing persons.

In conclusion, I once again stress that there is no
military solution to the Syrian crisis. There must be
a political solution that takes into consideration the
aspirations of all Syrians and guarantees the security,
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Syria, in
accordance with resolution 2254 (2015) and the Geneva
communique (S/2012/522, annex).

