Mr. Nduhungirehe (Rwanda): I thank Ms. Fatou
Bensouda, Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court, for her briefing on the activities of her
Office, herpresentation of the eighth report on the
implementation of resolution 1970 (2011) and for her
team's work in a challenging environment in Libya.

The continuing deterioration of the political and
security situation in Libya is very concerning. We
took note of the 6 November ruling of the Supreme
Court, which declared the House of Representatives
unconstitutional. We hope that the decision will not be
mishandled and risk causing greater divide in Libya
but, rather, that it will become an opportunity to forge
a way towards a sustainable political solution to the
crisis in the country. There are important tasks ahead
and we urge all the parties involved to put aside their
political interests and engage constructively in building
an inclusive Government.

As reminded by the Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court (ICC), Rwanda also notes with
concern that all sides in Libya continue to commit the
most serious crimes since February 2011, including
indiscriminate shelling, assassinations, torture and ill
treatment of conflict-related detainees, abduction of
civilians and mass displacements ofTawerghans. We are
also alarmed by the continuing intimidation of judges
and prosecutors and assassinations of security forces,
which all affect the efficiency of the justice system,
not to mention threats to members of the media and
human rights defenders. Despite the current situation
on the ground, it is critical that the Government of
Libya play its part in ensuring that all perpetrators of
mass atrocities in the country are brought to justice and
receive a fair trial.

We understand that security challenges in Libya
hamper the work of the justice system and that of the
ICC investigation team. But we emphasize that no level
of insecurity can deprive the victims of their basic
right to justice and reparation. Accountability for war
crimes and crimes against humanity is in fact the best
guarantee for ending the cycle of violence in Libya.
Failure to quash the blooming culture of impunity will
negatively affect efforts to restore peace and security
in the country.

In that regard, the Government of Libya should
reiterate its commitment to the full implementation
of law 29/2013, on transitional justice, which requires
authorities to charge or release all detainees affiliated
with the former regime, and law 10/2013, criminalizing
torture, ill treatment and discrimination. We note that
no militia member or State official has been brought to
justice to face such charges, and we call for additional
efforts by the Libyan Government in that regard.

Our long-standing position on international
criminal justice is well known. We believe in the
importance of accountability for the most serious
crimes, under national or international jurisdiction,
based on the principle of complementarity. We stress
that national jurisdictions are ultimately better placed
to provide justice and promote reconciliation. But at the
same time, we are of the view that national sovereignty
should never serve as a pretext in the denial ofjustice. In
the case of Libya we note the Government's continuing
commitment to cooperate with the International
Criminal Court and we again highlight the importance
of the complementarity clause contained in the Rome
Statute.

Nonetheless, we recognize that Libya continues to
face serious challenges in rebuilding its judicial sector.
In that context, we support the recommendation of
the Prosecutor to establish a contact group of Libya's
partners on justice issues, through which material and
legal support could be provided regularly to enhance
Libya's efforts to provide justice to the victims. That
technical support could come in handy, especially in
relation to the Abdullah Al-Senussi case, where the Court
upheld Libya's request to hear the case domestically.

Lastly, Rwanda would like to emphasize that
accountability for mass atrocities is one of the building
blocks of post-conflict peacebuilding. Therefore,
the international community, which in 2011 rightly
exercised its responsibility to protect in the case of
Libya, must redouble its efforts and support the Libyan
people in restoring peace and security, as well as in
strengthening the national judicial system. Indeed, an
efficientjudiciary in Libya will significantly contribute
to ending the cycle of violence in the country and
to promoting justice, reconciliation and long-term
stability.

