Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in French): Let
me start by congratulating the United Kingdom on its
assumption of the Council presidency for the month of
March. The holding of this important debate less than
two weeks after the holding of the London conference,
as well as your personal presence among us, Sir, attest
to the importance that the United Kingdom attaches to
improving the situation in that Arab-African country. I
would also like to congratulate Togo on its productive,
successful presidency, which did honour to the African
continent.
My country pays tribute to the participation and
involvement of Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon on the
issue of Somalia, which reflects his commitment to
peace and stability throughout our continent. His
Special Representative, Mr. Augustine Mahiga, merits
our full recognition for the excellent work that he has
carried out in a very brief time frame.

The resurgence of interest in Somalia and its
people, which have experienced more than 20 years of
the ravages of civil war, aggravated by a most tragic
humanitarian situation, is a strong signal of the
commitment of the international community to
promoting peace and stability in the country.

The increasing hope of the international
community for peace and stability in Somalia has been
demonstrated by the Council's adoption on 22 February
of resolution 2036 (2012), increasing the troop levels,
funding and mandate of the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM), and by the recent holding of the
London conference, which will be followed up by the
conference planned for June in Istanbul.

We welcome the holding and results of the
London conference, which was an important turning
point in the efforts of the international community to
breathe new life into the peace and stabilization
process in Somalia. We support the new approach
adopted at the London conference in support of a
comprehensive and consistent treatment of all of
Somalia's problems, whether in the political, security
or humanitarian fronts or related to the fight against
terrorism and piracy, on the basis of concerted
international action.

A political process that is fully owned by Somalis
and that involves all Somali parties who renounce
violence in favour of dialogue is the only guarantee for
the establishment of a sustainable political and
constitutional order that will ensure the development of
Somali society. In that regard, my delegation welcomes
the adoption of the Garowe Principles following the
second Constitutional Conference, held in February.
The consensus on the important aspects related to the
federal structure of the State, its system of Government
and the implementation of the first Garowe Conference
Principles with regard to the adoption of the
constitution by the national Constituent Assembly
represent a decisive step in the process of finalizing the
constitution.

The six months remaining before the end of
transition are crucial for laying the basis of a Somali
State that is able to ensure effective governance for
Somali society. It is therefore essential that the priority
tasks decided in the road map for ending the Somali
transition be implemented within the deadlines set
forth. In that respect, we support the call of Special
Representative Mahiga for unity and for the good
functioning of the Somali Parliament.

With the announcement that Al-Shabaab has now
joined the Al-Qaida movement, the terrorist threats
targeting Somalia and the international community are
even more pressing and call for substantial, rigorous
and coordinated international action. Such action
against Al-Shabaab should also target its sources of
funding, in particular that stemming from the trade in
charcoal. In that respect, particular mention should be
made of the efforts and sacrifices made by Somali
forces and those of the countries contributing troops to
AMISOM. to consolidate the security gains and to
liberate more territory currently controlled by
Al-Shabaab. But despite those advances, the challenges
to Government authority and to its effective control
over its national territory still have to be overcome.

However, the achievements in the military and
security areas cannot be sustained without effective
local governance and administration in the territories
taken from Al-Shabaab, which is essential for success
in the current political process and for obtaining the
support of the local population for its implementation.
In that connection, we welcome the announcement
made at the London conference with regard to new
local stability funds and a joint financial management
board to ensure an efficient use of resources in favour
of the development of Somali society.

Although we welcome the fact that Somalia is no
longer in a state of famine, the situation nevertheless
remains fragile. We hope that the improvement in the
security situation will make it possible to establish
better conditions for humanitarian operations, in
particular since the Al-Shabaab movement continues to
prohibit certain humanitarian organizations from
operating in areas under its control, which considerably
affects the ability to provide aid to populations in need.
The international community should also show greater
solidarity with the Somali people in terms of providing
humanitarian assistance.
15

Finally, piracy off the coast of Somalia is still a

source of major concern for the international

community owing to its human cost and the fresh

outbreaks of violence against hostages, with their
destabilizing consequences for Somali society.

In conclusion, the Kingdom of Morocco
welcomes the international community's renewed
interest in solving the crisis in Somalia and welcomes
the steps taken towards stabilizing that African country.
We take comfort every time that Africa is on its way to
resolving a conflict that is shaking our continent. We
hope that the Somali authorities will redouble their
efforts to contribute to returning Somalia to normality
in region that is so strategic for the stability of our
continent.

