Mr. Menan (Togo) (spoke in French): Togo
welcomes the adoption just now of resolution 2027
(2013), on the Central African Republic. We thank
all Council members that worked to this end. We
congratulate France in particular on having initiated the
drafting of the resolution and guided the negotiations
leading to its adoption.

The situationintheCentralAfricanRepublic-which
everyone agrees to be highly alarming in the light ofthe
rampant violence and serious mass violations of human
rights in that country, which would appear to be teetering
on the brink of chaos - has required the international
community and the Security Council in particular to
assume their responsibilities for maintaining peace
there and in the subregion. In speaking of the situation
in the Central African Republic during his visit to
France in November, the Head of State of Togo, whose
commitment to fighting terrorist and criminal groups
in West Africa, the Sahel and wherever they thrive is
well known, said unequivocally that

"if that country falls into neglect and the
international community does nothing, we risk
creating a terrorist sanctuary in the Central
African Republic. We cannot accept that."

That is why the adoption of today's resolution is a
source of great satisfaction for my country. Not only
does it provide for the deployment of the African-led
International Support Mission in the Central African
Republic (MISCA) in order to restore order, peace and
security in that country, it also authorizes the French
forces in the country to take every measure necessary
to support MISCA in carrying out its mandate. That
deployment authorization, for an initial period of 12
months, is also intended to respond to the efforts of
the African Union and the countries of the Economic
Community of Central African States, which cannot
accept the Central African Republic succumbing
to violence and serving as a haven for terrorist and
other criminal organizations to destabilize the entire
continent.

It is now important that the international community
lend its full support to MISCA by contributing to the
special trust fund to be set up by the Secretary-General
to allow the Mission to carry out its mandate. Togo
would like in advance to express its gratitude to the
countries and bodies that will contribute to the fund.

My country reiterates its deep gratitude to France
and the African countries that have deployed or are
preparing to send military contingents to the Central
African Republic. Our hope is that the sacrifice being
made by those countries will make it possible to
stabilize the country and bring an end to the unseen
suffering of the population.

