Mr. Staur (Denmark): First, Denmark would
like to thank India as the current President of the
Security Council for focusing our collective attention
on the global challenge of piracy. We value the good
cooperation that we have with India in the Contact
Group on Piracy off the Coast of Somalia. We share
the view that piracy is a global problem that not only
threatens the global economy, but also causes great
human suffering for those seafarers who are exposed
to that threat.

One of the worst affected areas is the waters off
the coast of Somalia coast in the Gulf of Aden and the
Indian Ocean. Through determined international action
and concerted efforts we have succeeded in suppressing
piracy in that region.

I am pleased that the Secretary-General in his
report (S/2012/783) puts emphasis on the active
engagement of the national and regional administrations
of Somalia. For the first time in 20 years, there is a
central Government in place in Mogadishu. We
have a unique chance to establish a drive for Somali
ownership in the fight against piracy. We urge the new
Government in Mogadishu to work with its neighbours
in order to prepare a comprehensive regional counter-
piracy framework and to adopt the necessary domestic
legislation. A long-term solution is only viable with
a Somalia that can itself eventually deal with the
challenges posed by the threat. Capacity-building is
central to that end.

Another key element of our efforts to curb piracy
has been to identify legal solutions to guide States and
organizations. Denmark is chairing Working Group
2 under the Contact Group on Piracy off the Coast
of Somalia, which, over the past four years, has been
dealing with all legal aspects of countering piracy in
that region. In the 12 meetings so far, legal experts
from 55 States and organizations have exchanged
information on current legal challenges, including
investigation, detention, prosecution, transfer and
incarceration, as well as the legal framework for private
armed guards. Significant progress has been made in
that field. Almost 1,200 suspected pirates have either
been prosecuted or are awaiting prosecution in 21
countries worldwide. We will continue to pursue all
feasible ways to ensure that pirates get prosecuted and
to support national prosecutions in the region.

In the longer perspective, Somali pirates should
be prosecuted in Somalia. That will require that the
necessary legal structures and capacities are in place,
which will need a long and consolidated effort. In the
meantime, international law already today includes the
necessary legal provisions for States and organizations
to counter piracy off the coast of Somalia, including
with regard to piracy leaders, financiers and organizers
operating ashore.

Currently, one of the key challenges is prison
capacity. States of the region, especially Kenya and
Seychelles, are making a truly remarkable effort to
prosecute piracy suspects. However, their prison
capacities are limited, and that has now become an
obstacle to further prosecution.
The Legal Working Group has been working
hard to address the problem by creating a so-called
Piracy Prisoner Transfer Programme, by which Somali
pirates convicted in other States are transferred for
incarceration in Somalia. In line with the observations
by the Secretary-General, the transfer of convicted
pirates to Somalia is crucial to the strengthening of
counter-piracy efforts. That is why the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC), Working
Group 2 and other actors are working intensively
with the relevant Somali authorities to implement
that concept. As a result, the first post-trial transfers
of 17 convicted pirates took place from Seychelles to
Somaliland in March. We see that as a very positive
and significant development. I am therefore pleased
to report that the post-trial Transfer Programme is in
constant development and refinement, in conformity
with the recommendations contained in the report of
the Secretary-General.

Denmark highly commends the active role that
UNODC and its counter-piracy programme have played
in that regard. As Chair of the Legal Working Group,
we look forward to continuing our close collaboration
with UNODC. We call for all States to support those
important activities.

Despite our success so far in many different areas,
this is no time to rest on our laurels or for complacency.
Pirates are still out there. Should our attention fade,
should Governments turn their attention elsewhere
or should the vigilance of seafarers and the shipping
companies wane, pirates will quickly be back out
in their skiffs. Piracy is a global challenge. There
are pirates operating in the South China Sea and the
Malacca Strait. Countries in that region have come
together and taken comprehensive action in various
fields to eliminate piracy there. We also see increased
activity in the Gulf of Guinea, which affects a number
of countries in West Africa as well as the international
community. The Security Council has expressed its
deep concern about piracy and armed robbery at sea in
the Gulf of Guinea, urging States of the region to act to
counter the scourge at the national and regional levels.

In conclusion, the responses to piracy vary from
region to region but have one thing in common, that
is, close cooperation among States. To overcome the
challenges posed by piracy, we need to work together
on legal issues, on the ground, on building capacity and
on finding ways to reduce the risks to seafarers. We
need to work together in all those areas where global,
regional and national efforts must come together to
counter the threat of piracy.
