Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I thank Mr. David Shearer, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS),
for his briefing. I also thank Ambassador Joanna
Wronecka for her briefing on the work of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 2206 (2015). I thank
her and her team for their excellent stewardship of the
work of the Committee over the past two years.

I would like to discuss three issues: political
developments, the Mission's mandate and the
humanitarian situation.

First, with regard to political developments, we
welcome the meetings between President Salva Kiir
Mayardit and Mr. Riek Machar last month in Uganda
and more recently in Juba, as well as the commitment
to completing the tasks of the pretransitional phase
before the end of the additional 100-day extension
period, especially those relating to mandates in terms
of numbers and scope, the grouping, unification and
training of forces and the formation of the transitional
Government of national unity, in accordance with
the Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the
Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan. We also
thank the other countries of the region, especially the
Sudan, Uganda and Ethiopia, for their active role in
making peace, and we appreciate the support given
by the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
in connection with those efforts, most recently its
10 November communique.

Secondly, with regard to the humanitarian situation,
we welcome the fact that the ceasefire has continued
to hold in most regions of South Sudan, and we hope
that conditions will be conducive to strengthening the
safe, voluntary and dignified return of refugees and
internally displaced persons to their areas. We call on
the international community to redouble its efforts to
alleviate the humanitarian burden on the population,
especially in the areas of health, education and housing,
and underscore the references in resolution 2417 (2018) to
starvation and conflict. Starvation is central to relapses
into conflict and we are concerned that more than
6 million people are undernourished or malnourished.
At the same time, we welcome the progressive reduction
in the number of persons in civilian protection sites at
UNMISS, and reaffirm that the protection of civilians
remains the primary responsibility of the Government
of South Sudan.

Thirdly, with regard to the work and mandate of
the Mission, we appreciate the role of UNMISS in
South Sudan and we commend its good offices and the
health, humanitarian and legal services it provides, all
of which contribute to the consolidation of peace by
giving priority to political solutions. We also call for
assurance of the freedom of movement and humanitarian
assistance, supported by UNMISS, in accordance with
the status-of-forces agreement and relevant Security
Council resolutions regarding the mandate of the
Mission. We condemn the kidnapping and killing
of volunteers of the International Organization for
Migration in late October 2018 and remind everyone of
their responsibilities under international human rights
law and international humanitarian law.

In conclusion, as this is the last meeting of the
Council in which our delegation will discuss the
situation in South Sudan, we express our hope that this
dossier will see positive developments and promote
greater unity among Council members. Kuwait recalls
the historically close relationship of brotherhood and
development that it has shared with South Sudan for
more than 45 years. We therefore look forward to
pursuing bilateral cooperation in the near future and
to playing a renewed role in supporting South Sudan
through one of the most delicate stages in its history,
towards security, stability and development in a friendly
South Sudan and in order to generate hope for a future
full of peace and prosperity.

