The Secretary-General: On 5 May 1999, Portugal,
Indonesia and the United Nations concluded a historic set
of Agreements intended to resolve the long-standing issue
of East Timor. These 5 May Agreements requested me to
determine, through a popular consultation based on a
universal, direct and secret ballot, whether the East
Timorese people would accept or reject a proposed special
autonomy for East Timor within the unitary Republic of
Indonesia.

To enable me to fulfil this request, the Security
Council established on 11 June 1999 the United Nations
Mission in East Timor, which proceeded to organize and
conduct the popular consultation. It registered 451,792
voters in East Timor and around the world, in a registration
process which the Electoral Commission, a body composed
of three independent commissioners, deemed to be a sound
basis for the conduct of the consultation.

Thus, on 30 August 1999, in a show of courage and
determination, the people of East Timor turned out in
massive numbers to vote in the popular consultation,
expressing their will as to the future of the Territory. The
votes cast have now been counted, and the Electoral
Commission has assessed all outstanding complaints and
certified the results of the popular consultation process.
Therefore, in fulfilment of the task entrusted to me by the
5 May Agreements, I hereby announce the result of the
vote.

The result of the vote is 94,388, or 21.5 per cent, in
favour and 344,580, or 78.5 per cent, against the proposal
for special autonomy. The people of East Timor have thus
rejected the proposed special autonomy and expressed
their wish to begin a process of transition towards
independence.

After 24 years of conflict, East Timor now stands at
the threshold of what we all hope will be a process
orderly and peaceful transition towards independence. The
coming days, however, will require patience and calm
from the people of East Timor. I hardly need stress how
important it is for its leaders to exercise wisdom and
reason. Now is the time for all concerned to seize the
opportunity to lay a firm and lasting foundation for
cooperation and peace and to usher in an era of stability
and prosperity for all future generations of East Timorese.

Those who voted to accept the proposed special
autonomy must not consider this outcome a loss. Nor
indeed should the majority consider it a victory, for there
are no winners and no losers today. Rather, this moment
heralds the opportunity for all East Timorese to begin to
forge together a common future in what is to become an
independent East Timor.

Today I ask all the parties to bring to an end the
violence that for 24 years has caused untold suffering to
East Timor. I ask them to begin in earnest a process of
dialogue and reconciliation through the East Timor
Consultative Commission. I call upon the Government of
Indonesia, which made possible the consultation process
through a statesmanlike initiative of the President of the
Republic, to ensure its successful culmination by carrying
out its responsibility to maintain law and order in the
Territory.

I should like to thank both Indonesia and Portugal
for their commitment and perseverance in this process. I
am confident that the Governments will fulfil their
remaining obligations under the 5 May Agreements. Let
 

me assure both Governments that the United Nations will
continue to work with them to ensure the implementation
of the results of the consultation through a peaceful and
orderly process.

Let me also assure the people of East Timor that the
United Nations will not fail them in guiding East Timor in
its transition towards independence.

