The President (interpretation from Russian): I should
like to inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Croatia in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the discussion of the item on the
Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, I
propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite that
representative to participate in the discussion, without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of
the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Drobnjak
(Croatia) took a seat at the Council table.

The President (interpretation from Russian): The
Security Council will now begin its consideration of the
item on its agenda. The Security Council is meeting in
accordance with the understanding reached in its prior
consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the report
on the situation of human rights in Croatia pursuant to
Security Council resolution 1019 (1995), document
S/1995/1051.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council takes note of the report
of the Secretary-General (S/ 1995/ 1051) of 21
December 1995, which it has just received.

"The Security Council, as a matter of urgency,
expresses its grave concern that, according to
information in that report, the Government of the
Republic of Croatia has ignored the call of the
Council in the statement of its President of
3 October 1995 (S/PRST/1995/49) that it lift any
time-limits placed on the return of refugees to
reclaim their property. The requirement that owners
must reclaim their property by 27 December 1995
constitutes a Virtually insurmountable obstacle for
most Serb refugees.

"The Security Council strongly demands that
the Government of the Republic of Croatia lift
immediately any time-limits placed on the return of
refugees to reclaim their property.

"The Council shall continue its consideration of
the report of the Secretary-Genera ."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/1995/63.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on the agenda.

The Security Council will remain seized of the
matter.

The meeting rose at 1 pm.

