Mr. He Yafei (China) (spoke in Chinese): At a
time when the Middle East question is at an important
juncture, the holding of this meeting of the Security
Council is of paramount importance. Since the
Annapolis process was launched in November last
year, difficult political negotiations started between
Palestine and Israel. The international community has
made tireless efforts to promote and push forward the
peace process. However, regrettably, the negotiations
have failed to achieve major breakthroughs in line with
the set timetable. At the present moment, the Middle
East situation is not only blessed with opportunities for
further improvement, but also confronts a variety of
uncertainties and risks. It is the common challenge
facing the international community to ensure that that
negotiating process forges ahead and achieves
substantive progress. We believe that today's Security
Council meeting will play a positive role in taking up
this common challenge.

China has consistently maintained that the
Security Council should play its due role in handling
the Middle East question. Under the current
circumstances, which support the adoption of a
resolution by the Security Council on the question of
the Middle East, we welcome the draft resolution
submitted by the United States and Russia, which calls
for support to Palestine and Israel in pushing forward
their political negotiations. It is our consistent view
that political negotiations represent the sole viable and
correct path towards enduring peace in the Middle
East. In these new circumstances, we expect both
parties to rapidly build momentum for negotiations. We
expect both parties to work on the basis of the relevant
United Nations resolutions as well as the principle of
land for peace in order to realize at an early date,
through negotiation, the prospect of two countries
living side by side in peace.

As Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon recently
expressed, China, too, expects 2009 to be a harvest
year for the Middle East peace process. We are full of
expectations. However, we have also come to realize
that the road ahead promises to be tortuous. The most
urgent task facing us is to make sure that both parties
implement in earnest their respective obligations and
refrain from taking any action that might undermine
mutual trust or prejudge the outcome of the
negotiations. The construction of settlements by Israel
in the West Bank and its imposition of embargoes and
blockades in Gaza are not conducive to creating an
enabling environment for negotiations.

China expresses its deep concern over the
humanitarian crisis facing the Palestinian people in the
West Bank and Gaza. We call upon the international
community to continue to provide a variety of
assistance and to actively support Palestine in its
capacity-building and in accelerating its economic
development.

A lasting peace in the Middle East is by necessity
a comprehensive peace. Realizing peace between Syria
and Israel as well as between Lebanon and Israel
represents an integral part of the Middle East peace
process. We expect Syria and Israel as well as Lebanon
and Israel to improve their bilateral relations through
peace talks while we call upon the international
community to beef up its diplomatic efforts in a
practical way. The 2002 Arab Peace Initiative has great
potential indeed and should be built upon.

The Quartet mechanism plays an important role
in promoting a comprehensive settlement of the Middle
East question. At the same time, we expect the
mechanism to exert greater efforts. We support the
Secretary-General's active engagement in the activities
of the Quartet. At the same time, we expect the
mechanism to strengthen its regular communication
and coordination with the Security Council. China is
ready and willing to work with the international
community in playing a constructive role in seeking a
proper settlement of the Middle East question at an
early date and realizing a comprehensive, lasting and
just peace in the region.

