Mr. Dangue Rewaka (Gabon) (interpretation from French): My delegation wishes to join those that have
already spoken in thanking you, Mr. President, for having
convened this meeting, whose significance is clear to all.
We paid close attention to the important statement just
made by Under-Secretary-General Vieira de Mello on the
problems related to security and freedom of access and
movement that often confront governmental and non-
governmental organizations entrusted with humanitarian
assistance, particularly in times of conflict. In this
connection, my delegation would like once again to express
our deep gratitude for the tireless efforts deployed by the
Under-Secretary-General and the department he heads to
ensure enhanced coordination and distribution of
humanitarian assistance to those in need.

It is most regrettable to note that despite all of the
efforts made to substitute peaceful measures for the resort
to war, we cannot but acknowledge that human suffering
and the material damage caused by war continue unabated.
As emphasized by Under-Secretary-General Vieira de
Mello, the United Nations and the international community
as a whole have at their disposal a considerable body of
norms and instruments based on international humanitarian
law that were adopted to prevent and protect civilian
populations in areas of armed conflict.

I should like to add that last year, in considering the
report of the Secretary-General on the causes of conflict in
Africa, the Security Council adopted a number of
resolutions, including those on the protection of refugee
camps, and in particular resolution 1208 (1998), which
was mentioned by the representative of the United
Kingdom in his statement. We agree with Under-
Secretary-General Vieira de Mello that the Council, in the
context of its responsibilities, must consider other, more
specific measures that would afford increased protection
to humanitarian personnel and civilian populations, taking
into account the Charter of the United Nations. We will
do our utmost to see to it that the Council responds in a
satisfactory manner to the measures proposed by Under-
Secretary-General Vieira de Mello.

