Mr. Konuzin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): My delegation would also like to associate
itself with the expressions of condolence to the United
Kingdom and Turkey, following the terrorist acts that
took place in Istanbul and with the condemnations of
those acts.

We welcome the presence in the Chamber of
eminent personalities and representatives of Africa.

Africa is confronting a new generation of
challenges and threats, which are having a destabilizing
effect on peace in countries of the region. Internal and
international crises are engendered by the aggressive
spread of illegal armed groups, weak State
administration, poorly developed democracy, the
failure to implement laws governing relations between
peoples, impunity for massive violations of human
rights and the norms of international humanitarian law,
and the inability of leaders to provide for the
sustainable socio-economic development of their
States. There is no quick solution to those problems.
Multilevel coordinated efforts are required both of the
friends of Africa and, primarily, of Africans
themselves.

We come to today's meeting on the situation in
the Great Lakes region having made certain
achievements. In the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, under the leadership of the transitional
Government of national unity, life is returning to
normal, despite the continuing instability particularly
in the eastern part of the country. The peace process in
Burundi is gaining ground despite the obstructionist
position of one of the armed groups. Progress can be
observed in relations between the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Rwanda and Burundi. That is being
promoted by the efforts of the States in the region. The
United Nations and its Security Council have played a
major role here. From 2000 to 2003, the Great Lakes
region was visited by four Security Council missions.
We are pleased that their work and recommendations
proved essential. In particular, in September under the
aegis of the Secretary-General, leaders of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Burundi, Rwanda
and Uganda adopted a declaration on principles of
good-neighbourly relations and cooperation.
Implementation of the provisions of that declaration
has already started.

We are not blind to the risks and difficulties that
still exist: the danger of a renewed outbreak of inter-
ethnic confrontation, difficulties in the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration process, illegal flows
of small arms and light weapons, the problem of
mercenaries, the use of child soldiers, uncontrolled
borders, violence against civilians, the dire
humanitarian situation and so on.

However, at the present time, the Great Lakes
region is reaching a critical mass of positive factors,
making it possible to move to a new type of relations
among States of the region. The next effective step
towards the complete normalization of the situation in
the Great Lakes region, should be the holding of the
international conference on this region under the aegis
of the United Nations and the African Union. We agree
that this event should be held within a time frame
agreed to by the interested African States, and we agree
with the forum's objectives and format. We are sure
that the process of the work of the conference will help
to resolve many interlocking regional problems and
open the way to peace, security, democracy, socio-
economic development and cooperation among States
within the Great Lakes region.

However, I want to stress once again that the
productivity of this conference primarily depends on
how consistently the core players in the crisis of the
Great Lakes region implement the various agreements
and accords related to the ceasefire in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and Burundi and implement the
goals of the inter-Congolese dialogue and border
security.

Russia supports the advancement of the peace
process in the Great Lakes region. We support the idea
of the establishment of a group of friends of the
conference on the Great Lakes region, and we are
prepared to participate in its work. At the same time,
we would like to propose that the conference's
organizers give thought to the possibility of including
in its work another participant: international business.
For many decades, multinational companies exploited
the natural and human resources of that very rich part
of the world. Developing its still enormous potential
for the benefit of the countries of the region would
require new capital investment and entrepreneurship.
Participation by their representatives in the conference
could help it attain its goals.

The many years of bloody conflict in the Great
Lakes region are an open wound on the body of the
African continent. How quickly and effectively these
conflicts can be resolved will determine to a large
extent stability for the whole of Africa, which has
endured such terrible trials. It is time to act quickly and
effectively.

I would like to ask two questions.

I ask the first question of the representative of the
presidency of the African Union. One of the most acute
problems confronted in conflict situations in Africa,
including in the Great Lakes region, is impunity for
war crimes and crimes against humanity. Impunity
engenders new conflicts within countries, between
neighbouring States and in whole regions as well. Our
appeals to individual African States have so far not
produced any results that we could rely on. They prefer
to appeal to international forums. A great role in
resolving these problems could be played by the
regional and subregional organizations, including the
African Union. My question is: what can the African
Union do to combat impunity?

For my second question I turn to the
representative of Tanzania. In June of this year, the
Security Council mission visited the Great Lakes
region, including Tanzania. The impression was created
that regional countries can exert pressure on the Forces
nationales de liberation (FNL) to force that armed
group to join the peace process in Burundi. My
question is: what can the regional countries do to force
the FNL to sit at the negotiating table?

