Mr. Petrella (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): Allow
me to thank you, Mr. President, for your efforts to convene
this open meeting of the Security Council to consider this
urgent and important matter. I should like also to reiterate
that we admire the effective and authoritative manner in
which you have been guiding and presiding over our
meetings. I would also express my particular appreciation
for the resolve and efforts of the Secretary-General
throughout this entire process, as well as for the clarity of
his dramatic report, which requires no further comment on
our part.

I would now like to emphasize Portugal's interest in
this matter. Its request that the Council hold an open
meeting to discuss the situation in East Timor, which was
clearly set out in its letters of 8 and 10 September, had to
be heeded at once. Given the events - which we all regard
as extremely serious, because they have a direct bearing on
the fundamental values enshrined in the Charter - the
Council had to echo the voices of the innocent victims. It
had to respond to the demands of public opinion and to
requests made by Member States. Accordingly, we
supported your efforts, Mr. President, calling for maximum
visibility for the Council in this matter. We also supported
Portugal and Brazil immediately when, on 9 September,
they formally requested that this meeting be held.

When, on 30 August last, the people of East Timor
expressed their views freely and democratically, we
welcomed the successful outcome of one stage in the
process that was initiated thanks to the courageous decision
taken by President Habibie of Indonesia to invite the
Timorese to determine their own future.

In this way, one of the best-organized undertakings
of the United Nations took effect. Registration of voters
had proceeded without problems, despite conditions that
were less than ideal, and there was a high degree of
participation in the ballot. Indonesia' s cooperation in these
two stages was certainly essential. At that time, we
recognized that the Indonesian authorities had done their
best to facilitate the process, and we expressed our thanks
to Portugal and to the Secretary-General for the very
important role that they played.

Unfortunately, the wealth of information that we
have today shows that we are very far from the positive
scenario glimpsed two weeks ago. We believe that the
Council's reaction, in its three statements to the press on
8, 9 and 10 September, was appropriate under the
circumstances. The Council not only expressed its serious
concern at the deteriorating situation in East Timor and
the growing humanitarian crisis there, but also urgently
called on the Government of Indonesia to implement the
commitments it had entered into in the 5 May
Agreements, namely to maintain peace and security
throughout the territory. In the light of the gravity of the
situation, the members of the Council supported the
initiative of the Secretary-General and adopted all the
measures that he recommended, endorsing his efforts to
help Indonesia to find a solution to the crisis.

I must say that the initiative to send a mission to
Indonesia must be commended and supported. In so
doing, we will show that we are not blind to the serious
humanitarian violations that have emerged in the issues
on our agenda. The mission has held, and will hold, very
important talks with the highest authorities in Indonesia.

However, at this time all of us are asking how this
situation of violence and disorder can be brought to an
end. In the 5 May Agreements, Indonesia made a
commitment to maintain order and security in East Timor
before, during and after the consultation. Accordingly, the
first step in controlling the situation must be taken by the
authorities of that country, particularly by its armed
forces. The Secretary-General and the Security Council
have on many occasions appealed to the authorities in
Jakarta to take all the steps that are within their power to
normalize the situation immediately.

We reiterate that appeal, especially to those sectors
in Indonesia that seem to have placed themselves outside

 

the traditions of their country, outside international law and
outside basic humanitarian norms. We appeal to them to put
an end to their actions.

The Secretary-General has also stated repeatedly that
if Indonesia cannot control the situation, it must seek the
cooperation of the international community. Many countries
have already expressed their willingness to participate in an
international force to assist in the restoration of peace and
security in East Timor, thereby allowing for the results of
the consultation to be implemented peacefully. Argentina
supports the Secretary-General and explicitly associates
itself with that appeal.

The Security Council mission has repeated that request
in Indonesia at all levels, emphasizing the fact that Jakarta
would continue to be responsible for maintaining order in
East Timor, as established in the 5 May Agreements.

It seems to us that those within Indonesia who do not
yet understand the extent to which they will be responsible
if they fail to take the steps that the Council has set out for
them will have to take into account every one of the
concepts set forth in the statement on East Timor made by
the Secretary-General yesterday - a statement endorsed by
this Council.

In this context, the crimes and abuses against innocent
civilians and against the personnel of the United Nations
Mission in East Timor (UNAMET) - to whose dedication
and courage we pay tribute today - are aberrant. I should
like to recall the constant concern of Argentina that United
Nations and associated personnel should enjoy all the
guarantees of security and freedom of movement that they
need so as to discharge their functions. We in the Security
Council must find the formulas to ensure that the activities
and the lives of United Nations personnel are strictly
respected. Those who do not understand this will have to
pay a high price.

This debate is taking place at a time when the
Council's delegation has not yet returned to New York.
Only the urgency of the situation can explain that
circumstance. For that reason we believe that, in the
interests of ensuring greater clarity, we should wait until we
receive the report from the Ambassador of Namibia, who
is chairing the delegation. We reiterate here our support for
and solidarity with the work he is doing and the difficulties
that he has had to overcome.

We should like to conclude our statement by
expressing our belief that Indonesia, which is coping with
enormous difficulties because of the necessary process of
change that is under way, will understand that the violent
groups that have destroyed parts of East T imor do not
deserve any support whatsoever and do not represent the
best interests of their country. We therefore hope that the
process of independence will be completed, that Indonesia
will agree to international assistance as soon as possible
and that anarchy will be brought to an end.

