Mr. Taha (Chad) (spoke in French): First and
foremost, I would like, on behalf of the Government of
Chad, to convey my gratitude to the various speakers
for their expressions of sympathy and solidarity
following the deaths of the three soldiers of the Chadian
contingent of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA).
The deaths of young Chadian soldiers in northern Mali
add to the heavy price already paid by my country for
the cause ofpeace in that part of Africa, which is in the
grip of insecurity and violence.

Allow me to congratulate the French presidency
of the Security Council for their leadership and the
crucial role that they have been playing in developing
a correct understanding of our shared will to fight
terrorism and cross-border organized crime in the
Sahel region. The recent visit of the Council to our
subregion was quite reassuring, for it was a powerful
expression of the Council's clear interest in the Sahel
and the people living there, who are confronted with the
combined effects of terrorism and violent extremism,
trafficking of all kinds and the ongoing degradation
of their environment owing to climate change. The
Council's poignant testimonies echo the concerns that
we have constantly raised concerning the reality of the
threats prevailing in the Sahel and the need to eradicate
them swiftly.

The latest report of the Secretary-General
(S/20l7/869) refers to the numerous challenges, both
natural and manmade, facing the peoples ofthe Sahel. It
also recognizes the determination of our Governments
to improve the living conditions of our people through
the implementation of development projects in a secure
environment. The report strongly emphasizes the
necessity for international community support for the
effort, which is being led by the States of the Sahel.

I would also like to take this opportunity to convey
to the Secretary-General the cordial greetings of
President Idriss Deby Itno, as well as his congratulations

to the Secretary-General for the innovative spirit that
he has brought to our Organization with a view to
realizing its major objectives. I address to him these
words of gratitude from my country and our people for
his commitment to the Sahel. The unequivocal terms
that he used in depicting the situation in the region
indicate an informed understanding of the threats and
the responsibilities that we must bear to overcome
those threats. May I also praise the very important role
of the Chairperson of the African Union Commission,
who has spared no effort in bringing this project to its
current stage.

In setting up the Joint Force of the Group of Five
for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel), the Heads of State of the
G-5 Sahel wanted to show their determination to fight
terrorism, organized crime and trafficking in drugs and
human beings in the region, while taking into account
the need to respect human rights, the gender issue and
child welfare. Resolution 2359 (2017) of 21 June and
the adoption of the strategic concept of operations
marked a turning point in the establishment of the
Joint Force. However, it is clear that much remains
to be done, because some key issues that are part of
what is intended to be a robust mandate still need to be
addressed, and we need resources to render the Force
fully operational.

International peace and security are indivisible,
and terrorist activities are now crossing the borders
of the Sahel. The recent attacks in Burkina Faso, the
Niger, Mali, including those against MINUSMA,
are a perfect illustration of the danger posed by the
terrorists' actions, which also reveal a paradigm shift
in their modus operandi. In addition, violent extremists
and others who preach jihad, particularly those close to
Da'esh, exploit the volatility of the situation in Libya
to re-establish themselves there and continue their
criminal activities. The freedom of movement inherent
in the very geography of the Sahel allows them to
engage in transnational crime and the trafficking of
drugs, weapons and human beings.

To combat those threats and ensure the security of
the peoples of the Sahel, the G-5 States, in the exercise
of their sovereign responsibilities, have undertaken
considerable efforts. But the threats are of such
magnitude that our limited logistical, material and
financial capacities cannot stop them. The situation
therefore calls for the immediate commitment on the
part of the international community in order to give
the Force real intervention capabilities. Any hesitation
will only benefit criminal groups and weaken both the
resilience of the people and the reaction of our States,
which, it should be emphasized, fully understand the
situation prevailing in the Sahel.

Against that backdrop, we welcome the options
presented by the Secretary-General in his report, and
we believe that the implementation of the first phase
of the strategic concept of operations, in particular the
ramping-up of troop levels within the three strategic
corridors, responds objectively to current security
concerns. The international community is also affected
by this threat and must respond by providing substantial
support to G-5 Sahel States, which are pooling their
operational capabilities in order to fight this scourge
through the Joint Force of the G-5 Sahel.

The Security Council, which has dispatched
working missions to the States members of the G-5
Sahel and which has the primary responsibility for
maintaining international peace and security, is
sufficiently informed about what is at stake. We await,
therefore, strong and robust support that will launch
the start of G-5 operations. Only the availability of
predictable and sustainable resources will make it
possible to pre-empt the deadly strategies of terrorists
and give the countries of the Sahel the means to take
responsibility for the immense needs of the population.
We therefore call for strong mobilization and tangible
pledges at the next donors conference, scheduled for
14 December in Brussels.

In conclusion, I would like to reaffirm the renewed
commitment of the Government of Chad to continue
the fight against terrorism through its contribution to
MINUSMA and to the Multinational Joint Task Force
to fight Boko Haram in the Lake Chad basin. Chad will
also stand beside its brother countries of the G-5 Sahel
as part of the Joint Force, for which we once again ask
for the international community's support.

