Mrs. Robinson: I am honoured to address the Security Council again as the Chair of The Elders at this important open debate. I thank the Government of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam for the invitation. As we mark the seventy-fifth anniversary of the Charter of the United Nations, I wish that the founder of The Elders, Nelson Mandela, could address the Council, in his powerful and inimitable voice, with his strong vision and purpose. Instead, the Council has me, with my Irish accent, trying to rise to the occasion. For rise to the occasion we must. At the start of a new year and a new decade, The Elders are clear that the world faces two distinct, existential threats: nuclear proliferation and the climate crisis. Responding to those threats is critical, but made harder at a time when multilateral cooperation is being undermined by populism and _ nationalism. The Elders issued a statement in early December in which we urged all world leaders to acknowledge that effective multilateralism is in their own national interest, regardless of size or strength. Getting others to cooperate by means of internationally agreed mechanisms is less costly and more reliable than unilateral force. This collaborative approach is at the heart of the United Nations Charter, and the only way in which we can hope to tackle challenges such as the climate crisis and nuclear proliferation. We also need this sense of cooperation as the world seeks to address the recent alarming escalation of tensions in the Middle East. Indeed, it is my understanding that Iran's Foreign Minister, Javad Zarif, was due to address the Council today. He was going to speak about the role of the United Nations Charter in supporting international peace and security but has been prevented from doing so as tensions have risen between Iran and the United States. This is highly regrettable. It is precisely in times such as these that we need to hear the voices of all concerned. As the Secretary-General has reminded us, Chapter VI of the Charter of the United Nations requires parties to any dispute that threatens international peace and security to hold negotiations or use other peaceful means to resolve their conflict. The gravity of the current situation in the Middle East means that dialogue and negotiations are urgently needed, and I urge the representatives in the Chamber to consider what the United Nations can do to bring them to the table in the spirit of its Charter. What we need today is a new vision and bold sense of purpose on how we will tackle the scourge of war. With respect to nuclear arms control, The Elders have spoken out clearly and forcefully about the need for all nuclear Powers to get serious about disarmament and to pursue policies of nuclear minimization in order to preserve peace for future generations. We sum those up as the four "Ds": doctrine - every nuclear State should make an unequivocal declaration of no first use; de-alerting - almost all warheads should be taken off high-alert status; deployment - substantially reduce the one-quarter ofall nuclear warheads that are currently operationally deployed; and decrease - dramatically cut the number of nuclear weapons in existence, with the United States and Russia reducing to a total of no more than 500 each. The Elders hope that instead of a new arms race in 2020, we will see a re-energized Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and an agreement between the United States and the Russian Federation to extend the New START Treaty until 2026. With regard to the climate crisis, The Elders recognize the need for a bold new initiative. The disappointing outcome of the twenty-fifth session of the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change in Madrid shows that there is still insufficient political will for urgent, collective action to avert catastrophe. We need a new mindset. There are those, for instance, who call for work to begin on a new fossil fuel non-proliferation treaty, which is a bold and innovative idea that seeks to bring transparency, accountability and agreement to the cessation of fossil fuel production in a way that supports jobs and livelihoods. New ideas like those are needed. We need a new mindset that recognizes the urgency of the challenge the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change posed in its report Global Warming of 1.5°C. We need new ideas borne from a shared understanding that we need to reduce global carbon emissions by 45 per cent by 2030. The Security Council should be a key player in shaping that new mindset, but unfortunately it is seen by many as not being fit for purpose. Too many members, not least those with the special responsibility of holding permanent seats, treat it as a forum for advancing their own narrow interests rather than a means of addressing common challenges. I address the Council today as a woman, and indeed a grandmother. If women had equal power in the world today, I believe that we would have a very different problem-solving way of dealing with the challenges that we face. Women drew up a remarkable agenda in Beijing 25 years ago, but not enough progress has been made since to really champion equality, and both within and outside the United Nations women now face a backlash in marking that anniversary. I ask the Security Council in particular to give greater priority to the terrible problem of systemic violence and discrimination against women and girls, which is a cause of immense suffering. I call on the Council to implement its numerous resolutions dealing with gender inequality with full funding. That should start with resolution 1325 (2000), the twentieth anniversary of which we will mark this year. I also urge the Council to listen to the children and young people who have come together in their millions to strike for Fridays for Future. They have understood the importance of thinking globally and acting locally. They are bonded together by the threat that they see posed by the climate emergency. That bond has enabled them to reach out in solidarity, and even love, to those most vulnerable, most affected and least responsible for what is causing the climate crisis. They are asking us not to listen to them but to listen to the science. We should all take heed. The science of the climate crisis makes it imperative that we implement in full the voluntary commitments of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, with its 17 Sustainable Development Goals, and the commitments of the Paris Agreement on Climate Change. We need a bold new vision in which every country, city and corporation commits to being carbon neutral by 2050. We need a change of mindset to enable a just transition to clean energy in a way that allows us to stay at or below 1.5°C of warming. We need to put a proper price on carbon. Every country needs to take seriously the report of the Global Commission on Adaptation, Adapt Now. A Global Call for Leadership on Climate Resilience, and build resilience in communities for the new normal that we are experiencing - an experience exemplified by the terrible bushfires in Australia. The calls for action are getting louder. Civil society is coming together for a People & Planet call to action in 2020 on 20 January, and the fiftieth anniversary of Earth Day in April promises to see the greatest mobilization in human history. When Nelson Mandela addressed the General Assembly on 3 October 1994 (see A/49/ PV.14) as President of South Africa, he posed the following question. Given the interdependence of the nations of the world, what is it that we can and must do to ensure that democracy, peace and prosperity prevail everywhere? In response, he suggested that a new initiative was needed - one that should inspire all of humankind because of the seriousness of its intent. The time for such an initiative to protect people and the planet is surely now. Future generations will neither forget nor forgive if we squander this opportunity.
