Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): May I thank
Secretary General Liu and Ambassador Aboulatta for
their briefings, which were both informative. I thought
that they contained some important recommendations
of which we can all take note.

A year ago, the Security Council met to adopt its
first-ever resolution on the terrorist threats facing civil
aviation (see S/PV.7775). Through that unanimous
adoption, we showed our joint resolve to protect our
citizens from a shared and escalating threat, and we
started a global discussion on how together we would
improve aviation security standards. We therefore
welcome the good work that has followed over the past
12 months. It speaks volumes about the momentum
created by resolution 2309 (2016) that the Global
Aviation Security Plan was completed two years ahead
of the original schedule. And we look forward to the
plan being endorsed later this year by the International
Civil Aviation Organization Council (ICAO). We
believe that the Security Council should then add its
endorsement and call to action.

And yet, one year on from 2309 (2016), it is clear
that the threat facing civil aviation has not diminished;
instead, it has evolved. Members will recall the plot to

smuggle bombs inside laptops, which led the United
Kingdom and the United States to ban larger electronics
from the cabins of aircraft for several months this year,
or the failed attack at Sydney's international airport
just two months ago - a sophisticated effort that would
have claimed hundreds of innocent lives. Those are but
two examples of the terrorists' unrelenting desire to
bring death and destruction to our skies. Those plots
should remind us all that we cannot relent in our efforts
to keep our citizens safe.

Instead, we need to maintain the resolve we found
a year ago. That means each and every ICAO member
State turning its commitment to the global aviation
security plan into real action. Lip service is simply no
deterrent. Those who believe their airports and carriers
are somehow immune from terrorist targeting are not
just wrong; they are also irresponsible, shirking both
their obligations and the common responsibility we
have to protect the global industry and our peoples who
use it.
Aviation is part ofthe lifeblood ofour economies. We
recognize that implementing ICAO's agreed Standards
and doing so on the basis of recommended practices
validated by robust verification is a challenge for some,
no matter how good their intentions. Let us therefore
support each other through technical cooperation and
capacity development, as spelled out in 2309 (2016).
The United Kingdom has recently tripled its budget for
such assistance and has an active programme, working
alongside dozens of fellow Member States. I call upon
other Council members to do the same.

It is not just ICAO members that can do more. I
see three ways for the United Nations, together with
ICAO, to work better to ensure that aviation security
remains at the top of the agenda, getting the attention
it requires. First, threats to aviation security should
be routinely included in United Nations reporting
related to terrorism. We encourage the Monitoring
Team of the Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267
(1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015) concerning ISIL
(Da'esh), Al-Qaida, and associated individuals, groups,
undertakings and entities to make sure that it asks States
about threats to aviation security and that those threats
are properly assessed in the team's regular reporting.

Secondly, we welcome the close corporation
that has developed between the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate (CTED) and ICAO.
Those two agencies already work together closely and

are developing a cooperation agreement. We encourage
continued collaboration on CTED country assessments,
but also on sharing information, research and analysis
about the emerging trends in terrorist threats to civil
aviation, and on cutting-edge ways in which they could
be mitigated.

Thirdly, we encourage the new United Nations to
work closely with ICAO and make capacity-building
in aviation security a priority. We encourage them
together to identify and deliver appropriate capacity-
building projects, in line with the actions and tasks set
out in the global aviation security plan.

In conclusion, the first anniversary of2309 (2016) is
a moment, in part, to reflect on what has been achieved
over the past year; but it needs to be far more than that.
It should also be a moment when we ask how we sustain
the momentum created by 2309 (2016), putting into
practice what we have committed to on paper.

