Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): France
welcomes the unanimous adoption of resolution 2375
(2017), which reinforces the sanctions imposed by
the United Nations against North Korea. I thank the
Permanent Representative of the United States, Nikki
Haley, and her team, as well as every member of the
Council, for their commitment to that end.

The tragic anniversary of 11 September 2001, which
we are commemorating today, leads me once again to
express our deepest sympathy to our American friends
and to all countries that have been affected by terrorism.
This commemoration and the solemnity surrounding it
also call on us to rise collectively to the responsibilities
of the Council with respect to the crucial question of
war and peace and the conditions of peace. That is the
question that brings us here today to discuss North
Korea, and it is why, on behalf of France, I should like

today to deliver three messages of a political nature in
the form of three requirements.

The first requirement is that of clear thinking in the
face of the evolution of the threat. Let us not deceive
ourselves. Following this year's intercontinental
ballistic missile launches, and then the nuclear test
of unprecedented scale on 3 September, the threat
has changed in dimension and even in nature. From
regional, it has become global; from virtual, it has
become immediate; and from serious, it has become
existential. The threat now compels and brings us
together. It demands a strong and united reaction of the
Security Council, for which France has called from the
beginning and without reservation.

The second key requirement today is that of
firmness. In the face of the regime's irresponsible
headlong dash and its contempt for its international
obligations, it was more than ever necessary to act
quickly, in unison and with resolve. It was essential
to respond to this attack on the norms of peace and
security and the legal system on which they are based.
The resolution that we have just adopted constitutes an
important and necessary step in that regard in order to
maximize the pressure on the North Korean regime.

In a significant and targeted manner, this robust
resolution reinforces and expands several important
aspects of the the sanctions regime. In particular, I
would refer to the very strong reinforcement of the
constraints on the sectors of the economy that directly
fund the North Korean regime, such as textiles and
North Korean workers. I refer also to the important
restrictions imposed on oil exports to North Korea.
Finally, the resolution strengthens the tools available
to us to prevent the circumvention of sanctions,
especially in the maritime field. The latest report
(S/2017/742, annex) of the United Nations Panel of
Experts established pursuant to resolution 1874 (2009)
confirms that the North Korean regime is becoming
increasingly innovative in avoiding the sanctions
imposed on it. Let us know how to make our sanctions
correspondingly inventive.

This is not a mere show of resolve. The sanctions
are neither a leitmotiv without purpose nor an end in
themselves. Our united, firm and unequivocal response
today has a dual objective. On the one hand, we must
resist the unjustifiable attitude of Pyongyang and avoid
any signal of impunity with regard to the flagrant
violation of our decisions; and, on the other hand,
we must maximize the pressure on the North Korean
regime in order to lead it back to its obligations and
to reason.

In that context, the third requirement, logically
and chronologically, is that of diplomacy, to which
the determination we express together today will,
we hope, pave the way. France's conviction is that
maximal resolve today, in the form of a strengthening
of sanctions, is our best leverage for promoting a
political settlement tomorrow. Contrarily, anything that
could be perceived by the North Korean regime as an
admission of weakness or the expression of divisions
among us would encourage it to pursue its provocations
and would objectively heighten the danger of a resort
to extremes. Simply put, the great resolve that we are
expressing together today is our best antidote to the risk
ofconfrontation and our best chance to open a path to the
diplomatic process, which we believe must be founded
on the denuclearization of the Korean peninsula.

We are therefore not closing the door to dialogue,
and we never will. It is the North Korean regime that
is showing its obstinacy by rejecting dialogue through
its irresponsible and unacceptable attitude. So long
as North Korea remains deaf to our entreaties and
continues to heighten its threat with provocation upon
provocation, we will have no other choice than to step
up pressure in response. That is the sole solution to
bring North Korea to the negotiating table and to open
up the path to the necessary political and diplomatic
way out of this matter.

For France, these are the three necessary demands
that should guide us: clarity as to the existential nature
of the threat, maximum resolve to respond to it, and
diplomacy as the way forward - all, we hope, towards
a political solution to resolve the North Korean nuclear
crisis. The security ofus all is at stake. For the sake ofthe
future of the backbone that is the entire non-proliferation
regime, France calls upon all the actors concerned to
together follow this demanding path.

