Mr. Macieira (Portugal): Mr. President, I would
like to thank you for convening this meeting and thank
the Secretary-General for his latest report on the
situation in Timor-Leste (S/2004/669), as well as
Special Representative Hasegawa and his staff for the
excellent work they have done so far, as well as
Assistant Secretary-General Annabi for his briefing.

Portugal wholly subscribes to the statement made
by the representative of the Netherlands on behalf of
the European Union. I will only add a few comments of
our own.

The Secretary-General's report sets out clearly
that Timor-Leste has made significant advances
towards self-sufficiency. It has adopted additional
legislation and has successfully assumed the
responsibility for its internal and external security,
while its public administration, law enforcement
agencies and armed forces have all continued to
develop.

It is clear, however, that work remains to be done,
particularly in terms of security, as the recent
confrontations between martial arts groups show.
Those events highlight the serious socio-economic
challenges that Timor-Leste still faces today, in
particular the disfranchisement of its youth,
unemployment and poverty.

Equally important to the sustainable and viable
development of Timor-Leste is the completion of the
border negotiations with both its neighbours, Australia
and Indonesia. In the latter case, there have been recent
positive developments concerning the delimitation of
the common land border, to which the commitment of
the leadership of both countries has been crucial. In
that respect, we would like to encourage both countries
to resolve expeditiously the remaining issues.

Encouraging negotiations are also under way with
Australia concerning the maritime borders. In that
respect, I would like to recall what Ms. Ana Pessoa
Pinto, Minister in the Presidency of the Council of
Ministers of Timor-Leste, said in the Council's meeting
last May,

"The position of my Government on this is
simple and clear: we are entitled to a just and fair
maritime boundary with our two neighbours,
Australia and Indonesia; and we are guided by
principles of international law and practice."
(S/PV.4965, p. 21)

My final remarks relate to the responsibility of
the international community and the Security Council
in relation to Timor-Leste in the context of ending
impunity and promoting accountability and
transparency.

In September 1999, the people of Timor-Leste
unreservedly trusted the United Nations. We are all
aware of what happened. A premeditated campaign of
terror forced tens of thousands of people to flee to the
mountains, and others were herded and forced to leave
the country. People were slaughtered, property looted
and more than 80 per cent of the country's
infrastructure was destroyed.

In that context, the Government of Indonesia
gave assurances that those responsible for those gross
violations of human rights and international law would
be brought to justice. The international community
relied on that commitment.

Portugal would like to recall the commitment of
the Government of Indonesia, in the context of respect
for international standards of justice and fairness, to
bring to justice those responsible for violations of
human rights and humanitarian law in Timor-Leste.
However, the verdicts did not result in a substantiated
account of the human rights violations that took place
in Timor-Leste.

Moreover, deeply disappointing were the recent
overturning on appeal of the convictions of the four
military and police officers originally convicted on
charges of committing atrocities in Timor-Leste, and in
particular the latest decisions, by which, of 18
defendants, only two, who are civilians and of East
Timorese origin, are serving jail terms.

We would like to underline the importance we
attach to accountability and respect for human rights.
In that regard, Portugal is following with great
attention the efforts of the Secretary-General and the
international community in the search for a viable
conclusion to the work of the structures put in place to
investigate the human rights violations that occurred in
Timor-Leste.

We support Timor-Leste as an independent nation
at peace with itself and its neighbours and fully
integrated into its region. As in the past, Portugal will
remain committed and ready to contribute to the
consolidation and development of Timor-Leste and to
the United Nations efforts to that effect.

