Mr. Siregar (Indonesia): At the outset, I am honoured to warmly welcome Their Majesties the King and Queen of the Belgians, together with the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Belgium, on the occasion of their official visit to the United Nations. I am equally honoured to welcome the Deputy Foreign Minister of Estonia. I would like to extend my appreciation to Belgium for organizing today's briefing. I would also like to thank the Secretary-General and the briefers for their comprehensive presentations. We welcome the adoption of presidential statement S/PRST/2020/3, initiated by Belgium earlier today. Today's briefing is timely. We witness children still bearing the brunt of protracted conflicts all over the world. There are more than 24,000 grave violations against children in 20 country situations. Those numbers are testament that today's agenda item remains a concern for all of us here.My country has not turned and will not turn a blind eye to the needs of protecting children in armed conflict situations. Much has been done, but there are challenges ahead in ensuring child-rights-based protection in armed conflicts. In that context, let me underline three points for us in building pathways for child protection measures. First, we must materialize our normative commitments into actions. We do not start from zero. Most of us here in the Council are parties to the Convention on the Rights of the Child and its Optional Protocol on the involvement of children in armed conflict. They laid normative foundations for our actions in child protection. The Council adopted resolution 2427 (2018), recognizing that child protection has to be specifically integrated into all peace processes, with strong emphasis on the best interests of children. In that spirit, Indonesia has always been committed to implementing those normative foundations on the ground. Our peacekeepers, for example, consistently conduct child protection mandates within civil-military coordination activities by providing health care for children and their mothers and engaging children through sports, education and other social activities. True action speaks louder than words. Secondly, child protection has to be addressed comprehensively. Child protection in armed conflicts should encompass all phases of conflicts, from preventing the six grave violations against children in armed conflict and breaking the cycle of child soldiers to advancing family- and community-based reintegration. That full cycle of comprehensive child protection measures has been integrated into United Nations peacekeeping mandates on disarmament, demobilization and reintegration. Having the largest child-protection section in any United Nations peacekeeping mission, Indonesian peacekeepers in the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) have been actively engaged in conducting interventions to separate children from armed groups, including their repatriation, and preventing violations and abuses against children. Lessons from MONUSCO should also be replicated in all peacekeeping missions. Thirdly, enhancing support on child protection measures is vital. Countries are not all on the same page in providing protection measures for children in armed conflicts. International cooperation and the sharing of best practices in that area are necessary. All parties involved in a peace process should develop capacity, sensitivity and awareness to the needs of children. That includes parties to conflicts, mediators, negotiators, child advisers and humanitarian actors. On that note, we welcome the launching of practical guidance for mediators to protect children in situations of armed conflict. The guidance would serve as an excellent tool to ensure child protection in peace processes. Indonesia looks forward to cooperating with other Member States to ensure better protection for children in armed conflicts. Children are not soldiers. Children are our future. By ensuring children of their rights, we have invested in creating future peacebuilders and development drivers. By doing so, we invest in long and durable peace.
