Mr. Aldouri (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): My
delegation congratulates you, Sir, on your assumption
of the presidency of the Council for this month. We
wish you success in your work amid these
extraordinarily difficult international circumstances.

We should have liked to have been granted
sufficient time, commensurate with the gravity of the
statement made by the United States Secretary of State
in his presentation, and not just a few minutes to rebut
a statement that lasted 90 minutes. Nevertheless, Iraq
will provide detailed and technical explanatory answers
to the allegations made in that statement. I shall be
polite and brief.

The pronouncements in Mr. Powell's statement
on weapons of mass destruction are utterly unrelated to
the truth and the reality on the ground. No new
information was provided; mere sound recordings
cannot be confirmed as genuine. Council members may
have seen me smile when I heard some of those
recordings; they contain certain words that I will not
attempt to translate here. However, those incorrect
allegations, unnamed and unknown sources, schemes
and presumptions are all in line with United States
policy, which is directed towards one known objective.

In the interview that he granted yesterday to
former British Minister Tony Benn, President Saddam
Hussain reiterated that Iraq is completely free from
weapons of mass destruction - a statement repeated
by numerous Iraqi officials for more than a decade.

Mr. Powell could have spared himself, his team
and the Security Council a great deal of effort by
presenting those allegations directly to the United
Nations Monitoring, Verification and Inspection
Commission (UNMOVIC) and the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), in accordance with the
provisions of paragraph 10 of Security Council
resolution 1441 (2002). He could have left the
inspectors to work in peace and quiet, to investigate
without media pressure. At any rate, the forthcoming
visit of Mr. Blix and Mr. ElBaradei on 8 and 9
February will provide another opportunity to test the
validity of those allegations. Ongoing inspections have
shown that previous allegations and reports from the
United States and Britain were false.

Iraq submitted an accurate, comprehensive and
updated 12,000-page declaration that included detailed
information about previous Iraqi programmes, as well
as updated information about Iraqi industries in various
fields.

The inspectors began their activities intensively
in Iraq on 27 November 2002, with more than 250
UNMOVIC and IAEA staff, including more than 100
inspectors. As of 4 February 2003, the inspection teams
had conducted 575 inspections throughout Iraq,
covering 321 sites. The sites singled out by President
Bush on 12 September 2002 and by British Prime
Minister Tony Blair in the same month, as well as in
the United States Central Intelligence Agency (CIA)
report of October 2002, were at the top of the list of
sites inspected by the inspection teams. Inspectors
discovered that none of the allegations contained in
those reports was true. Thus, the truth and accuracy of
Iraq's declaration that it was free from weapons of
mass destruction have been documented by the two
technical agencies entrusted by the Security Council
with undertaking that task.

It is well known that inspection teams took
samples of water, soil, plants, air and factory and
production remnants from vast areas, including cities,
villages, highways, farms, factories and universities
throughout Iraq north, south, east and west.
UNMOVIC and IAEA analyses of those samples
concluded that there was no indication of proscribed
chemical, biological or radiological agents or, indeed,
of any other proscribed activities in any part of Iraq.

 

Mr. Blix confirmed in his statement to The New
York Times on 30 January 2003 that the inspections did
not support any of the scenarios alleged by Mr. Colin
Powell - that Iraqi officials were moving proscribed
material within or out of Iraq with the goal of
concealing it. He confirmed that he did not find
sufficient reason to believe that Iraq was sending
scientists out of Iraq to prevent them from being
interviewed and that he had no reason to believe that
President Bush was correct in saying in his State of the
Union address that Iraqi intelligence agents were
posing as scientists for the interviews. We would like
to reiterate that Iraq encourages its scientists to submit
to interviews requested by UNMOVIC and the IAEA.

As for the existence of the mobile laboratories
alleged by Secretary Powell this morning, just
yesterday Mr. Blix stated that to date UNMOVIC had
found no proof of the presence of such mobile units.

As regards the U-2 overflights and the
controversy that has developed in that connection, Iraq
does not object to such flights for the purpose of
conducting inspection activities. Rather, the objection
is that United States and British warplanes are
imposing illegal no-fly zones, contrary to Security
Council resolutions. To overcome that obstacle, it
would be enough for such warplanes to suspend their
flights during U-2 flights. Iraq cannot be held
responsible for those flights.

The allegation that trucks leave sites prior to the
arrival of inspection teams is false. Inspections occur
suddenly, without prior notification to the Iraqi side.
Furthermore, UNMOVIC and the IAEA have their own
sources that provide satellite imagery, and they also use
helicopters for surveillance and inspection activities.
We therefore believe that those two agencies are very
well informed about what takes place on the ground in
Iraq. It is important to remind the Council that weapons
of mass destruction programmes are not like an aspirin
pill - something that can be easily hidden. Rather,
they require huge production facilities for research and
development, weaponization and deployment. Such
facilities cannot be concealed. Inspectors have criss-
crossed all of Iraq and found no evidence of that.

As regards the sound recordings, suffice it to say
that scientific and technical progress has reached a
level that would allow for the fabrication of such
allegations and for their presentation in the way that
Mr. Powell presented them. Anyone can be recorded, at
any time and anywhere in the world.

As for the supposed relationship between Iraq and
the Al Qaeda organization, I would like to note what
President Saddam Hussain has said:

"If we had a relationship with Al Qaeda and we
believed in that relationship, we would not be
ashamed to admit it. We have no relationship with
Al Qaeda".

I would like now to refer to a recent statement by
a United States official as reported in The New York
Times three days ago. He stated that analysts at the CIA
have complained that Administration officials have
exaggerated reports on weapons of mass destruction in
Iraq, and particularly on Iraq's presumed relationship
with Al Qaeda, in order to bolster their case for war.

I would like to add that Mr. Jack Straw has
ignored intelligence reports from his own Government
stating that there is no relationship between Iraq and Al
Qaeda.

Mr. Powell's assertion that Iraq used chemical
weapons against its own people particularly surprised
me, given that a CIA official unmasked the truth on 31
January - just a few days ago - in The New York
Times. He stated that the United States Administration
has known since 1988 that Iraq did not use chemical
weapons against its own people for one simple reason:
it does not have the chemical weapon that was used in
the Halabja incident.

In conclusion, I want to say that the obvious goal
behind the holding of this meeting and the presentation
of false allegations by the Secretary of State of the
United States was to sell the idea of war and aggression
against my country, Iraq, without providing any legal,
moral or political justification. This was primarily an
attempt to sway United States public opinion - and
world public opinion generally - in favour of
launching a hostile attack against Iraq.

In return, Iraq offers security and peace and
reiterates before the members of the Security Council
our commitment to continue our proactive cooperation
with the inspection teams in order to make it possible
for them to complete their tasks as soon as possible so
as to verify that Iraq is free of weapons of mass
destruction, lift the unjust sanctions imposed against
us, ensure respect for our national security and
guarantee regional security by ridding the whole
Middle East of weapons of mass destruction, including
Israel's huge arsenal of weapons of mass destruction,

in accordance with the provisions of paragraph 14 of Before adjourning, may I remind Council
Security Council resolution 687 (1991). members of the luncheon that my delegation will have

