The President: As this is the first meeting of the
Council for the month of September, I should like
to take this opportunity to pay tribute, on behalf of
the Council, to Her Excellency Mrs. Maria Cristina
Perceval, Permanent Representative of the Argentina,
for her service as President of the Security Council
for the month of August. I know that I speak for all
members of the Council in expressing deep appreciation
to Ambassador Perceval and her delegation for the
skill, perseverance and good humour with which they
conducted the Council's business last month. They have
set a very high benchmark.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

Non-proliferation

Briefing by the Chairman of the
Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006)

The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda.

I shall now give a briefing in my capacity as Chair
ofthe Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1737 (2006).

I have the honour to present the report of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1737
(2006), in accordance with paragraph 18 (h) of that
resolution. The present report covers the period
from 16 July to 5 September, during which time the
Committee held two informal meetings and conducted
additional work using the no-objection procedure
envisaged by paragraph 15 of the guidelines for the
conduct of its work.

I am happy to report that the Committee adopted,
on 9 August, its programme of work for the period
of 1 July to 31 December 2013, which was brought
to the Council's attention on the same date. During
this period, the Committee continued to consider the
recommendations made by the Panel of Experts in its
final report (S/2013/33l, annex). The Committee, which
shares the objective of improving the implementation
of Security Council measures, has made progress in
reviewing those recommendations and considering
whether to take practical steps to implement them. To
date, however, none of those recommendations has
been approved by the Committee.

The Committee invited the special representative
ofINTERPOL to briefus, at our informal consultations
on 25 July, on cooperation between INTERPOL
and other Sanctions Committees in promoting the
implementation of Security Council measures. The
Committee is now debating whether it should sign
an agreement with INTERPOL to apply INTERPOL
special notices to disseminate information to Member
States regarding the Council's targeted sanctions list.
Some Committee members have said, however, that
they do not favour signing an agreement.

The Permanent Representative for the Islamic
Republic of Iran, Ambassador Khazaee, called on
me at his request on 1 August to discuss that issue.
We continued our discussion on whether and how to
respond to the Panel's compilation of publicly available
statements made by Iranian officials and alleged
recipients of Iranian military assistance, including
Palestinian Islamic Jihad, Hamas and Hizbullah,
regarding potential violations of paragraph 5 of
resolution 1747 (2007). In that compilation, the Panel
includes quotes from officials who spoke of transfers
from Iran; some officials spoke of transfers that are
prohibited by paragraph 5 of resolution 1747 (2007).
As requested by the Committee, the Panel continued
to collect information on the matter regarding such
transfers and submitted additional information to the
Committee that the Panel coordinator said was

"submitted following the request of the Committee
to provide any information additional to the
compilation of public statements of transfers of
arms to Gaza by Iran".

We are studying that information carefully.

At my previous briefing to the Council in July (see S/PV.6999), I informed members that the Committee
was considering an appropriate response to the United
Nations Compensation Commission relating to the
release of funds for two environmental claims to Iran.
The Committee responded, on 24 July, to inform the
Commission that the release of funds was not prohibited
by the resolutions.

In July, I undertook to provide an update on our
follow-up to the Panel's unanimous conclusion that
Iran's launches of Shahab-l and - 3 missiles during
the Great Prophet VII exercises contravened paragraph
9 of resolution 1929 (2010). A number of Committee
members continued to express the View, as confirmed
by the Panel of Experts, that the launches constituted
a clear violation of resolution 1929 (2010), and that
therefore all Member States should redouble their
efforts to implement ballistic missile-related sanctions
on Iran. At the present stage, some Committee members
cannot share that view. Iran still has not responded
to the Committee's letter of 12 April on that matter,
despite the effort of the President of the Security
Council to reach out to the Iranian Mission on 28 June
on its intentions regarding the letter.

I had my own opportunity to raise the matter
directly with Iran's Permanent Representative during
his call on me on 1 August. Unfortunately, he could not
give me any indication as to whether an answer would
be forthcoming. I also asked him about Iran's intentions
to respond to the Committee's letter of 21 May, which
had sought Iran's comment on another Panel report,
this time concluding that an intercepted arms shipment
was, at the very least, a probable violation by Iran of
paragraph 5 of resolution 1747 (2007). Again, he was
unable to advise whether Iran intended to reply; and, to
date, Iran has not replied.

On both issues, the Committee remains actively
engaged in discussing next steps. I would like to reiterate
the Committee's hope that Iran will answer those
communications as soon as possible. The Committee
intends to continue to consider its options for action in
response to each of those incidents and will provide an
update in its next 90-day report to the Council.

I am happy to inform representatives that the
Committee continues to receive information from
States related to actions taken to implement the relevant
Security Council measures. By a letter dated 12 July,
a State forwarded preliminary information concerning
the interception of valves destined for Iran. Another
State, by a letter dated 1 August, transmitted a report
on shipments confiscated by its authorities during the
first half of this year and on measures taken to prevent
the transit of shipments to Iran that were suspected
of containing prohibited items. Such information is
very useful to the Committee and its Panel of Experts,
which is currently investigating those cases. I would
like to take this opportunity to encourage all Member
States to transmit relevant information regarding the
implementation of the Council's measures.

Through the Focal Point for Delisting, the
Committee has received additional information from
the First East Export Bank, an entity that is currently
on the Committee's consolidated list, and whose
request for delisting is on the Committee's agenda. The
Committee will carefully study the information and
will take it fully into account when considering the
delisting request.
During the reporting period, the Committee
received one notification with reference to paragraph
5 of resolution 1737 (2006) concerning the delivery of
a video unit for use in the monitoring system of the
Bushehr nuclear power plant.

That is the end of my report.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Security Council.


