Sir Jeremy Greenstock (United Kingdom): I
think that the mission report and Ambassador Levitte's
oral report this morning have said almost all that we
need to say about the work of the mission, what we
found and what we now need to do. I hope that the
Council as a whole will act swiftly and with
determination on the recommendations that we put
forward.

Along with everybody else on the mission, I am
still left in admiration of Ambassador Levitte's
leadership, both on the substance and on the spirit of
the mission. I pay that tribute to him again today.

I also think that we were remarkably well served
by the United Nations family on the ground and by the
members of the Secretariat who came with us. This was
the largest, the longest and, paradoxically, the
smoothest mission that I have been on so far, including
my own. I think that the whole team played a
remarkable game.

What did we achieve? I think that time and events
will have to tell us what we achieved. We are looking
at a glass half full, in that all the parties decided to tell
us - I think with reasonable conviction - that they
believed in Lusaka and would implement Lusaka. But
we also heard nuances from all of them about where
they would like to swing Lusaka their way. I entirely
agree with Ambassador Ward on what he has just
said- that we could have heard some more positive
spirit from the parties in the debate this morning; and
some of them are absent from the continuation of the
debate now. This is the parties' interest, this is the
interest of the people in the region: to take the
opportunity of our focused interest and determination
to follow up to bring peace to the Great Lakes region.

We all know perfectly well that parties will be
tempted to squeeze advantage out of the next stages of
implementation for their singular interests. But the
international community is looking at the region as a
whole, and we, the international community, are not
going to be prepared to invest, politically and
economically, in the widest sense of the word invest, in
one or another country in that region unless the
stability and prosperity of the whole region is a real
prospect. There is therefore no point in any one party
pursuing its own interests at the expense of neighbours
or of the region as a whole. They will get two things
out of that. One, I hope, will be the Security Council
breathing very heavily down their necks, and perhaps
worse. We have shown that we can bite, both on this
mission and with our follow-up to the Panel's report;
so they will get a negative reaction from us and others
in the international community.

But it is also short-sighted in terms of the
interests, in the medium-to-long term, of any one
country to ignore the need to bring its neighbours
positively forward with it. I think that is a very
important message that we should send out of today's
debate. We are not letting go. We will crack down on
people who offend against the letter and spirit of
Lusaka. We will go back to the region. And we will
make sure that those promises made to us by each of
the parties that they would implement Lusaka properly
and carry out the plans in the Political Committee's
deliberations properly will be fulfilled. We will mark
them on that.

So I will not go over the individual points. We all
know what they are. I want to place an emphasis on
Kisangani and the symbolism that it would represent
for Kisangani to come out of its shadows and its
immediate problems - which are partly relieved by
the Rassemblement congolais pour la de'mocratie
(RCD-Goma) but also partly contributed to by it - and
show, as the third city of the Congo, that a quick
advance there would inject an enormous amount of
further spirit into the whole peace implementation
process.

I, too, pay tribute to the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUC). I think that Ambassador
Morjane, as he comes towards the end of his tenure,
has done a remarkable job. We will be lucky if the
Secretary-General finds someone as good to follow
him. But finding someone as good to follow him is a
very important next step among next steps that have to
be taken by the United Nations family.

Like others, I am more depressed on Burundi. I
do not think that any of the parties are really
contributing as they should be to the peace process,
neither the current Government, nor any of the 19
signatories, nor the non-signatories especially. But
they, too, will have to remember the warning that we
gave them: that there is no point whatsoever in the
continuation of armed force, not least because one
only, in that way, gives justification to one's enemies to
use armed force or to stay in the positions where they
are relying on armed force.

I think that a unitary negotiating mechanism for
Burundi is essential. Whoever Madiba intends to bring
into it, he or she must be under his direction or under
the direction of any successor that he approves of with
the Secretary-General and the Organization for African
Unity. There is also a need for regional input, and I am
very glad to hear today that President Museveni is
indeed intending to call a meeting in Arusha of the
regional initiative in the early days of June. That is
good news as follow-up to our mission, in that respect.

Finally, I entirely agree with the Secretary-
General's very well-balanced input this morning and
where he ended, which is that the parties are in the
lead. It is their region and their responsibility, but we,
the Security Council, have shown that we are serious.
In the weeks and months to come we have got to
double that representation of seriousness if we are to
draw the positive out of what we have done in the last
two weeks and to scotch the negative. So let us move
forward on all of this together with that kind of
determination.

