Mr. Lwin (Myanmar): Our delegation would like
to congratulate Malaysia on its assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council and the chairmanship
of the Council's Working Group on Children and Armed
Conflict. We would also like to express our appreciation
to the Secretary-General, His Excellency Mr. Ban
Ki-moon, for his opening remarks. We also thank
Ms. Leila Zerrougui, the Secretary-General's Special
Representative for Children and Armed Conflict, and
the other briefers for their presentations. Myanmar
also aligns itself with the statement delivered by the
Permanent Representative of Viet Nam on behalf of the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN).

My delegation fully shares the international
community's concern regarding the increase in the
number of grave violations committed against children
in armed conflicts in many parts of the world. The
decision to focus today on the abduction of children is
also very timely and relevant, since we are witnessing
a disturbing new trend in abductions, used mainly
by non-State actors for their purposes. There is no
doubt that in an insecure environment children are
most vulnerable to the serious consequences of armed
conflicts.

Myanmar has always fully supported the search
for a sustainable solution able to protect innocent
children from the effects of armed conflicts. We have
also supported the "Children, Not Soldiers" campaign,
launched last year to end the recruitment and use of
children by Government armed forces by 2016. We are
encouraged by the steady progress made in the first
year of the campaign. Six of the seven countries that
continue to recruit and use children have cooperated
with the United Nations by signing and recommitting
to action plans to end and prevent such recruitment.
The Security Council must therefore take a cooperative
rather than a punitive approach to this sensitive issue
in the case of the parties cooperating with the United
Nations.

My own country, Myanmar, is indeed one of the
countries actively engaging with the United Nations to
address the matter. Since our action plan was signed in
June 2012, Myanmar has honoured its commitments by
taking a series of measures in regular consultation with
the United Nations country task force on monitoring and
reporting and the central committee for the prevention
of the military recruitment of underage children of
the Ministry of Defence of Myanmar. The action plan
has been extended twice, each time for six months.
Over 35 monitoring visits to regional commands and
regiments have been conducted. Nationwide awareness-
raising campaigns to combat the recruitment and use of
minors have been launched. Over 12,000 members of
the armed forces have received training on the action
plan. Almost all of the steps outlined in the plan,
including the issuance of orders prohibiting underage
recruitment, the verification of ages, the identification
and release of underage recruits, their reintegration
into society and the punishment of offenders, have
been taken. The increase in the number of complaints
can be attributed to such factors as growing awareness,
greater freedom of expression and the repeated filing of
similar complaints. The recruitment of children under
18 is strictly prohibited under the existing regulations.
Any such complaints would relate to crimes perpetrated
by individuals rather than to the policy of the armed
forces.

Some of the information in the Secretary-General's
report on children and armed conflict (S/2015/409) has
been overtaken by recent developments in Myanmar.
On 4 June, the Government armed forces discharged
a further 51 children from military service after
verification of their ages. Since the action plan was
signed in 2012, a total of 645 underage children have
been discharged from military service and have been
reunited with their families. In accordance with the Joint
Strategy for the Elimination of Forced Labour, signed
by Myanmar and the International Labour Organization
(ILO), a directive criminalizing forced recruitments
has been issued. A total of 327 perpetrators, including
50 officers and 277 other ranks, have been punished
for the wrongful recruitment of minors. Since June
last year, recruitment centres rather than infantry units
have been solely responsible for recruitment, and more
supporting personal documentation has been required
of new recruits so that their age can be verified and
forgery prevented. The Supplementary Understanding
signed by Myanmar and the ILO has also effectively
prevented action against underage recruits as deserters
from the armed forces.

My delegation would like to thank the Secretary-
General and his Special Representative for Children
and Armed Conflict for rightly reflecting in his report
some of the positive measures taken by Myanmar. At
the same time, the Government has been making every
effort to sign a nationwide ceasefire agreement with the
ethnic armed groups to end the conflicts in the country,
which have lasted over six decades. The ending of
armed conflicts will eradicate the suffering caused by
violence against innocent children.

In conclusion, my delegation is also pleased to
inform the Security Council that an invitation has
been extended to Ms. Leila Zerrougui, the Secretary-
General's Special Representative, to visit Myanmar and
hold consultations for the further advancement of the
work plan. We are looking forward to welcoming her
to Myanmar soon, so that we can remove the remaining
obstacles to reaching the common goal of ending the
recruitment and use of children in the Government
armed forces by 2016.
