Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish):
We welcome the presence of Secretary of State
Greening and thank the United Kingdom presidency
for convening this open debate. We also appreciate the
briefings made by the Secretary-General, the Chairman
of the Peacebuilding Commission, and the President
of the Tunisian Confederation of Industry, Trade and
Handicrafts and Nobel Peace Prize laureate for the
Tunisian National Dialogue Quartet.

In a scenario of growing and new threats, it is
essential to use multidimensional approaches to address
the root causes of destabilizing processes that lead to
conflicts. It is imperative to take such an approach in
order to neutralize various forms of violence and its
worst manifestation, terrorism. The world has recently
been disturbed by heinous actions against universal
values based on unity, multicultural coexistence and
tolerance, which all civilizations and cultures should
promote. Security and development, as recognized by
the Council in its presidential statement S/PRST/2015/3
on inclusive development of 19 January, are closely
interrelated, mutually reinforcing, and essential to
achieving peace sustainable.

Therefore, it is a question not of the competence of
the various organs of the United Nations system, but
rather of how the international community as a whole,
the United Nations, other international organizations
and civil society, recognizing the interdependence
among the pillars of peace, security and development,
responds to these challenges to peace. Coordination
and complementarity are essential to the search for
sustainable solutions.

In these efforts, the substantive action of the
Council must be linked to the challenges of effective
prevention. The consequences of inaction in the face
of cycles of violence and tensions should be among the
concerns of this organ if we are to fully exercise our
responsibilities. The Human Rights Up Front initiative
is an effective way to identify the early signs and
anticipate negative developments. The availability of
better information on the ground can allow the United
Nations and the Council to act promptly when crises or
instability arise.

In that context, we reiterate the critical role and
participation of women in the processes of conflict and
post-conflict prevention. The adoption of resolution
1325 (2000) was a turning point in efforts to promote the
enhanced engagement ofwomen in the decision-making
process and political leadership in areas linked to
peace and security. We hope that the informal group of
experts on women and peace and security, established
under resolution 2242 (2015), will contribute to that.

National ownership is critical in addressing the
cycle of prevention and crisis response, and reinforces
the interdependence of the three pillars. Respect for the
rule of law, human rights, building effective, inclusive,
accountable and transparent institutions that ensure
accountability are sine qua non for achieving inclusive
societies and facilitating the creation of conditions
conducive to lasting and stable peace. In that regard, the
work of the Peacebuilding Commission, bridging the
gap between security and development, is indicative of
the need to seek interaction between the various bodies,
always from the perspective of efficient coordination.

We stress the importance of regional and
subregional organizations. Coordinated work with the
Council will contribute to a better understanding of
the root causes that affect the proliferation of conflicts,
and will identify responses that take into account the
historical and cultural contexts that are indispensable
to enhancing the legitimacy and effectiveness of these
contexts. Its tasks in the areas of preventive diplomacy
and mediation should be strengthened, with the full
cooperation of United Nations.

In the context of all this, we suggest that additional
opportunities for relations with institutions of the
United Nations system be evaluated so as to contribute
to the political heritage that should be available to the
Council. It is essential to adopt an integrated approach
that seeks complementarity rather than logic based on
exclusive competences.

As was recognized by the President ofthe Republic
of Chile, Michelle Bachelet, in January, and included
in the presidential statement adopted at that time,
we reiterate the call to adopt a comprehensive and
integrated approach that incorporates and strengthens
the coherence of political and security activities,
development, human rights and the promotion of the
rule of law, and that addresses the root causes of each
conflict.

