Mr. Omaish (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): I thank
Mr. Farid Zarif, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo for his
comprehensive briefing. I would also like to welcome
the Prime Minister of Republic of Serbia, His Excellency
Mr. Ivica Dacie, and His Excellency Mr. Hashim Thaci,
Prime Minister of the Republic of Kosovo, and thank
them for their statements.

We have all witnessed genuine political progress in

the relations between Pristina and Belgrade during 2013,
which is reflected, above all, by the First Agreement of
Principles Governing the Normalization of Relations,
an agreement that was facilitated by the European
Union (EU) in April 2013. Jordan believes that it is
incumbent upon both parties to build on the momentum
created by the Agreement and move forward decisively
to address pending aspects. In that regard, we commend
the ongoing direct dialogue under the auspices of the
EU between the Prime Ministers of Serbia and Kosovo,
as well as the serious commitment shown by the parties
during the meetings. We also commend the ongoing
meetings of the technical working groups and their
recent progress in implementing the agreement on the
integral management of the check points.

Jordan believes that the EU has a key role to play
in accelerating progress in the dialogue. While we
commend the serious and continued efforts undertaken
by the EU High Representative, Baroness Catherine
Ashton, we believe that the European effort will not
only help to overcome the challenges ahead, but also
contribute to the promotion of a culture of dialogue and
cooperation, stability and respect for human rights in
the region.

Jordan welcomes the concluion of the second
round of the mayoral elections in the municipalities in
Kosovo, which were organized in a peaceful manner
in early December 2013. Jordan also commends the
international presence in all its forms in Kosovo for all
its efforts during each election rounds, in particular the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe,
which facilitated the holding of the elections in the
northern municipalities as well as outside Kosovo.
The elections held in different parts of the Republic of
Kosovo, within a unique legislative framework and with
participation by both local and international observers,
were an important landmark on the path towards
strengthening democratic institutions in Kosovo, as
well as a necessary step towards achieving legitimate
representation for local communities. The upcoming
period will be crucial to strengthening the positive
results of the elections.

Jordan read with great interest the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2014/68), particularly with
respect to the security situation in Kosovo and the fact
that the situation was relatively stable in the period
under review, with a drop in crime rates. We regret the
killing of the elected official in northern Mitrovica. We
trust that that assassination will not have a negative
impact on the political process.

We commend the European Union Rule of Law
Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) and support its activities.
Jordan commends its ongoing efforts to facilitate
the implementation of provisions on the rule of law
in the First Agreement of Principles Governing the
Normalization of Relations.

Jordan believes that it is vital to address,
continuously and seriously, all post-conflict issues that
have a major impact on the psychological state ofvarious
local communities, such as the fate of missing persons
and returnees, and the ethnic groups. In that regard, we
welcome the commitment by the Kosovo authorities to
facilitate the return of displaced Kosovo Serbs to their
homes, as expressed by Mr. Thaci during his visit to
the returning families in the village of Videje/Vidanje
on the occasion of the Orthodox Christmas. We hope
that UNMIK and other international organizations
will continue to contribute to finding solutions to all
those issues in order to build trust and achieve stronger
reconciliation in the region.

Jordan recognized Kosovo's independence in 2009.
That independence is a de facto reality. We took note
of all the positive developments that have taken place
in Kosovo since the adoption of resolution 1244 (1999)
and the deployment of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo.

Therefore, We believe that it will be useful at
this stage to give the parties more time in the periods
between the quarterly reports of the Secretary-General
and their discussions by the Security Council, in order
to focus on dialogue and the implementation of the
Agreement.

In conclusion, we express our appreciation for the
efforts of to the Head of UNMIK and all its staff to
implement the Mission's mandate in different areas.

