Mr. Matjila (South Africa): Before I deliver our
joint statement for the 10 elected members (E-lO)
of the Security Council on the working methods of
the Council, allow me to reflect for a moment on the
momentous events that took place 75 years ago today.
I would like to commemorate and pay homage to the
thousands of servicemen, servicewomen and civilians
who gave their lives on this day 75 years ago during the
D-Day assault on the beaches of Normandy. This act of
valour and self-sacrifice to free the world of the tyranny
and oppression of fascism should never be forgotten,
as it was an important building block in laying the
foundation for the creation of the United Nations. As
our search for peace and security in the world continues
through our work in the Security Council, we should
always be reminded of and honour through our actions
and decisions the ultimate sacrifice that many men and
women made for a peaceful and just world so that all of
us could enjoy greater and larger freedoms.

Let me now turn to our business at hand. On behalfof
the current 10 elected members of the Security Council,
let me express our appreciation to you, Mr. President,
for convening today's timely and important debate.
We thank the briefers, Ms. Karin Landgren, Executive
Director of Security Council Report, and Mr. James
Cockayne, Director of the United Nations University
Centre for Policy Research, for their excellent briefings.
We welcome the presence of the honourable Ministers
of Romania and Estonia in the Chamber today.

Allow me also to pay tribute to all those who
endeavoured to improve and codify the Council's
working methods, which are critical to its functioning.
In particular, I would like to express our gratitude for
the work done within the Informal Working Group on
Documentation and Other Procedural Questions over
the past year and a half under the President's most able
and dedicated chairmanship.

Today, as in previous open debates, we see a
large number of Member States on the speakers list.
This clearly illustrates the importance that all States
Members of the United Nations attach to the working
methods of the Council. We share this position, hence
our joint statement, corresponding both with our unity
in efforts aimed at improving the Council's functioning
and with the provisions relating to the conduct of open
debates, contained in the most recent comprehensive
note of the President on the Council's working methods
(S/2017/507, annex), the so-called note 507.

The adoption of consecutive notes developed
within the Informal Working Group marks important
steps in the steady advancement of the Council's
working methods that are of special significance for
elected members. This is particularly important given
the short period during which elected members serve
on the Council and given that the codification of
working methods allows for all members of the Council
to be more effective. This in turn contributes to the
efficiency of the Council in executing its mandate.
Therefore, while we welcome the provisions of note
507 of 2017, adopted under the excellent chairmanship
of the Permanent Representative of Japan, Ambassador
Koro Bessho, whom I see in the Chamber this morning,
and are committed to their full implementation, we see
room, and an urgent need, for further progress.

Consequently, the E-10 supports and stands ready
to further improve the draft notes of the President,
which are currently being discussed within the
Working Group. These notes are intended to take into
account the concerns expressed by the broader United
Nations membership during previous debates, as well
as during the annual General Assembly debate on the
report of the Security Council. We are convinced that
the adoption and implementation of these notes will
contribute to enhancing the efficiency and transparency
of the Council's work, as well as the dialogue with the
broader United Nations membership.

As E-lO members, we have also taken it upon
ourselves to attempt to bridge the gap created by
our limited term on the Council by fostering greater
cooperation and coordination among ourselves.
This intention was manifest in the November 2018
coordination meeting launched in Pretoria, which
brought together incoming, current and outgoing
E-10 members to explore mechanisms and areas
for collaboration and coordination, so that elected
members could better serve the Council in pursuit of
the maintenance of international peace and security.

As the elected members and incoming members
emphasized in their letter to the Council last year, there
is a need for burden-sharing and equal distribution
of work among Security Council members, including
the Council's permanent five members. Two draft
notes regarding the Chairs of subsidiary bodies and
co-penholderships specifically address these concerns.
The notes could eventually increase opportunities for
engagement by all Council members and allow for
greater use of expertise and knowledge accumulated by
the Chairs of the subsidiary bodies. We are therefore
convinced that the Security Council should consider
promoting the Chairs' role as penholders, as well as
making their role as co-penholders on related dossiers
automatic, should the Chairs choose to accept that role.

Additional measures could facilitate the planning
and preparations of newly elected Council members
both in New York and in capitals in order to allow
them to hit the ground running. These measures may
also allow for members' better preparation for Council
meetings and visiting missions. Another proposal
aims at strengthening fair and clear procedures for the
Security Council sanction regimes and considers the
need to respect international due process standards
when implementing decisions of the Security Council.

The rule of law should particularly apply in
situations in which the actions of the United Nations
directly affect individual rights. In this regard, the
establishment of the Ombudsperson was a significant
step forward in improving the fairness and transparency
of the Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267
(1999) 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015) concerning ISIL
(Da'esh) Al-Qaida and associated individuals groups
undertakings and entities.

We strongly believe in the need to continue to
render United Nations targeted sanctions more effective
and legitimate by further pursuing efforts to strengthen
procedures and due process guarantees in other sanction
regimes of the Council, including by creating review
mechanisms, similar to that of the Ombudsperson,
for other sanction regimes. This would strengthen the
effectiveness, legitimacy and uniform implementation
of all sanctions adopted by the Council. Furthermore,
there have been calls for the promotion and advancement
of women and greater gender inclusivity and equality,
thus adapting the Security Council's working methods
to current realities and commonly shared expectations
that have already been advanced in the substantive work
of the Council, for example in the women and peace and
security agenda.
We look forward to achieving an agreement on the
aforementioned proposals and improving the ways the
Council operates. The E-10 reiterates that the previously
mentioned notes were introduced separately with the
intention of issuing any note that has been agreed by
Member States in the context of the Informal Working
Group and that these notes were never intended to
be agreed or issued as a package. We call upon the
five permanent members to show more flexibility in
ensuring a swift adoption of the notes going forward,
based on the extensive discussions that have already
taken place in the Informal Working Group.

Our commitment to working together towards that
goal stems from our shared ambition of enhancing
the Council's functionality and efficiency while
ensuring that its interactions and cooperation with
other stakeholders are more robust. That approach can
only serve to improve the Council's ability to maintain
international peace and security, drawing on the
diverse and distinguished expertise, fresh perspectives
and dynamism that the 10 non-permanent members and
other stakeholders bring to the table.

Such an approach is reflective of the expectations
of the States Members of the United Nations, who have
conferred on the Council the primary responsibility
for the maintenance of international peace and
security, that the Council's actions should be prompt
and effective. It also answers the call for enhancing
the Council's performance and inclusiveness and
ensuring its accountability to the entire United Nations
membership, on whose behalf it acts in carrying out
its duties.

We look forward to hearing concrete proposals and
feedback during this debate from the wider membership
on further measures that the Council could undertake
to improve its working methods, and we hope to pursue
those ideas further within the Informal Working Group
for the remainder of the year.

Five new members of the Council will be elected
tomorrow, after which consultations on the distribution
of the chairmanships of the subsidiary bodies starting
from 1 January 2020 will soon begin. Note 507
states that the informal process of consultations on
the selection of the Chairs will be undertaken in a
"balanced, transparent, efficient and inclusive way"
(S/2017/507, para. 113).

We are confident that the consultation process will
be conducted in a manner consistent with that provision
and that the end result will conform to the need for
burden-sharing, collective responsibility and a fair and
equitable distribution of work among all members of
the Council, including its permanent members. The
call for a more equal distribution of work is not new
and has been persistently brought forward by members
and non-members of the Security Council. We strongly
believe that such an equal distribution ofwork is notjust
a matter of fair burden-sharing but will also positively
affect the overall effectiveness of the Council.

In conclusion, I would like to once again thank
Kuwait for convening this meeting and reiterate the
elected members' commitment to the improvement of
the Security Council's working methods. Guided by
the spirit of the Charter of the United Nations, whose
seventy-fifth anniversary we will be celebrating next
year, we remain fully committed to promoting the
Security Council as a body that serves and represents
the entire United Nations membership.

On behalf of the three African members of the
Council, I would also like to inform the Council that
the Peace and Security Council has, with immediate
effect, suspended the participation of the Republic
of the Sudan in all African Union activities until the
effective establishment of a civilian-led transitional
authority as the only way to allow the Sudan to exit
from the current crisis.

