The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of Singapore.

Since our last open debate, on 19 April, there
have been several developments in the Middle East.
There has been good news and bad news, but overall
the situation remains grim and is of grave concern to
the international community.

On the good news front, we welcome the ongoing
diplomatic initiatives that have been undertaken to help
implement the Security Council resolutions. Israel's
decision to lift the restrictions on Chairman Arafat, as a
result of diplomatic efforts undertaken by the United
States and the United Kingdom, is a positive
development. Similarly, yesterday's announcement
from the "quartet" - consisting of the United States,
Russia, the European Union and the United Nations -
that the international peace conference could be
convened in early summer with a comprehensive
agenda for security, economic, humanitarian and
political tracks is indeed a truly welcome
announcement.

Just before the resumption of the meeting, we
were encouraged by the briefing that the Secretary-
General gave us in the informal consultations room. We
believe that the Secretary-General has a vital role to
play. We have responded positively to his proposal to
deploy an impartial and robust multinational force to
the region. We have urged the Council to consider that
suggestion seriously. We hope that proposal will gain
some traction.

But there is also bad news. We continue to
deplore in the strongest terms all acts of terror and to
call for an end to the extreme acts by both sides. We
believe that there must be a withdrawal of Israeli forces
from all Palestinian cities, accompanied by general
efforts by the Palestinian Authority to take action
against acts of terror.

There is the bad news related to Jenin, which has
probably triggered the meeting that we are having here
today. Initially, we were encouraged by the Secretary-
General's initiative to develop accurate information
regarding the events in the Jenin refugee camp through
the dispatch of a fact-finding team. We were therefore
happy to vote unanimously, with the other Council
members, to support the Secretary-General's initiative.
We did so because we believed that it was in Israel's
interest to have a full and public clarification of the
situation in Jenin. It is therefore unfortunate that the
team has now been disbanded, and we join others in
expressing deep regret at Israel's rebuff of those
efforts.

We also believe that the Council's credibility has
been damaged by the non-compliance with its
resolutions. Indeed, listening to this debate since it
began, if there is one clear theme that emerged in all
the speeches, it was that Security Council resolutions
must be complied with. Let me just cite two examples.
The Permanent Representative of Spain, speaking on
behalf of the European Union said: "Security Council
resolutions must be implemented fully and
immediately The European Union deplores that yet
another Security Council resolution has not been fully
implemented." The Permanent Representative of South
Africa said:

"If the Council fails to impose
consequences for non-compliance with its
decisions, its ability to fulfil its Charter mandate
will be completely undermined and its credibility
will be harmed."

If that is indeed the consensus, why, then, has the
Council not reacted to the latest developments? Here,
perhaps, it may be useful for the international
community to be apprised of the fact that the Council
indeed has not been quiet. There has been intense
activity over the last 48 hours to try to forge a common
response by the Council. Indeed, it began on the first
day of the month, when it is not traditional for the
Council to hold meetings. But we met at 5.20 pm. to
discuss the letter that was sent to us by the Secretary-
General, informing us of his efforts to implement
resolution 1405 (2002), including a chronology of
events and his analysis leading to his intention to
disband the fact-finding team. Indeed, we had a
comprehensive and exhaustive discussion that lasted
three hours, and, of course, we discussed the possible
responses that the Council could make, including a
draft resolution. We suspended the meeting at 8 p.m.,
corridor diplomacy continued, and we resumed our
meetings at 10.20 p.m.; at that point in time, we had
one draft resolution on the table, plus other alternative
texts. They were circulated and, indeed, have been
referred to in today's meetings.

Throughout all these discussions, various efforts
were made to try to bring the Council together to act in
a unified fashion, and at 11.10 pm. on Wednesday
night all 15 heads of delegations were invited by the
presidency to find creative and practical ways to avoid
divisions in the Council. These efforts did not succeed
and I believe that at about 10 minutes past midnight
this Chamber was opened up and we all began to enter
in the expectation that a decision would be taken.
Subsequently, however, the decision was made not to
proceed with a vote on the draft resolution.

Subsequently, we then resumed our informal
consultations at 1.15 am. to discuss again a possible
Council response. In those consultations, which lasted
from 1.15 am. to 2.15 a.m., we reached some
agreement and, as instructed by the members of the
Council in my capacity as President of the Council, I
went outside and I told the media that the Council had
agreed that a letter should be prepared and sent to the
Secretary-General. I suppose that many members
noticed that, when the Secretary-General spoke at his
press conference yesterday in Washington, DC, he
referred to the possibility of receiving such a letter and
he said:

"I hope I will get a letter from them at the end of
the day. I do not know what they will do next, but
there is a paragraph in the draft, which I have
seen, which will require that we proceed and
prepare a report on Jenin with all available
information, implying that it should be done even
if we could not get in on the ground."

That was a letter that had been drafted by the
Singapore delegation and circulated at the
consultations yesterday morning. Regrettably, because
we could not reach agreement on the letter, the
discussions continued and finally the decision was
made to convene this open meeting.

I thought it may be useful to document all these
facts to indicate that the members of the Council are
aware that they have a responsibility in this situation. I
believe that most members are aware that, if the
Security Council is to make a real and constructive
impact on this situation, it is important that it act, as far
as possible, in a unified manner. The Security Council
should continue to build on the other successful stream
of resolutions we have adopted in the past few months,
for that would send a clear message to all the parties
involved that they need to come together. We hope that,
as a result of the debate today, with a clear message
sent by the non-members of the Council to the
members of the Council that they have an obligation to
react to these latest developments, the Council will
come together and do so in the realization that its
credibility is at stake now and that we, the Council
members, have to assume common responsibility for
this credibility.

I now resume my function as President of the
Council.

There are no more speakers inscribed on my list.
The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The meeting ruse at10.20p.m.
