Mr. Jana Milano (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, I should
like to convey to the members of the Council and all
those present at this debate the greetings ofthe President
of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, Nicolas
Maduro Moros. He asked me in particular to convey
to you, President Cristina, his pleasure at seeing you
assuming with dignity and courage this very important
global responsibility. In Venezuela, we are sure that all
of Latin America and the Caribbean are deeply proud
of you. President Maduro reiterates before the United
Nations his firm commitment to continuing to fly the
banner of peace, social justice, cooperation and the
self-determination of peoples, bearing in mind the
historic legacy of Commander President Hugo Chavez
Frias, leader of the Bolivarian revolution.

Today, we join in the pleasure of the Bolivian people
on its national holiday, and recall the commemoration
of the 200 years of the triumphant entry of the liberator
Simon Bolivar into the town of Caracas after having
carried out a successful campaign that began in
December of 1812 in New Granada. We must always
remember that, when united, we South Americans will
achieve independence, and united we are achieving
independence, equality and democracy for our peoples.

On behalf of the States members of the Southern
Common Market (MERCOSUR), we congratulate
you, Madam President, and the people of Argentina
on assuming the presidency of the Security Council,
entrusted with maintaining international peace and
security. Today in the Latin American and Caribbean
region, there are no conflicts between countries that
would endanger global or regional peace. On the
contrary, we have seen more and more initiatives of
regional and subregional integration that promote
dialogue and trust among peoples and prevent and
avoid conflicts between States through innovative
mechanisms. We continue to strengthen our democratic
systems, creating the conditions in every country and
the entire bloc to build a culture of peace.

The Union of South American Nations (UNASUR),
the Community of Latin American and Caribbean
States, the Bolivarian Alliance for the Peoples of Our
America, PetroCaribe and MERCOSUR, which I am
proud to represent here, are among those regional
integration initiatives that, in a very short time, have
made major achievements in sustaining peace and
preserving democracy in our region.

Peace cannot be achieved in the world without
social justice and without eradicating once and for
all hunger, poverty, illiteracy, malnutrition, and the
wide technological divides - in other words, without
guaranteeing to all the resources necessary for their full
development in equal conditions. Nor can we achieve
peace without guaranteeing the effective participation of
citizens in political matters and in controlling their own
destinies - in other words, without the entrenchment
of democratic systems as a way of guaranteeing a social
state of law and justice. It is in these aspects where the
Latin American and Caribbean integration has made
progress, showing that we can identify joint formulas
to achieve the well-being of our peoples in democracy.

In particular, we note that MERCOSUR has
gone from being a commercial agreement to being a
very important social mechanism, creating common
institutions endowed with the human and material
resources to work in these areas. Furthermore,
MERCOSUR's commitment to democracy has been
clear throughout its existence. The instruments,
declarations, decisions and resolutions of MERCOSUR
have sought democracy and peace in the region,
including by preventing coups and other attempts to
frustrate the democratic will of our peoples, promoted
by fascistic movements represented by political and
economic leaders that are found particularly in media
corporations. These movements attack democratic
Governments and peoples that have chosen the path
of independence, social inclusion and the grass-
roots democratization of our societies. These groups
and movements, which ignore election results and
democratic institutions and promote political violence,
pose the greatest threat to political stability in our
region.

The timely and firm action of MERCOSUR, along
with other regional and subregional organizations,
managed to stop attempted coups in Paraguay in 1996
and 1999, thereby guaranteeing democratic order.
Similarly, in 2006 and 2007, MERCOSUR condemned
and took action to prevent attempts to divide Bolivia
as a way of weakening the democratic Government of
President Evo Morales. Likewise, the Foreign Ministers
of the countries members of MERCOSUR condemned
the attempted coup against President Rafael Correa
in Ecuador on 30 September 2010, joining with other
regional blocs to issue ajoint warning to the world and
prevent that crime from taking place.

Although it could not be prevented, MERCOSUR
acted decisively in the parliamentary coup against
President Fernando Lugo of Paraguay in June 2012. On
that occasion, the Foreign Ministers of MERCOSUR
and UNASUR travelled to Asuncion with the intention
of starting a dialogue and preventing the interruption
of the constitutional order. That was not achieved, and
the bloc had to temporarily suspend the Republic of
Paraguay until its political institutional and democratic
situation was normalized through the holding of
elections. More recently, MERCOSUR issued a timely
appeal for respect for the popular will and democratic
institutions of my country, Venezuela, following
rejection by the defeated candidate of the results of the
elections on 15 April and his call to violence.

We stress that MERCOSUR has been able
to circumvent these situations with peaceful and
democratic mechanisms, without economic blockades,
military intervention, indiscriminate bombing or
armed intervention of any kind. We believe that the
only way to defeat Violence is with greater democracy
and peaceful means.

MERCOSUR has also participated in issues that
affect international peace and security, such as the coup
in Honduras against President Zelaya, and, inter alia, the
situations in the Middle East, the Korean peninsula and
the Balkan peninsula when it was engulfed in conflict.
MERCOSUR has also created its own institutions in
order to deepen and preserve democracy, including the
MERCOSUR Center for the Promotion of the Rule of
Law and the MERCOSUR Democracy Observatory,
among others.

MERCOSUR reiterates its support for United
Nations reform, including that of the Security
Council, with a View to giving greater legitimacy to its
composition and decision-making process in accordance
with the purposes and principles of the United Nations
Charter, among them the sovereign equality of States.
The words of President Hugo Chavez Frias before the
General Assembly during the closing meeting of the
Millennium Summit on 8 September 2000 remain valid
today. It is an appeal to continue working earnestly to
achieve the democratization of the Security Council.
Commander Chavez proposed

"that democratization of the Security Council be
faced and achieved. But it must be done because
if it is not, many said we could lose the credibility
of the message and the debate on democracy and
equality, which is spoken of frequently in these
forums. This is so necessary in order to effect
change in the world." (A/55/PV8, p. 37)

In the opinion of the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela, unfortunately, in recent times we have been
concerned to see that, on the contrary, some countries
have continued to assert their political, military and
economic power and distorted the very essence of
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
and subregional organizations. They have gone so far as
to use the Security Council as a platform to encourage
armed interventions against sovereign States and
peoples with a View to promoting the poorly named
regime change, in contravention of all principles of
international law.

We reject ongoing colonial situations that undermine
the maintenance of international peace and security,
such as the violation of Argentinian sovereignty over
the Malvinas Islands. In this sense, the States members
of MERCOSUR reassert their full support for the
sovereign rights of the Republic of Argentina over this
island territory. Similarly, we continue to condemn
and call for an end to the criminal economic blockade
against the honourable and brotherly Republic of Cuba,
as well as compliance with relevant United Nations
resolutions. Furthermore, as a major contribution to
achieving peace in the Middle East, in particular the
question of Palestine, the Council must address as
soon as possible the legitimate request of the State of
Palestine to be admitted as a full-fledged Member of
the United Nations.

As Foreign Minister of the Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela and as Pro-Tempore President of
MERCOSUR, I take this opportunity to reiterate our
firm condemnation of the insult to the office of the
President ofthe Plurinational State of Bolivia, President
Evo Morales, when some European Governments did
not permit the overflight or landing of the aircraft
transporting him. That was not only a hostile,
unfounded, discriminatory and arbitrary action, but
also a flagrant violation of the precepts of international
law. Similarly, we reject the actions of global espionage
carried out by the Government of the United States,
which undermine the sovereignty of States and which
we have become familiar through the revelations of the
former security contractor, Edward Snowden.

Given the seriousness of these reports of computer
espionage on a global scale, recognized by the Secretary-
General of the International Telecommunication Union
himself, the United Nations must initiate a broad
multilateral discussion that would make it possible to
design agreements to safeguard the sovereignty and
security of States in the light of such illegal practices.
MERCOSUR has begun action to promote a discussion
on this matter so that we can open an appropriate
investigation within the United Nations and punish and
condemn this violation of international law.

We reiterate our condemnation of actions that could
undermine the power of States to fully implement the
right of humanitarian asylum. In this respect, we reject

any attempt to pressure, harass or criminalize a State

or third party over the sovereign decision of any nation

to grant asylum, which is enshrined in all international

conventions. Likewise, we express our solidarity with

the Governments of Bolivia and Nicaragua, which,

like Venezuela, have offered asylum to Mr. Snowden,

as expressed by the Heads of State of MERCOSUR in

the decision concerning the universal recognition of
the right of political asylum, issued in Montevideo on

12 July. These three matters were discussed yesterday

with the Secretary-General of the United Nations, in

compliance with the mandate of the Presidents of
MERCOSUR, at his meeting with the Foreign Ministers
of our organization seeking due treatment from United
Nations bodies.

Lastly, MERCOSUR reaffirms its commitment to
the common cause of international peace and security
guided by shared values in building a pluripolar
system that is free of hegemony and contributes to
strengthening a multicentric and inclusive world with
unlimited respect for international law.

