Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I
should like to thank the Secretary-General for his
report (S/2010/127) and Under-Secretary-General
Alain Le Roy for his comprehensive briefing this
morning. I should also like to welcome the positive
remarks made by Ambassador Tanin.

The report of the Secretary-General outlines
clearly the progress made towards Afghanistan's
becoming a secure, stable and prosperous nation. We
remain firmly committed to this goal. But the report
also sets out the scale of the challenges that remain.

As this is the first time the Council has formally
discussed Afghanistan since his appointment, let me
like others welcome Staffan de Mistura as the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General. He has the
United Kingdom's full support. We encourage him to
maximize his time on the ground in Afghanistan in
order to strengthen the United Nations leadership. We
welcome the progress already made in filling vacant
posts in the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA), and stand ready to support
further recruitment efforts.

The United Kingdom also welcomes the
appointments of the NATO Senior Civilian
Representative and the European Union's Special
Representative. Working with the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, they will help
to ensure that civilian delivery in Afghanistan amounts
to more than the sum of its individual parts.

The London Conference in January marked an
important step. The Afghan Government, the United
Nations and the international community agreed a
common set of principles reflecting the ambitions that
President Karzai outlined in his inauguration speech
last year. These priorities renewed the international
community's commitment to Afghanistan and its
people, and recognized a new phase towards greater
Afghan leadership. These priorities will be reflected in
UNAMA's renewed mandate next week.

The international community and President
Karzai's Government now need to deliver on the
commitments we collectively made in London,
particularly in three priority areas. The first is security.
As the Secretary-General's report sets out, the past
three months have presented major security challenges,
but the progress we have made is real. Operation
Moshtarak shows the increasing role that Afghanistan
is playing in strengthening its own security. We
welcome the considerable efforts made by the
International Security Assistance Force and Afghan
forces in minimizing civilian casualties - a fall of
some 28 per cent over the past year. We are working
towards the day when foreign troops are no longer
needed on the front line in Afghanistan, and when
Afghanistan can stand up by itself to the threat posed
by terrorism.

Second is the political process. Developing an
Afghan-led political settlement remains a critical task
for 2010. Both the forthcoming Peace Jirga and the
Kabul conference are central to that effort. We support
the Afghan Government in its endeavour to develop a
representative reconciliation process. As my Foreign
Minister said last week, the Afghans must own, lead
and drive such political engagement. It will be a slow,
gradual process. And to support that Afghan-led
political process, and at the request of the Government,
we envisage an important role for UNAMA and the
good offices of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General.

Third are elections. UNAMA will have an
important role in helping the Afghan Government to
prepare for the forthcoming legislative elections. We
hope that all efforts will be made by the Government to
ensure that they are transparent, credible and safe. We
reaffirm our support for the Government's commitment
in the London communique to preventing any
irregularity and misconduct. It is important for the
credibility of the election that both the Afghan
Electoral Complaints Commission and the Independent
Election Commission be genuinely independent so that
they can provide the proper checks and balances
required by the Constitution. We therefore welcome
President Karzai's commitment to appointing two
internationals to the Electoral Complaints Commission,
and we look forward to the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General making those appointments
shortly.

We agree with the analysis in the Secretary-
General's report of the presidential elections last year.
A number of lessons need to be learned, and we
recognize the challenges in delivering credible
elections this coming September. We note the
commitment in the London communique that the
Afghan Government will work closely with the United
Nations to deliver improvements in all future electoral
processes, and we look forward to the Government
outlining and implementing electoral reforms without
delay.

Tackling corruption must remain a top priority for
the Afghan Government and for international partners.
As the Secretary-General's report highlights,
corruption is currently an even greater priority for
Afghans than security. Corruption hampers socio-
economic development and undermines the legitimacy
of the Government and its ability to deliver services to
the Afghan people. At the London Conference,
President Karzai committed to tackling corruption and
to building independent institutions to drive and
monitor progress. We therefore welcome Mr. Le Roy's
confirmation that President Karzai today enacted
legislation establishing the High Office for Oversight
and Anti-corruption. Improving anti-corruption efforts
will build the confidence of donors to channel an
increasing percentage of development funds directly
through Afghan ministries.

Finally, we look forward to the Kabul conference
later this year. That event will maintain momentum in
building a political strategy in Afghanistan and will
enable the Government of Afghanistan, with the
support of the United Nations and the international
community, to articulate how it will implement the
commitments made in January. Afghanistan and the
United Nations have the United Kingdom's full
support.

