Mr. Sreenivasan (India): My delegation is pleased,
Sir, that this important debate is taking place under your
sagacious presidency. We are particularly appreciative of
your personal contribution to transparency in the
functioning of the Security Council through your regular

 

briefing of the general membership on the formal and
informal proceedings of the Council.

We have undertaken a preliminary analysis and
assessment of the "Supplement to an Agenda for Peace",
which has been thoughtfully prepared and presented by the
Secretary-General as we enter the fiftieth anniversary year
of the United Nations. We have taken note of the fact that
the Secretary-General has presented his Supplement as a
document of the fiftieth session of the General Assembly.
As the issues addressed have direct and long-term
implications for the work of the United Nations in fulfilling
the objectives of the Charter, it is the expectation of my
delegation that this debate of the Security Council is just
the beginning of a series of wide-ranging discussions on the
issues raised by the Secretary-General - a process that will
necessarily continue in greater detail during the fiftieth
session of the General Assembly. By then we shall have
gained more experience in different areas and shall also
have received the central documents on the Agenda for
Peace and the Agenda for Development to which the
Secretary-General referred in his press conference of 5
January 1995.

The focus of the "Supplement to an Agenda for
Peace" is understandably on peace-keeping operations. This
not only highlights the principal focus of United Nations
activities in the recent past, but also underlines the need to
restore the balance between peace-keeping operations and
the vital activities of the United Nations in the economic
and social sectors.

We are gratified to note that the clear lesson drawn in
the Supplement from recent experience of peace-keeping
operations is that respect for certain basic principles of
peace-keeping is essential to success. These are consent,
impartiality and the non-use of force except in cases of
self-defence. We are equally gratified that the Secretary-
General has highlighted the point that the logic of
peace-keeping flows from political and military premises
quite distinct from those of enforcement, and that the
dynamics of the latter are incompatible with the political
process that peace-keeping is intended to facilitate. We trust
that the Security Council will bear these lessons of recent
history in mind as it proceeds to deal with the challenging
situations that lie ahead.

We agree with the Secretary-General that conflicts that
the United Nations is asked to resolve usually have deep
roots and have defied the peacemaking efforts of others,
and that their resolution requires patience, diplomacy and
the establishment of a political process that will lead to a
mutually acceptable political settlement. We also agree
that it is necessary to resist the temptation to use military
power to speed up the process of resolution of conflicts.
Peace-keeping and peace enforcement are indeed, clearly,
alternative techniques.

In the section on sanctions, the Secretary-General
has highlighted certain issues that should engage the
serious attention of the international community in the
light of recent experience. The issues raised by the
Secretary-General are both philosophical and practical,
and they are revealing and thought-provoking. As we
address the overall question of sanctions, we trust that
these issues will also be appropriately addressed. It is
important to ensure that the means are as justifiable as the
ends.

We have noted the Security Council's suggestion
concerning the establishment of a mechanism to
implement Article 50 of the Charter. We have long called
for such a mechanism to be established. In our view, the
mechanism should be established by the Security Council,
and it must contain the element of automaticity of
application. The Security Council could consider
establishing a fund for this purpose financed from
assessed contributions, as peace-keeping operations are, at
the very time the Council imposes sanctions.

The Secretary-General has made in his Supplement
some new proposals and also resuscitated some old yet
significant ones made in "An Agenda for Peace". We
have not had the time for a detailed examination of some
of these proposals, yet it would be inappropriate for us
not to convey our preliminary reaction to some of them,
even at this stage.

The Secretary-General acknowledges in paragraph 6
of the Supplement that some of the ideas contained in
"An Agenda for Peace" have not proved themselves. The
unprecedented growth of peace-keeping operations has
imposed a strain on Member States, resulting in a dearth
of personnel and funding, even for mandated operations.
The delay in the reimbursement of troop costs makes it
difficult for developing countries to participate in the
operations. In certain countries public opinion is agitated
over the loss of peace-keepers' lives and the existing
anomalies in death and disability benefits.

A pragmatic and realistic approach is clearly called
for. It is obvious that the United Nations would be well
advised to return to the traditional format of
peace-keeping and to the customary caution with which

 

these operations were established. Barring
peace-enforcement, and in exceptional cases where consent
is a matter of practical and realistic impossibility, consent
must be a prerequisite for United Nations activity. At the
same time, my delegation is not at all sure that the United
Nations should have an independent capacity for peace
enforcement. Similarly, while India has agreed to contribute
to stand-by forces as presently constituted, we doubt the
validity of the concept of a standing force for the United
Nations.

The suggestion that there is need to create a climate of
opinion or ethos within the international community in
which the norm would be for Member States to accept the
offer of United Nations good offices is well taken.
However, this needs to be thought through. Good offices
are efforts under Chapter VI and are predicated on the
consent of the parties concerned. The creation of norms,
automatically applicable, would lead to dilution of the
principle of consent and, on application, the confusion
between peace-keeping and peace-enforcement, which the
Secretary-General has clearly presented as mutually
exclusive, would return. Similarly, we feel it necessary to
urge caution with respect to the proposal for establishing
small field missions. These, unless closely monitored and
approved only after inter-governmental scrutiny, could
easily lead to long-term and expensive entanglements.

The Secretary-General has, in his Supplement, rightly
pointed out that the discussions initiated in 1994 for the
elaboration of an "Agenda for Development" have also
served to advance international consensus on the crucial
importance of economic and social development as the
most secure basis for lasting peace. It is also his
understanding that his Supplement to the Agenda for Peace
is just for reflection and discussion, while the focus for
discussions during the next six months should be on the
Agenda for Development. We fully share the
Secretary-General's belief that the focus during 1995 must
be on the Agenda for Development. As I have already
indicated, it is imperative that the balance between the
United Nations activities on the maintenance of
international peace and security on the one hand and
economic and social activities on the other be urgently
restored. For this purpose, the present momentum in the
discussions on an Agenda for Development must be
maintained.

Earlier in the debate the Permanent Representative of
Indonesia, in his capacity as the Chairman of the Non-
Aligned Movement, addressed the Council. My delegation
would like to associate itself with his statement.

Before I conclude, may I take this opportunity to
reiterate my Government's continuing commitment to the
objectives of the United Nations. Further, India will
continue, as in the past, to effectively participate in
United Nations peace-keeping operations, as part of its
consistent and principled contribution to the maintenance
of international peace and security.

