Ms. Hobbs (New Zealand): It is my honour to
address the Council on behalf of the members of the
Pacific Islands Forum group of countries that maintain
permanent missions in New York: Australia, the
Federated States of Micronesia, Fiji, the Republic of
the Marshall Islands, Nauru, Papua New Guinea,
Samoa, Solomon Islands, Tonga, Tuvalu, Vanuatu and
my own country, New Zealand.

The countries of the Pacific Islands Forum group
reaffirm our unequivocal condemnation of terrorism in
all its forms and our continuing determination to fight
against terrorism by all means possible, consistent with
human rights and the rule of law. As history has too
often demonstrated to us, no State is immune from acts
of terrorism. The threat of terrorism, although always
present, has increasingly assumed an international
character, including the frightening prospect of
terrorists' obtaining access to weapons of mass
destruction - an issue that will be considered
tomorrow at a seminar on weapons of mass destruction
and the United Nations, organized by the International
Peace Academy with the support of the Government of
New Zealand.

Terrorism is a global problem and, if it is to be
eliminated, requires action at the national, regional and
international levels. The Pacific Islands Forum
therefore supports the work of the Security Council
Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC) established under
resolution 1373 (2001). Resolution 1373 (2001)
brought a significant new element to the existing
multilateral counter-terrorism framework. If the
objectives of the resolution are to be attained, it will
require full and meaningful implementation of its
requirements. This, in turn, requires the Counter-
Terrorism Committee to take a proactive role, in
consultation with Member States, in evaluating the
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001), focused and
directed at increasing and improving the capacity of
States - particularly small island States - in the fight
against terrorism.

This meeting provides a useful opportunity to
reflect on the work so far done by the Counter-
Terrorism Committee and the road that lies ahead to
ensure the full implementation of the now landmark
resolution 1373 (2001). We welcome the Council's
analysis of these issues and its determination to see the
Committee take a clear and pragmatic direction in its
future work, as reflected in its proposal for the
revitalization of the Committee contained in the report
under discussion today. The clarification of the roles of
the Council, the CTC and the new Executive
Directorate set out in the report should, in our view,
significantly assist in this regard.

As a group made up of primarily developing
States, many of them small island States, the Pacific
Islands Forum places particular emphasis on capacity-
building. We accordingly welcome the report's
renewed focus on strengthening direct dialogue with
States and relevant organizations. The task of the new
Assessment and Technical Assistance Office in
following up on the technical assistance needs of
Member States will be particularly important as the
CTC moves ahead with its work.

Continued efforts at the regional and subregional
levels will remain critical to translating the terms of
resolution 1373 (2001) into effective action. The
Pacific Islands Forum group has taken a number of
steps to increase its political and technical cooperation
in that field. With the assistance of the Forum
secretariat and regional donor partners, work is
ongoing to ensure that a robust and consistent
framework of anti-terrorism measures is in place across
the region. A Pacific roundtable on counter-terrorism
will be held in Wellington, New Zealand, in early May
to further that goal.
As we face the evolving challenge of terrorism,
and as we work to implement the letter and the spirit of
resolution 1373 (2001), the Security Council and the
Counter-Terrorism Committee can be assured of the
continuing full support of the members of the Pacific
Islands Forum group.

