Mr. Chowdhury (Bangladesh): I thank Under-
Secretary-General Guehenno for his briefing on the
situation in Kosovo.

It has been about a month since the new Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and head of
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) assumed his responsibilities. His
predecessor, Mr. Kouchner, has left behind a firm
foundation on which to build, but the task of the new
Special Representative is by no means an easy one.

In our statement to the Council last month, we
underscored a number of priorities for Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Hans
Haekkerup. We are happy to see that he has already
been acting on some of the priorities, particularly
focusing on the preparation of a legal framework for
the forthcoming general elections in Kosovo and
guaranteeing security as a top priority for UNMIK.

In today's statement, I will limit myself to the
following four points relevant to recent developments
in Kosovo.

First, curbing violence and improving security
continue to be the top priority in Kosovo. All
arrangements must be put in place that will make all
people, irrespective of their ethnicity, feel safe. We are
concerned that yet another spate of violence occurred
in Mitrovica late in January and that the anger of the
crowd was directed against the United Nations
peacekeepers. We hope that the declaration signed after
the incident by the Kosovo Albanian leaders, which
was also endorsed by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, will work to restore calm in the city.
We believe that, without stabilization of the security
situation in Mitrovica, it is impossible to address the
longer-term issues involving the future viability and
integration of the city. We urge both parties in the
northern and southern parts of the city to exercise
restraint and to protect their minorities.

Secondly, with respect to missing persons and
detainees, we appreciate the emphasis given by the new
Special Representative of the Secretary-General to the
return of all Kosovo prisoners detained in Serbia. We
are encouraged by the new amnesty bill currently in the
Serbian Parliament for the release of prisoners. The
process needs to be expedited and all who would be
covered by its provisions should be promptly released.
Those who will not fall under the scope of the amnesty
law should also be returned to Kosovo. We support
Mr. Haekkerup's proposal that their cases be processed
through a judicial review conducted under United
Nations supervision.

We expect a comprehensive solution to the issue
of missing persons and detainees in Kosovo. We
believe that a resolution of this problem will
significantly contribute to the reduction of inter-ethnic
tensions. Last month, we wanted the Secretariat to brief
us on the outcome ofthe mandate ofthe Special Envoy
on Persons Deprived of Liberty, Ambassador Henrik
Amneus. We reiterate that request for action by the
Secretariat.

Thirdly, as to the judiciary, a greater level of
judicial activity has been seen in Kosovo, particularly
recently with the increase in the number of personnel
and material resources. The appointment of about a
dozen international judges to look into ethnicity-related
crimes has brought about great improvement in judicial
actions. The swearing in of 137 judges on 24 January
was also a significant step. We believe that this
reinforcement will visibly contribute to uprooting
crime and fostering multi-ethnic coexistence.

Fourthly, with respect to depleted uranium, my
delegation expressed the view that it would be
appropriate for the Council to watch the question of
links between depleted uranium and medical cases in
Kosovo. We are to some extent relieved that the team
of experts from the World Health Organization (WHO),
investigating upon request of UNMIK, has found no
proven link between exposure to depleted uranium and
the onset of cancers, congenital abnormalities or
serious toxic chemical effects on the organs of the
peacekeepers or residents of Kosovo. We note that the
WHO team of experts has recommended that its
findings be confirmed by a larger body of independent
experts.

We are encouraged by the attention given by the
new head of UNMIK to the immediate priorities in
Kosovo. We particularly note his emphasis on the
completion of a legal framework that will enable the
participation of all Kosovars, including minorities. We
believe that only leaders democratically elected
through a fair and full participatory process are in a
position to put forward views on the critical
outstanding issues in Kosovo.

In the past 19 months, Kosovo has come a long
way, from being a war-ravaged society to one with
prospects of a peaceful future. The constant support of
the international community is crucial at this point to
sustaining and consolidating the gains achieved and to
moving towards a future of peaceful coexistence.

