Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset, we would like to thank the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the People's Republic of China for having
organized this debate. We also thank the Secretary-
General for his statement.

The purposes and principles enshrined in the
United Nations Charter establish the fundamental basis
for peaceful coexistence among States. They are the
backbone of the political and legal values that structure
the international system, and we must continue to guide
cooperation among States on these bases - even more
so in a diverse and asymmetrical world such as ours.

In the light of the upcoming commemoration
of the seventieth anniversary of the adoption of the
Charter, we would like to state that its purposes and
principles are assets to the international community
and should guarantee the universal application of the
rule of law and global governance. Those principles
will form a comprehensive corpus that is customary,
universal, non-derogable and as a whole enforceable,
as recognized in General Assembly resolution 2625
(XXV) and international jurisprudence. Under these
principles, selectivity is not possible.

Against that backdrop. international law, which
has undergone significant developments, demands
adherence to the integrity of the founding principles
of the Charter, which must be upheld even in the face
of new realities, when the goal of helping to establish
stability, peace and security is stake. Consequently, even
when employed in the service of necessary evolution,
such legal principles as the sovereign equality of States,
good faith compliance with international obligations,
States' territorial integrity and political independence,
the peaceful settlement of disputes and the non-use of
force should not be affected. The constitutional nature
of that set of principles should not be relativized,
since it would affect the very essence of stability and
coexistence among States.

The Charter is an instrument for peace, security
and development, and respecting it involves
recognizing that the dignity and welfare of people are
an integral part of respect for fundamental rights. Our
country firmly believes that systematic human rights
violations and crimes against humanity, including
ethnic cleansing, genocide and war crimes, call for the
international community to express legitimate concern,
as it has the duty to give effect to the instruments and
mechanisms in place. In that context, its is with a sense
of responsibility that we reiterate that the principle of
non-intervention cannot be a barrier that prevents the
international community from ruling on situations
where fundamental rights are violated.

In an interconnected world, where ethical
development is crucial to addressing pressing issues
of global policy, we cannot remain indifferent to acts
that are repugnant to human consciousness, which daily
challenge Governments and international institutions
to act. The responsibility to protect is a concept that
has legitimacy and, as such, should be incorporated
into the international law and institutions with which
the international community has been endowed. The
Security Council has recognized that in successive
resolutions, including resolutions 2150 (2014) and
2171 (2014). Through those resolutions, the Council
has emphasized that the responsibility to protect can
be instrumental in preventing and combating serious
international crimes such as genocide.

The Council must take all the steps necessary to
facilitate the search, in accordance with international
law, for frameworks through which to prevent conflicts
and act on them in a legitimate and appropriate manner
when appropriate. Today we recognize that international
law has evolved from being aimed at coexistence to being
aimed at cooperation, as evidenced in the obligations
and instruments on those subjects. We must rise to the
challenge of enhancing those elements that enable us to
continue to build an international regulatory structure
that adequately reflects the purposes and principles of
the Charter in our current circumstances.

In that context, the policy and legal imperative that
the United Nations, and in particular the Council, must
continue to promote is key. The Council, taking into
full consideration the role of regional organizations
under Chapter VIII, must act in a manner consistent
with those purposes and principles.

A, analysis of the root or immediate causes of the
destabilizing processes and crises that today seriously
threaten the maintenance of international peace and
security cannot therefore depart from the teaching
of the universal principles expressed in the Charter.
Neither terrorism, arms proliferation, internal armed
conflicts nor piracy, among other threats, may serve
to justify a departure from the founding treaty of the
system.

I wish to conclude my statement by recalling that
the Council has recognized that the three pillars of the
United Nations - peace and security, human rights, and
development - are closely interrelated and mutually
reinforcing. Chile has promoted inclusive development
as a transformative mechanism for dealing with the
underlying causes of conflict, and we find strength
in our conviction that it is not possible to separate the
concept of the precepts and principles of the Charter and
international law, which must prevail as the structural
political and legal values of the global order.

