Mr. Mohammad Kama] (Malaysia): My
delegation would like to join in thanking Ambassador
Richard Holbrooke, not only for presenting the report
of the Security Council mission's visit to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, but also for his
outstanding leadership of this important mission. We
commend him and the other mission members for
helping to improve the Council's understanding of the
challenges that the United Nations Organization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUC) faces there.

The civil war in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo is a key link in the chain of interconnected
conflicts that are ravaging a vast swathe of Africa. No
fewer than six countries and three rebel factions have
been drawn into the struggle in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, which also includes militias
and profiteers more motivated by the desire to exploit
that country's natural resources than anything else.
Thousands of civilians have been killed, and many
more are dying from disease and hunger. Nearly a
million Congolese have been displaced from their
homes. The recent fighting in Kisangani, which
violated the Lusaka Agreement, the disengagement
agreement signed at Kampala on 8 April and the 14
April ceasefire, is indeed a setback to the peace process
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

We agree with Ambassador Holbrooke that the
setbacks that have occurred should not deter us. The
international community cannot abandon the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. Doing so will only
send the wrong message to Africa.

There is, of course, reason to be wary of another
potentially dangerous United Nations peacekeeping
operation in one of the most intractable war zones, but
this operation reflects the growing consensus by the
combatants themselves that it is in their own interests
to abide by a peace Agreement that was signed last
July. If an environment safe enough for peacekeepers
can be established, the deployment of United Nations
peacekeepers deserves support. We noted that each of
the five central and southern African Presidents
consulted during the mission's trip was unequivocal in
his appeal for rapid deployment and apprehensive
about the sustainability of the ceasefire without it.
There is no doubt that the leaders of the region have to
share responsibility for returning the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to stability. Consequently, my
delegation fully shares the recommendation that the
Secretary-General, before making his final decision,
should speak to each of the Lusaka parties at the
highest level, seeking their unequivocal commitment to
assist the deployment of phase II of MONUC and
securing their continued commitment to the
maintenance of the ceasefire and their firm undertaking
to support phase II on the ground in every way
possible.

The Lusaka Agreement is intended to lead to an
immediate ceasefire and an inter-Congolese dialogue
on the country's future. All sides continue to violate
the Agreement, but large parts of the country are
substantially at peace. MONUC would not interpose
itself between active combatants; rather, it would
provide security in relatively stable zones, which
would allow observers to document violations of the
Lusaka Agreement there. The aim is to reduce security
fears on all sides and build confidence that would
enable the parties themselves to expand peaceful areas
and address the more intractable issues.

Chief among these issues is the problem of how
to neutralize the ex-Rwandan Armed Forces and the
Interhamwe militia, an essential element in restoring
confidence in the eastern part of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. My delegation concurs with the
mission's suggestion that unless this is resolved, it will
be very difficult to restore the rule of law or to ensure
the security of borders in the eastern part of that
country. We agree that any successful disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programme requires
an end to support for all non-State militias, the
peaceful reintegration of such fighters from
neighbouring States into their countries of origin and
the commitment by the international community to
assist in this process.

We express our support to France for its intention
to invite the Political Committee to meet in New York
during the French presidency in June.
The experiences of Somalia and Rwanda have
shown the disastrous potential of poorly conceived, ill-
defined operations that lack the military and financial
means to do the job.

As in Sierra Leone or elsewhere in Africa, the
international community is at a crossroads in terms of
how to respond in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. Peacekeepers everywhere know that even the
best-prepared ceasefire sometimes breaks down.
Moreover, the crisis in Sierra Leone should not be
allowed to cloud the international community's
responsibility for helping to bring peace to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. At the same time,
we would like to emphasize the need to avoid repeating
similar mistakes in other missions, including the one in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The situation in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo has its own
unique characteristics, and the peacekeeping operation
there must be judged on its own merits.

