Mr. Berrocal Soto (Costa Rica) (interpretation from Spanish): My delegation, with those of other members of
the Security Council, is very pleased to welcome the
successful conclusion of the work of the multinational
protection force in Albania. The presence of that force,
which was aimed at providing the necessary security
measures for the delivery of humanitarian aid in close
cooperation with the agencies of the United Nations and
non-governmental organizations, was of great importance
for the settlement of the crisis in Albania.

In particular, my delegation wishes to congratulate the
Government of the Republic of Italy, the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and the
European Union for their generous and prompt assistance
to the people of Albania. We also wish to emphasize the
great degree of cooperation and coordination of the
Republic of Italy, the OSCE and the European Union with
the Security Council, which acted, upon their request, in
accordance with the circumstances.

My delegation wishes to express its satisfaction at
the presidential statement to be made today. The case of
Albania is a very clear example of the new theoretical
and practical vision of the concept of international peace
and security that the Security Council has been applying.
In Albania, the multinational protection force not only
helped to check the armed attacks and the anarchy, but
helped to restore the basic social fabric, and it is now
putting the future of Albania back into the hands of the
Albanians themselves, as should be the case. The
presidential statement wisely points out that from now on
it will be up to the Albanians to restore normal conditions
to their country, with the assistance and cooperation of
the international community.

The successful conclusion of the work of the force
in Albania also shows how positive responsible
international intervention can be when it is conducted
under the auspices of the United Nations. It is important
to stress that this intervention, which did no more than
was necessary, was conducted with strict respect for the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Albania, with a
purpose primarily humanitarian in nature.

In this context, for example, we were very pleased
that, thanks to the technical support provided by the force
to humanitarian operations, it was possible to vaccinate
350,000 children against polio, chlorinate water and
distribute teaching materials. The force made it possible,
in a relatively short period of time, to re-open schools,
relaunch commercial activity and give direction to social
and political life in general.

We want to emphasize especially that, thanks to the
work of the multinational protection force, it was possible
to guarantee a secure environment during the electoral
period. In this respect, we commend the force for its
timely intervention in certain serious incidents, thereby
allowing greater impartiality in the electoral process,
facilitating broad participation by the voters and avoiding
the Violation by political forces of the electoral will of the
Albanian people. In this context it is worth mentioning in
particular that the work of the force facilitated the
presence and safety of observers at all stages of the
electoral process.

My delegation is therefore pleased to note that the
parliamentary representatives of the European Union were
able to conclude that the elections were satisfactory and

 

can serve as the basis for a pluralist and free democratic
system. In this respect, we are delighted at reports that the
new Government has begun its constitutional activities.

It is now up to the Albanian people and their
institutions to continue to build their future. It is
particularly essential that the new Government, in an
atmosphere of freedom and respect for human rights, make
special efforts to ensure the security of the entire country
and achieve full reconciliation among its inhabitants. A
great deal remains to be done. The path of democratic
institutionality is complex and difficult. The international
community cannot stand aside; it must maintain its support
and its cooperation for the full reconstruction of Albania.
We are sure that this will be the case.

In reiterating our appreciation to the Governments that
contributed troops, and in particular to the Italian authorities
who promoted and coordinated this important effort by the
international community in Albania, my delegation is
pleased to express its firm support for the presidential
statement that you, Mr. President, will be making today on
behalf of the Security Council.

