I thank Under-Secretary-General Jean-Pierre Lacroix for his briefing. I would like to begin by paying tribute to the women and men who serve under the United Nations flag and, in particular, those who have paid with their lives for the commitment to peace. The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) has added to this terrible human toll. None of us forgets the sacrifices made by mission personnel. Today, I will focus my remarks on three aspects: first, where we are in the reforms and what remains to be done; secondly, the protection role of the missions; and thirdly, the need for support for the rule of law in the missions. With regard to reforms, Belgium is a strong supporter of the Action for Peacekeeping (A4P) initiative. We continue to work to fully meet our commitments. We welcome the work done on the theme of performance and, in particular the development of two central tools for a culture of effectiveness based on data, namely, the comprehensive planning and performance assessment system and the integrated Performance and Accountability Framework. Together, we can undoubtedly go further in the common use of the lessons learned from these tools. It would indeed be useful for the Security Council, when preparing mandate renewals, to have access to the detailed analyses and recommendations resulting from these tools, on the instructions to be given to missions. It is important to remain committed to A4P with respect to all aspects of these mutual commitments. The recent resolution 2538 (2020), on women in peacekeeping operations, promotes the increased participation of women - both uniformed and civilian personnel - by advocating an approach that goes beyond stereotypes and proposes solutions to traditional obstacles to such participation. We must continue down this path. We also continue to promote the multilingualism of missions by translating staff training manuals into French. Let me now turn to protection, another of the pillars of A4P and of the mandates of the Security Council. Peacekeeping has moved closer to local populations in recent years, and we welcome this development. That is reflected in the mandates, on the one hand, and on the ground in Bunia, Mopti and Malakal, on the other hand. This engagement also allows for effective identification of risks for the populations and the peacekeepers. Missions must be equipped with the tools of this engagement, and their personnel must have clear instructions, including for the protection of those with whom they come into contact. The recently distributed guidelines on information acquisition are one such tool. Finally, the protection of children in armed conflict must remain at the heart of the mandates for peace operations, and Belgium advocates the strengthening of the mission teams in charge of this protection. The COVID-19 crisis has had a negative impact on the possibilities of engagement. The social-distancing imperative makes these contacts more complex, but not impossible. As we reinvent new ways of operating at the margins of this pandemic, missions must also reinvent themselves and find the tools to continue this engagement, with full respect for the health of mission staff and local populations. That brings me to my third point, namely, the importance of rule-of-law support functions in the mandates and functioning of operations designed to support national authorities. Post-conflict reconstruction must be based in particular on a democratic police force that respects human rights, a reliable justice system and humane penitentiary institutions. The solidity of these institutions lays the necessary foundations for lasting peace. In this framework, the Security Council has mandated that some United Nations missions provide support for transitional justice measures. A calm and peaceful future must be based on justice, the recognition of victims and commemoration of past violations. We acknowledge the work carried out by the missions for almost 30 years in this regard and the support provided by the missions to national justice systems. We also acknowledge the variety of models for both transitional justice and mission support. With our partner, South Africa, we continue to work towards the adoption of a draft resolution on this important subject and thank the members of the Security Council for their support.
