Mr. Mlynar (Slovakia): First of all, I join
other delegations in most sincerely thanking you,
Mr. President, for convening this open debate towards
the end of your Security Council presidency. I wish
you, Sir, every success in your responsibilities as
Council President.

This debate is important, as it significantly
contributes to building a common understanding and the
required consensus about the need for a comprehensive
and concerted approach to the maintenance of
international peace and security. This meeting is also
timely in the light of our ongoing constructive dialogue
on the reform of the United Nations. The General
Assembly took an important step today in adopting
resolution 72/ 199, which will help the Secretary-
General to take his reform proposal for the United
Nations peace and security pillar to the next phase and
allow him to further elaborate his reform proposals in
that area. Adopted by consensus, the resolution reflects
our collective determination to revitalize the United
Nations to better serve the needs of peoples around the
world. Together with the Permanent Representative of
Rwanda, I was honoured to co-facilitate the process of
informal consultations on the drafting of the resolution
in an open, transparent and inclusive manner, with the
aim of ensuring Member State ownership and support
for that important endeavour, while building trust and
consensus. That is something that I believe we all need,
both in the Council and in the Assembly.

Slovakia aligns itself with the statement delivered

by the observer of the European Union. I would like to
add a few points in my national capacity.

The Security Council, as the primary United
Nations organ responsible for the maintenance of
international peace and security, plays a leading
role in shaping United Nations action in this area.
As pointed out in your concept note (S/2017/1016, annex), Sir, in recent years the Security Council has
repeatedly discussed and expressed its views on a
wide range of non-traditional - put better perhaps as
"cross-cutting" - threats, including those concerning
public health, the exploitation of natural resources,
climate change, transnational crime, poverty
and underdevelopment, and forced displacement.
We very much welcome today's focus on those
important linkages.

First of all, we think that the Security Council
should deal with these issues in a more systematic and
targeted fashion, including by exploring and identifying
the linkages, synergies and correlations among them.
Each and every conflict scenario is different: there
is no one-size-fits-all. However, we should strive to
identify and address the root causes and drivers of
conflict that hinder the path to peaceful, durable and
sustainable solutions.

The increasing impact of those cross-cutting
challenges to international peace and stability calls
for an updating of the tools at the Council's disposal in
order to better integrate diplomatic, economic, military
and capacity-building responses in conflict resolution
and peacebuilding endeavours. In that context, we
firmly believe that both the Security Council and the
General Assembly should take greater, more systematic
and more in-depth advantage of the work of the
Peacebuilding Commission.

The Security Council should furthermore promote
greater integration, coherence and partnerships
among the activities of the United Nations missions,
the United Nations system and non-United Nations
actors, including, of course, the relevant regional and
subregional organizations, in particular the African
Union, the European Union, the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), the
Economic Community of West African States and
others. Those partnerships are truly essential and their
importance cannot be overemphasized. We have seen
that ourselves, for example in November 2014 when we
partnered with the United Nations, the African Union,
the European Union and others in organizing the first
Africa Forum on Security Sector Reform, which was
a very positive contribution to debating some of the
cross-cutting issues, such as security sector reform
(SSR), justice, the rule of law and other related issues.
In that context, we are committed to actively promoting
even closer partnerships. Given that Slovakia will hold
the chairmanship of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe in 2019, we are particularly
looking at how to further enhance the partnership
between the United Nations and the OSCE.

Last but not least, the Security Council should
enhance its preventive and mitigating role - one of its
most significant responsibilities under the Charter of the
United Nations. There are opportunities to sharpen and
expand the preventive capacities of the United Nations.
There is a need for deeper integration and coordination
in preventive endeavours, including among the relevant
components of the United Nations system.

I have already mentioned the issue of security
sector reform, which I would also like to highlight in
the context of the link to sustaining peace, which is also
reflected in resolution 2151 (2014). The Group ofFriends
of Security Sector Reform, which is co-chaired by South
Africa and my country, is planning to hold a high-level
round table, proposed to take place on 23 April 2018,
that will contribute to the sustaining peace activities
of the General Assembly in that month, and will seek
to build on the important insights of previous events
and relevant recently developed policy and research in
the areas of sustaining peace, prevention and security
sector reform. To highlight just three key areas of our
focus in that regard, I would mention genuine national
ownership, effective partnerships and addressing SSR
and different types of related linkages, primarily as
political challenges and avoiding other, more technical,
approaches.

Although the primary responsibility in peace and
security efforts lies with national authorities, the United
Nations and the broader international community
must effectively support those activities. We have a
collective responsibility to make the United Nations
more effective and efficient in addressing the real and
immediate needs of populations on the ground. In that
context, the debate you have convened today, Sir, and
the specific linkages that we are focusing on show a
very timely and practical approach.

