Mr. Mehdiyev (Azerbaijan): At the outset, I
would like to welcome Mr. Ebrahim Ismail Ebrahim,
Deputy Minister of International Relations and
Cooperation of the Republic of South Africa, and to
thank the South African presidency for convening this
very important open debate on the situation in the
Middle East. We are grateful for the briefing on the
subject by Assistant Secretary-General for Political
Affairs Oscar Fernandez-Taranco.

Azerbaijan welcomes the valuable efforts of
Jordan to revive negotiations and expresses its hope
that the ongoing discussions in Amman will help to
restart the peace process towards the achievement of a
long-awaited comprehensive, just and lasting solution.
It should be made clear that, in contrast to some other
well-known situations involving groundless and
illegitimate territorial claims - including those under
the far-fetched pretext of care for ethnic minority
groups - the people of Palestine have been recognized
as having the right to self-determination and statehood.
That has been affirmed in a number of United Nations
resolutions and by the International Court of Justice in
its advisory opinion on the Legal Consequences of the
Construction of a Wall in the Occupied Palestinian
Territory (see A/ES-10/273). We support the
application of Palestine for admission to membership
in the United Nations and look forward to a solution to
the issue based on international law.
Azerbaijan also supports the ongoing efforts
towards Palestinian reconciliation and expresses its
hope that Palestinian unity will soon be achieved. At
the same time, as we have repeatedly stated on a
number of occasions in the past, the lack of agreement
on political issues in situations of armed conflict and
military occupation cannot be used as a pretext for
disrespect for international humanitarian and human
rights law. Indeed, the prolonged occupation of the
Palestinian territories has placed a tremendous burden
on civilians.

We are particularly concerned at the continued
settlement policy and practices in the occupied
Palestinian territories. The reports from both the
United Nations and non-governmental organizations in
that regard are self-evident. Most alarming is that,
apart from their impact on the rights, freedoms and
everyday lives of the Palestinians, settlements cause
serious damage to the peace process and, more
specifically, threaten a two-State solution and the
emergence of a viable Palestinian State. As was
recently noted by the United Nations Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs,

"continuing settlement construction, expansion
and encroachment on Palestinian land is an
integral part of the ongoing fragmentation of the
West Bank, including the isolation of the East
Jerusalem."

There is no doubt that such fragmentation undermines
the legitimate right of the Palestinian people to self-
determination, which is to be realized with the creation
of a viable and contiguous Palestinian State alongside
Israel.

Regardless of whether settlements are new or old,
they are illegal under international law and must be
seized immediately, completely and unconditionally.
Pursuant to article 49 of the Fourth Geneva
Convention, the occupying Power shall not deport or
transfer parts of its own civilian population into the
territory it occupies. That constitutes the basis and
expression of a rule of law prohibiting the
establishment of settlements in the occupied territories
consisting of the population of the occupying Power or
of persons encouraged by the Power to settle those
territories with the intention, expressed or otherwise, of
changing the demographic balance. We proceed from
the importance of reaffirming, with respect to the
occupied Palestinian territories and similar situations
in different parts of the world, the continuing
applicability of all relevant international legal norms,
achieving the invalidation of activities aimed at the
consolidation of military occupations, initiating urgent
measures towards removing the adverse effects of such
activities and discouraging any further practices of the
same or similar nature.

We are of the view that the Security Council
cannot remain indifferent to situations involving
serious violations of international humanitarian and
human rights law. In carrying out its primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security, the Council must react adequately
to put an end to illegal practices and policies and to
ensure that human rights and fundamental freedoms are
observed and respected.

Azerbaijan is deeply concerned at the continuing
destabilization, violence and widespread human rights
violations in Syria, which have resulted in the deaths of
thousands of people. The position of my country in this
regard has been clearly reflected in our support for the
recently adopted General Assembly resolution on the
situation of human rights in the Syrian Arab Republic
(Assembly resolution 66/176).

Azerbaijan fully supports the efforts of the
League of Arab States to address all aspects of the
situation in Syria, including its steps aimed at ending
the crisis and acts of violence.

We are strongly of the view that the only solution
to the crisis in Syria is through an inclusive and
Syrian-led political process. It is important that
obligations with respect to the sovereignty, territorial
integrity and political independence of Syria and all
other States in the region are fully observed and
respected.

