Mr. Keita (Mali) (spoke in French): I should like to
join other delegations in thanking Mr. Wolfgang Petritsch
for the introduction of his very detailed report. My
delegation would like to make the following comments on
the question of Bosnia and Herzegovina, under
consideration today.

Despite certain difficulties in their implementation,
the Dayton/Paris Accords have established a sense of
moral responsibility, a certain balance and a political
framework guaranteeing stability and a real chance for
Bosnia and Herzegovina. In this regard, the collective
Presidency is required to ensure the full implementation
of the Accords, showing real political will at the domestic
level while seeking complementary solutions at the
regional level.

My delegation welcomes the positive developments
in the restructuring and modification of the mono-ethnic
nature of the police force, in the creation of a stable
judicial system and in the consolidation of a State based
on the rule of law, all of which are essential for a truly
democratic society. Real progress has been made in
consolidating peace, freedom of circulation and the
rebuilding of infrastructures.

However, despite the important contribution of the
United Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina
(UNMIBH) to the strengthening of national identity and
the mobilization of the population around a common
endeavour, we note that the initiatives are being
obstructed, and the support of the Security Council for
UNMIBH is absolutely essential to overcome such
resistance and to change the will of the forces opposing
change. The best guarantee for lasting progress and
stability in the country remains economic development.
My delegation therefore requests the Bosnian authorities

 

to work at bringing about economic and structural reform
and cooperate more closely with the international financial
institutions, in order to speed up the process of
incorporating the country into the Euro-Atlantic structures.

The activities of the United Nations institutions - the
United Nations Development Programme, the United
Nations Children's Fund and the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization - must
focus on programmes to strengthen capacities and training.
Many tasks remain, requiring the cooperation of all the
groups concerned. We therefore believe that it is necessary
to strengthen programmes for the return of refugees and to
combat violence against women and children.

In conclusion, I should like to express the support of
my delegation for the priorities identified by Mr. Petritsch.

