Mr. Prendergast: I have the pleasure to introduce
to the Council the report of the Secretary-General on
Angola contained in document 8/2000/23.

In his report, the Secretary-General assesses the
political, military and humanitarian situations in the
country and stresses that the absence of political dialogue
and the resumption of heavy fighting have exacerbated
the already alarming humanitarian situation. The
Secretary-General also notes that the situation has been
further aggravated by the spillover of the fighting into
neighbouring areas of Zambia and Namibia, which has
been accompanied by an influx of large numbers of
Angolan refugees on both sides of the border areas.

The humanitarian situation is particularly critical.
The war-affected population in Angola is estimated at
almost 4 million, about one third of the country's
population. Nearly 2 million people are internally
displaced, and resident populations and internally
displaced persons both show high levels of malnutrition.
In addition, the humanitarian situation of another third of
the Angolan population living in inaccessible areas is
unknown but is thought to be critical.

The Secretary-General is deeply concerned by the
human suffering as well as by the destruction of property
and infrastructure in Angola, a country so richly endowed

 

with natural resources and with immense potential for
development. The extension of State administration in the
provinces will make it possible for humanitarian assistance
to reach populations whose exact conditions are unknown
at present but are predicted to be dire. The task of
ameliorating conditions in those areas will present a
challenge both to the Government of Angola and to the
international community.

Malnutrition rates have escalated sharply in conflict
areas. Forty-two per cent of children under the age of 5 are
either severely or moderately underweight. Even if they
survive, these children are likely to develop health problems
later on in life. Experience shows that malnutrition rates
will rise as the rainy season compounds the effects of
already low food stocks.

Mine clearance is of critical importance for any safe
resumption of agricultural and commercial activities, for
temporary resettlement of internally displaced persons and
for return to rural areas. The mounting risk of mine
accidents and ambushes is a major constraint on
humanitarian operations. Some donors have suspended their
assistance to mine-clearance activities due to remining, and
the lack of support for such activities is hurting innocent
people and freezing access to arable land.

Despite the best efforts of United Nations and other
humanitarian and development agencies, the lack of
security, as well as ambushes and attacks by armed
elements, have constrained severely international relief
efforts. The remining of roads and of the countryside has
added to the perils faced by civilians and aid workers alike.
Humanitarian workers have not been immune to the
conflict. Indeed, they have been targeted and killed in
violent attacks. Since April 1999, seven humanitarian
workers have been killed and two wounded in direct attacks
on well-marked vehicles.

Current conditions of insecurity and open conflict
require costly logistical operations to ensure the safe
delivery of humanitarian assistance. In addition, increased
access to vulnerable populations requires that the donor
community remain as responsive to the Consolidated
Appeal as it has been in the past. The Secretary-General
has appealed to donors for an effective response to the
United Nations Consolidated Inter-agency Appeal for
Angola, the funding requirement for which is $258 million.

The Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees (UNHCR) has reported that more than 20,000
Angolan refugees have entered Zambia since October last
year and has predicted that the figure could rise to more
than 30,000 in the next few weeks. This is in addition to
some 160,000 Angolan refugees already in Zambia. Every
effort is being made by the United Nations to send food
and medicines to refugees, who comprise mostly women,
children and elderly people. There has also been a new
influx of some 10,000 Angolan refugees into Namibia
since the escalation of fighting in September in the border
region between the two countries.

Reports of human rights abuses both by UNITA and
by Government forces have continued to be received from
all parts of the country. The same sources have also
reported that both sides have carried out the forced
recruitment of civilians, including minors.

The post-independence history of Angola has been
characterized by a brutal civil war and by lost
opportunities for peace and reconciliation as well as for
the development of the country. The United Nations was
first called upon in late 1988 to carry out a relatively
straightforward assignment: namely, to monitor the
withdrawal of Cuban forces from Angola. This was the
United Nations Angola Verification Mission
(UNAVEM. I).

Then, the international community saw an
opportunity to help end the longstanding conflict in the
country, and the United Nations was tasked with the
responsibility of, among other things, observing and
verifying the country's first democratic elections. This
was done by UNAVEM. II. As is well known, UNITA
rejected the outcome of the 1992 elections, and the
country reverted to war.

Despite the setbacks, efforts to facilitate a political
solution continued, and a comprehensive peace agreement,
the Lusaka Protocol, was signed in November 1994. The
signing of the Protocol was viewed as a very important
stage in the Angolan peace process, and the United
Nations was asked to undertake an enlarged and
reinforced role through UNAVEM. III.

After more than two years of vigorous efforts by the
United Nations, UNITA failed to demobilize its forces
and to allow State administration to be extended to areas
under its control. The resumption of fighting and the
worsening security situation in the country led the
Secretary-General to conclude that the conditions for an
effective United Nations peacekeeping role had ceased to
exist, and the Security Council terminated the United

 

Nations Observer Mission in Angola (MONUA) last
February.

The United Nations has contributed to four years of
relative peace in Angola, the longest period of peace
enjoyed by the Angolan people. It is tragic that the
unprecedented commitment by the international community,
and the unique opportunity it provided Angola to achieve
peace and reconciliation, was repeatedly squandered.

Last November, President dos Santos stated that the
Lusaka accord was still valid and laid out a programme of
action to culminate in the holding of legislative and
presidential elections. UNITA, which appears to have
suffered major military setbacks, has expressed readiness to
resume the peace process. Smaller political parties and
church groups have called for the resumption of a national
dialogue, including an all-inclusive multiparty conference.

The Secretary-General has reiterated that the United
Nations will not abandon the people of Angola, and the
Organization has continued to provide humanitarian, human
rights and development assistance to the country. The
Secretary-General has also reiterated the readiness of the
United Nations to support efforts to seek a peaceful
settlement of the conflict. As the Council knows,
consultations are continuing with the Angolan Government
regarding the future United Nations presence and role in
Angola.

Meanwhile, Ambassador Fowler and the panel of
experts have been consulting with Angola and other
countries in and outside the region on ways of improving
the implementation of measures imposed against UNITA
and the additional measures needed to strengthen them. I
see that Ambassador Fowler will brief the Council today.

Angolan Government forces appear to be pursuing a
successful military offensive, and State authority is
gradually being re-established. However, I would like to
take this opportunity to reiterate that for an enduring peace
to become a reality in Angola, a political solution to the
conflict will also have to be pursued. That is why the
Secretary General was encouraged by the Angolan
Government's recent indication that the Lusaka Protocol
remained a valid basis for a resumed peace process.

There is no question that UNITA bears the primary
responsibility for the continued humanitarian and human
rights catastrophe in Angola. However, it is incumbent on
the Government to ensure that all those living in areas
recently under UNITA control are treated in accordance
with international humanitarian law, and to do everything
possible to improve the human rights situation in the
country.

As mandated by the Security Council, the new
United Nations Office in Angola will continue to assist
the Government and civic organizations in the areas of
capacity-building, humanitarian assistance and the
promotion of human rights. The Secretary-General is
encouraged by the decision of the Council of Ministers to
approve the Status-of-Mission Agreement that has now
been forwarded to the National Assembly for
endorsement. He hopes that the Government will soon
conclude action on that issue.

To give added impetus to the search for a political
solution to the conflict in Angola, the Secretary-General
recently appointed Mr. Ibrahim Gambari as his Special
Adviser on African issues and asked him to pay particular
attention to Angola. He also intends to appoint the Head
of the new United Nations Office in Angola soon. The
Secretary-General looks forward to an early opportunity
to exchange views with the Government on the future role
of the United Nations in Angola - a role that would
make it possible for the Organization to make a
meaningful contribution to the search for lasting peace in
the country and to the security and stability of the region.

