Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arabic Republic) (spoke in Arabic): Before I begin my statement, I would like
to say to the members of the Security Council that
we reject those who consider us responsible for the
bombing of the Katarji neighbourhood in Khaled. The
Russian Government has also rejected that accusation.
Therefore, the perpetrator must be elsewhere. I
would like to shed light on the fact that the tragedy
in that neighbourhood is directly linked to what some
colleagues mentioned with regard the little Syrian
boy Omran, who came from Venus or from Mercury.
That Syrian boy is just like all other Syrian children
who dream - and like the scores of others who have
suffered, directly or indirectly, from the conflict in
Syria and the conspiracy against it.

Also before going into the substance of my
statement, I would like to recall certain incidents
that may refresh the memory of some members of the
Council in order that they can distinguish between what
is true and what is not.
On 30 April 2014, aerial forces of the so-
called international alliance destroyed a centre for
the deaf and mute in Raqqah, causing the deaths
of dozens of children. On 7 July 2016, the same so-
called international alliance inaugurated the so-
called liberation operation Manbij, using heavy aerial
bombardment targeting the inhabitants of the city and
leading to the death or injury of hundreds of men,
women and children, all civilians. On 12 July 2016, the
fighters of the so-called international alliance bombed
the town of As-Susa in Deir ez-Zor, causing the deaths
of over 80 people, including women and children. On
26 July 2016, the French Air force, a partner in the so-
called international alliance, bombed greater Tokhar, a
village in the Khaled area, causing the deaths of more
than 180 civilians, many of whom were women and
children. The self-proclaimed international alliance did
not request any approval from the Syrian Government to
conduct air operations; nor did the Syrian Government
invite it to come to our country - on the contrary. That
is a flagrant violation of the fundamental principles
of this international organization. I will return to this
issue later.

The victims who fell in Khaled are Syrian civilians.
The victims who fell in Damascus are Syrian civilians
as well. And the victims who fell in Idlib and Dar'a,
Raqqah, Deir ez-Zor and other cities and towns are
also Syrian civilians. No one in the world cares for the
lives of those Syrians or feels their pain more than us,
the people and the Government of Syria. No one but
us is paying the heavy toll for this terrorist war that
has been imposed against my country. The question
that should be raised is, Why are those civilians being
targeted? Who is killing them? And why, in fact, is
there a humanitarian crisis in Syria? Before I answer
that question, I would like to read Council members
the text of Article 2, paragraph 4, of the Charter of the
United Nations:

"All Members shall refrain in their international
relations from the threat or use of force against the
territorial integrity or political independence of
any state, or in any other manner inconsistent with
the Purposes of the United Nations."

Five-and-a-half years ago, Syria was one of
the world's safest and most stable countries. It was
self-sufficient in terms of basic needs, such as food,
medication, health and education. Syria was one of the
foremost hosts of refugees, for whom we did not build
camps or tents and whose pain and suffering we did
not exploit. We did not use their tears and suffering in
those so-called international pledging conferences. We
hosted them in our homes. We sent them to our schools
and treated them in our health-care centres, until some
of them returned to their homes, while others remained
in Syria. They were Iraqi refugees, our brothers and
sisters from Iraq, who left their country and took asylum
in Syria because of the Anglo-American invasion of
that country, as members well know.

That situation changed dramatically when Arab,
regional and international States met in Tunisia on
24 February 2012 under the so-called "friends of the
Syrian people". That "friendship" with the Syrian
people resulted innovative means of murder, from
decapitation to the eating of human parts, the slaughter
of archeologists, various forms of destruction,
displacement, the plunder of factories, crops, grain
silos, oil and gas facilities, monuments and other
infrastructure, as well as the siege of the Syrian people.
We would like to take this opportunity to thank those
who brought us this fatal friendship, which will never
be forgotten by the Syrian people.

Following that, the so-called international
alliance was formed on the pretext of fighting
terrorism - without United Nations approval or that
of the Syrian Government. It began to target innocent
civilians and infrastructure in Syria, including roads,
bridges, refineries, schools and hospitals. The cost
of the destruction as a result of those attacks by the
international alliance in terms of just oil and gas
facilities amounts to at least $2 billion. In fact, an attack
in Aleppo against the sole electrical plant - which cost
the Syrian people €1.3 billion - resulted in its total
destruction, by the American doves of peace in a single
air strike.

As a matter of fact, the party foremost responsible
for the suffering of Syrian civilians are the Governments
that have falsely claimed - from the very beginning of
the war against Syria-to be friends ofthe Syrian people.
Some have opened their borders to tens of thousands
of mercenary terrorists from all over the world. Others
have recruited those mercenary terrorists - either by
using money or promising them paradise and heavenly
maidens for theirjihad - who abuse women in the most
shameful way, for the first time ever in history under
the banner of "fornication jihad". Other countries have
smuggled thousands of tons of every sort of weapon
to terrorists, set up training centres for them, recruited
children for them and taught them how to carry out
the most horrible terrorist operations. Yet others have
opened up their coffers to them, their oil and gas
resources, providing billions of dollars in order to
finance the terrorist war against Syria. Still others have
instructed the scholars of strife to issue Wahabi edicts
to legitimize branding othes as infidels the killing of
civilians, the plunder of their property and the defiling
of their women and desecration oftheir holy places. Still
others have dedicated their media and political forums
to legitimizing those groups by sometimes calling them
the "moderate opposition", and at other times "armed
moderate opposition"; whereas now they are termed
"non- State armed groups", as referred to by Mr. O'Brien
in his briefing. Most recently, they have been called the
"vetted Syrian opposition". Perhaps that nomenclature
will soon change to "groups of armed angels".

Those States did not stop at supporting the terrorism
against Syria, they complemented it with despicable
economic terrorism via unilateral coercive measures
that have exacerbated the suffering of Syrians, forcing
them to flee their homes for better lives.
Allow me to briefly refer to the "moderate
opposition" in order to tell the Council of some
elements of such "moderate" opposition - genetically
altered in the laboratories of the intelligence agencies
of certain well-known countries. I would mention
Abou Omar Al-Shisheni, Abou Al-Meqdad Al-Turki,
Abou Moussab Al-Saudi, Abou Souhaib Al-Libi, Abou
John Al-Britani, Abou Mohammed Al-Tunsi, Abou
Hourrairah Al-Ameriki, Abou Mouath Al-Turkistani,
Abou Hassah Al-Misri, Abou Abdelrahman Al-Canadi,
Abou Abdallah Al-Urduni, Abou Talha Al-Kuwaiti,
Abou Murrah Al-Fransi, Abou Aoud Al-Belgiki and
Abou Walid Al-Walid Al-Australi. I would also mention
the religious mufti of the Al-Nusra Front, Abdulaha
Mohassini, who is Saudi. Those are the faces of the
"moderate armed opposition" in Syria.

Aleppo remained safe and stable for more than a
year and a half following the beginning of the so-called
crisis in Syria - until the Governments of Turkey, Qatar
and Saudi Arabia prompted armed terrorist groups to
attack the city, wreak havoc on people and property and
use the population as human shields. Destruction has
reigned. They have obliterated cultural, religious and
historic property. They burned Souk Al-Medina i the
city's ancient marketplace, the oldest in the world.
They targeted the Umayyad Mosque, one of the oldest
in the Islamic world. They destroyed the Carlton Hotel
and tried to wreck the city's citadel as well. Those are
all "achievements" by the opposition to the Syrian
regime - the regime, not the Government and not the
State. What did escape the terrible destruction was
plundered, dismantled and transferred to Turkey - an
instance of overt theft unprecedented in history. We
have provided the Council with numerous documents
to prove those despicable acts by the gangs supported
by the Turkish intelligence services.

Aleppo having been destroyed - over which
some shed crocodile tears today - was once home to
4 million civilians. Today there are only neighbourhoods
in which armed terrorist groups are active. A mere
250,000 people remain in the city. After the terrorist
forces began to target the inhabitants, 1.75 million
fled Aleppo to seek refuge in areas under the control
of Syrian Government institutions in various cities,
where they found protection and assistance. Civilians
do not flee to areas controlled by the terrorists, but to
areas controlled by the State, which provides 75 per
cent of all the humanitarian assistance to the Syrian
people - it is not the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs.

The efforts of the Syrian Government in Aleppo
today, with the support of its friends and allies, is a
constitutional duty to protect civilians from the actions
ofarmed terrorist groups that have violated the cessation
of hostilities from the first day. Groups allied with the
Al-Nusra Front, which was not originally involved in
the cessation of hostilities, have daily rained hundreds
ofrockets and mortars down on Aleppo, some weighing
more than a ton, causing the deaths of hundreds of
men, women and children and the destruction of
infrastructure and public and private property.

Against that backdrop, before taking any military
action, the President of the Republic issued decree
No.15 on 28 July 2016 to the effect that general amnesty
would be granted to all those who bore or owned arms
for any reason, or were fugitives or in hiding. On
26 July, the General Command of the Army and the
armed forces sent several messages to civilians and
armed actors in the eastern neighbourhoods of Aleppo,
calling on them to join the national reconciliation
and expel the foreign mercenaries. It established safe
humanitarian corridors and temporary housing for
them, particularly for those who want safe egress so
as to protect their lives and provide for their needs.
The Government also called upon the armed actors to
lay down their weapons and resolve their issues. As a
matter of fact, that has enabled hundreds of families
to leave the eastern neighbourhoods of Aleppo, to
whom the Syrian Government has provided temporary
housing and basic needs. Regrettably, other families
were not able to leave because they were prevented
from doing so by armed terrorist groups. Those groups
have intentionally used families as human shields and
have booby-trapped access to the safe corridors. They
have also used snipers to target them, as other terrorist
groups have done, in cities such as Raqqa, Mambij,
Al-Bab and Deir ez-Zor.

My Government questions the continued and
deliberate distortion of facts and the use of unreliable
sources in the reports of the Secretariat on the
humanitarian situation in Syria. Any report issued by
the United Nations is expected to be based on neutral
and reliable sources, not on what are known to be "open"
sources or centres of opposition located outside of the
country and run and financed by foreign intelligence
entities that have taken a hostile position vis-a-vis the
Syrian Government in an attempt to distort its image
internationally and level false accusations against it
without any tangible proof. Those reports, deliberately
or not, also cover up actions carried out by armed
terrorist groups by continuing to call them - as I
have mentioned - "armed opposition", at times, and,
at other times, referring to them as 'non-State armed
groups", among other names.

Regrettably, the Secretariat has created a historic
precedent within the United Nations by justifying the
egregious terrorist crime perpetrated by Nour al-Din
al-Zenki, which decapitated a Palestinian child in
Aleppo. The report attempts to convey legitimacy
on that group by mentioning that it had issued a
communique comdemning the act and stating that
those responsible for it had been detained and handed
over to an investigation committee. It is as if the report
is saying that the practices of such terrorist groups,
through their recruitment and killing of children,
is allowed and its leaders are bound by international
law and human rights law, having become party to the
International Criminal Court.

Please allow me to quote from a recent book by the
Australian writer Tim Anderson, entitled title The Dirty
War on Syria. The book was published in Australia, not
Damascus.

(spoke in English)

"Although every war makes ample use of lies and
deception, the dirty war on Syria has relied on a level
of mass disinformation not seen in living memory.
The British-Australian journalist Philip Knightley
pointed out that war propaganda typically involves
'a depressingly predictable pattern' of demonizing
the enemy leader, then demonizing the enemy
people through atrocity stories, real or imagined.

"In Syria the big Powers have sought to hide their
hand, using proxy armies while demonizing the
Syrian Government and army, accusing them of
constant atrocities and then pretending to rescue
the Syrian people from their own Government. Far
fewer Western people opposed the war on Syria
than opposed the invasion of Iraq, because they
were deceived about its true nature."

(spoke in Arabic)

The Government of my country reiterates its firm
position that the only solution to the crisis in Syria is
a political one within a dialogue among Syrians, under

Syrian leadership and without any external interference
or preconditions. My country reiterates that the political
path runs parallel to the path of fighting terrorism,
which will continue until all active and deployed
armed-terrorist groups in Syria are eliminated.

In conclusion, I would like only to recall that
the well-known French journalist Richard Labe'viere
recently wrote an opinion piece in which he criticized
Le Monde's fabricated coverage of events in Syria. He
stated that Le Monde journalists got their news about
Syria from the book Alice in Wonderland. He addressed
the editorial board of the newspaper by writing to the
journalists as his colleagues -journalists who are part
of the tradition of Le Monde dating to historic times,
people such as Hubert Beuve-Mery, Andre Fontaine
and Andre Laurent. He wrote that they needed to wake
up and that something was amiss in their newspaper.

French journalists Georges Malbrunot and Christian
Chesnot wrote an important book to which I alluded in
one of my previous statements, entitled Les Chemins
de Damas In their book, those two known French
writers uncovered the fact that Laurent Fabius, former
Prime Minister and Foreign Minister of France, was
responsible for the use of chemical weapons in Syria
in August 2013, when Mr. Sellstrom was on his way
to Aleppo to investigate the use of chemical weapons
in Khan Al-Assal. The use of chemical weapons in the
Damascus area was meant to prevent Mr. Sellstrom from
going to Aleppo to investigate because, at that time, the
former Prime Minister knew who had used chemical
weapons in Khan Al-Assal in Aleppo. He wanted to
prevent Mr. Sellstrom from reaching Khan Al-Assal by
any means. Therefore, they used chemical weapons in
Damascus with the involvement of French intelligence
services and the former French Prime Minister. There
are so many scandals that I could expose to the Security
Council. But rather than take up more of the Council's
time, I will stop at this point.

