Mr. Akram (Pakistan): I would like to felicitate
you, Sir, and the delegation of Argentina on the skilful
manner in which Argentina is guiding the work of the
Security Council this month. May I also congratulate
Ambassador Bolton and the United States delegation
for the successful and eventful United States
presidency last month. I would also like to wish
Ambassador Wang Guangya of China a successful
presidency next month.

The Pakistan delegation expresses its gratitude to
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Tom Koenigs, for his briefing to the Council today
and to the Secretary-General for his comprehensive
report on the situation in Afghanistan (S/2006/145).
Let me also take this opportunity to express our
appreciation to Mr. Koenigs' predecessor, Mr. Jean
Arnault. Pakistan fully supports the continuation of the
important role of the United Nations in Afghanistan.
We also support the international security assistance
for Afghanistan.

The Secretary-General's report outlines the
considerable progress made in Afghanistan in fulfilling
the benchmarks of the Bonn process. We wish to
congratulate President Karzai and the fraternal people
of Afghanistan on those achievements.

Unfortunately, there are also many outstanding
challenges that remain to be overcome - especially
security, narcotics, crime, warlordism and
development. The Afghanistan Compact, adopted at the
London Conference, endorsed a comprehensive plan to
address those challenges in order to restore peace and
security and to build prosperity in Afghanistan. The
commitments undertaken by the Afghan Government
and its international partners under the Compact will,
we hope, be fulfilled.

Pakistan and Afghanistan enjoy a close and
symbiotic relationship rooted in geography, history,
shared ethnicity and a common faith. Our destinies are
inextricably linked. Peace in Afghanistan reinforces
peace and tranquillity in Pakistan. Peace in
Afghanistan will enable both nations to serve as the
bridge for trade and commerce between Central Asia,
South Asia and beyond. The success of the endeavours
for peace and prosperity in Afghanistan is therefore
vital for Pakistan.

More than 25 years ago, the Pakistani people
welcomed nearly 4 million of their Afghan brothers
with open arms. We hosted them mostly without the
generosity of external assistance. Three million
Afghans still remain in Pakistan. In accordance with
our traditions and with the principles of humanitarian
law, Pakistan has not obliged them to return
involuntarily to their country. Yet return they should,
and we trust that conditions will soon be created that
will enable them to do so in dignity and honour.

As history will recount, Pakistan's hospitality
during Afghanistan's most difficult years created
enduring problems for Pakistan, including the rise of
extremism and the presence of terrorism. We are
addressing those phenomena resolutely and, we
believe, successfully.

Pakistan has adopted short- and long-term
strategies to address the problems of terrorism and
extremism. We have captured more than 600 Al-Qaida
terrorists, most of whom infiltrated Pakistan after
11 September 2001. We have acted resolutely against
Taliban terrorism, in accordance with the provisions of
Security Council resolution 1267 (1999). We have
deployed more than 80,000 troops on our western
border with Afghanistan to prevent the infiltration or
ex-filtration by Al-Qaida and other terrorists.
Concurrently, we are investing in infrastructure and
socio-economic developments of these so-far unsettled
frontier regions. Pakistan has also launched major
military operations in some of our tribal areas to
eliminate the presence of foreign terrorists and their
supporters. More than 600 Pakistani soldiers have lost
their lives in the 75 operations conducted by Pakistani
security forces. I should like to recall that those
casualties are greater than all of those suffered by
Coalition forces in Afghanistan.

No one, therefore, can question Pakistan's
commitment and determination to succeed in defeating
terrorism. A comprehensive approach is required to
address the challenges of terrorism and criminal
violence and insurgency in Afghanistan. The terrorist
and other violent incidents in Afghanistan are taking
place not only in the south and south-east but in
various other parts of the country. They can be
prevented by effective action within Afghanistan by
the Afghan national forces and international coalition
forces. To ensure success, the root causes of such
violence - extremism, warlordism, the narcotics trade
and local rivalries - will all need to be addressed
patiently and sincerely. The failure to do so cannot be
externalized.

Certainly, border security and control is essential
in order to prevent the infiltration into Pakistan or
Afghanistan of terrorists or other violent criminals. As
I said, Pakistan has deployed 80,000 troops to do so on
our side. A matching effort is required on the other side
if the hammer and anvil strategy is to work. Moreover,
this endeavour cannot succeed without close
cooperation in intelligence-sharing, in real time. We
can achieve this in the Tripartite Commission, as well
as through close and constant bilateral contacts.

Pakistan has also decided to take additional
actions. We will fence parts of the border to reinforce
interdiction by our forces. We will also seek to
eliminate terrorist elements that may be located in
Afghan refugee camps and elsewhere among the
refugee population.

Together with intelligence-sharing, Pakistan
expects its partners to enhance Pakistan's capabilities
for interdiction and counter-terrorism through the
provision of electronic and other equipment, especially
additional helicopters, with a view to enhancing
mobility and reaction time. Our requirements have
been conveyed to our partners.

Finally, joint counter-terrorism operations must
be conducted with full adherence to the principles of
international law, including those incorporated in the
Kabul Declaration, regarding respect for sovereignty,
territorial integrity and non-interference. Pakistan will
not countenance any violation of those principles.

Pakistan believes that Afghanistan, with the
support of the international community and through
cooperation with its neighbours, can succeed in
meeting the challenges of security, governance and
development. Pakistan wishes to make the maximum
contribution to the success of the Afghanistan
Compact. An essential component of the Compact is to
ensure sustainable and rapid development in
Afghanistan.

In London, Pakistan supplemented its earlier
commitment of $200 million with an additional pledge
of $50 million for Afghanistan's development. We have
made special arrangements to facilitate transit trade to
and from Afghanistan. Bilateral trade between Pakistan
and Afghanistan was $1.2 billion last year, which we
hope will grow to $2 billion this year. We have reached
an agreement with the United States on the creation of
industrial zones on the border with Afghanistan whose
goods will be allowed duty-free access to the United
States market.

Pakistan is convinced that, given mutual goodwill
and enhanced trust, Afghanistan and Pakistan will be
able to cooperate closely to build peace and security in
the region and ensure prosperity for our peoples, whose
historical and fraternal bonds are strong enough to
withstand the vicissitudes of politics and posturing by
those who wish to sow the seeds of division and
discord between us.

