Mr. Mansour: On behalfofPalestine, I congratulate
you, Mr. President, and your country, Colombia, on
your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for this month. We are fully confident in your
leadership. I also wish to express appreciation to the
People's Republic of China for its wise stewardship of
the Council last month. And I thank Special Coordinator
Robert Serry for his comprehensive briefing today.

Three months ago, I addressed the Council (see S/PV.6757) on behalf of Palestine and conveyed our
grave concerns regarding the deteriorating situation
in the occupied Palestinian territory, including East
Jerusalem, as a result of the continuation of Israeli
crimes and violations against the Palestinian people,
their land and property.

We regret that positive developments on the ground
cannot be reported at this time, as we continue to find
ourselves in a situation that has precariously worsened
at all levels and further distanced us from the goal that
we all share, namely, to end Israel's more than 45-year
military occupation in order to realize the two-State
solution of Palestine and Israel living side by side in
peace and security within recognized borders on the
basis of the pre-1967 borders.

Nothing takes us farther away from that
internationally endorsed goal for peace than the
continuation of Israel's illegal settlement campaign,
which is being waged in a deliberate attempt to seize
more Palestinian land and entrench Israeli control over
the Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem. That
is the matter on which I will focus my statement, based
on our hope of compelling the international community
to finally take serious and practical action aimed at
stopping Israel, the occupying Power, from completely
destroying the viability of the two-State solution based
on the pre-1967 borders and reviving the prospects
for soon achieving the long overdue just, lasting and
peaceful settlement that we all have been seeking and
working towards.

Yet, before focusing on the destructive, illegal
Israeli settlement campaign in our land, I must once
again draw the Council's attention to the many other
illegal actions and measures that continue also to be
taken by the occupying Power against the Palestinian
civilian population living under its ruthless occupation.

During the recent period, Israel forged ahead
with the demolition of Palestinian homes and civilian
infrastructure, resulting in further displacement of
families in the occupied West Bank, including East
Jerusalem. Today's comprehensive statement by
Mr. Serry testified about many of the details regarding
those issues.

Israel has also continued to carry out daily military
raids throughout Palestinian villages, towns and cities,
arresting more and more Palestinian civilians and
thereby adding to the thousands of Palestinians already
imprisoned or detained, including hundreds of children.
In that connection, we reiterate our grave concern
about the deplorable treatment to which Palestinian
civilians in Israeli jails and detention centres continue
to be subjected, including degrading, inhumane and
unhygienic captivity conditions, severe humiliation
and mental and physical ill-treatment, including acts
of torture, denial of family visits, denial of access to
proper medical care and education and denial of due
process oflaw.

We recall the plight of the many Palestinian
prisoners, including those under administrative
detention without charge or trial, who have carried
out prolonged hunger strikes in non-violent, peaceful
protest of that cruel treatment by the occupying Power.
We call on the international community to act to compel
Israel to cease those illegal practices and to release all
of the Palestinian civilians it is illegally imprisoning.

Israel has also continued to carry out military

attacks via missile air strikes and artillery bombardment
of civilian areas in the besieged Gaza Strip, in grave
violation of international law, including the Geneva
Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons
in Time of War. In that regard, Israel has continued to
deliberately target and kill Palestinian civilians, thereby
persisting with its deliberate policy of extrajudicial
executions.

In the month of June alone, at least 15 Palestinians,
including 3 children, were killed and scores were injured
by Israeli military attacks against the Gaza Strip. In
addition to living in constant fear of such military
attacks, the population of the Gaza Strip continues
to suffer grave hardship as a result of the inhumane
blockade imposed since June 2007 by the occupying
Power, which has now entered into its sixth year. The
cruel blockade clearly constitutes collective punishment
of the over 1.6 million Palestinian civilians living
there, more than half of them children, in a deliberate
and grave breach of international law, specifically
the Fourth Geneva Convention, which prohibits the
occupying Power from collectively punishing protected
persons and prohibits pillaging and reprisals against
them and their property. In that regard, I am referring to
article 33 of the Fourth Geneva Convention and article
50 of The Hague Regulations, which are recognized by
the international community as customary international
law. The blockade is also a violation of the population's
basic human rights.

The international community must not relent in
demanding that Israel, the occupying Power, act in
accordance with its obligations under international law,
including the Fourth Geneva Convention and relevant
United Nations resolutions, including resolution 1860
(2009), to end the blockade of Gaza and to cease its
human rights violations and bring an end to the travesty
against our people.

With the myriad of human rights violations
committed by the occupying Power on a daily basis, it
is a challenging task to keep our statement focused on
one issue. However, it is unquestionably clear that the
continuation of illegal Israeli settlement activities and
the vast network of related infrastructure, including
more than 500 internal checkpoints, roadblocks
and other physical obstacles, which exist primarily
to "protect" the illegal settlers and facilitate their
movement while impeding Palestinian movement and
all aspects of life in the occupied West Bank, including
East Jerusalem, are the largest obstacles to peace.

Since the Council's last debate on this issue in April
(see S/PV.6757), Israeli announcements of settlement
building have continued unabated, inflaming tensions
and mistrust, further poisoning the environment
and undermining any prospects for the revival of
a negotiated peace process. Throughout that time,
Palestine has submitted numerous letters informing
the Security Council of Israel's gross violations and
appealing to the Council to speak with one voice and to
act to persuade Israel to cease all settlement activities
in the occupied Palestinian territory, including in and
around East Jerusalem and the Jordan Valley, and to act
to end the rampant settler terror and violence against
the Palestinian people and their properties. Regrettably,
the Council has failed to find the political will to act,
and the illegal Israeli settlement campaign, including
constant provocations and settler rampages, continue
throughout the occupied Palestinian territory unabated
and unpunished.

I wish to recall to the Council some ofIsrael's illegal
settlement activities in the recent period, reflecting
the occupying Power's ill intentions to continue rather
than end its belligerent military occupation of our land.
First is the construction of 1,121 units in the illegal
settlement of Har Homa, in Jabal Abu Ghneim in the
southern part of occupied East Jerusalem, about which
the Council met 15 years ago but tragically failed to
stop. There are also the construction of 180 units
in the illegal settlement of Giv'at Ze'ev, 117 units in
the Ariel settlement, 92 units in the Ma'ale Adumim
settlement, 144 units in the Adam settlement and 180
units in the settlement of East Talpiot, also known as
Armon Hanatsiv. All of those illegal settlements are
also in or near occupied East Jerusalem. Moreover,
there is the construction of 2,500 more units in Gilo,
a massive settlement on the outskirts of occupied East
Jerusalem near the city of Bethlehem, as well as the
construction of 114 units in the Efrat settlement, also
near Bethlehem. Add to that the construction of a
300-unit settlement in a declared military compound
near the settlement of Beit El, adjacent to the city of
Ramallah. An announcement has also been made of
plans for the construction of another 84 units in the
Kiryat Arba settlement, located in Al-Khalil, where
hundreds of extremist Israeli settlers have been
deliberately transferred into the midst of 200,000
Palestinians, who are daily subjected to terror, violence
and intimidation. In addition, during the same time
frame, Israeli occupying forces raided the Al-Makhrour
area of Beit Jala, a predominately Christian community
west of Bethlehem, and carried out the demolition by
bulldozer of two Palestinian homes and a water well,
a road and 53 utility poles, cutting off electricity to at
least 12 Palestinian families in the area, to facilitate the
expansion of the illegal settlement of Har Gilo, entrench
Israel's network of settlements from occupied East
Jerusalem towards Al-Khalil in the south and further
restrict the area for the future natural development of
Palestinian cities, towns and villages.

To be clear, all settlements and settlement-related
infrastructure, including the separation wall, are illegal,
no matter where they are constructed in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including in East Jerusalem.
Colonization of occupied territory through the transfer of
citizens of the occupying Power is strictly prohibited by
Article 49, Section 6, of the Fourth Geneva Convention,
is considered to be a grave breach under Additional
Protocol 1 to the Geneva Conventions and constitutes
a war crime under Article 8, Section 2 (a) (iv) and (b)
(viii), of the Rome Statute. Moreover, the illegality of
that practice and the demands for its complete cessation
and reversal have been repeatedly reaffirmed by the
Security Council, the General Assembly, the Human
Rights Council and the Economic and Social Council,
as well as by the International Court of Justice in its
advisory opinion of 9 July 2004.

We continue to call on the international community
to be firm in its condemnation and rejection of all of
Israel's illegal settlement activities in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem, and
to put a stop to them, regardless of the unjustifiable
pretexts and justifications given by the Government
of Israel. In this call we are also referring to attempts
by the occupying Power to try to legalize its illegal
acts, as it has tried to do with the Levy committee
report, a right-wing, Israeli Government-appointed
committee that has made erroneous conclusions and
recommendations to the effect that Israel should legalize
outposts - a recommendation that defies international
law and the international consensus on Israel's illegal
settlement campaign. Not coincidentally, the so-called
Levy report was published on the anniversary of the
advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice
of 9 July 2004 (A/ES-l9/273), which determined, inter
alia, that, as an occupying Power, Israel is bound by the
Hague Regulations, the Fourth Geneva Convention, as
well as the International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights, the International Covenant on Economic, Social
and Cultural Rights and the Convention on the Rights
of the Child - which are all applicable in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem. The
Court also reaffirmed that, in view of the provisions
of Article 49, paragraph 6, of the Fourth Geneva
Convention, "the Israeli settlements in the occupied
Palestinian territory (including East Jerusalem) have
been established in breach of international law".

How can Israel speak of a two-State solution - or
peace for that matter - while it continues its illegal
policies and practices, stealing more Palestinian land,
scarce water resources and agricultural land, and
destroying homes, civilian infrastructure and historical
and religious landmarks, as well as separating
Palestinian communities and even families through the
construction of its settlements, the separation wall and
its vast system of roads meant only for Jewish settlers,
in addition to the multitude of other violations of
international law and human rights it commits on a daily
basis? How can Israel or the international community
ask the Palestinian side to engage in negotiations on
ending the occupation in order for them to finally gain
their independence in their own State when the occupier
continues to defy all agreements and provisions of
international law and United Nations resolutions and to
take more and more land, totally impairing the viability
of the Palestinian State? Here, we must recall that, for
20 years throughout the height of the peace process,
Israel persisted with the colonization ofPalestinian land
and with the entrenchment of its occupation. Indeed,
despite the good faith and intentions of the Palestinian
side, the Israeli side continued its deceitful behaviour,
taking advantage of a flawed negotiation process and
of the total asymmetry of the situation on the ground,
where the occupying Power subjugated the occupied
territory to its might and will in every respect.

In fact, from 1993 to 2000, the number of settlers in
the occupied Palestinian territory doubled. Today there
are more than 500,000 illegal settlers in about 150 illegal
settlements in the occupied West Bank, including East
Jerusalem, in addition to some 100 outposts erected
with the tacit approval of the Israeli Government.

The only conclusion one can come to is that, as
long as Israel is allowed to act with impunity and in
violation of international law without repercussions,
little will change, and the possibility of achieving a
two-State solution based on the pre-1967 borders will
not be possible.

As President Mahmoud Abbas stated recently at
the World Economic Forum on the Middle East, North
Africa and Eurasia 2012, held in Istanbul in June:
"Our region needs bridges of cooperation, peace and
dialogue rather than walls and settlement expansion".
He cautioned that time was running out for the historic
peaceful compromise we seek. President Abbas has also
repeatedly said that negotiations remain his first, second
and third option for arriving at a peaceful settlement.
But there must be genuine and credible negotiations
based on the pre-l967 borders, with minor adjustments
accepted by both sides, and based on adherence to,
and respect for, international law, United Nations
resolutions, including Security Council resolutions,
and in line with Israel's obligations under the Quartet
road map. That is not a Palestinian condition, nor, for
that matter, is it a Palestinian position; rather, it is the
position of the entire international community.

Settlements run counter to the formula of land for
peace, on which the entire Middle East peace process is
built. Israel's illegal actions continue to undermine all
efforts to resume the peace process, including via direct
negotiations between the Palestinian and Israeli sides, on
the basis of the well-known parameters. No Palestinian
can accept continued settlement construction and the
ongoing colonization of Palestinian land, whether
in occupied East Jerusalem or in any other part of
the occupied Palestinian territory. The international
community, which has clear obligations under the
Charter, United Nations resolutions, and international
conventions and covenants, including its obligations
as high contracting parties to the Fourth Geneva
Convention, must live up to those obligations and
muster the political will to compel Israel to abandon its
expansionism, colonization and aggression against the
Palestinian people and their land, and instead pursue
peace and take the hand of peace that has for so long
been extended to it by the Palestinian leadership.

Tragically, 5 June marked 45 years since the onset
of the Israeli military occupation of the Palestinian
and Arab lands in 1967 - 45 years of suffering and
oppression in addition to the two prior decades of grave
injustice inflicted on the Palestinian people. Our people
have waited long enough for their inalienable rights to
be realized and to live their lives free from occupation
and in their own State of Palestine, with East Jerusalem
as its capital.

The time is now, and the international community
should spare no effort to achieve the vision of two States,
Palestine and Israel, living side by side in peace and
security, which would represent a historic achievement
for our peoples, our region and the global community,
and not just a tragically missed historic opportunity
with far-reaching and ever more tragic consequences.

