Mr. Khiari (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset,
I would like to convey my sincere congratulations to
you, Sir, on your presidency of the Council this month,
and I thank you for holding this open debate on the
situation in the Middle East, including the question of
Palestine. I also thank Under-Secretary-General Jeffrey
Feltman for his briefing today.

Today we meet in our quarterly open debate at a
time when the peace efforts are at a very difficult stage.
The stalemate in the peace process has lasted for years
now and there seems to be no hope for an end to the
deadlock or a resumption of negotiations to achieve a
durable, just and comprehensive peace that would put
an end to the occupation and confirm the recognition of
the Palestinian State as an independent and sovereign
State, within the borders of 4 June 1967 and with East
Jerusalem as its capital.

We believe that full responsibilty for the stalemate
lies with Israel's continued practices, as the occupying
Power, its procrastination, its grave violations of
international law and the basic terms of reference of
the peace process, and its continued enforcement
of a policy of fait accompli, enacted through further
annexation of Palestinian territories, the Judaization
of Jerusalem and its separation from its surroundings
in the West Bank, which we denounce. Israel has also
carried out forced expulsions and cancelled Palestinian
identity cards, while increasing and intensifying its
settlement activities and campaigns of escalating
violence by settlers against Palestinians and against
Islamic and Christian places of worship, including the
Al-Aqsa mosque. The current violations and abuses
against Palestinian prisoners in full view of the entire
world are grave violations of the principles of human
rights and international humanitarian law.

Firm and urgent action is required on the part of the
international community to end the bloodshed, which
cannot be prolonged or tolerated and which carries the
risk of an escalation of the situation at any moment,
especially in the light of Israel's continued policy of
arbitrary arrests of Palestinians, including women
and children. The practices of Israel as the occupying
Power over the past decades can be considered a
form of collective punishment, and the international
community can no longer justify this policy to current
and future generations.

We believe that the resumption of negotiations
on a fair and honest basis requires putting an end to
those practices in the occupied territories, including
East Jerusalem; addressing the question of Palestinian
prisoners in Israeli prisons; and immediately lifting the
unfair and oppressive blockade of Gaza. Those measures
are based on the principles of international legitimacy
and are basic requirements for the resumption of the
peace process.

Tunisia reaffirms that achieving a just and lasting
peace in the Middle East is a comprehensive effort that
can be realized only through an Israeli withdrawal
from all Palestinian and Arab occupied territories,
including the Arab Syrian Golan, a withdrawal to
the pre-1967 borders and from the territories still
occupied in southern Lebanon, and a recognition of the
independence and sovereignty of the State of Palestine,
with East Jerusalem as its capital, as the basis for a two-
State solution in which Israel and Palestine live side by
side in peace.

We also express our deep concern regarding the
situation in the brotherly country of Syria, where
the ongoing killing and destruction have had grave
consequences for Syria and the entire region, in
particular at the humanitarian level. We reiterate
our support for the aspirations of the Syrian people
to liberty, dignity and democracy, and we recall the
resolutions adopted by the most recent Arab summit in
Doha, which were mentioned by the representative of
the League of Arab States in his statement. We also
emphasize the need for an expedited political solution
that would put an end to the crisis, which can no longer
be tolerated or prolonged, while emphasizing the unity
of Syrians and the territorial integrity of Syria.

