Mr. Arias (Panama) (spoke in Spanish): Permit
me at the outset to thank you, Mr. President, for the
timely convening of this open debate on a topic of
great importance on which your country has taken the
lead. We also appreciated the briefing by Mr. John
Holmes, Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs, about the alarming situation of civilians in
armed conflict.

The Geneva Conventions and their Additional
Protocols are the foundation of international
humanitarian law. They are the highest expression of
international law as regards the protection of civilians
in armed conflict. Nevertheless, there are countless
obstacles to protecting civilian populations caught in
the midst of hostilities, which were extensively
described in Mr. Holmes's presentation. Among them

08-3528]
we wish to emphasize restrictions on access for
humanitarian assistance owing to security, bureaucratic
or logistical factors.

We must also emphasize other challenges to the
provision of humanitarian assistance that we consider
to be of great importance. These include a lack of clear
mandates for humanitarian actions; a lack of
monitoring and investigating mechanisms to identify
and register the perpetrators of flagrant and systematic
violations of international humanitarian law. Among
such violations, the use of sexual violence as a weapon
of war and, most recently, acts of piracy deserve
particular attention.

To confront these challenges, the Security
Council must implement a strategic vision for the more
effective allocation of existing resources and
capacities. Also, the Council should take on a
supervisory role and use all the tools at its disposal to
identify those who commit such violations and bring
them to trial before the relevant judicial bodies. At the
same time, the United Nations should carry out
preventive activities by collecting and disseminating
information, implementing an early-warning system in
coordination with regional and subregional
organizations, and strengthening State institutions in
order to protect human rights, the rule of law and the
provisions of basic services.

In parallel, it is important to incorporate - or
where it already exists, strengthen - the civilian
protection element in current peacekeeping operations.
In that context, we agree with the suggestion that a
Security Council working group on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict be established.

In the sphere of international justice, the
International Criminal Court is, without question, the
key instrument for avoiding the obstacles I have
mentioned and deterring parties from ignoring the rules
in this area. Unfortunately, initiating a case and
gathering evidence can sometimes be an enormously
complex and difficult task owing to the situation on the
ground. Hence, we encourage all States Members of the
United Nations to help the Court in its work by
providing the resources and evidence needed to punish
the perpetrators of crimes in conflict areas.
Nor can we forget that the protection of civilians
is relevant not only during armed conflict. The
international community must also support States in
meeting the most pressing needs of their populations
when those populations are affected by natural
disasters.

Finally, my delegation has repeatedly stated that
there is a close relationship among international
humanitarian law, the protection of civilians and the
concept of the responsibility to protect, as set out in the
2005 World Summit Outcome (General Assembly resolution 60/ 1). That principle makes the State and its
institutions responsible for protecting its citizens from
genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes
against humanity, and it warns that, if the State does
not wish to protect its population or is unable to do so,
the international community is obliged to help with
that task, or to assume it, through an effective and
transparent response. In order to prevent this concept
from becoming a mere footnote to history, we must be
clear about its definition so that it can provide a
concrete mandate for those entrusted with the
protection of civilians.

