Mrs. Adnin (Malaysia): My delegation welcomes
the First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Republic of Serbia and Ambassador
Vlora Citaku of Kosovo back to New York and thanks
them for their statements. I am also grateful to Special
Representative Mr. Zahir Tanin for his briefing.
Years of persistent efforts by the leaders in
implementing socioeconomic reforms have evidently
borne fruits. We are pleased with the strong economic
performance shown by Kosovo with a 4 per cent
growth in its gross domestic product and a marked
improvement in its global ranking for doing business,
as reported by the World Bank. As Kosovo moves closer
towards European Union integration, we envisage
further intensified efforts by Kosovo to restructure its
economy, implement economic reform measures and
address the persisting challenge of high unemployment.
The normalization of relations between Belgrade and
Pristina remains a crucial aspect in paving the way
towards European integration in the interests of peace,
stability and prosperity in Kosovo and the region.

We therefore wish to see the resumption of the
high-level European Union-facilitated dialogue
between Pristina and Belgrade as soon as possible.
With respect to outstanding commitments, as agreed
in the 15-point Brussels agreement, Malaysia urges
Pristina and Belgrade to redouble their efforts in
implementing the historic agreement. This includes the
establishment of the association/community of Serb-
majority municipalities and the implementation of the
action plan for telecommunications in Kosovo. We
also welcome the recent progress made with regard to
Kosovo's judicial integration and the redevelopment of
the Mitrovica bridge.

I share the concerns on the political tensions
relating to the issues of territorial delineation with
Montenegro and the Trepca mining and industrial
complex, as highlighted by Mr. Tanin today and the
Secretary-General in his latest report (S/2016/901).
We call on the opposition parties and their supporters
to abstain from political violence in expressing their
grievances. We also urge all parties and stakeholders to
avoid inflammatory rhetoric and to engage in dialogue
and consultations in good faith to resolve the issues
amicably and in accordance with the rule of law.

Malaysia commends President Hashim Thaci of
Kosovo for his exemplary leadership and reconciliatory
gesture in visiting memorials commemorating Kosovo's
civilian victims in the conflict. His visits send a much
needed signal of reconciliation, national unity, social
integration and building a common future. We call on
the people of Kosovo to similarly focus on rebuilding
trust and confidence to cease the targeting ofminorities,
as well as religious and cultural sites.

Part of the effort to rebuild trust between the
communities in Kosovo involves addressing the past. In
that regard, Malaysia takes note of the appointment of
the ChiefProsecutor ofthe Kosovo Specialist Chambers
in the Netherlands to try cases arising from the
findings of the European Union Special Investigative
Task Force. We also commend ongoing efforts by the
Kosovo Government in countering terrorism, violent
extremism and radicalization.

I join my other colleagues in reaffirming support
for the United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo (UNMIK), which continues to play a key role
in promoting security, stability and respect for human
rights in Kosovo. We commend the leadership of the
Special Representative and the important role of the
European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo, the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
and the Kosovo Force in ensuring peace, security and
the rule of law in Kosovo.

Lastly, my delegation strongly supports the call
made by other Council members for a reduction in the
frequency of Council meetings of UNMIK to better
reflect the situation in Kosovo and in view of more
pressing matters on the Council's agenda.

