Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I welcome you,
Mr. President, back to New York. It is a pleasure to see
you at this meeting. I think your presence is a sign of
your country's commitment to the people of Libya at
this difficult time for them.

I also thank Ambassador Skoog for all his
hard work on the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya, and
Special Representative Salame for his thorough and
fascinating briefing. It has certainly been an eventful
two months sent he set out his action plan for Libya
to the General Assembly. Under his guidance there
have been important steps forward to revitalize the
Libyan political process. Yet, in recent weeks, violence
has escalated again. It is clear that Libya now faces a
simple choice - a future of stability and security or a
return to a past of violence and uncertainty.

Let me start with the positives, and there have
been positive developments on the political process.
The dialogue committees from both the House of
Representatives and the High State Council worked
hard to secure agreements on amendments to the
Libyan Political Agreement. This has taken courage
and compromise, but of course it is only a start.
Further commitment from all parties is now needed
to sustain the momentum and move Libya forward. In
doing so, we should not lose sight of what is at stake.
It is a real chance now for Libya to establish a truly
national Government - one that will enjoy the support
of both the House of Representatives and the High
State Council and that will be able to deliver for all its
citizens. Further delay, however, will only prolong the
suffering of ordinary Libyans who I think we can all
agree have suffered for far too long.

We need only look at the recent escalation in
violence to see the consequences ofdelay. The strikes on
Derna, which killed 16 civilians and the recent apparent
summary executions in Al-Abyar and Warshafanah are
examples. There are many others. These escalating acts

of violence make it unambiguously clear that a political
solution is no longer a choice, but a critical necessity
for the Libyan people. We should all be concerned by
these continuing human rights violations and abuses
across the country, so many of them at the expense
of civilians, including migrants. Let us all condemn
extrajudicial killings by all parties from all sides of the
conflict. The climate of impunity must stop. I reiterate
our support for Libyan and international efforts to
bring to account those responsible for such crimes.
It is clear from the recent escalation in Violence
that the existing arms embargo has not cut off the flow
of illicit weapons in and out of Libya. This is not only
undermining the peace and security of Libya and the
region, but it is also playing into the hands of terrorist
groups who continue to threaten global security. I urge
all Member States to make every effort to ensure that
the arms embargo is strictly observed.

Engagement between both sides is needed not only
for the political process, but also for the economy.
A prosperous economy will be realized only if key
economic institutions take the steps necessary to
introduce important reforms. It is also Vital that
Libya's oil resources be used to benefit the country as
a whole. I call on all Member States to make sure that
they continue to do all they can to prevent illegal oil
smuggling and enforce the sanctions regime, which was
designed to protect Libya's oil wealth for the benefit of
the Libyan people.

Let me conclude by reiterating that the Libyan
Political Agreement remains the only valid framework
for Libya's transitional period into 2018. The United
Kingdom will continue to support the immediate next
steps to amend the Agreement and agree on a reformed
Presidency Council. We will also support subsequent
efforts to promote national reconciliation, agree on a
longer-term Constitution and prepare for elections. We
believe that the United Nations must remain firmly at
the helm and that the international community must be
united and steadfast in its support because, simply put,
conflict and instability in Libya are hurting the region
and the world, but most of all, they are hurting Libya's
citizens. I therefore call on Libya's leaders from all
sides to show that they are committed to delivering
peace and security for all Libyan people. They must
look beyond immediate personal considerations and
towards the long-term future of their country. They
have a responsibility to make progress and I urge them
to continue to work with Special Representative Salame
and take the bold steps required to move Libya forward.

