Mr. Aisi (Papua New Guinea): Thank you,
Mr. President, for your warm welcome. Like previous
speakers, I would like to congratulate you on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month. I wish you and your Mission well.
Through you, Sir, I would like also to thank and
compliment Ambassador Pleuger and his Mission with
respect to their able oversight of the work of the
Council last month.

I thank Mr. Turk for his report and for his support
over the past few years in the work we are doing.
Those thanks go also to his staff.

Papua New Guinea sincerely appreciates the
interest the United Nations takes in the Bougainville
peace process and the practical support it provides
through the United Nations Observer Mission in
Bougainville (UNOMB) and in other ways. On behalf
of all of the parties, my delegation expresses our
sincere thanks to the Council for its positive and
creative response to Papua New Guinea's request,
made on behalf of all of the parties late last year, for
UNOMB to remain and continue supporting the
Bougainville peace process on the ground.

In the past few months, the Bougainville peace
process has passed a number of significant milestones
on the way to self-sustaining peace. They include the
withdrawal of the last in a series of neutral regional
supports for the peace process: the Bougainville
Transition Team, made up of unarmed civilians,
women and men, from Australia, Fiji, New Zealand
and Vanuatu.

At the end of February, the parties said farewell
to a trusted, good friend who had worked very hard in
support of the peace process and who had helped build
mutual confidence between the parties over the
previous five years. The departing Director of the
United Nations Political Office in Bougainville, His
Excellency Ambassador Noel Sinclair, left with the
sincere admiration and thanks of people throughout
Papua New Guinea for having met the diverse
challenges of his assignment with commitment and
distinction.

The parties were then pleased to receive UNOMB
and its new Director, Mr. Tor Stenbock, whose prior
service, both in other peace processes and in
Bougainville, had already earned respect and a very
warm welcome to his new appointment on all sides.

Before either of those two transitions had
occurred, the peace process passed one of the most
significant milestones on the way to lasting peace
when the Peace Process Consultative Committee met in
December and resolved that the guns contained under
the agreed weapons disposal plan would be destroyed.
The meeting was held within the time frame set in the
plan, which forms part of the Bougainville Peace
Agreement. The agreed outcome is clear: the guns must
be rendered so they "cannot be used again, recovered,
repaired, used for spare parts, or employed to make
or support threats".

With UNOMB's inspiration and support,
implementation has been truly impressive. Former
combatants have displayed real determination in
putting away and destroying their guns. By the last
week of April, we estimate that more than 80 per
cent - the figure of 83 per cent has been mentioned,
and we will take that higher amount - of guns
contained under the agreed weapons disposal plan had
been destroyed. Guns which were removed from
containers in 2002 continue to be recovered and then
destroyed. Former combatants from the remaining "no-
go zone" around Panguna are joining in. The prospects
for completing the process in the next few weeks are
strong.

That does not mean that Bougainville will be
completely free of the presence and the threat of guns.
But the main former combatant groups will have
contained and destroyed their guns. The way will be
clear for holding free and democratic elections for the
autonomous Bougainville government, to be set up
under the Bougainville Peace Agreement.

All of the parties involved in the Bougainville
peace process continue to urge Francis Ona and his
successors in the "no-go zone" around Panguna in
central Bougainville to eliminate the psychological
barriers, remove the remaining roadblocks and join in
working for lasting peace by peaceful means.

Progress towards that objective is supported by
the efforts being made to strengthen policing and other
aspects of civil authority on the ground, including
courts and correctional services. Those efforts include
the delegation of significant police functions and
powers from the national Government to Bougainville,
as provided for in the Bougainville Peace Agreement.

Australia and New Zealand give valued financial
and technical support for strengthening policing in
Bougainville, including the training of both additional
general duties police and community auxiliary police.
The recent establishment of the Governance and
Implementation Fund provides a means by which they
and other foreign aid donors can contribute to practical
peace-building in Bougainville by helping to provide
resources for implementation of a jointly developed
work plan which is supported by the national
Government and the Bougainville administration.
Priorities include promoting awareness and building
capacity, both nationally and in Bougainville, to make
sure that the arrangements for Bougainville autonomy
develop and operate as agreed.

Currently, consultations intended to promote a
cooperative approach in drafting and implementing the
proposed constitution for the autonomous Bougainville
government are moving ahead. In fact, members of the
bipartisan national committee led by the Minister for
Inter-Government Relations, Sir Peter Barter, are in
Bougainville this week to meet and exchange views
with the Bougainville Constitutional Commission. The
Commission is expected to complete its third and final
draft of the proposed Bougainville constitution later
this month. The Bougainville leadership has already
agreed to arrangements for the Bougainville
Constituent Assembly, which will convene to consider
and adopt the draft constitution as soon as the
Commission completes the final draft.

Consultations are open, smooth and productive. It
is expected that by the middle of the year the final draft
of the proposed Bougainville constitution will be ready
for the National Executive Council to endorse its
consistency with the national Constitution as amended
by the laws implementing the Bougainville Peace
Agreement.

In that context, let me again draw the Council's
attention to the agreement, given the force of law in the
Papua New Guinea Constitution, that, if there are
differences over whether conditions are conducive to
holding elections for the autonomous Bougainville
government, they will be referred to UNOMB for
resolution. The constitutional provisions, which may
well be unique in the world, make it critical to the
Bougainville peace process - and for the sake of
respect of good governance under our national
Constitution - that UNOMB remain on the ground
until the autonomous Bougainville government has
been elected.

Until then, UNOMB also has an important role to
play in continuing to chair the Peace Process
Consultative Committee, the main body in which the
parties meet to consult and cooperate in managing the
Bougainville peace process until the autonomous
Bougainville government has been elected. The
autonomous Bougainville government will then assume
responsibility as the legitimate representative of the
people of Bougainville under the agreed arrangements.
The establishment of the autonomous Bougainville
government will mark a natural exit-point for
UNOMB. That has been agreed and is understood by
all parties.

While foreign aid donors will continue to provide
technical and financial assistance, the parties will
otherwise be directly and solely responsible from then
on for future peace-building and governance under the
Bougainville Peace Agreement.

Practical peace-building involves more than
making and implementing political agreements. It also
has very significant economic and social dimensions.
As our Minister for Inter-Government Relations, Sir
Peter Barter, has said, Bougainville needs to develop
an economy capable of sustaining autonomy. It needs a
society which sustains peace. In that respect, UNOMB
continues to make an important contribution by
promoting reconciliation.

The United Nations Development Programme and
other United Nations specialized agencies, such as
UNICEF, support practical peace-building in other
important ways. Those include providing a wide range
of opportunities - from training to providing
seedlings - so that former combatants and
communities can participate in, and benefit from,
development on the basis of self-reliance. Papua New
Guinea, on behalf of all parties, appreciates our
overseas partners' continuing support and cooperation.

The Government is determined to take a
proactive approach. That is why the Cabinet has
decided to set up a new ministerial committee to plan
and implement a vision for a Bougainville that remains
at peace. In striving to define that vision of peace and
mobilize resources for it, Papua New Guinea will
continue to look to the United Nations for continued
help and support. That includes a response from the
Security Council when, at the appropriate time, Papua
New Guinea makes a formal request for UNOMB to
continue until it fulfils its agreed responsibilities and
the autonomous Bougainville government is elected.

The Secretariat mission that is expected to travel
to Papua New Guinea in June to review the
Bougainville peace process can help ensure free and
democratic elections for the autonomous Bougainville
government by being tasked and equipped to advise on
what is required to ensure that UNOMB can do what
its mandate requires.

Papua New Guinea is grateful for the continuing
support of United Nations specialized agencies and
other development cooperation partners. We encourage
them to continue providing assistance for Bougainville
and the rest of our country so that peace is secured and
all of our people can enjoy the benefits of lasting
peace, achieved, strengthened and maintained by
peaceful means.

