The Secretary-General: Peacebuilding is at the
core of the United Nations activities in conflict-affected
countries throughout the world. The recent historic
resolutions adopted by the General Assembly and the
Security Council emphasize that sustaining peace
is a shared responsibility of Governments, national
stakeholders and the United Nations.

Peace in Africa is a top priority. As we meet, South
Sudan remains precariously poised on the brink of an
abyss. The promises of the new State for peace, justice
and opportunity have been squandered. I am appalled
by the scale of sexual violence documented by our
human rights teams. We demand accountability for all
atrocities and that the leaders of South Sudan commit
to the peace process. Instability also persists in the
Central African Republic, the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, Libya, Mali and a number of other nations.

This a cause of grave concern for all, but it is also
important to emphasize that this is not the full story
of Africa. There is another narrative, largely untold,
of growing economies, improved living standards and
expanding democratic space. Our shared responsibility
is to nourish these seeds of peace and prosperity. One
way we can do that is to nurture inclusive, transparent,
effective and accountable institutions and help the
nations of Africa achieve the Sustainable Development
Goals. When institutions are weak, nations cannot
thrive. Inclusive and accountable institutions are
the cement that bonds States and citizens. They
provide security and justice, limit corruption, reduce
marginalization and avert ethnic tension. They promote
the delivery of essential services, from sanitation and
health care to an enabling environment for business to
flourish. They offer a channel for resolving disputes
and preventing the outbreak of violent conflict. They
are the bedrock of peace and sustainable development.
Building effective and legitimate institutions is not
easy, but we have learned some fundamental lessons.

First, there are no one-size-fits-all solutions.
Institution-building has to be rooted in national
historical, political, social, cultural and economic
contexts. Trying to impose an outside model on a post-
conflict country can do more harm than good. The
focus should be on building on existing institutions to
provide the services that people need.

Secondly, institution-building needs to be
rooted in political agreement. National ownership
and leadership are key. That means broad, inclusive
dialogue encompassing central Government, local
authorities, communities, the private sector and civil
society, especially youth, women and marginalized
groups. Such dialogue enhances social cohesion,
strengthens the legitimacy of the State and increases
the sustainability of reforms.

Thirdly, institution-building is a long-term
process that sometimes takes decades. Each country's
institutions should be allowed to develop incrementally,
allowing for experimentation, learning and adaptation.
But communities also need to see early and tangible
progress. Peace dividends are essential, and perceptions
are critical. If expectations are high but not met, even
if there is progress, grievances can mount. Measuring
the impact of institution-building is not easy. Results
can be intangible or elusive for years. Pressures from
donor countries for instant results can be detrimental
to long-term development objectives and, ultimately, to
peace. Therefore, in meeting our shared responsibility,
we need wisdom, commitment and patience.

United Nations missions and humanitarian and
development actors are committed to working closely as
one to support institution-rebuilding and strengthening
in Africa. In Somalia, the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Somalia, the country team, the Peacebuilding
Support Office, the United Nations Development
Programme and the World Bank are supporting the
Government under the New Deal Compact to restore
core Government functions, including through a
flagship capacity development programme. We are
helping the country to build stronger public-sector
institutions that can deliver services and access, thereby
helping the Federal Government to establish and gain
the people's trust in State authority, especially outside
of Mogadishu in newly recovered areas.

In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
United Nations country team have been working on an
integrated programme of justice, local governance and
development initiatives in support of the international
security, stabilization and support strategy. The
programme focuses on the delivery of basic services
in stabilized areas in North Kivu and on preventing
grievances that could lead to further conflict

Finally, the United Nations and the World Bank
have jointly developed a diagnostic tool to assess
core Government functions and identify key actions
necessary to deliver essential services. Drawing on our
experience in the Central African Republic in 2014,
when the United Nations and the World Bank supported
the payment of civil servants, the tool is currently being
piloted in Libya, and we hope to be able to deploy it in
South Sudan and Yemen. Support for core Government
functions is critical during the early recovery period
and an essential component of the peacebuilding and
State-building process.

Peacekeeping operations and political missions
have seen a significant increase in institution-building
mandates from the Council in recent years. However,
these have not always come with realistic time frames
or the necessary resources and support. I welcome
the fact that the Fifth Committee has allocated
funds in the budgets of a number of peacekeeping
operations for programmatic activities focusing on
institution-building, including in partnership with
United Nations country teams.

But a large gap remains. Despite praise for the
Peacebuilding Fund (PBF) in the recent peace and
security reviews, it faces a desperate funding shortfall.
To deliver on the collective commitment to sustaining
peace. Iarn asking Governments to help the PBF pledging
conference in September to achieve the funding target
of $300 million. I thank the efforts of hosts Kenya,
Mexico, the Netherlands, Somalia, Sri Lanka, Sweden
and the United Kingdom for their efforts.

Institution-building entails strong partnership,
coherence and coordination among many actors:
intergovernmental bodies, headquarters and the
field, entities on the ground, international financial
institutions, regional organizations and civil society.
The Peacebuilding Commission provides an important
platform to help focus the attention of all these actors
on long-term institution-building. It can help mobilize
resources, share lessons and sustain engagement by
the international community. I encourage the Security
Council to build on the recent resolution 2282 (2016),
on sustaining peace, and on its deliberations during the
informal interactive dialogue led by France in June,
and to continue to strengthen its relationship with the
Peacebuilding Commission.

