Mr. Arias Cz'trdenas (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): The delegation of the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela congratulates the
delegation of the Slovak Republic on its assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council for the month of
February and on having convened this important debate
on the situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question. Our congratulations go also to the
delegation of the Russian Federation on the excellent
manner in which it presided over the work of the
Council in January 2007. We thank Mr. Alvaro de Soto,
Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process
and Personal Representative of the Secretary-General,
for his briefing this morning.

My delegation aligns itself with the statement
made by the representative of Cuba on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement.

We are convinced that the maintenance of
international peace and security is founded on the
premise that relations between States - regardless of
their ideological, cultural or political differences -
should be guided by strict commitment to the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations and
by respect for international law, including the principle
of peaceful coexistence between States. Our country
has historically worked to promote a permanent
solution to the Palestinian question in order to achieve
stable and lasting peace in the Middle East. In that
context, we have supported all agreements between the
parties in the search for a peaceful negotiated solution.
Hence, we consider it indispensable that the
fundamental rights of the Palestinian people be fully
realized.

The Government of Israel has continued to move
civilians into settlements that had previously been
vacated, in clear violation of the Road Map. This has
led to a 6-per-cent increase in the number of Israeli
settlers in the West Bank, as Mr. Ibrahim Gambari,
Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs, told the
Council on 25 January (see S/PV.5624).

Peace in the region will be achieved only with
full implementation of the relevant resolutions of the
Security Council, the Arab Peace Initiative, the
principle of land for peace and the Road Map. My
Government considers it crucial to establish an
independent Palestinian State that will respond to the
Palestinian people's aspirations to freedom,
independence and security.

The Government of the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela reaffirms its firm support for the legitimate
and democratically elected Government in Beirut and
for the territorial integrity, unity and political
independence of Lebanon. It fully supports the
reconstruction of Lebanon and reaffirms its
condemnation of actions taken against that country.
Here, we consider that complete implementation of
resolution 1701 (2006) is essential.

The abuse of the veto by the United States with
respect to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict has served as
a cloak for major human rights violations which have
been vigorously condemned by the United Nations, and
in particular by the Human Rights Council. The
violence in Iraq clearly shows the consequences of
unilateral action taken in violation of international law,
such as the United States invasion of Iraq.

The situation in the Middle East region
constitutes one of the greatest moral debts owed by the
international community, and especially by the United
Nations and the Security Council. The Organization
was born with a mandate to maintain international
peace and security and to ensure compliance with the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the norms
of coexistence and unwavering respect for international
law. The international community expects the Security
Council and the Organization as a whole to act with
that historical perspective.

