Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I wish to thank
Ismail, Stephen and Muhannad for their very powerful
briefings. They all are doing vital work on this issue,
and, as Security Council penholder on Yemen, I want
to reiterate at this meeting today our appreciation for
their tireless efforts.

As they all have highlighted, the sheer scale of
the crisis facing the people of Yemen means that there
can be no letup in our efforts. It is a political crisis,
a humanitarian crisis, a crisis where the violence
simply will not end. As a result, civilians continue to
suffer, with more than 14 million people now food-
insecure, and more than 21 million people in need of
humanitarian assistance. That is the tragic cost of the
ongoing conflict in Yemen.

In response, we all know what needs to happen.
First, the violence must stop. There needs to be an
enduring, meaningful cessation of hostilities. I was
proud of the United Kingdom's efforts to help secure a
ceasefire early this month, but it is clear that three days
is simply not enough. We therefore call on the parties to
renew their commitment and implement an immediate,
sustainable cease-fire.

In support of that goal, we also need to make sure
that the De-escalation and Coordination Committee has
the support, training and resources that it needs. The
Committee is a crucial mechanism for building trust
and addressing violations. If the Yemeni parties are
serious about peace, they should engage with it fully.

Sadly, any signs of de-escalation have been elusive
of late. Only last week, a long-range missile was fired
from Sa'dah into Saudi Arabia, reportedly at the King
Abdulaziz international airport, north of Jeddah. This
attack by the Houthi and Saleh loyallists was provocative
and unacceptable. All sides need to show restraint.

We were shocked and appalled by the terrible loss
of life in the airstrikes on the funeral hall in Sana'a
earlier this month. We immediately underlined our
deep concerns at the ministerial level with the Saudi
Government. More than 140 people died that day. Elbio
has just spoken very powerfully about it, and I share
his disappointment and his regret at the fact that the
Security Council was unable to agree on the draft press
statement that the United Kingdom had circulated,
which would have strongly condemned the attack.

Despite this failure, the United Kingdom is clear
that there must be accountability for that attack. The
release of an initial investigation by the coalition's
Joint Incidents Assessment Team is a positive step in
that direction.

Stopping the violence is just the first step, and even
that will not be enough to help the millions of people
in need of assistance in Yemen. Regardless of progress
on the ceasefire, we also need to make concerted
strides on improving the humanitarian situation. In
the General Assembly last month, the United Kingdom
hosted an event that raised $100 million for Yemen; half
of that money came from United Kingdom itself. The
international community and United Nations agencies
also committed to strengthening their response. But
money alone is never enough. It counts for very little,
in fact, when aid cannot get through. So let us call
on the parties to take every step possible to improve
humanitarian access, so that we can help alleviate the
suffering of the millions in need.

Ultimately, for all of this - the cessation of
hostilities and the humanitarian access - to be
sustainable, we need the stability that comes only from
a political process, and that requires a compromise
between the parties. We therefore welcome Ismail's
presentation of the road map to the Yemeni parties; it
sets out how that compromise can be achieved, it says
clearly the security and political steps that the parties
must take to reach a peaceful resolution.

While the path ahead on the political track has
become clearer, it is still a path that has yet to be
followed fully. We are disappointed at the continuing
failure of the Houthis and Saleh to engage on the Sana'a
security plan, in defiance of resolution 2216 (2015), and
by President Hadi's public rejection of the road map.
We hope that he will now receive it and engage on it
in good faith. In fact, we call on all parties to engage
in good faith with the Special Envoy and to return to
negotiations on the basis ofthe road map and in a spirit
of compromise.

As they do so, the Special Envoy will have the full
support of the United Kingdom for his efforts to bring
the parties together. We take note of his requests just
now for full Security Council support, and, as penholder
on this issue, we will continue to work on a draft
Security Council resolution calling on all parties to do
four things: first, return to an immediate cessation of
hostilities; secondly, return to negotiations on the basis
of the road map; thirdly, bring about accountability for
alleged breaches ofinternational humanitarian law; and,
fourthly, allow unhindered access to humanitarian aid.

We pledge to continue working with our partners
on this resolution in support of the Special Envoy and
all his efforts on the road map and on the cessation of
hostilities, and, ultimately, on bringing peace to Yemen.

