Mr. Chidyausiku (Zimbabwe): Failure to
actively participate in today's open debate, which
addresses one of the most acute problems of our times,
the scourge of small arms and light weapons, would be
a dereliction of duty on my part.

We thank you, Mr. President, for convening this
meeting. As noted in the Secretary-General's report on
small arms of 31 December 2003 (S/2003/l2l7), which
provides the basis for our meeting today, small arms
have acquired the less than enviable role of being one
of the main vehicles of violence and social instability
in many developing countries. My delegation
welcomes the report's recommendations on the
implementation of the United Nations Programme of
Action on Small Arms as well as the call for the
Council to strengthen the financing of disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR) programmes.

In Southern Africa, a growing number of issues
that know no borders, such as smuggling and trade in
small arms and light weapons and drugs, demand a
coordinated regional response. The Southern Africa
Regional Action Programme on Light Arms and Illicit
Arms Trafficking is guided by the Southern African
Development Community (SADC) Summit decisions
of August 1999. On the issue of prevention and combat
of illicit trafficking in small arms and related crimes,
the SADC Summit noted that conflicts in the SADC
region over many years led to a proliferation of arms,
including light weapons. This, in turn, contributed to
an increase in criminal activities, such as armed
robberies, illicit trafficking in small arms, drug
trafficking, money laundering and carjackings.

Relying on its philosophy, which is best described
by the adage "cooperation is better than competition",
SADC has developed a well-coordinated framework to
effectively combat armed trans-border crime and curb
the flow of small arms and light weapons.

SADC has established the Southern African
Regional Police Chiefs Cooperation Organization,
which acts as the regional database for information
associated with the flows of small arms and light
weapons.

The harmonization of basic criminal law relating
to drugs and small arms trafficking has also been a
priority area. This has been linked to the training and
education of the judiciary to encourage tougher
sentencing for firearms offences.

In the past, Zimbabwe has played an active and
influential role in this area, especially at the 2001
United Nations Conference on the Illicit Trade in Small
Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects and its
associated preparatory committees. Zimbabwe signed
and ratified the SADC Protocol on Firearms,
Ammunition and Other Related Materials in August
2001, which provides a useful model for other regions
when considering the implementation of the
Programme of Action on Small Arms.

The Protocol reflects priority needs that relate to
the following: the coordination of procedures for the
import, export and transit of firearms shipments; the
standardized marking and identification of firearms at
the time of manufacture, import or export; transparency
and information exchange; and measures promoting
legal uniformity and minimum standards relating to the
manufacture, possession, import, export and transfer of
firearms and ammunition.

At a national level, Zimbabwe does not
manufacture small arms, nor does it have a national
coordination agency designed to deal specifically with
small arms and light weapons. However, there is an
existing mechanism of interaction and cooperation
between appropriate ministries and State agencies in
the field of arms control and disarmament and the
politico-military dimension of security.

In accordance with the United Nations
Programme of Action on Small Arms, Zimbabwe is in
the process of establishing a regional point of contact
on small arms and light weapons. Also in line with the
increasing focus on the importance of strengthening
strategic export and import controls, Zimbabwe has
taken steps to ensure that its import controls conform
to the highest international standards.

Zimbabwe's municipal laws pertaining to
firearms and ammunition provide a range of interesting
learning points. We have a Central Firearms Registry,
which acts as a database for civilians who own
firearms. The security ministries are in the process of
developing guidelines for undertaking a national
review of firearms legislation.

The integration into our Programme of Action of
the Secretary General's recommendation that the
Council strengthen the financing of disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programmes (DDR)
will enhance the preventive measures already in place.

Zimbabwe and, indeed, most of its neighbours
that waged wars of national liberation know the
importance of well coordinated and funded DDR
programmes. Some of the projects essential for
successful DDR programmes include the following: the
provision of small-scale credit to returning female ex-
combatants and refugees, to facilitate their
reintegration into the community; the integration of
demobilized soldiers into the economic and social
reconstruction process through support for small scale
projects that provide income and employment
opportunities; funding for vocational training and
promotion of micro-enterprise for demobilized
soldiers; and support national programmes for
reintegration counselling and referral services.

In the case of the SADC, the international
community's support of the Regional Peacekeeping
Training Centre should be unwavering. The centre
provides training for army and civilian police
personnel who participate in United Nations
peacekeeping missions.

In conclusion, if our goal is prevention, that is,
curbing further international small arms proliferation
by way of strengthening the international capacity to
monitor and suppress the flow of small arms and light
weapons, our endeavours must tackle both the supply
and the demand side of the equation. In other words, a
holistic approach is needed, which addresses the causes
driving the demand for arms, such as poverty and
social deprivation.

International action to address small arms and
light weapons proliferation should not be a substitute
for coherent foreign and international policies to
promote economic development in the developing
world. Our gathering today should not provide a
pretext to avoid tackling the underlying causes
associated with poverty, unemployment and socio-
economic exclusion. I must emphasize that failure to
address the demand side of the small arms and light
weapons plague is likely to render all our other efforts
nothing more than an exercise in futility.

It is our fervent hope that the Council will
remained seized of this matter and continue to
encourage practical steps in support of the Secretary-
General's recommendations.

