The President: Following consultations among
Council members, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on their behalf:
"The Security Council strongly condemns
the ongoing attacks carried out by the Lord's
Resistance Army (LRA) in parts of Central
Africa, which pose a continuing threat to regional
security. The Council reiterates its grave concern
at the atrocities committed by the LRA, which
have serious humanitarian and human rights
consequences, including the displacement of over
440,000 people across the region. The Council
remains deeply concerned that its previous calls
for the LRA to cease its attacks have not been
heeded.

"The Security Council strongly condemns
the continued violations of international
humanitarian law and the abuses of human rights
by the LRA. The Security Council condemns
further the recruitment and use of children,
killing and maiming, rape, sexual slavery and
other sexual Violence, and abductions. The
Council demands an immediate end to all attacks
by the LRA, particularly those on civilians, urges
LRA leaders to release all those abducted, and
insists that all LRA elements put an end to such
practices, and surrender and disarm.

"The Security Council encourages the
remaining LRA fighters to leave the group's
ranks and take advantage of offers of
reintegration support. Over the course of the
LRA's existence, more than 12,000 combatants
and abductees have left the LRA's ranks and have
been integrated and reunited with their families
through Uganda's Amnesty Commission. The
Security Council emphasizes its support for
continued efforts across the affected countries to
disarm, demobilize and reintegrate former LRA
fighters back into normal life, and notes the
recent successful escape of 30 women and
children from two LRA groups on the border
between the Republic of South Sudan and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. The Council
acknowledges the important ongoing efforts of
the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUSCO) disarmament, demobilization,
repatriation, reintegration and resettlement office
to encourage and facilitate further LRA
defections, and requests that the United Nations
work with regional Governments to expand these
efforts across the LRA-affected region.
26

"The Security Council commends the
important efforts undertaken by the militaries of
the Central African Republic, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, the Republic of South
Sudan and Uganda to address the threat posed by
the LRA, and urges those militaries to coordinate
and concert their efforts to apprehend Joseph
Kony and LRA top commanders in the coming
months and bring them to justice. The Council
recognizes the challenges the Governments in the

region face, and welcomes efforts by the
international community, in coordination with the
African Union and United Nations, to enhance
the capacity of regional militaries to conduct
effective operations against LRA top commanders
and better protect civilians; it notes, for example,
the efforts by the United States to work with
regional militaries. The Council underlines the
need for all action against the LRA to be
conducted in compliance with applicable
international humanitarian, human rights and
refugee law.

"The Security Council commends the
enhanced engagement of the African Union (AU)
on this issue through its regional cooperation
initiative for the elimination of the LRA, and its
efforts to establish a regional intervention force, a
joint operations centre and a joint coordination
mechanism. The Security Council further
commends the support provided by the United
Nations Secretary-General to the AU Commission
through the planning process and encourages the
AU to promote coordination on LRA issues by
sharing its counter-LRA plans at the earliest
opportunity. The Council urges the prompt
appointment of the proposed African Union
Special Envoy for the LRA-affected areas, and
expresses hope that this official will work quickly
to solidify cooperation between regional
Governments and promote a regional framework
for the defection, disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration of LRA fighters.

"The Security Council underlines the
primary responsibility of States in the LRA-
affected region to protect civilians and calls upon
them to take all appropriate measures in this
regard. The Council notes at the same time the
important role being played by United Nations
missions in the region, particularly through the
adoption of protection measures such as
community liaison, and stresses the need for them
to play a major role in the coordination among all
those engaged in addressing the threat posed by
the LRA. The Council requests that MONUSCO
and the United Nations Mission in the Republic
of South Sudan (UNMISS) seek, within their
mandates and capabilities, to increase protection
activities in LRA-affected areas over coming

months, with a particular focus on the
communities that are most vulnerable. The
Council also welcomes the increased focus of the
United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office
in the Central African Republic on LRA issues in
the Central African Republic and encourages
further action by the United Nations to address
the needs of LRA-affected communities in the
Central African Republic. The Security Council
encourages all United Nations offices and
missions in the LRA-affected region to continue
to enhance information-sharing and coordination
with all relevant actors, and welcomes the
preparation of a regional human rights report on
the LRA.

"The Council commends efforts by the
European Union, the United States and other
donors to provide humanitarian assistance to
LRA-affected populations in the Central African
Republic, the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Republic of South Sudan. The Council
stresses the need for an enhanced, comprehensive
and more regional approach to the humanitarian
situation, including assistance to victims of
sexual Violence and other attacks, and reiterates
the requirement for all parties to promote and
ensure safe and unhindered access for
humanitarian organizations to the civilian
population. The Council calls upon the
international community to provide support to
capacity-building, good governance and
humanitarian efforts in LRA-affected areas.

"The Security Council welcomes the
Secretary-General's report on the LRA and
commends the efforts made by the United
Nations Regional Office for Central Africa
(UNOCA), in coordination with United Nations
Office to the African Union, to engage with the
United Nations missions in the LRA-affected
region, the AU and affected Central African
States to facilitate cooperation on issues related
to countering the threat posed by the LRA. The
Security Council encourages UNOCA to work
with the United Nations missions and the AU to
develop a regional strategy for international
humanitarian, development and peacebuilding
assistance in the LRA-affected area, enhanced
cross-border mechanisms to improve civilian
protection, early warning capacity, humanitarian
access and response, and appropriate

the

reintegration support for those returning from
displacement, abductees and ex-combatants, as
well as strengthening the overall capacity of
affected States to extend their authority
throughout their respective territories.

"The Security Council recalls the
International Criminal Court's arrest warrants for
three remaining LRA leaders on charges of,
among other things, war crimes and crimes
against humanity, including murder, rape and the
enlistment of children through abduction, and
encourages all States to cooperate with the
Ugandan authorities and the International
Criminal Court in order to implement those
warrants and to bring to justice those responsible
for the atrocities. The Council recalls its
statement of June 2006 (S/PRST/2006/28) and
reaffirms the vital importance of promoting
justice and the rule of law, including respect for
human rights, as an indispensible element for
lasting peace.

"The Security Council requests that the
Secretary-General keep it informed on
developments in relation to the LRA, including
through a single report on both UNOCA and the
LRA to be submitted before 31 May 2012,
identifying opportunities for improved
information-sharing between the AU, LRA-
affected States and United Nations missions, and
outlining the role of UNOCA in coordinating
activity against the LRA."

This statement will be issued as a document of
Security Council under the symbol

S/PRST/201 1/21.

I now give the floor to Mr. Louis Sylvain-Goma,

Secretary-General of the Economic Community of
Central African States, to respond to comments and
questions raised.
