Mr. Rficker: I would like to thank everyone
around the table for the encouraging words of welcome
and the expressions of support for my mission. I am
also grateful for the interventions highlighting so many
subjects that are important for our mission. I would
like to briefly comment on just a few of these:
Ms. Sanda Raskovic-Ivic just mentioned the non-
participation of Kosovo Serbs in the Institutions;
freedom of movement, which was highlighted by
several speakers; returns; and finally, crime, which was
a recurrent theme.

Regarding the non-participation of the Kosovo
Serbs in the past elections, we have the impression in
Kosovo that this was induced, or at least not stopped
by Belgrade. I think the Serbian Government should
avoid even the perception that it is creating the very
conditions that it deplores in terms of the political
integration and economic participation of the Kosovo
Serbs, which was a recurrent theme as something
desirable.

With regard to freedom of movement, which was
mentioned by several; speakers, I think we have seen
steady improvement both in reality and in perception.
The most recent Kosovo Police Service freedom of
movement assessment reports that 93 per cent of the
people in Kosovo 4 including, of course, all
communities - travel outside their Village, and that 94
per cent of these feel safe in doing so. Perceptions of
security and the freedom to move, particularly of the
Kosovo Serb community south of Mitrovica and the
Kosovo Albanian community north of Mitrovica,
continue to be undermined by acts of intimidation and
by rumours. That, of course, is due to frequent
reporting of statements by senior Serbian officials that
Kosovo Serbs are not safe and do not have freedom of
movement. This exacerbates those perceptions and has
a significant damaging psychological impact. Again, I
think even the perception should be avoided that
something is created, only to be deplored in the next
phase.

With regard to returns, I am very grateful for the
encouragement referring to what we have recently
concluded with Belgrade. Yes, there was the signing of
the Protocol on Voluntary and Sustainable Returns
between the Provisional Institutions, the Government
of Serbia and UNMIK on 6 June 2006. It further
reaffirmed the commitment of Pristina and Belgrade to
intensify the return process, which is crucial. And most
important, it has lead to 70 families that have agreed to
return to Srpski Babus by signing the respective
agreements. We have to do much more in that respect. I
fully agree with all that was said.

The reasons for the low number of returns are, of
course, multiple. They include the lack of jobs, the
economy and lack of clarity on status, which all play a
role. But we are fully committed to that.

Let me now turn to the issue of crime. We
absolutely reject accusations by Belgrade that we are
turning a blind eye to ethnically motivated crime in
Kosovo. In fact, we specifically direct the police to
monitor and prioritize any crime that is potentially
ethnically motivated. We use the term "PME" -
potentially ethnically motivated crime - and that is
very closely monitored. Just to set the record straight,
potentially ethnically motivated crimes in Kosovo are
significantly on the decline. There is also a trend
towards the same absolute numbers of affected Kosovo
Albanians and Kosovo Serbs.

While some crime in Kosovo is ethnically
motivated, the great majority is not, and it is
irresponsible to politicize every security incident by
characterizing it as ethnically motivated before the
facts have even been investigated. There are lots of
examples which I will spare you, but which I could
give you in that respect.

With regard to the recent bombing incident in
Mitrovica, we are actively pursuing that. One arrest has
been made and investigations are ongoing. Also, with
regard to the follow-up of 4 March 2004, which was
mentioned by several delegations, 243 persons have
been successfully prosecuted and convicted of crimes
and minor offences in connection with the March 2004
riots. In addition, on 25 August 2006, the international
pre-trial judge ordered the detention of four defendants
suspected of being involved in the burning down of
numerous buildings in Fushe Kosove/Kosovo Polje
during the riots. It is expected that more arrests will
follow as the investigation continues. Those recent
arrests mark significant progress in the follow-up,
which is not reflected in the report that is in front of
Council members.

As regards individual cases that have been
mentioned, it is very frustrating to see that allegations
made in official communications from Belgrade, after
we have duly responded and clarified the facts, are
then used again in their original form in public
statements. We have again seen evidence today of that
phenomenon on the floor of the Council. I do not
intend to engage in a numbers game or to go into
individual cases with the Serbian representative.

Our factual position on the security situation for
the reporting period is amply reflected in the technical
assessment annexed to the report of the Secretary-
General. That technical assessment is the product of a
well-structured mechanism of regular collection,
collation and evaluation of facts that involves multiple
agencies at various levels, including, in addition to
UNMIK and the Provisional Institutions, the Contact
Group representatives in Pristina, who have been very
intensively engaged in the vetting of standards
implementation reports. This is, in other words, as
credible as it can get.

Let me thank the Council again for giving us the
opportunity to present this report today.

