Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait): Over the past two years, I
have had the privilege to chair the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1533 (2004) concerning the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. I would like to use
this occasion to reflect on both my role as Chair of the
Committee over the course of the past two years and the
work accomplished during that time.

At the outset of my term as Committee Chair and
with the support of the Secretariat, a work plan was
prepared, featuring our objectives for each meeting
and the key points of focus that we believed were
of importance.

During my chairmanship of the Committee, we
held meetings with the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the United Nations Mine Action
Service on the neutralization of armed groups, the
monitoring of the arms embargo and the situation with
regard to ammunition and weapons management in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, discussed the
illegal exploitation of natural resources and met with
the Presidential Adviser on Sexual Violence and Child
Recruitment in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Special Representatives of the Secretary-
General for Children and Armed Conflict and on Sexual
Violence in Conflict to discuss human rights issues,
focusing on women and children, which provided a
platform for discussing progress and challenges. We
also held open briefings for all Member States, in
addition to meetings for States of the region, to allow
all of them to be heard and relay relevant information to
the Committee and to address their concerns pertaining
to the reports of the Group of Experts.

In May of this year, I had the opportunity to visit
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Republic of
Uganda and the United Arab Emirates to obtain first-
hand knowledge of the implementation of sanctions
measures. The visit to the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the region was my first since assuming the
chairpersonship of the Committee. It provided me and
participating delegations with an opportunity to hold
consultations with high-level officials, civil society
representatives and businesspersons from the Member
States concerned on a number of issues relevant to the
work ofthe Committee. Following the visit, I sent a report
to the Committee and discussed the report's findings
and recommendations in a Committee meeting with a
view to further strengthening cooperation with relevant
States on the implementation of sanctions measures.

The past two years have been very constructive.
They have shed light on the challenges the Committee
faces in carrying out its work, while simultaneously
highlighting good practices that should be continued
in the long run. I feel that using all types of meetings
available to the Committee, such as informal informals,
open briefings and informal consultations, can enhance
its effectiveness.

The positive developments remind us that the
Security Council should continue to combat the
rampant impunity enjoyed by armed groups in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and send a clear
message to those who intend to undermine peace
and security in the country and the region. Some
individuals subject to sanctions continue to abuse and
prey on civilians and benefit from the cash generated by
their illegal taxation of the population and exploitation
of natural resources. These individuals succeed in
circumventing the sanctions as they do not travel or
make banking transactions.

Member States should be reminded that the
obligation to notify the Committee before providing
military support to the authorities of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo would enable effective
traceability and better monitoring by the Committee and
the Group of Experts, which is necessary for the efforts
of the Council to resolve the crisis in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the Great Lakes region. This
is the case because, with less visibility, weapons and
military equipment can end up in the hands of armed
groups that use them to attack civilians, humanitarian
workers and United Nations peacekeepers in eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

I would like to conclude my remarks and reflections
in this context with two important points. The first is
that continuing to work towards the implementation
of United Nations sanctions should be a priority.
Indeed, I believe sanctions cannot be successful if
they are not properly implemented by Member States.
Proper implementation entails cooperation with the
Committee, the Secretariat and the Group of Experts by
States, which is why we strived to enhance cooperation
during my tenure as Chair. Secondly, I would like to
emphasize the importance of supporting the work of the
Group of Experts, which has provided the Committee
with a considerable amount of information on the
situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
in the most recent period. The experts went to great
lengths to obtain credible information with a view to
identifying spoilers. On behalf of the Committee, let
me emphasize the great value that we place on the work
of the experts, their independence and their security.

I would like to take this opportunity today to convey
my sincere thanks and appreciation to all who have
worked with and supported my chairpersonship over the
course of these two years, most notably the members of
the committees that I have chaired, without whom we
would not have been successful in accomplishing our
objectives. I must express my most sincere gratitude to
our friends and colleagues in the sanctions secretariat,
who have provided us with the utmost support over the
last two years.

Please allow me to say a few words in my capacity as
Chair of the Informal Working Group on Documentation
and Other Procedural Questions. As members know, I
assumed the Chair of the Informal Working Group at
the start of 2018, shortly after the adoption of revised
presidential note S/2016/619, otherwise known as note
507, which was facilitated by Japan in its capacity as
former Chair of the Informal Working Group in the
preceding two years. The Informal Working Group
held 11 formal meetings, 5 in 2018 and 6 in 2019. We
also held many informal informals for the purpose of
discussions and negotiations.

During its first presidency of the Security Council,
in the month of February 2018, Kuwait convened an
open debate on the issue of working methods, at which
many Member States stressed the need for continued
discussion and engagement on the enhancement of
the Council's working methods and decision-making
process (see S/PV.8175). The discussions in the
open debate set the tone for the Informal Working
Group's programme of work. During the first year of
its chairpersonship of the Group, Kuwait convened
several meetings and informal briefings on various
issues related to the Council's working methods, many
of which were proposed by Member States during the
open debate. A non-paper containing proposals based
on those put forward by the wider membership during
the open debate was also prepared and circulated to
members by the Chair. During the second year of our
chairpersonship, in 2019, we drafted and circulated
eight presidential notes, which included proposals on
co-penholdership, subsidiary bodies, visiting missions,
wrap-up sessions and several other issues. Over the
course of the last year, we discussed these proposals
within the group and received feedback from Council
members by convening several rounds of negotiations
and bilateral meetings. We hope to see these notes
adopted before the end of this month.

Kuwait also held an open debate during its
second presidency of the Council, in June, on the
implementation of note 507 (see S/PV.8539), which
served as an opportunity to update Member States on
the progress made in the deliberations of the Informal
Working Group thus far and also to hear feedback from
the wider membership on the Council's performance in
the context of its working methods. The meeting also
saw two procedural precedents, namely, the first-ever
joint statement by the 10 elected members, delivered by
the representative of South Africa, and the statement
delivered by the representative of New Zealand on
behalf of more than 20 former elected numbers.

With the assistance of the Secretariat, the Informal
Working Group also came up with a set of indicators
designed to measure the implementation of several
aspects of note 507, including the number of references
to note 507 in Council meetings, the number and
format of meetings held, the number and type of papers
presented in Council meetings, the gender of briefers
and the number of wrap-up sessions held. These
indicators were updated and circulated to members on
a quarterly basis and remained a standing agenda item
at all the meetings of the Informal Working Group. The
selection of subsidiary body chairs was also facilitated
by the Chair, in his capacity as Chair of the Informal
Working Group, in both 2018 and 2019, in accordance
with the provisions of note 507, with a permanent
member also serving as a facilitator both years.

We are currently carrying out the hand-over
to the incoming Chairs and hope to ensure that the
momentum achieved in the last two years will continue
when Saint Vincent and the Grenadines takes over
the chairpersonship next year. To help with a smooth
handover, we are co-organizing a workshop with Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines involving all 15 members,
to take place in Saint Vincent and the Grenadines in
January. The workshop will focus specifically on the
issue of working methods and the Informal Working
Group. We hope that this workshop will set the tone
for the Group's work beginning in 2020 and serve as a
forum for Council members to engage with one another
and continue exploring ways to improve the efficiency
and effectiveness of the Council's work through its
working methods.

As we have mentioned before, it is vital to stress
that improving the working methods of the Council
does not end with the adoption of the revised version of
note 507. The whole process, including note 507, which
we consider as a living document, is dynamic and
evolving. We therefore believe that it requires an open
mind and flexibility and that the issue of enhancing the
working methods is an ongoing process.

In conclusion, I would like to express my sincere
gratitude to all members of the Security Council,
including the former members that we worked with
during our first year on the Council, in addition to
the wider membership and, of course, the Secretariat
for their cooperation over the past two years. I am
confident that the incoming Chair, Ambassador Inga
Rhonda King of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, will
bring her enthusiasm and ideas to further the work of
the Group. I convey my best wishes to Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines and assure that country of our full
support and cooperation from outside of the Council.

