Ms. Malcorra: It gives me great pleasure to be
here today to participate in this very important debate
concerning transitions and exit strategies. This follows
on naturally from several debates held in this Chamber
last year on post-conflict peacebuilding and United
Nations peacekeeping.

I offer a different perspective from the other
speakers, to be sure, in terms of the challenges that we
in the Secretariat face in our engagement with
countries emerging from conflict. My department, the
Department of Field Support (DFS) - the youngest
department in the United Nations - was created in
2007 with the relatively narrow mandate to provide
logistics and administrative support for the
Secretariat's field operations, whether they are large-
scale peacekeeping operations, small political
presences or anything in between.

Many of the requirements of a large-scale,
multifunctional peacekeeping operation with thousands
of troops, military observers, police and civilian staff
are, of course, quite different from the needs of the
smaller presences, which are mostly composed of
functional experts in the areas of governance, rule of
law and security institutions, to name a few.

DFS is working hard to calibrate the services it
provides according to the mandated objectives of each
mission. At the same time, we recognize that there is a
high degree of commonality in the support component
for each field presence. The support needs to alter over
time as the mission goes through its life cycle - start-
up and surge, maturity, maintenance, reconfiguration,
drawdown and exit - and has to change according to
political developments on the ground and the mandates
emanating from this Council. As a consequence, we
need to be responsive, agile and flexible.

I have mentioned before in this Chamber the
particular support challenges we face based on the
existing regulatory framework and procedures, which
do not always easily provide for such agility. But I
assure the Council that my Department is working in
close collaboration with other United Nations
departments and, of course, with Member States on
ways to improve the framework for the support we
provide.

In this connection, we have just completed a
document outlining our global field support strategy,
which will be discussed in the General Assembly later
in the year. The proposed strategy is very much
intended to enable us to deliver our services better and
faster. It would allow us to adapt to the requirements of
each field operation as they evolve over time, from
start-up until closure and in all transitions in between.
Specifically, our proposal to service more than one
operation from a regional service centre would
facilitate the transformation from one type of mission
to another and support that evolution in a much
smoother manner.

Since the creation of DFS, we have seen the
United Nations presence in several countries go
through different configurations that have tested our
ability to adapt ourselves within the limitations of the
existing framework. The Secretariat's presence in
Sierra Leone has transitioned from a fully fledged
peacekeeping mission to a small integrated
peacebuilding office. Mr. Von der Schulenburg is here
today and will describe, I am sure, his effort to make
that transition a success and the problems surmounted
along the way.

I acknowledge that the path of that particular
change was not always smooth from the mission
support perspective, but we have learned many lessons
that we are now applying successfully in Burundi and

also, as I speak, in Guinea-Bissau and the Central
African Republic, where two more changes to the
United Nations configuration in-country are well under
way. These include better succession planning and
targeted staffing of the follow-on presences, which
address the requirements of personnel profiles and
skill, which are quite different.

We have also supported three transitions in which
a long-serving mission either closed or reconfigured
itself into a much smaller operation. Last year we
supported the liquidation of two quite different
missions - the United Nations Mission in Ethiopia
and Eritrea and the United Nations Observer Mission
in Georgia - within a very short time span. The two
missions, however, had some similar support
requirements, such as contingent repatriation, asset
disposal and the retrenchment of civilian staff, which
required us to move quickly. At the same time, we had
to conclude a number of sensitive issues with respect to
the host countries.

In Kosovo, we supported the reconfiguration of
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo. From a support perspective, this involved the
progressive retrenchment of over 1,000 civilian staff,
who were either separated or reappointed to other
missions where their skills and experience were
needed. It also involved the disposal of a vast quantity
of physical assets, either through redeployment to other
missions or through sale or transfer to the European
Union.

In addition, we need to be aware of the potential
impact of mission drawdown on the local economy
and, in particular, on the local labour market of a host
country as procurement and staffing needs decrease as
the size and geographical configuration of the United
Nations footprint change. Among other efforts,
partnerships with other international organizations and
the local private sector can help our national staff to
move on to other employment opportunities.

Each of these cases has reinforced in my mind the
need to reconsider how the Organization generates the
required civilian capacities, as well as how it finances
its field operations. It goes without saying that when
the Council decides to adopt a peacekeeping or
peacebuilding mandate, it does so in the expectation
that the Secretary-General will implement the mandate
through an integrated approach maximizing the civilian
capacities of the United Nations, the United Nations

country team and their implementing partners. I am
sorry to say that we have not always been able to meet
the Council's expectations in this regard. At the risk of
oversimplifying, I should like to say that this is due in
large part to diverse staffing practices among
organizations, agencies, funds and programmes. We are
working together with the Department of Management
and other partners to resolve these issues or, until we
have done so, to mitigate their effects on our ability to
support the Organization in its response to post-conflict
situations.

Finally, I should like to touch on another issue
that impacts our ability to deliver - the question of
financing. Council members are all aware that
peacekeeping operations have a special scale of
assessments. When an operation shifts to become a
special political mission or peacebuilding office, it is
then paid for from the regular budget of the United
Nations and is thus financed by and assessed on all
Member States accordingly, without the adjustments
particular to the peacekeeping scale. The United
Nations regular budget, as I am sure Council members
know, comes under intense scrutiny and has only a
small margin for growth during each biennium.
Integrated United Nations offices and country team
presences are financed from a separate set of funding
streams, often relying on voluntary contributions and
earmarked trust funds. An ongoing, predictable source
of funding is required if a United Nations presence is
to evolve smoothly with all the necessary capacities in
place.

I do not offer any solutions to this problem today,
and I recognize that resolving it goes beyond the
purview of this body, but I would be remiss ifI did not
signal it as a very real challenge for us in how we think
about support to peacekeeping transition and exit
strategies. The constructive engagement of the full
General Assembly membership will be required to
address these issues.

We in DFS stand ready to address the challenges I
have laid out with respect to countries in transition and
countries emerging from conflict, where our collective
efforts to nurture and consolidate peace are so critical.
My Department will work closely with our partners
within the Secretariat and the broader United Nations
common system to ensure that support flows smoothly
and reliably throughout the lifecycle of the United
Nation presence in these countries.

We have a great deal of work before us to
streamline business practices, establish common
services and reconcile funding schemes. Unless we
address these back-office challenges properly, it will be
hard to really service these transitions as required
because we will not always have the right tools.

