The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, and with the consent of the Council, I
shall take it that the Council agrees to extend
invitations to the representatives of Brazil, Burundi, the
Congo, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Egypt,
Greece, Japan, Malaysia, Mauritius, the Philippines,
Rwanda, South Africa, Tunisia, the United Republic of
Tanzania and Uruguay to participate in the meeting
without the right to vote, in accordance with the
relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council's provisional rules of procedure.

It is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Mota
Sardenberg (Brazil), Mr. Nteturuye (Burundi),
Mr. Ikouebe (Congo), Mr. Ileka (Democratic Republic of the Congo), Mr. Aboul Gheit (Egypt),
Mr. Daratzikis (Greece), Mr. Haraguchi (Japan),
Mr. Rastam (Malaysia), Mr. Koonjul (Mauritius),
Mr. Baja (Philippines), Mr. Kamanzi (Rwanda),
Mr. Kumalo (South Africa), Mr. Hachami
(Tunisia), Mrs. Mulamula (United Republic of Tanzania) and Mr. Paolillo (Uruguay) took the
seats reservedfor them at the side of the Council
Chamber.

The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, and in the absence of objection, I shall
take it that the Security Council agrees to extend an
invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of
procedure to Mr. Ibrahim Gambari, Under-Secretary-
General and Special Adviser on Africa.

It is so decided.

I invite Mr. Gambari to take a seat at the Council
table.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

As we all know, the Council has on its current
agenda a host of African issues which include the
current zones of conflict in Central and West Africa. In
a matter of days, Security Council missions will be
departing for those two subregions. They will take a
powerful message that the Council remains focused on
these issues and is actively engaged. Today, we will
have a full discussion on how those missions can
promote the Security Council's primary responsibility
for the maintenance of international peace and security.

Another major objective of this debate will be to
analyse the conflicts and complex crises that plague
Africa with a view to discussing ways and means and
possible mechanisms within the United Nations system
to promote durable solutions and peace and stability in
the continent. With the participation of Council and
non-Council members in the discussion, we anticipate a
rich debate and a productive outcome.

I shall now give the floor to Under-Secretary-
General and Special Adviser on Africa, Mr. Ibrahim
Gambari.


