Ms. Schonmann (Israel): I would like to thank
you, Madam President, for convening this important
debate. I also wish to thank Under-Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs Holmes for his informative
briefing, as well as High Commissioner for Human
Rights Pillay.

Israel considers the protection of civilians in
armed conflict to be of the utmost importance. We are
encouraged by the continued efforts of the Security
Council, the Secretary-General and his staff in this
area. Israel works closely with the United Nations here
at Headquarters and on the ground to ensure
humanitarian access to civilians in need in times of
armed conflict, and will continue to do so.

Since last November's debate in the Council (see S/PV.62]6) - which marked the anniversary of the
adoption of resolution 1265 (1999) on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict - and the adoption of
resolution 1894 (2009) as well as last week's debate on
the protection of children in armed conflict (see S/PV.634I), it has become evident that, alongside the
considerable progress that has been made, including
the recent appointment of a Special Representative on
Sexual Violence in Conflict, key challenges and
difficult operational, humanitarian and moral dilemmas
still remain.

In the face of asymmetric warfare, which is a new
and complex phenomenon that the international
community has yet to address, regular armies
increasingly find themselves fighting paramilitary
terrorists or guerrilla organizations that deliberately
operate in the vicinity of civilians in densely populated
urban settings. While the principle of distinction
between combatants and civilians under the laws of
armed conflict remain of paramount importance, it has
been challenged time and again by developments in
modern warfare.

The dilemmas inherent in asymmetric warfare,
especially in a situation where terrorists intentionally
draw civilians into armed conflict, using them as
human shields, warrants close, candid and serious
consideration by the Council, taking into account that
there are no easy answers, no simple formulas, nor any
mathematical certainty in calculating the tragic toll on
civilian lives in any given armed conflict. It further
requires international lawyers and policymakers to
grapple with the reality on the ground, intricate and
complex as it may be.

Although asymmetric warfare has unfortunately
become characteristic of the challenges facing Israel in
its fight against terrorism in Gaza, it features in many
other situations around the world, with similar modus
operandi and warfare tactics employed by terrorists,
including the deliberate placement of civilians in the
vicinity of military targets, turning residential
neighbourhoods into combat zones, firing rockets and
mortar shells from within civilian population centres
and using mosques, hospitals and educational
institutions as locations for storing weapons and
terrorist infrastructure, to mention but a few.

From our own experience, the blatant disregard
by terrorists of the sanctity of human life is not
restricted to civilians of their adversary, but is also
extended to their own populations. In the Gaza Strip,
Palestinian terrorists use similar tactics to launch
rockets and mortars from densely populated areas,
while turning the civilians' homes from which they
operate into a battlefield.

In Lebanon, Hizbullah, just as Hamas in Gaza,
maintains its military activity within the fabric of
civilian life. Only a few days ago, Hizbullah yet again
demonstrated its disregard of civilians when its
operatives organized and actively encouraged Lebanese
residents and Hizbullah activists to stage seemingly
spontaneous violent riots of protest against the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon, to be followed by
numerous incidents directed at these forces, which
consequently took place on 3 July. Those orchestrated
incidents by Hizbullah against United Nations
peacekeepers violates resolution 1701 (2006). Israel
expects that these incidents will be addressed in the
upcoming briefing to the Security Council on the
implementation of resolution 1701 (2006), which is
scheduled for next week.

Israel also wishes to pay tribute to, and express
its continuing support for, the work of humanitarian
agencies that provide essential services on the ground.
Israel's continued efforts to facilitate humanitarian
assistance to Gaza, including, most recently, the
expanded opening of crossing points and the lifting of
restrictions on products, are indicative of its genuine

efforts to alleviate the hardship of the civilian
population subjected to the control and manipulation of
the hostile terrorist entity.

However, we must not ignore the fact that
terrorists often abuse access privileges, which greatly
endangers humanitarian workers and obstructs the
movement of aid. Under international humanitarian
law, the right to free movement of humanitarian
personnel is subject to military necessities and security
considerations, among them the safety of the
humanitarian personnel themselves and the need to
prevent the abuse of humanitarian channels.

Ultimately, any candid assessment of the
challenges and dilemmas involved in the protection of
civilians in contemporary battlefields as well as the
applicable rules of the laws of armed conflict must
properly address and balance between several key
concepts and principles, including military necessity,
humanity, distinction and proportionality, as well as the
recognition that civilians too have the responsibility
not to abuse their protected status to take direct part in
hostilities.

Israel's Supreme Court has had to address such
real and practical challenges during active warfare and
combat activities, at times even at the expense of
suspending military operations. In seeking a balance
between competing security and humanitarian
considerations, the protection of civilians resurfaces
throughout the Court's extensive jurisprudence on this
matter, shedding light on the dilemmas involved in
finding an appropriate balance within the framework of
the rule of law.

Israel, for its part, will continue to engage in this
critical debate and share its experience as part of its
commitment to ensuring the protection of civilians
amid hostilities and warfare and as part of its
commitment to the rule of law.

