Mr. Vassilakis (Greece): Let me join others in
welcoming Mrs. Ellen Johnson-Sirleaf to New York
and in expressing our warmest congratulations to her
on her assumption of the presidency of Liberia.

The recent elections held there and her victory
signal the successful completion of the transitional
process and a turning point in the country's history, as
well as a symbol and a vindication of the sacrifices, the
struggle and the contributions of all Liberian and other
African women.

President Johnson-Sirleaf's determination to
promote national reconciliation, political inclusion,
sustainable development and economic governance
reforms, as well as her qualifications and international
credentials, guarantee the success of her efforts.

We would like also to commend the progress
made in implementing the Governance and Economic
Management Assistance Programme and hope to see
Liberia soon assuming full ownership of it.

The Government of Liberia has undertaken the
tremendous and difficult task of rebuilding and uniting
the country, but in doing so it is also seeking justice
and making efforts to address impunity. In that regard,
we welcome the statement made earlier this week that
the Governments of Liberia and of Nigeria are
determined and committed to arriving at a solution to
the issue involving Mr. Charles Taylor and his transfer
to the Special Court of Sierra Leone, while at the same
time guaranteeing his rights under international law.

Moreover, we welcome the inauguration of the
Truth and Reconciliation Commission, since we
believe that through its work justice will be served and
those who committed atrocities held accountable. The
international community should and will stand by
Liberia in this critical phase and provide all necessary
support in that regard.

Greece, with all the means at its disposal, will do
its share. We believe that the reconstruction of the
country should be one of the first issues that the
Peacebuilding Commission should deal with as soon as
it becomes operational. We now have reason to hope
that the dream of the country will become reality.

We wish President Johnson-Sirleaf every success
in her difficult mission.

