The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the United States.

The briefing in the Security Council yesterday
by United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
Antonio Guterres and Ms. Kyung-wha Kang, Assistant
Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Deputy Emergency Relief Coordinator (see S/PV.7592)
was clear. The humanitarian situation in Syria is dire
and it is getting worse.

Thirteen and a half million people in Syria - more
than half of the pre-war population - are currently in
need of humanitarian assistance. That is 1.2 million
more people than required humanitarian assistance
last year. The scale of the crisis makes it all the more
critical that the mechanism to deliver humanitarian
aid across conflict lines and through border crossings
established by resolution 2165 (2014) works as it is
supposed to, thereby allowing lifesaving assistance to
reach those in the greatest need. The mechanism, which
includes monitoring and reporting, has facilitated the
delivery of humanitarian assistance more effectively
and efficiently, but it continues to face significant
obstacles that prevent critical assistance from reaching
people who desperately need it.

As yesterday's briefings underscored, humanitarian
access to millions of people inside Syria is still either
restricted or denied. According to the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA), from
1 September to 30 November, the United Nations and
its partners accessed just one third of the hard-to-
reach locations. An estimated 4.5 million people live
in those hard-to-reach locations, meaning more than
3 million people could not be reached. We know this
is an enduring and serious problem, yet until now, the
Council and the international community have been
unable to fix it, notwithstanding our collective efforts
through the Vienna process to secure a long overdue
political settlement, in accordance with the Geneva
communique (S/2012/522, annex). According to the
United Nations, there has been no improvement in
access to hard-to-reach and besieged areas. In many
places, the access situation is even worse.

The situation is catastrophic for the 400,000 Syrians
living in besieged areas. OCHA reports that only 1 in
every 100 people living in a besieged area has received
food aid, and an even smaller proportion has received

health assistance. As we all know, the dire humanitarian
situation has not only caused immeasurable suffering
for Syrian men, women and children and led to
countless deaths - so many of them preventable - but
the humanitarian catastrophic situation also continues
to drive the displacement of Syrians inside the country,
often for the second or third time, and continues to lead
one wave after another of Syrians to flee their country,
helping fuel the largest refugee crisis in a generation.

The resolution adopted by the Council today
underscores the urgent need for assistance across
conflict lines and calls for Syrian authorities to
"expeditiously respond to all requests for cross-line
deliveries" (resolution 2258 (2015), para. 3) by the
United Nations. People's lives depend on those requests
being approved, yet more than half of requests made in
2015 for cross-line deliveries remain pending. Often,
the Syrian Government just ignores the United Nations
requests; they do not even bother to respond. Acute
malnourishment and disease are prevalent, yet nothing
seems to create a sense of urgency in dealing with the
requests by the United Nations on the part of the Syrian
Government. The International Syria Support Group,
OCHA and members of the Council have repeatedly
called on the Syrian authorities to approve the requests.
But even when cross-line delivery requests are
approved, they are too often prevented from being acted
upon. Half of the approved requests have subsequently
been held up by the Syrian security forces. This record,
which is worse than that for 2014, is unacceptable, and
the Council, which adopts these resolutions, should not
accept the denial of requests and a pattern of a failure
to even respond to requests.

Humanitarian access to territory held by the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant, where about half
of the besieged and hard-to-reach population lives, is
also extremely limited, thus exacerbating the suffering
that the terrorist group inflicts on the Syrian people. As
the resolution reiterates, medical assistance is crucial.
As such, the resolution recalls the obligations of all
parties under international humanitarian law, including
the need to cease all attacks against civilians as well
as against medical facilities and medical personnel.
According to Physicians for Human Rights, medical
facilities have been attacked 112 times in 2015, more
than during any other year of the conflict. Nearly two
thirds of hospitals in Syria have been destroyed or
are only partly functional as a result of attacks. The
lack of health-care workers, facilities and medical
supplies forces Syrians to seek lifesaving assistance
elsewhere. According to credible reports, Russian
air strikes have hit major supply routes, interrupting
humanitarian programmes, killing civilians, including
first responders, and hitting schools and markets.

There are of course many other profound challenges
in Syria, including terrorism, which we are working
to address through various initiatives that themselves
are critically urgent. Yet it is incumbent upon the
Council to ensure that resolutions aimed at addressing
humanitarian challenges remain focused on responsibly
addressing those concerns. We all understand that the
most effective way to resolve Syria's crisis, including
its dire humanitarian situation, is through a political
solution. The adoption in the past week of resolution
2254 (2015) provides a genuine opportunity to reach a
nationwide ceasefire and foster a political process that
could lead to a political transition in Syria based on the
Geneva communique. As the Council, we must do all
within our power to seize this opportunity. At the same
time, until that day comes, we must look out for the
humanitarian needs of the Syrian people, who are in
desperate need of our help.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

The meeting rose at 10.35 am.
