Ms. Sison (United States of America): I thank the
Prosecutor for briefing the Council on the efforts of
the International Criminal Court to promote justice for
atrocity crimes in Libya. The abuses that the Prosecutor
has described today, and which have been reported
separately to the Security Council and the Human
Rights Council, emerge from a broader political and
security crisis in Libya. In that context, the United
States welcomes the positive political developments
that have taken place since the Prosecutor last briefed
the Security Council on the situation in Libya last year
(S/PV.7549), including the arrival of the Presidency
Council, led by Prime Minister Al-Sarraj in Tripoli,
and the decision of the Presidency Council to have the
ministers of the Government of national accord begin
work in a caretaker status.

We also echo the unified message of the Joint
Communique on Libya issued in Vienna on 16 May
on behalf of 21 of Libya's partners, three regional
organizations and the United Nations expressing
support for the Government of National Accord and for
its efforts to restore State authority and the rule of law.
Uniting behind the Government of National Accord
represents the only path towards the kind of national
cohesion that will be needed to defeat Da'esh and other
Violent extremists. The need for progress in these areas
has never been more urgent, and the human cost of its
absence has been high.

We continue to see deeply worrying reports of
abuses against civilians. In addition, the environment
for those who seek to document or seek justice for those
actions remains hostile as well. An investigation by the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
recently reported disturbing instances of attacks against
and harassment of judicial actors and court facilities, as
well as human rights defenders and journalists. It also
describes sexual violence against women in detention
committed by one armed faction.

The fear of abduction or other abuses has left many
women in Da'esh-controlled areas effectively trapped
in their homes. The United States continues to condemn
the abuses that Da'esh-affiliated groups have committed

in Sirte and other areas under Da'esh control, including
killings of civilians and members of the security forces.
As we have made clear, the United States will support
the application of targeted individual sanctions against
those who engage in activities that threaten Libya's
peace, security and stability, and those involved in
certain serious abuses or violations of human rights.
But ultimately, to halt these abuses, it will be critical
for the Government of national accord to restore
confidence in the rule of law and reverse the collapse
of Libya's domestic judicial system, which must be
able to investigate and pass judgments without fear of
reprisal, and which must do so in a way that respects
the rights of defendants. That is critical for re-engaging
Libyans in the political process and restoring trust in
democratic institutions.

To promote a culture of accountability in Libya,
we strongly support efforts to promote a reckoning
for the abuses that were committed in the final days
of the Al-Qadhafi regime, including the crimes against
humanity of murder and persecution, for which Saif
Al-Qadhafi is alleged to have been responsible in
the course of helping carrying out a policy to attack
civilians who were holding demonstrations against his
father's Government. We welcome what the Prosecutor
has continued to describe as a cooperative relationship
between Libya's prosecutorial authorities and her
Office, and we urge the Government of national accord
to sustain and build upon that relationship, consistent
with the Security Council's continuing call for Libya
to cooperate with the Prosecutor. We also welcome
the acknowledgement by Libyan authorities that Saif
Al-Qadhafi is not in their custody, and we urge the
Government of national accord to take appropriate
steps to seek Al-Qadhafi's transfer to the International
Criminal Court.

Ending impunity is only one of several critical
challenges the Government of national accord faces,
although success in that regard will reinforce progress
in others. We appreciate the contribution that Prosecutor
Bensouda and her Office have made in helping to
promote accountability in Libya, which reinforces what
we continue to say: that the Government and the Libyan
people are far from alone as they stand at the beginning
of this new chapter in Libya's history, and that the
United States and many other partners will stand with
them as they seek to build ajust and lasting peace.

