Slovenia aligns itself with the statements submitted by the European Union (annex 38) and by the Group of Friends of Women, Peace and Security (annex 27). The year 2020 marks important milestones for gender equality and women and peace and security. Women's meaningful participation must be at the centre of all peace-related activities. Without women as equal and fundamental partners in decision-making processes, there can be no equal and inclusive society and, without resilience, which only equal and inclusive societies can provide, there can be no sustainable peace. Looking at the Secretary-General's report (S/2020/946), we recognize that certain progress has been made but that it has been too slow. Twenty-five years after the international community's commitment to achieving gender equality and 20 years after the essential role of women in securing and maintaining peace were recognized, an equal and meaningful place at the table is still out of reach for too many women. We must do more, and we must do it faster. As we celebrate the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), the coronavirus disease pandemic has revealed the structural inequalities and devastating consequences of undelivered promises and unachieved goals. The central role and power of women's leadership have proved to be essential for effective and human-rights-based response and recovery. However, the increase in all forms of violence against women, including political violence targeting women, remains of concern. Women's organizations on the ground play a crucial role in the implementation of the women and peace and security agenda, and we condemn all threats and violence against women peacebuilders, political leaders, activists and women human rights defenders. We reiterate our support for the Secretary-General's calls to end violence everywhere, in war zones and at home. Our national efforts and achievements in implementing the women and peace and security agenda over the past 20 years include the following. The post of the Slovenian Minister of Defence has twice been occupied by a woman, and women have been appointed as heads of the General Staff of the Slovenian Armed Forces and of the Police. Slovenia also had the first woman to command a contingent of the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon. Currently, women constitute 33 per cent of employees in the Slovenian Police; female soldiers represent 17 per cent within the Slovenian Armed Forces; and 61 per cent of Slovenian Ministry for Foreign Affairs employees are women. Furthermore, 41 per cent of Slovenian Ministry for Foreign Affairs employees at the rank of Ambassador are women. Slovenia has integrated the gender perspective into a number of national strategies, such as on national security and countering terrorism and violent extremism. We have adopted our second national action plan on women, peace and security, for the period 2018-2020, and established a centre for education and training for participation in peacekeeping operations and missions, which provides training on women and peace and security. In November, the Slovenian Ministry of Defence, together with the Slovenian Peacekeeping Operations Training Centre, will host a virtual conference to mark the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000). Together with Norway, we will host a meeting of experts on women and peace and security in January 2021. We have been given the opportunity to build back better, and it is our responsibility to seize that opportunity. To preserve the hard-fought gains of the past 20 years and accelerate progress on achieving our commitments and goals, we need to act together, and we need to act now. Slovenia stands ready to do its part.
