Mr. Binrn Lian (Norway): Allow me first of all to
thank the Costa Rican presidency for organizing this open
debate on Bosnia in the Security Council, and to voice
our satisfaction at seeing you, Mr. Foreign Minister,
presiding over this important meeting. It is indeed an
honour to take the floor under your presidency.
We see today's meeting as a timely occasion for the
members of the Council and for other United Nations
member countries to take stock of the situation and again
demonstrate their commitment to a continued international
presence in Bosnia and Herzegovina. We would also like
to congratulate Ms. Elisabeth Rehn of Finland on her
appointment as new Special Representative and
Coordinator of United Nations Operations in Bosnia to
succeed Mr. Kai Eide of Norway. We can assure Ms.
Rehn of our full cooperation and assistance in fulfilling
her mandate.

 

The international community has invested heavily in
the peace process in Bosnia and Herzegovina. At the Peace
Implementation Conference in Bonn last week it was
agreed that important progress has been achieved, but also
that a lot remains to be done. Norway supports a more
persistent approach to ensure that the parties fulfil their
commitments and take increased responsibility in the
implementation of the Peace Agreement. We welcome the
intention of the High Representative to make full use of his
mandate in order to push the peace process forward.
International involvement and support will still be needed
in Bosnia. Norway will remain actively engaged, but we
demand at the same time full cooperation from all parties.
In our opinion, there is no alternative to the Dayton
Agreement and compliance with this Agreement will
continue to be a condition for Norwegian aid and assistance
to Bosnia.

Norway highly appreciates the important work that the
United Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina
(UNMIBH) and the International Police Task Force (IPTF)
continue to perform in the implementation of the civilian
aspects of the Dayton Peace Agreement, including in the
areas of police reform, return of refugees, mine clearance
and humanitarian and economic assistance.

We therefore fully support the recommendation of the
Secretary-General to extend the UNMIBH/IPTF mandate
for a further period that would add up to 12 months unless
there were substantial changes in the security arrangements
produced by the Stabilization Force (SFOR), and we would
welcome a decision by the Security Council to this effect.

Within the framework of the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization (NATO), we have now also started the
process of considering post-SFOR options in Bosnia.
Norway firmly believes that the stabilizing presence of a
NATO-led military follow-on force, authorized by a
Security Council mandate, will also be required after June
1998, when the current SFOR mandate expires, in order to
consolidate our gains and provide vital support to the
civilian agencies involved. Together with our allies and
partners, Norway will continue to participate with troops in
such a common endeavour.

Continued support from a robust and credible NATO-
led military force will not least be crucial to a successful
completion of IPTF's efforts to restructure, retrain and
reform the local police and judicial system in Bosnia in
order to help them handle public security in a manner
which is professionally sound, democratic and observant of
human and minority rights. Norway doubts whether any
other formula can realistically function more effectively
than the SFOR-IPTF cooperation.

There seems, furthermore, to be an emerging
agreement that mandating the arming of IPTF personnel
to take on law enforcement tasks is not a viable option.
Norway remains convinced that the right way to go is,
rather, to increase international assistance to IPTF's
efforts. For our part, we are about to provide $400,000
for the support of police academies and the purchase of
uniforms in Bosnia, thereby bringing our 1997
contribution to over $1 million. We also intend to step up
our contributions for next year, by providing more IPTF
police personnel with special qualifications, including
training skills, and by making further financial
contributions to the IPTF's police reform efforts.

Norway continues to be concerned about the serious
landmine problems in Bosnia. We will therefore also
carry on our support of mine clearance efforts, both
through the programmes of the Norwegian People's Aid
and the activities of the United Nations Mine Action
Centre.

Finally, I would like to take this opportunity to pay
a special tribute to the men and women working for
UNMIBH and IPTF, including those who have tragically
lost their lives, and to pay the same tribute to those
working for other organizations and non-governmental
organizations in the service of peace and a better life for
the Bosnian peoples.

