Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I thank you,
Sir, for organizing this debate to allow the Council to
consider an issue that is dear to my country, namely, the
contributions of regional and subregional organizations
in the maintenance of international peace and security
and promoting rule of law. I thank the Secretary-
General for his statement.

I welcome the Secretary-General of the Organization
of Islamic Cooperation (OIC) in his first opportunity
to speak before the Council. I congratulate him on his
dynamic efforts, which have led to profound changes
in the OIC. We look forward to soon working with his
predecessor, Mr. Iyad Madani, whom we welcome and
wish every success in carrying out his functions in
future.

France has strengthened its relations with the OIC.
We have appointed a special envoy to the organization
and we hold regular political consultations on issues of
common interest such as the Syrian crisis, the Middle
East peace process, the Arab Spring, Mali and the fight
against international terrorism. We have also decided
to deepen our exchanges on human rights.

We welcome the adoption by the OIC of the 10-year
programme of action to meet the challenges facing the
Muslim Ummah in the twenty-first century. While the
Arab and Muslim world faces major crises, dialogue
between the United Nations and the OIC on topics such
as conflict prevention and mediation, human rights,
humanitarian assistance and refugees, the fight against
terrorism and intercultural dialogue is essential. It must
be strengthened.

I should like to undescore several aspects of the

OIC's contribution to the achievement of the United
Nations objectives.

First, I hail the courgeous commitment of the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation in the Syrian
conflict. Since the beginning of the Syrian tragedy, the
OIC has tirelessly called on the Council to carry out
its responsibilities to put an end to the bloodshed. The
OIC has underscored that the primary responsibility
for the ongoing violence, murders and slaughters lies
with the Syrian Government. All that has led to the
deaths of thousands of unarmed civilians. The OIC has
condemned those massacres, perpetrated in cities and
towns by the Syrian authorities. Given the intransigence
of the Syrian regime and its persistent will to pursue a
military solution to the crisis, the OIC leadership took
the courageous decision to suspend Syria from the
organization in August 2012.

The OIC has also held the Syrian Government fully
responsible for chemical attacks against the Syrian
people, which took place on 21 August in Ghouta, on
the outskirts of Damascus. As Mr. Ihsanoglu indicated,
the use of such arms in Syria should be considered a war
crime and a crime against humanity. The perpetrators
of that odious crime must be brought to justice. On
Syria, we share the same objective: putting an end
to this conflict through a political solution that will
allow the Syrian people to achieve their aspirations for
freedom and justice.

We also believe that the Middle East peace
process is a central question. We very much hope that
negotiations between the Palestinians and the Israelis
will allow for a negotiated solution based on the
coexistence of two States, Israel and Palestine, living
in peace and security.

Furthermore, we appreciate the mediations efforts
undertaken by the OIC through the good offices of its
Secretary-General in Somalia, where the organization
is an active member of the International Contact
Group, as well as in Afghanistan. We would also like
to hail the commitment of OIC member countries in the
service of peacekeeping and peacebuilding through the
contribution of military and police for peacekeeping
operations.

As the Secretary-General has also underscored,
the OIC is also an important partner for the United
Nations in the humanitarian field. A memorandum
of agreement and a plan of action was signed by the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
and the OIC in 2011. The two organizations have
worked closely in Somalia and the Philippines and
more recently in Syria, where they conducted a joint
assessment of humanitarian needs. In 2011 and 2012,
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees and the OIC worked together to convene
an international ministerial conference on refugees in
the Muslim world.

I should also like to hail the commitment of the
OIC in the fight against terrorism. As noted repeatedly
by the Secretary-General of OIC, nothing justifies
international terrorism. In the fight against terrorism
and radical extremism, we all know that we enjoy the
support of Muslims around the world who condemn
those who distort or manipulate their religion.

The OIC is also a central interlocator for the
initiative ofthe Alliance of Civilizations. We are pleased
that the United Nations and the OIC are commited
to strengthening their dialogue to promote tolerance
and peace. It is essential to protect and promote,
everywhere, the freedom of religion or belief and the
rights of individuals belonging to religious minorities.

With regard to human rights, we hope that the
Permanent and Independent Commission for Human
Rights that the OIC has created will effectively
contribute to the promotion and protection of human
rights for all those living in OIC member countries, with
respect for the universal principles of human rights.

To conclude, I wish to emphasize that the partnership
between the United Nations and regional organizations
is a very topical matter. The severity and the number
of conflicts around the world require calling up all
available resources. This partnership must continue
in line with the relevant principles and provisions of
the Charter of the United Nations, under the auspices
of the Security Council. That is how we will ensure
coherent international action, clarity in actions taken
by the United Nations, and respect for the core values
of our Organization.

