Mr. Kullane (Somalia): I thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this open debate on children and armed
conflict.

Iwould like first ofall to thank Ms. Leila Zerrougui,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict, Mr. Herve Ladsous,
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,
Ms. Yoka Brandt, Deputy Executive Director of
UNICEF, and Mr. Forest Whitaker, UNESCO Special
Envoy for Peace and Reconciliation, as well as our sister
Sandra Unwiringiyimana, for all their prior remarks.

The Somali Federal Government commends the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict for all her efforts. We
also commend the resilient system of child protection
established by the Security Council, which is now
being implemented in Somalia through the Somali
Federal Government. Somalia is firmly committed
to the protection of children in armed conflict. The
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
recently visited Somalia and met with the President,
His Excellency Mr. Hassan Sheikh Mohamud, and with
the Prime Minister of Somalia. The President renewed
Somalia's commitment to taking concrete steps to
move forward on the implementation of the two action
plans signed in 2012 to end the recruitment and use of
children, as well as to end their killing and maiming,
by armed forces. The Somali Federal Government
also strongly reiterates its commitment to achieve the
objectives of the Children, Not Soldiers campaign and
to take all concrete measures to prevent and end child
recruitment by all forces in Somalia. We also reaffirm
Somalia's intention to be the next campaign country to
be delisted.

At the national level, the laws governing the armed
forces, the police and the security services categorically
prohibit the recruitment of children to their ranks.
The ongoing political, constitutional and security
sector reform process offers unique opportunities to
join efforts and marks significant progress towards
improving child welfare and protection after 25 years of
conflict that has deeply affected the people of Somalia.

The Somali Federal Government welcomes the
support of the United Nations, in particular that of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) and UNICEF, to Government institutions
aimed at facilitating implementation of the action plan
that has been signed.

Key steps taken towards compliance with the
action plan include the establishment in May of a
joint military-civilian child-protection unit within
the Ministry of Defence. The unit is charged with
coordinating the activities of the action plan at the
headquarters level and with mainstreaming child
protection in policies and activities within the Somali
National Armed Forces and across Government
institutions. The Government of Somalia will soon
appoint focal points at the sector level. Furthermore, in
March, the Government adopted a standard operating
procedure for the handover of children separated from
armed groups. The Government welcomes the joint
screening of troops and new recruits. which we just
resumed and will continue. The mobile screening team,
comprised of representatives from the Somali National
Armed Forces, the United Nations, AMISOM. and the
European training team, was established on 14 May and
has been conducting systematic screening of Somali
military units, including the Somali National Armed
Forces and the Somali police force. With respect to the
separation of children, as part of the activities set out
in the action plan, 250 Somali National Armed Forces
soldiers were screened at the Jazeera Training Camp
in Mogadishu on 29 June, In addition, some 900 new
recruits were screened. No child was found among the
soldiers.

Somalia is committed to strengthening child
protection by expediting the ratification process of the
Convention of the Rights of the Child and its Additional
Protocols concerning the involvement of children in
armed conflict. That policy will be implemented based
on the African Charter on the Rights and Welfare of
the Child.

In our protracted civil war, we have learned that
the first casualties are hope, culture, values, principles,
dignity and integrity. Today Somalia stands for healing,
restoring and repairing all the sectors that have been
affected by the protracted civil war, so that our children,
who are our future, can learn from our mistakes. We
must provide them with an environment that allows
them to reach their potential and we must ensure that
they and we are not defined by the horrors of the civil
war, but by the speed with which we are overcoming
them.

