Mr. Le Luong Minh (Viet Nam): The
Vietnamese delegation thanks you, Sir, and the
Mexican presidency for taking the initiative of holding
this debate of the Council on the important topic of
mediation and the settlement of disputes. I thank
Under-Secretary-General Lynn Pascoe for his
comprehensive briefing.
We align ourselves with the statement to be
delivered by the representative of Cuba on behalf of
the Non-Aligned Movement.

The fact that this issue is enshrined in the Charter
testifies to the importance that the United Nations
attaches to the peaceful settlement of disputes and
conflicts, including through mediation. The increase in
the number of conflicts and their negative impact on
international peace, security and development, together
with the increase in the United Nations budget for
peacekeeping, makes conflict prevention and resolution
through mediation and the role of the United Nations in
this connection more necessary and urgent than ever.

We welcome the publication of the Secretary-
General's report on mediation (S/2009/ 189), which we
believe will constitute a major step forward in
promoting mediation as an effective tool in resolving
disputes and conflicts. The Mediation Support Unit
had, by late 2008, supported 18 peace processes in the
world and, within the short period since its
establishment in 2006, has become a very important
tool for supporting the good offices and mediation
efforts conducted not only by the United Nations but
also by regional organizations. These efforts manifest
the increasingly prominent role that the United Nations
is assuming in mediation activities. Reaffirming our
support for the mediation activities of the United
Nations, we are of the view that, for those activities to
be effective, the following principles must be observed.

First, mediators' in-depth knowledge and
understanding of the disputes and conflicts taking place
in their own regions and of the parties concerned,
including the parties' interests and demands, both
legitimate and illegitimate or controversial, put them in
a better position to accurately analyse the situation and
come up with objective and realistic proposals that
may bring the sides together. To that end, regional and
subregional organizations and personalities should be
allowed and encouraged to participate and contribute.
We share the Secretary-General's observation that
more attention should be paid to national and local
capacity-building with a view to enhancing local
actors' mediating skills and abilities.

We commend the assistance extended by the
United Nations Mediation Support Unit to the African
Union (AU), the Southern African Development
Community, the Economic Community of Central
African States and the European Union in
strengthening their mediation capacities. The United
Nation's two-year work plan with the AU to build the
latter's mediation capacity is an exemplary tool for
such cooperation, which should be further enhanced.

Secondly, coordination between the United
Nations and regional and subregional organizations in
mediation activities should be ensured with a view to
both enhancing effectiveness and avoiding unnecessary
duplication, waste of resources, unhealthy competition
or rivalry that may negate each other's role and thus
hamper the common search for solutions to disputes
and conflicts. The history of mediating recent disputes
and conflicts in all major continents, from Africa to
Asia, America and Europe, further proves that,
whenever such coordination exists, success is achieved
and vice versa.

Thirdly, mediation efforts should focus on
addressing the root causes of conflicts with due
attention paid to the need to help the country or
countries concerned overcome the conditions of
absolute poverty and the lack of socio-economic
development that rank high among the root causes of
disputes and conflicts. In the view of my delegation,
this approach not only helps find appropriate solutions
for each specific dispute or conflict, but also avoids its
hasty dramatization, which could lead to the
unnecessary application of measures of last resort, such
as those invoked under Chapter VII of the Charter of
the United Nations, which many States Members have
pointed to as a cause for concern.

Last but not least, mediation, as a means of
peacefully settling disputes, must be in conformity
with the fundamental principles of objectivity, fairness,
respect for national independence, sovereignty and
territorial integrity, and equality in international
relations.

As the highest organ of the United Nations
entrusted with the primary responsibility of
maintaining international peace and security, the
Security Council has a vital role in promoting the
peaceful settlement of disputes and conflicts, including
and especially by means of mediation. The Security
Council's active engagement, such as its endorsement
of mediators and support for the Secretary-General in
dispatching his envoys and mediators to help resolve
disputes and conflicts, has highlighted the increasing
importance the Council attaches to mediation activities.
Viet Nam supports strongly the consolidation of
cooperation and coordination between the Security
Council and the Secretary-General, the Secretariat and
United Nations missions in carrying out mediation
activities to peacefully resolve disputes and conflicts.
At the same time, we hold that, to preserve its integrity
and ensure that it enjoys the necessary acceptance and
support for its activities, the Security Council should
avoid unjustified and counterproductive involvement in
the work that falls under the purview of the mandates
of other United Nations organs, as defined in the
Charter.

