Mr. Burleigh (United States of America): Like other
colleagues, I want to thank the Prosecutor, Ms. Del Ponte,
for being with us today and for giving us the briefing that
we have listened to with great interest. It is our View that
regular exchanges between the Tribunals and the Security
Council are very welcome, and we look forward to more
such exchanges.

We would like to state that already the admirable
determination and commitment of Ms. Del Ponte in her
new role has been highly appreciated by my Government,
and that we have every confidence in her abilities and look
forward to a productive working relationship.

I would like also to agree with what Ambassador
Greenstock said earlier with regard to our appreciation for
the work of the staff of the Tribunals. We appreciate very
much their professionalism and dedication, and we hope
that Ms. Del Ponte will convey that to them.

The United States, like other colleagues, is deeply
concerned about reports of Member States failing to comply
with Security Council resolutions. We share the view of
other colleagues that it is essential for all Governments to
fulfil those obligations, and we thus reiterate the call on all
States to cooperate fully with the Tribunals and their
organs: specifically, to execute the arrest warrants
transmitted to them by the Tribunals and to comply with
requests for information and investigations.

In the case of the International Tribunal for the
former Yugoslavia, I would like to say that we agree with
most of what we have heard from our colleagues this
morning, and in particular most recently from
Ambassador Hasmy: that one of the greatest challenges
confronting the Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia is
obtaining custody of indictees still at large. Serbia has
made this difficult to achieve by offering de facto
sanctuary to indicted fugitives. We agree with the
Prosecutor's characterization this morning of the attitude
in Belgrade as one of "total defiance". It is our view that
this cannot be accepted by the international community.

The Security Council must stand firm in its
insistence that Serbia transfer indictees, including the
"Vukovar Three", General Mladie, "Arkan" and,
ultimately, Slobodan Milosevic and his co-indictees. We
also believe that it is imperative that Radovan Karadiie
face justice before the International Tribunal for the
former Yugoslavia. Those indictees not yet in custody
must understand that there is absolutely no safe haven for
them. We thus do not agree with some of the points made
this morning by our Russian colleague on this point.

With regard to Kosovo, it is our view that the
Tribunal's work there is of fundamental importance, and
we appreciate very much the preliminary status report
today. We understand the difficulty of the challenge and
also its scope, and if there are additional resources which
are needed, including gratis personnel, we hope we will
hear directly from the Tribunal about those needs - and
we need to hear loudly and clearly from the Tribunal
about them.

With regard to Croatia, while we welcome recent
cooperation on one important case, there is much work
left to be done. We support the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia's request for
cooperation on Operations Storm and Flash, and we
strongly urge the Government of Croatia to comply
promptly.

In the case of the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda, like other colleagues, we note with regret that
the Government of Rwanda has suspended cooperation
with the Tribunal over a recent court decision, as we
understand it. We understand Rwanda's frustration, but we
hope that the Government of Rwanda will reconsider its
decision and continue relations with the Tribunal.

We hope the Tribunal in turn can also speed up its
work with regard to its responsibilities in Rwanda, and,

 

like Ambassador Fowler, who spoke earlier, we would
welcome a report or would like to hear some kind of
summary of the opinions and assessment of the Prosecutor
after she completes her upcoming trip to Rwanda, which
will be her first visit to that country that is important part
of her responsibilities.

Like many of our colleagues, we are troubled by the
assertion, which we read about and hear about from time to
time, that the Security Council is not providing adequate
support to the Tribunals, whether political, material or
budgetary support. We would like to state here - we have
heard similar statements from several of our colleagues -
that the United States would support measures in the
Council that Council colleagues believe would be effective
in improving compliance with the orders of the Tribunals.
We also recognize that there are a lot of challenges
remaining before the Tribunals, and we are determined to
help the Tribunals fulfil their mandates fully. To do this,
Member States must provide the Tribunals with sufficient
financial and material support. In that regard, it is our hope
that the budget requests for the two Tribunals for calendar
year 2000 will be approved expeditiously.

Finally, let me thank Prosecutor Del Ponte again for
being with us today. I hope that her relationship with the
Council will be a regular and close one. In particular, we
would welcome hearing about her impressions once she
returns from the Rwanda Tribunal.

