Mr. Alsaidi (Yemen) (spoke in Arabic): I should
like at the outset to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the Presidency of the Security Council at
this very sensitive time. I should also like to take this
opportunity to acknowledge the special relationship
between our two friendly countries, which is daily
growing stronger. At the same time, I would like to
express our appreciation and admiration for the
principled and wise leadership provided by France
during its presidency of the Council last month.

Your prompt response, Sir, to the request made by
the representative of South Africa, on behalf of the
States members of the Non-Aligned Movement, for the
convening of an open meeting of the Council allowing
all States Members of the Organization to participate,
rather than restricting participation to Council members
only, was an eloquent expression of your recognition of
the fact that questions pertaining to global peace and
security are not the preserve of certain States alone.
Nor do such issues affect the interests of some and not
of others. The situation in Iraq is thus of concern to all,
making an international consensus indispensable.

I am not the first to say that the eyes of the whole
world are on the Council to see how it will deal with
the situation in Iraq. Analysts and observers agree that
the international system is at a crossroads. The
Council's decision on this question will have enormous
repercussions for international relations in general and
for the future of the United Nations in particular.

Like all the other States of the region, the
Republic of Yemen would like to express profound
concern about the tense situation prevailing in the
region - the massing of troops, the media war and the
constant threat of the use of force against Iraq. In this
regard, we would like to make a number of points.

First, we greatly appreciate the efforts of the
Security Council and the interest shown by the
majority of its members in exhausting all peaceful
means to ensure the implementation of its resolutions
on the disarmament of Iraqi weapons of mass
destruction, in particular through the recent resolution
1441 (2002). The implementation of the provisions of
that resolution would be a step towards dealing with
the consequences of the 1991 Iraqi invasion of Kuwait.
In this context, the Government of the Republic of
Yemen welcomes the cooperation extended by the Iraqi
Government to the international inspection teams in
implementation of the resolution to which I referred.
We reaffirm once again the importance of the
Iraqi Government's honouring its commitments
regarding the remaining issues raised by the inspectors,
in accordance with the relevant resolutions of
international legality. At the same time, we believe that
Iraq must honour its commitments with regard to
resolving the issue of Kuwaiti missing persons in
accordance with Security Council resolutions and with
the decisions taken at the Beirut Arab Summit. This is
a humanitarian question that continues to act as a
stumbling block on the road to a rapprochement
between the two countries. It should be resolved in
such a way as to end the estrangement between those
two brotherly peoples and ensure Arab solidarity.

Secondly, we reaffirm the importance of
implementing the remaining relevant Security Council
resolutions setting out the Council's objectives. In this
regard, we stress that the Security Council is entrusted
with the maintenance of international peace and
security on behalf of the international community. We
would also like to reaffirm the validity of the
provisions of the United Nations Charter, which make
it clear that nothing can justify interference in the
internal affairs of a State. There is no doubt that
interfering in the internal affairs of a given country in
order to bring about change there would constitute a
very serious precedent and would cause confusion and
chaos in international relations. It would take us back
to the era of the League of Nations, which was
followed by a world war, something that would be
unacceptable for human beings in the twenty-first
century.

Thirdly, the Republic of Yemen reaffirms its
support for Security Council resolutions in general and
in particular for those pertaining to the question of Iraq
in particular. However, my country has always stressed
the need for all the members of the Council to act with
a sense of responsibility so that the Council cannot be
accused of selectivity or double standards with regard
to such resolutions. Paragraph 14 of resolution 687
(1991), concerning the elimination of weapons of mass
destruction from all States of the region, including
Israel, must be implemented. Legally binding
international resolutions concerning the Palestinian
question must be implemented with the same zeal that
is shown in the implementation of the resolutions
concerning Iraq.

The Government of the Republic of Yemen has
noted with satisfaction the accurate and responsible
views expressed by some countries, calling for
Members of this Organization to look further than their
noses and to go beyond narrow, immediate self-interest
so as to lead the international community towards
ensuring security and stability in the Middle East in a
manner that safeguards the interests of all.

Once again, I would like to reiterate my country's
concern about the ongoing threat to invade the
brotherly country Iraq. My country strongly opposes
any military action outside the framework of
international legality, whatever pretexts and
justifications are put forward. The drums of war and
the dust raised by the military massing obscure the
truth. It would be both wise and necessary for the
Security Council to give peaceful means a chance, as
they have not yet been exhausted. In this respect, we
support the opinion of the majority of States, which
have called for giving the inspection teams the
necessary time to finish their task without time
pressure or other influence.

Let us not forget that at an earlier stage the
inspection teams destroyed a great deal more than was
destroyed by war in 1991 or by successive aerial
bombardments of Iraq. Continuing the inspection and
monitoring regime is the only way to close this
ominous file. The only cost of peaceful action is
patience and perseverance. Military invasion, however,
would lead to the further destruction of Iraq and the
further destabilization of the region. That would
constitute a threat to peace and security throughout the
world. It would also take international relations back to
the policy of force and the logic of military blocs and
military solutions. That would be inconsistent with the
spirit and the letter of the United Nations Charter.

