The Secretary-General: I thank Japan for using
its presidency of the Security Council to focus on the
increasingly complex drivers of armed conflict and
instability. Let me also express my appreciation to the
Government and the people of Japan for their hospitality
during my visit to the country last week. I would like to
make three main points today.

First, we are seeing not only a quantitative but
also a qualitative change in threats to international
peace and security. The perils of nuclear weapons
are again front and centre, with tensions higher than
they have been since the end of the Cold War. Climate
change has emerged as a threat multiplier. Water
scarcity is a growing concern, as demand for fresh
water is projected to grow by more than 40 per cent
by the middle of the century. Inequality and exclusion
fuel frustration and marginalization. Cybersecurity
dangers are escalating, as some of the same advances in
technology that have generated so many gains have also
made it easier for extremists to communicate, broadcast
distorted narratives of grievance, recruit followers and
exploit people.

The number of armed conflicts has declined over
the long-term, but in the Middle East and parts of
Africa conflicts have surged. Conflicts are becoming
more intractable. They are longer - more than 20 years
on average - meaning that the people they displace
are spending ever-increasing amounts of time away
from their homes and communities. They are more
complex, as armed groups compete for control over
State institutions, natural resources and territory, and
as extremist groups with absolutist demands leave little
room for diplomacy.

We are seeing a multiplication of political factions
and non-State armed groups, with hundreds of armed
groups in Syria alone. There is also an increase in the
regionalization and internationaiization of conflicts.
External military and financial support to conflict
parties prolongs civil wars and fuels wider tensions
as local fights become proxies for larger rivalries.
Conflicts are more linked with each other, and with the
worldwide threat of terrorism. And transnational drug
smugglers and human traffickers perpetuate the chaos
and prey on refugees and migrants.

Secondly, the changing nature of conflict means
rethinking our approaches, both how we work and
how we work with others. Our efforts must be
coherent, coordinated and context-specific. We must
work across pillars and across the peace continuum
towards integrated action. It was with that goal in
mind that I initiated three inter-linked reform efforts
aimed at repositioning the United Nations development
system, streamlining our internal management and
strengthening the Secretariat's peace and security
architecture. I have also sought to forge closer links
with regional partners, including the African Union,
the European Union and others. The Joint Force created
by the Member States ofthe Group of Five for the Sahel
is an important step in that regard, as is the Joint United
Nations-African Union Framework for an Enhanced
Partnership in Peace and Security, signed earlier
this year.

Thirdly, prevention must be at the centre of
everything we do. It is better to prevent conflict than
to manage it - which avoids tragic human suffering
and also saves money. Although hard to quantify and
typically undertaken far from the media spotlight,
prevention is a sound investment that produces ample,
visible dividends. Development is one of our best
instruments of prevention, and the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development gives us enormous potential.
Development is an objective in its own right, and should
not be mis-used in pursuit ofother aims. But the steps we
take towards achieving the 17 Sustainable Development
Goals will also help build peaceful societies.

Respect for all human rights - not only civil and
political rights but also economic, social and cultural
ones - is an essential element of prevention. In the
lead-up to the outbreak of widespread violence we often
see increases in repression, the closing of space for civil
society and the rise of sectarianism. We must invest in
social cohesion so that all people feel they have a stake
in society. We also know that gender equality is closely
linked with resilience and that women's participation
is crucial to success, from conflict prevention to
peacemaking and sustaining peace. Where women are
empowered, societies flourish and peace processes have
a better chance of taking hold. We must also do more
to address the systematic violence faced by women
before, during and after conflict, and to pursue justice
for perpetrators as an essential part of post-conflict
healing and recovery.

Prevention also includes preventive diplomacy:
efforts to respond promptly to signs of tension and
to forge political solutions. The newly established
High-level Advisory Board on Mediation has met for
the first time to assess opportunities for engagement,
and I expect it to begin its first formal, but discreet,
undertaking soon. My own good offices are of course
available to the Security Council at all times.

The concept of human security is a useful frame of
reference for this work, and I thank Japan for its long-
standing advocacy. Human security is people-centred
and holistic. It stresses the need to act early and prioritize
the most vulnerable. Those must all be touchstones for
our work.

I welcome the efforts of the Council to explore
new ways to monitor and address the risks of conflict.
Let us work together to enhance the Council's focus
on emerging situations, expand the toolbox, increase
resources for prevention and be more systematic in
preventing conflict and sustaining peace.

Finally, let me emphasize the need for unity on the
part of the Security Council. Without it, the parties to
conflict may take more inflexible and intransigeant
positions, and the drivers of conflict will push situations
to the point of no return again and again. But with unity,
we can advance security and well-being for all.

