Mr. Ramirez Carrefio (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): I thank the presidency
for convening this informative meeting on the work of
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1737 (2006), whose report (see S/2015/401, annex) was presented by Ambassador Mr. Roman
Oyarzun Marchesi, as Chair of the Committee. We
congratulate him for his outstanding leadership of that
subsidiary body.

Venezuela welcomes the significant progress made
regarding the Joint Plan of Action, the negotiations
undertaken between the P5+l and Iran, and the
commitment of all parties to continue the round of
negotiations so as to achieve a broad agreement.

The possibility of achieving this important
agreement aimed at reaching a comprehensive
settlement of the Iranian nuclear issue in the long term
is a tangible option today. It once again demonstrates
than when a political commitment to reach negotiated
solutions, engage in dialogue and achieve peace exists,
this is the optimal path for overcoming violence and
militaristic discourse, especially in a region deeply
affected by conflicts and extremists.

The most important task in the next phase is
to take advantage of this positive momentum and
focus on resolving the differences through dialogue,
negotiations and mutual trust. That will open a new
phase in diplomatic relations with Iran, leading finally
to the definitive lifting of the sanctions regime against
that country, which has had negative economic and
social effects on the Iranian people.

We are pleased that dialogue and cooperation
between Iran and the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA) have continued, as highlighted in the
Agency's May 2015 report. We recognize the importance
of the constructive role played by the IAEA in resolving
the issues relating to Iran's nuclear programme. We hope
that that cooperation will continue to be strengthened,
and that the ongoing issues will be resolved, as will
the measures relating to the implementation of the Joint
Plan of Action. In that respect, we call on all parties
involved to fulfil their respective commitments in good
faith.

Venezuela reaffirms the sovereign right of the
Islamic Republic of Iran to the peaceful use of nuclear
energy. We therefore reiterate that article IV of the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT),
which stipulates the inalienable right of all parties to
the Treaty to continue with the research, production
and use of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes,
without any discrimination whatsoever, should be fully
respected. Venezuela attaches great importance to the
efforts made by the international community to promote
disarmament and the non-proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction. We express our full commitment to
the strengthening of the international regime applicable
to those issues through compliance with the obligations
derived from the relevant binding legal instruments.
Venezuela believes that holding the conference on a
nuclear-weapon-free zone in the Middle East, in line
with the agreements achieved at the 1995 NPT Review
Conference, is an extremely positive measure that
would further strengthen peace and stability.

As the NPT Review Conference held in May 2015
was unable to adopt an outcome document, owing to the
failure to implement the agreement reached 20 years
ago, we believe that the international community should
not abandon its efforts to promote the denuclearization
of the Middle East on the basis of agreements freely
entered into between States, in accordance with the
guidelines defined by the Disarmament Commission in
its 1999 report (A/54/42). To that end, we call on all
Member States to focus their diplomatic and political
efforts on reaching such an agreement without further
delay.

For my country, weapons of mass destruction
constitute a threat to international peace and security,
and their elimination is therefore a priority for all of
humankind.

Finally, we call on the Committee, in this crucial
phase, to focus its attention on the new challenges and
objectives that are arising under this new dynamic,
in line with the principles of objectivity, impartiality
and balance. In the area within its competence, the
Committee must facilitate the ongoing negotiations.
We hope that the diplomatic initiatives under way in
other forums on the implementation of Iranian nuclear
safeguards Will have a positive effect on the work of
the Council and lead to the permanent suspension of
sanctions against that brotherly country.

