Mr. Meece (Spoke in French): It is a great
privilege and honour for me to address the Council
following an important period of major events in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. Recent months
have been characterized by many questions and
uncertainties, and I believe that this moment for
reflection and discussion is particularly important to
the mission, to the people of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and to the region.

(spoke in English)

The attention of the Congolese and the
international community has of course been heavily
focused on the holding of national presidential and
legislative elections late last year. As has been widely
reported, despite enormous logistical and
organizational challenges, voting got under way as
2

scheduled by the Congolese Independent National
Electoral Commission on 28 November. The campaign
period, however, was increasingly marked in some
areas of the country, including Kinshasa, by political
and inter-community tensions, too often fed by some
political leaders and others who engaged in public or
private rhetoric, exacerbating these tensions.

Indeed, scattered incidents of violence during the
campaign culminated in a day of particular tension and
violence at the end of the campaign period on Saturday,
26 November in Kinshasa, as well as violent incidents
in some other portions of the country, resulting in the
deaths of many Congolese, as well as injuries to others,
and contributing to post-election tensions as well. We
have been conducting a thorough investigation led by
our Joint Human Rights Office and involving several
other offices of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUSCO) and the United Nations to
look into all reports of election violence. We plan to
issue a detailed report of our findings in the near
future. For now, I would wish to reiterate our
condemnation of all acts of election-related violence
and other violations of human rights, and my heartfelt
condolences to the families and friends of those who
lost their lives, as well as all victims of the acts of
violence that have taken place.

As Council members are well aware, the elections
themselves were marked by numerous problems. The
late procurement and delivery of vital elections
materials complicated an already difficult and tight
election calendar. This prompted the mobilization of
substantial additional aircraft and other resources from
the Governments of South Africa, Angola and the
Republic of the Congo, as well as from MONUSCO, to
address logistical shortfalls and bolster the Independent
National Electoral Commission's ability to successfully
conduct the elections. Furthermore, the South African
Government generously transported from South Africa
to various points in the Congo large quantities of
ballots, including supplementary orders to cover
shortages in some areas in response to problems
identified by the Commission.

Nonetheless, the Independent National Electoral
Commission was obliged to extend the period of voting
to provide access to polls by voters, in some cases for
several days. Various problems were reported in a
number of cases by accredited domestic and
international observer missions during this period, and
12-22477
particularly in the immediate aftermath during the
compilation and verification processes to determine
results.

While none of the observer missions have
determined that these problems necessarily would have
changed the reported presidential results, we and others
have expressed our strong concerns about the
irregularities reported by the various observer
missions, and believe a thorough and open review of
the preparations and conduct of the November
elections is important. it should provide as accurate as
possible an overview of the process, draw relevant
lessons and propose recommendations, and ensure that
improvements are put in place so that future elections
achieve the highest level of integrity possible. I would
note that the Independent National Electoral
Commission itself has already initiated action for the
arrest and prosecution of some of its employees, while
discussions of the broader review are proceeding.

At the same time, we have strongly emphasized
the importance of all parties and candidates utilizing
fully peaceful means and dialogue to deal with points
of contention. Only one candidate chose to deposit a
legal challenge with the Congolese Supreme Court
regarding presidential results. Provisional results for
the legislative elections were announced only last
week. We have again emphasized to all candidates and
parties the importance of utilizing legal channels for
those seeking to contest results, as well as pursuing full
dialogue and discussions among political leaders and
parties to address all differences of view, including
election-related issues. While it is essential that
Government authorities ensure that all Congolese
citizens fully enjoy their rights of freedom of
expression and other rights, violent confrontations will
not resolve any problems and only tend to propagate
further violence.

MONUSCO has provided all support possible to
the electoral process consistent with our mandate. This
included full logistics support, fulfilling all
commitments described in the original integrated
logistics plans established with the Independent
National Electoral Commission, and indeed additional
supplementary support as new challenges emerged in
the immediate run-up to the elections. In addition, the
Mission has financed and carried out the training of the
intervention units of the Congolese National Police,
and provided non-lethal equipment to enhance the
capacity of the Police to ensure the security of the
12-22477

electoral process. The Mission and the United Nations
Development Programme are continuing to provide
technical counsel and support to the maximum extent
possible, although we have no official role or
responsibility in the verification or ratification of
announced results.

We have also supported extensive efforts in a
variety of forums at the national and provincial levels
to promote dialogue among Congolese parties,
candidates, civil society and other stakeholders. It is
our intent to do all possible to facilitate a full review of
the election operations and, drawing from these and
external observations, to provide support to ensure that
improvements are implemented to achieve the
maximum credibility of future elections. In particular,
these will be immediately focused on the remaining
important provincial and local elections to complete
the current electoral cycle. I would note that although
the timings of these elections are now uncertain, the
importance of full, credible and transparent provincial
and local elections is very clear.

With the announcement of most recent
provisional legislative results by the Independent
National Electoral Commission, political attention in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo is now shifting
to the new National Assembly, the consolidation of
coalitions, and the formation and ratification of a new
Government. The timing and specific composition of
the new structures are of course not yet clear, but
preliminary discussions among various individuals and
parties have certainly already been initiated. We
believe it very important that all newly elected officials
play an active and full role in these discussions and the
work of the new institutions in the interests of their
constituents and the country. We strongly encourage all
elected officials and political leaders to carry out fully
and actively their political and civic responsibilities on
behalf of the Congolese people.

The post-election environment has also of course
permitted MONUSCO and Congolese officials to
re-evaluate security conditions in the country, and in
particular the continuing threats to the civilian
population and general stability of the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo. The protection of
civilians, of course, remains MONUSCO's highest
priority. In that regard, apparent renewed recent
activity by the Forces democratiques de liberation du
Rwanda (FDLR) movement has been of particular
concern. The January massacre of an estimated 54
3
civilians in remote areas of Shabunda territory, South
Kivu province, is a tragic and visible example of this
activity and the continuing predatory actions of the
FDLR. Our own analysis of these attacks suggest that
this indicates no underlying renewed strength of FDLR
capabilities, but rather a continuation of past patterns
of reprisals taken by FDLR forces against relatively
soft targets to intimidate civilians and seek to bolster
their positions.

In reality, however, the loss of some senior
commanders, continuing encouraging numbers of
FDLR combatants and dependents being processed for
repatriation to Rwanda, and information confirming
ongoing internal tensions and strains within the FDLR
leadership all suggest continuing relative weaknesses
in the organization. Working with the Democratic
Republic of the Congo authorities, we intend to pursue
all possible activity to achieve a further reduction in
FDLR capabilities.

A new point of concern has been the emergence
or growth of various Congolese groups in North and
South Kivu, some positioning themselves as so-called
self-defence groups targeting various perceived
opponents. As well, some existing groups, for example
Mayi Mayi Yakutumba in South Kivu, have also shown
increased armed and criminal activity, often in
combination with various arrangements with other
armed groups, including the FDLR and Burundian
Forces nationales de liberation. All of them represent a
significant threat to civilians and to the general
security in the areas where they operate.

In north-eastern Democratic Republic of the
Congo, the activities of the Ugandan Lord's Resistance
Army (LRA) have in fact been reduced in recent
months, and extensive operations by MONUSCO and
the Forces armees de la Republique democratique du
Congo (FARDC) were conducted to preclude larger-
scale potential end-of-year LRA attacks. Nonetheless,
the LRA clearly continues to pose a serious threat in a
region that includes portions of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Central African Republic and
South Sudan.

We welcome initiatives taken by the African
Union for a regional approach to the LRA threat, as
well as the deployment of United States military
personnel in support of operations to address that
threat. We will continue our active cooperation with
Congolese authorities and coordination with other
United Nations missions in pursuit of putting an end to
the LRA threat in the Congo, consistent with our
mandate.

The Allied Democratic Front/National Army for
the Liberation of Uganda also retains a significant
military capacity in northern North Kivu, as
underscored by a recent attack by the group targeting
an FARDC unit. In addition, the activities of some
ostensibly integrated FARDC elements that do not
accept or follow central command and State authority
also continue to pose a serious threat to stability and
security in the Kivus. That is particularly true of Bosco
Ntaganda and those allied to him, which represents a
significant challenge to the establishment of lasting
and secure conditions for the area.

We have recently been having some very
productive discussions with FARDC interlocutors
regarding a variety of actions to address the
aforementioned threats and realize lasting
improvements in the eastern Democratic Republic of
the Congo. These include renewed military pressure
directed at the FDLR and other armed groups seeking
to realize further degradation of FDLR and other armed
group capabilities, the maximum possible repatriation
of foreign combatants, and the demobilization of
Congolese militia or other armed groups.

In that regard, I am pleased to report that the
recent addition of one South African and three
Pakistani military transport helicopters and the
expected arrival of four Ukrainian combat helicopters
in coming weeks will provide a much needed boost to
MONUSCO capabilities in the east, which have been
severely impacted in recent months by insufficient
military helicopter capability. I would like to express
my appreciation to all those involved in providing
those very important additions.

In our discussions with Congolese partners, we
have also been exploring ideas as to how overall
FARDC capabilities can be strengthened and
augmented. Military reform and strengthening are
clearly a key element to the achievement of druable
security conditions in the eastern Democratic Republic
of the Congo. It is too early to comment specifically as
to what may be possible, but I will say that I am
encouraged by the ideas being considered. These, of
course, would be fully consistent with essential
programmes and activities being pursued in other key
security sector areas, including programmes to expand
12-22477
police training and generally augment Congolese
National Police capabilities, and to bolster justice and
corrections systems programmes. I believe that the
police and military justice systems already being
implemented by MONUSCO, in partnership with
relevant Congolese authorities, have been particularly
successful and shown demonstrable results in
augmenting Congolese National Police capabilities.

Rape and sexual violence continue to be a major
problem and the focus of Mission and United Nations
agency attention and activities. We have been
continuing to support an encouraging increase of
military and other prosecutions of those guilty of rapes
and other sexual violence, as well as other serious
human rights abuses, in order to put an end to
impunity. I assure you the Council that we will
continue to pursue every opportunity to bring those
guilty of such crimes to justice.

I must also note, however, that data increasingly
suggest that a great deal of the sexual violence,
including rape, in eastern Democratic Republic of the
Congo and other regions of the country substantially
involves civilians committing those grave crimes
against women. I strongly believe that the issue
demands much greater attention from all of us involved
in that critically important area. I would urge all
Governments and organizations to consider increased
attention to the problem. None of us can afford to
reduce our level of activity in any way in that critical
area, as too many Congolese women, and as a result
Congolese society as a whole, suffer from this terrible
problem.

Prisons also remain a significant problem, and the
late 2011 escape of Mayi Mayi leader Gedeon in a
mass prison break underscores it, as he shows signs of
establishing a renewed militia presence in Katanga
province. It is very clear that there is much more to do
in that area. To the extent that we can mobilize
resources, work with other engaged partners to expand
general programmes, and generally maintain and
hopefully augment these programmes and others across
all segments of security sector issues, including
military programmes, significant progress can be
realized to establish the conditions needed for the
security of the civilian population and lasting security
for the region.

While I will not elaborate extensively today on
stabilization programmes, I believe that everyone in
12-22477

the Democratic Republic of the Congo is very aware of
the importance of progress across the spectrum in that
area as well. Implemented within the framework of the
Stabilization and Reconstruction Plan for Eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo, those activities are
critical to the augmentation of State authority in
eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo and an
essential component of achieving sustainable security
conditions and providing for social and economic
development.

For other areas of the country, such activities are
no less important in addressing the urgent needs of the
Congolese population and supporting general
development. We believe that the early official
adoption of the Peace Consolidation Programme will
be an important component of that effort, and we will
be working through the close collaboration of
MONUSCO and United Nations agencies, along with
key bilateral and multilateral partners, to realize further
progress, always in partnership with Government
authorities and agencies, all non-governmental and
other organizations making their own contributions.

We will be very actively pursuing opportunities
to move forward in all these areas in the weeks and
months to come, focusing on civilian protection and
related security issues, associated reforms and
augmentation of State capacity and authority,
stabilization and development efforts, and successful
completion of the election cycle. Combating sexual
violence will continue to be a major specific focus of
our operations and programmes. Of course, as a new
Government is formed, we will also engage in active
dialogue with the new officials in order to move
forward in all areas. I am convinced, however, that
there are significant opportunities to take advantage of
now and in the immediate future, and I can assure
members that we will pursue all such openings to the
maximum extent possible.

(spoke in French)

To conclude, I should like to thank the members
of the Security Council and the international
community for their uninterrupted support to the
Mission. That support will be of extreme importance in
the months to come, when we will attempt to make
continued progress in response to the various
challenges I have just described. Similarly, I wish to
highlight my gratitude to the personnel of MONUSCO
and the United Nations agencies in the Democratic
5
Republic of the Congo. Their work is indispensable,
and I have the greatest admiration for it. Under the
pressure of the electoral process, their efforts have
been extraordinary and exemplary. Their work during
that period deserves our thanks and praise.
Strengthened by this support, I have no doubt that we
will be able to continue progress towards stability and
the establishment of a lasting peace, which are the
legitimate aspirations of the people of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.

