Mr. Kusljugie (Bosnia and Herzegovina): Allow
me at the outset, Mr. President, to extend my sincere
congratulations on your taking over the Presidency and
to wish you every success in presiding over the Council
this month. I would also like to thank you for the
opportunity to comment on the briefings by the High
Representative and the President of the International
Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY),
and to share with the distinguished Members of the
Security Council some recent views of my Government
regarding the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina and
the role of the international community in its post-war
recovery.
I also want to thank Lord Ashdown and Judge
Meron for their comprehensive briefings, as well as my
distinguished colleagues for their comments and
remarks.

It has been a year since the first self-organized
elections took place in Bosnia and Herzegovina and a
new Government took office. It so happened that the
beginning of the election process coincided with the
arrival of the new High Representative for Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Lord Paddy Ashdown. Even though it
might seem premature to make an assessment of the
achievements of the newly elected Bosnia and
Herzegovina authorities and their interaction with the
international community as personified by Lord
Ashdown, some positive - and some negative -
trends have become evident.

The past year, as every year before it, has been
marked by slow but steady progress in post-war
recovery and transition. What makes this year distinct
from those before it is the High Representative's very
agile approach to the tasks placed before him. His
platform, "jobs and justice" through reforms, so well
presented and so largely supported by this forum last
year, and the Office of the High Representative's
mission implementation plan proved to be well
thought-out strategies.

Not unlike his predecessors, Lord Ashdown
started off by imposing laws. Later on, as his mandate
progressed, the number of imposed laws decreased as
he succeeded in involving entity and State parliaments
in advancing legal reforms in various fields of
legislation.

The efforts of the High Representative were
concentrated in several major areas; his strategy clearly
focused on bringing Bosnia and Herzegovina closer to
Euro-Atlantic integration by fulfilling the conditions
set forth by the North Atlantic Treaty Organization
(NATO) Partnership for Peace and the feasibility study
for Stabilization and Association Agreement with the
European Union.

In the economic arena, an impressive package of
50 laws and regulations has been passed in order to
give a boost to private initiative and to create
conditions for direct foreign investments. Progress has
been made in the reform of customs, tax and revenue
systems, a State law on civil servants was passed, the
reorganization of the army structure brought Bosnia
and Herzegovina a step closer to the NATO Partnership
for Peace, the foundations for the State intelligence
service were laid and the State Court of Bosnia and
Herzegovina became operational.

However impressive the results, considering the
time frame, several problem areas remain constant in
the way they are dealt with by the international
community and its High Representatives.

First, the fact remains that in the past three years
the number of publicly indicted war criminals who
remain at large has been reduced from 20 to 17, and the
two most infamous fugitives, Radovan Karadzic and
Ratko Mladic, are still, eight years after being indicted,
as elusive as they have ever been. We consider that
responsibility for this lies both with the international
community and with the Bosnia and Herzegovina
authorities. It has been repeated many times that there
can be no reconciliation in Bosnia and Herzegovina
until all indicted war criminals are brought to justice.

A positive step in cooperation with the
International Criminal Tribunal was made last year by
establishing a special Chamber for war crimes within
the State Court, though this still has to be funded. It is
our hope that the contributing nations will be generous
at the forthcoming donor conference in The Hague later
this month.

Secondly, the return of refugees and displaced
persons shown by statistical data could easily qualify
for the greatest success of the international community
in the post-war Bosnia and Herzegovina. With the
addition of data on property return, the picture falls
little short of perfect. However, individual returns in
some areas of Republika Srpska, especially the
Srebrenica and Drina river regions, and some regions
in the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina, turned
out to be unsustainable. Generally, there should be
more economic support for the returnees to start anew
and get on with their lives.

Furthermore, the paramount importance of the
privatization process was largely underestimated. Even
though the entire concept of privatization was
conceived by the international community and put into
practice through direct participation of the Office of the
High Representative and other international
organizations and their experts, the results six years
down the line are far from acceptable, especially when
it comes to large-scale privatization of State-owned
enterprises and the so-called strategic sector.

The current High Representative has given the
privatization process a new push by improving the
privatization legal framework, but this has yet to
deliver results. Meanwhile, the burden of State-owned
enterprises, most of them barely operating but still
employing a significant workforce, remains on the
shoulders of the local authorities. Social unrest and
protests, which we witness on the streets of Bosnia and
Herzegovina on an almost daily basis, are partly due to
the inability of the international experts to find a viable
model for privatization of State-owned enterprises and
generate the interest of foreign investors in engaging
their capital in the Bosnian economy and thus create
new job opportunities for the unemployed workers,
who, statistics indicate, amount to 40 per cent of the
entire workforce.

Last but not least, I come to the impact of the
international community on the public information
sector. Far from being completed, the task of creating
an objective and unbiased public information service
was moved down the priority list, and the aid and
support given to the independent media has all but
dried up.

I am addressing the Council today as Permanent
Representative of a State of Bosnia and Herzegovina
that is no longer the focus of attention of the
international community as a crisis area. Rather, it has
become a typical State in transition that actively
participates in stabilization processes in the region and
throughout the world. The authorities in Bosnia and
Herzegovina remain committed to reforms, in order to
create conditions for overcoming the consequences of
recent conflicts, and are devoted to respect for all the
human rights of individual citizens and peoples, as well
as their cultural, religious and other diversities.

In the process of Bosnia and Herzegovina's
accession to European integration, discussions have
just been completed with the European Commission,
within the framework of the feasibility study. Bosnia
and Herzegovina is now entering the new phase with
full confidence, convinced that the process what has
been initiated will result in the fulfilment of conditions
and membership in the European Union. This comes as
a result of the decision of the Bosnia and Herzegovina
authorities to respond to major challenges, such as
combating organized crime and corruption;
strengthening the State institutions; conducting legal
system reforms; implementing structural reforms; and
reducing the unemployment rate.

The issue of missing persons is particularly
sensitive and difficult for Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Additional efforts are required, with the assistance of
the international community, to give the grieving
families the opportunity to find out the whereabouts of
their loved ones, what happened to them and where
they were buried, to identify their remains and to lay
them to rest with dignity. This would surely have a
positive impact on the reconciliation process in Bosnia
and Herzegovina.

At this moment the authorities in Bosnia and
Herzegovina attach paramount importance to reforms
and modernization of the educational system in Bosnia
and Herzegovina. By recently signing the Bologna
Protocol, Bosnia and Herzegovina made a firm
commitment to build an educational system that meets
European standards.

The duly elected authorities in Bosnia and
Herzegovina are ready to take ownership, to bear more
responsibility for the future of the country. The
ultimate goal is for Bosnia and Herzegovina to be a
member of NATO and of the European Union, Bosnia
and Herzegovina with its destiny in the hands of its
own citizens, on its road of no return towards European
integration, and on that road with more power in the
engine of its own institutions and less in the High
Representative's tow truck.

Despite all individual efforts and billions of
foreign aid poured into the country since the end of the
war, Bosnia and Herzegovina is officially still one of
the poorest European countries. The war, however
devastating, cannot be solely blamed for that. The
structure of the State, bequeathed by the Dayton Peace
Accords, with multiple levels of executive and
legislative power, resulting in more than 60 per cent of
gross national product being spent on public
expenditures, defies all the individual reforms and
threatens to become economically unviable. Last year,
the High Representative said that Dayton was the floor,
not the ceiling, so it can be built on. However, even the
floor needs to be statically sound.

Having realized that, the elected authorities in
Bosnia and Herzegovina are ready to initiate the long
and cumbersome negotiation process for constitutional
reforms, with the ultimate goal clearly set out in the
statement of His Excellency Dragan Covic', Chairman
of the Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina, at the
fifty-eighth session of the General Assembly, when he
said that the Constitution of Bosnia and Herzegovina is
"cut out to the measure of its peoples and to each and
every citizen." (A/58/PV.15) We intend to achieve this
by ourselves, through dialogue among all local
stakeholders, and with the support of the international
community.

The task before us may be difficult, but we have
to accomplish it, and for one reason only: children who
were spelling their first words when the first High
Representative arrived in Bosnia and Herzegovina are
coming of age now. They need a vision that goes
beyond a six-month reporting period, beyond 2004,
much further into the twenty-first century.

