Mr. Leao Monteiro (Cape Verde) (interpretation from French): I thank you, Sir, for the opportunity offered
to my delegation to speak briefly at this meeting,
convened by the Security Council to consider the situation
in Angola and to take decisions as the mandate of the
United Nations Observer Mission in Angola (MONUA)
comes to an end.

The Secretary-General's report of 12 January, which
is as clear and detailed as always, stresses the important
progress made in the peace process since early December
1997. Since then, bilateral exchanges have been
maintained at a steady pace, leading to the adoption by
the Joint Commission of a timetable for fulfilling the
agreements of the Lusaka Protocol. Moreov er, the
President of Angola and the leader of UNITA have
exchanged messages and been in personal contact
regarding both the timetable under discussion and
arrangements for their meeting, which has long been
planned and is now on the calendar.

The commitment of the leadership of UNITA finally
to install itself in the country's capital by late February

 

and the reaffirmation of the same schedule for the transfer
of Andulo and Bailundo to State administration are two
other particularly encouraging signs. A new phase, it would
seem, will thereby have begun in demonstrating high-level
political will, which is certainly of great significance.

This cannot, however, automatically resolve all the
pending problems. The extension of State administration to
the entire territory is being considerably delayed and the
normalization of life for the people of that territory remains
inadequate and precarious. In this regard, the movements in
the field of the Joint Commission itself, and above all the
establishment of joint Operational Groups in the provinces,
are extremely useful measures and machinery for
strengthening and maintaining confidence and stabilizing
relations.

The atmosphere will also be more relaxed with the
transformation of UNITA's Radio Vorgan into a non-
partisan broadcasting facility and we hope that the current
administrative and material difficulties will be speedily
overcome.

We wish to underline the importance which the parties
themselves attach to the fullest possible enjoyment of
human rights by the population, as acknowledged by the
Joint Commission. This is a factor for the consolidation of
peace and justifies the measures to extend the network of
observers deployed in the country.

A particularly essential aspect of the peace process has
always been the demobilization and social integration of
UNITA fighters. Everything possible must be done to speed
up and expand that movement, and we understand that the
means to achieve this are very shortly to be brought under
consideration.

We acknowledge that we were struck by the
magnitude of all that remains to be done in the area of
demining. To date, 10,000 mines out of an estimated total
of 6 to 8 million have been cleared from Angolan soil. This
is an enormous task, yet it is absolutely Vital to the revival
of the rural economy and life in general. Every support is
needed and the international community is called upon to
increase its assistance in resources and training in this area,
as well as to respond to the appeal now being prepared for
emergency rescue and humanitarian assistance programmes
for displaced persons.

We welcome the forthcoming adoption this afternoon
by the Council of a draft resolution which, among other
things, extends to 30 April 1998 the mandate of MONUA,
thus continuing to allow the peace process in Angola to
benefit by the help of the Mission's remarkable work.

We remain confident that, despite the remaining
problems, which we should not underestimate, the mid-
term report of the Secretary-General scheduled for 13
March will confirm that progress has remained consistent.
The Angolan people deserve and expect this.

We warmly congratulate and thank the Secretary-
General and his Special Representative for their
successful and dynamic work, and the three observer
States for their unflagging and devoted efforts.

