Mr. Bonser (Canada) (spoke in French): I
would like to thank you, Madam President, for this
opportunity to address the Security Council on the
situation in Afghanistan on the special occasion of
International Women's Day. Canada thanks the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)
for keeping Member States apprised of progress made
in the country. In particular, we thank Mr. Yamamoto,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, for his
briefing on, and tireless work in favour of, Afghanistan.

(spoke in English)

Allow me to join others in conveying our sincere
condolences to the people of Afghanistan in the
wake of recent violent attacks in Kabul and across
the country. We are disheartened by the toll such
attacks take on civilians, in particular on women and
children. While UNAMA'S recent report of a 9 per cent
decrease in civilian casualties in 2017 - as compared
to 2016 i is an improvement, any Civilian casualties
are unacceptable.

There are three themes that I will address today:
the peace and reconciliation process, the meaningful
participation of women in all aspects of Afghan society
and progress on human rights.

First, in the wake of the spike in recent violence,
it is now more essential than ever that the Afghan
Government, the armed insurgency and all parties
in the conflict come to the table for sincere peace
negotiations. In that regard, we urge the Taliban and
other insurgent groups to cease to use violence and to
engage in a negotiated peace. Peace and reconciliation
in Afghanistan must be Afghan-owned and Afghan-
led. In support of that, Canada commends both the
Afghan Government for convening the Kabul Process
on 28 February and Afghanistan's neighbours for their
efforts to work with the Government of Afghanistan
towards a more peaceful and stable region.

That brings me to my second point, namely, the
inclusion of women in all aspects of society, including
peace processes. For a peaceful, stable and prosperous
future to be achieved, women must be included, on
equal footing as men, in decision-making at all levels
of politics, society and the economy. Canada's national
action plan on women and peace and security recognizes
that peace is more enduring, stable and inclusive when
women are actively engaged in such processes. For that
reason, women must be given a prominent role in peace
negotiations at all levels and in all venues. As women
currently hold less than a third of parliamentary seats in
Afghanistan, it is especially important that we ensure
women are meaningfully included as both candidates
and informed voters in the upcoming elections.

The last theme I will address today is human
rights. Promoting and protecting human rights, with a
focus on women and girls, is at the core of Canada's
engagement in Afghanistan. Although there has been
notable progress made in that area, women continue
to be at a disadvantage as compared to men. Ongoing
violence, moreover, continues to deliberately and
disproportionately target marginalized ethnic and
religious groups, journalists, human rights activists and
civil society organizations. That is deplorable, and has
not gone un-noticed.

Canada remains committed to advancing the rights
of all Afghans by helping to improve governance
systems, increasing the capacity of Afghan institutions
and meeting the basic needs of the Afghan people,
especially women and girls. That includes supporting
the Afghan National Defense and Security Forces;
improving access to safe, quality education and health
services; and fostering greater economic opportunities.
Canada, moreover, remains a significant contributor
to the Afghanistan Independent Human Rights
Commission, a leading defender of human rights in
the country.

We were pleased to see that the Council has renewed
the mandate of the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan for a further 12 months. The Council
can count on Canada as a committed partner to help
Afghans create a more equitable, just and sustainable
future for all. We will continue to stand-by Afghanistan
in its efforts towards peace and regional stability.

