Mr. Cunningham (United States of America): I
want to applaud the excellent and thought-provoking
statements made by the Deputy Secretary-General and by
Ms. Bertini. I also want to join in welcoming you, Sir, to
New York and to the Council. I applaud your presence here
today to address this important subject.

With the need for peacekeeping and humanitarian
operations growing, the United States appreciates the focus
Argentina brings this month to the protection of United
Nations and associated personnel. Events in Kosovo, East
Timor, Burundi, Sudan, Sierra Leone and all too many
other places have illustrated the dangers to which these
personnel are exposed. Nearly 100 United Nations staff
have been murdered in recent years; another 80 have been
killed in the line of duty. These disturbing numbers do
not include the numerous humanitarian personnel working
for non-governmental organizations who have been
murdered, kidnapped, shot or otherwise harmed. We pay
tribute to these unarmed civilians, who all too often are
the targets of unprovoked attacks which must be
condemned.
The Security Council's decision to again address
this issue reinforces the seriousness of the matter. We
hope it will also inspire all Governments and non-State
actors to commit themselves to protecting those working
for peace and humanitarian relief. As Ms. Bertini noted
eloquently, the United Nations flag must not become a
target rather than a shield.

As a community of nations, we share a moral and
political obligation to take action to prevent the onset of
Violence and, when this fails, to mitigate conflict. We also
share a responsibility to protect United Nations and
associated personnel, humanitarian workers and members
of multinational forces working for peace and stability.
Under all circumstances, United Nations and associated
personnel have a right to protect themselves.
Nevertheless, it is incumbent upon host States and other
actors to create environments in which they can safely
carry out their missions. The primary responsibility for
the safety and security of humanitarian and United
Nations personnel rests with the authorities of the host
Government, but we must also do our best to ensure that
concrete steps are taken to protect those who serve and to
punish those who violate their safety.

The Security Council, along with the Secretary-
General and other concerned organs of the United
Nations, must continue efforts to bolster security and to
force protection for peacekeeping and humanitarian
operations. The Secretariat should develop comprehensive
security plans for all missions and we welcome the
Deputy Secretary-Generals comments today on the plans
to enhance security. It is imperative that all concerned
parties cooperate fully with the United Nations so as to
facilitate the timely, effective and secure deployment of
humanitarian and peacekeeping missions.

We further welcome the Security Council's decision
to avail itself of all of the tools appropriate for protecting

 

United Nations and associated and humanitarian personnel.
For example, the United States supports sanctions targeted
to deter and contain those who violate international
humanitarian and human rights law, as well as those parties
to conflicts who continually defy Security Council
resolutions.

We look forward to continuing the important work
that we are noting today and we thank Argentina for giving
its attention to this very important subject.

