Mr. Jallow: I am greatly honoured to brief the
Council once again on the progress of the completion
strategy of the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda (ICTR) and to present to you the first report
on the work of the Office of the Prosecutor of the
International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals.

The trial phase of the Office of the Prosecutor
of the ICTR has now concluded save for the receipt
of judgement in the case of Augustin Ngirabatware,
which is now scheduled to be delivered on 20 December
2012. With that will come the conclusion of the trial
phase of the ICTR. Similarly, all trial-related activities,
including the updating of the files of the fugitives,
evidence preservation proceedings in respect of the
three top-level fugitives, and litigation in respect of the
referrals of cases to national jurisdictions, have also
been concluded except in the case of The Prosecutor
v. Benard Munyagishari, in which there is a pending
appeal against the decision of the ICTR Referral
Chamber to refer his case to Rwanda for trial.

Our focus at the Office of the Prosecutor of the
ICTR for the past six months has been, and for the
ensuing months will continue to be, on the prosecution
and completion of appeals, the preparation of the
Office's records for archiving and handover to the
Residual Mechanism, and the completion of legacy,
residual and closure issues, as well as providing support
to the Office of the Prosecutor of the Arusha branch of
the Mechanism.

The conclusion of trials has substantially increased
the appellate workload of the Office of the Prosecutor,
and currently we are litigating 31 appeals arising
from nine cases. We nonetheless anticipate the timely
conclusion of this appellate workload by 2014, within
the time frame for the completion strategy of the ICTR
set by the Security Council.

The preparation of the records of the Office of the
Prosecutor for archiving by the Residual Mechanism
has progressed during the past few months and has
received a welcome boost with the promulgation of
the of the Secretary-General's bulletin on archiving
standards and retention schedules for the records of the
Tribunals (ST/SGB/2012/3). The bulletin clears the way
for the security classifications of the various records
held by the Office of the Prosecutor and the other
organs of the Tribunal. In July this year, following the
commencement of operations of the Arusha branch, I
was able to hand over to the Registrar of the Mechanism
the Office of the Prosecutor's records of some 27 cases
for retention by the archives of the Mechanism. The
remaining ICTR records will be handed over to the
Mechanism as and when they are cleaned up, properly
classified and packaged for secure storage, and when
they are no longer required as working records by the
ICTR.

These records and archives constitute an important
legacy of the ICTR and the other Tribunals for future
generations of researchers, historians, lawyers and
judges, as well as for the communities that were directly
affected by the situations under our mandate. So also
are a number of other important legacy projects on
which the ICTR has been working and which we plan
to conclude before the expiry of the Tribunal's mandate.

In 2006, at their first colloquium held in Arusha,
the Prosecutors of the International Tribunals, having
regard to the fact that the legacy of the Tribunals lies not
only in their jurisprudence, which is readily available,
but also in the practices that the various Offices of the
Prosecutor had developed in their operations, decided to
implement a best practices project that would document
the lessons learned from both successes and challenges
in the investigation and prosecution of mass crimes.

I am pleased to report that with the financial
support of the Government of Canada, the Prosecutors
of the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
(ICTY), the ICTR, the Special Court for Sierra Leone,
the Special Tribunal for Lebanon and the Extraordinary
Chambers in the Courts of Cambodia, on the basis
of their experience of the Tribunals, were able to
finalize a joint compendium of lessons learned on the
investigation and prosecution of international crimes
and to launch the compendium on 1 November, at the
annual conference of the International Association of
Prosecutors. The compendium is available to national
and international prosecutors and will, one hopes,
provide some guidance on some of the many difficult
aspects of the investigation and prosecution of mass
crimes.

Further work on legacy projects of this nature will
continue both jointly among the Prosecutors of the
various Tribunals and by individual Tribunals. The
Office of the Prosecutor of the ICTR has already made
substantial progress in executing a number of projects
from a best practices and lessons learned perspective,
including the tracking and arrest of fugitives and the
recording of the course of the 1994 Rwandan genocide
on the basis of facts established by the ICTR judicial
process, as well as the challenges in the referral of
cases to national jurisdictions for trial.

The latter project is intended to highlight the
difficulties and challenges encountered in finding
able and willing national jurisdictions for referral and
the measures, inter alia, of law reform and capacity-
building that have had to be undertaken in some
national jurisdictions in collaboration with the ICTR to
enable the States concerned to be legally eligible for
receipt of those cases. We hope the project will provide
useful lessons on the partnership between national and
international jurisdictions and on the implementation
of the principle of complementarity, whose effective
application is so critical to the future of international
criminal justice.

Similarly, we have also prepared two lessons learned
manuals on the investigation and prosecution of sexual
and gender-based violence, and on the management
of victims and witnesses of sexual violence crimes in
situations of armed conflict. Those two manuals, which
are now being finalized, were subjected some two
weeks ago to peer review at an international workshop
organized by my Office in Kigali in collaboration
with UN-Women, the Open Society Justice Initiative,
the East African Community and the Government of
Rwanda - to all of whom we are very grateful.

The manuals are based on the ICTR experience in
this particular field. Crimes of sexual violence were so
extensive in Rwanda during the genocide of 1994, and
unfortunately they continue to feature significantly in
many of the conflicts around the globe, making it one
of the biggest human rights challenges facing the global
community. We hope that our experience, captured in
those manuals and in the very useful discussions at the
workshop, will assist national and other international
jurisdictions to ensure accountability for such crimes.

We are currently also working on a final report of
the activities of the Office in time for the conclusion of
our mandate. We expect it will indicate what has been
undertaken and achieved, the challenges faced by the
ICTR in the execution of its mandate and the lessons
learned for the future of the struggle against impunity.

The reduction in the workload of our Office will
result in the considerable downsizing of the Office this
year and early next year. The Prosecution Division in
Arusha and the Investigation Section in Kigali will
both close down by 31 December 2012 and their staff
will be separated from the Tribunal. That will be
accompanied by staff reductions in the Information
and Evidence Support Section, the immediate Office of
the Prosecutor and in the Appeals and Legal Advisory
Division of the Office of the Prosecutor. Those staff
reductions are in addition to staff separations effected
earlier, at the end of June 2012.

Beyond the Office, there will also be significant
reduction in staff resources Tribunal-wide. To all of our
separating staff, we wish to record our appreciation for
their commitment and diligence, which has enabled the
ICTR to make significant progress in the discharge of
its mandate and in bringing justice to the victims of the
tragedy of 1994.

I now turn to the operations of the Office of the
Prosecutor of the Arusha branch of the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals.

The branch came into being on 1 July and has been
in operation since then. The recruitment of core staff
of the Office of the Prosecutor is ongoing, with 8 of
the 14 core staff already in place. The staff component
currently includes legal officers and investigators
charged with tracking and related assignments. We
expect the recruitment of core staff to be completed
in the next few months, and we plan to commence the
establishment of the roster of ad hoc staff soon after
the new year in order to be able to proceed with trials
without further delay in the event of any new arrests.

In order also to facilitate the work of the Office of
the Prosecutor of the Mechanism, I have also designated
several members of staff of the Office of the ICTR to
double-hat by attending to the Residual Mechanism
workload in addition to their normal ICTR duties.

I would like to record our appreciation of the
Registrars and staff of the ICTR, the ICTY and the
Residual Mechanism for their assistance, which has
facilitated the commencement and continuity of
operations of the Mechanism, in general, and of the
Office of the Prosecutor, in particular. In consultation
with my colleague at the ICTY, we have also commenced
preparations for the recruitment of staff for the Hague
branch ofthe Office ofthe Prosecutor in order to ensure
that it, too, can start work effectively on 1 July 2013, as
directed by the Council.

Since 1 July, the Office of the Prosecutor of the
Mechanism branch has focused on tracking the top
three fugitives - Felicien Kabuga, Protais Mpiranya
and Augustin Bizimana - the servicing of foreign
requests for assistance, the monitoring of cases referred
to national jurisdictions for trial, and trial preparations
for the possible arrest of the top three fugitives. Since
1 July, the Office ofthe Prosecutor ofthe Mechanism has
dealt with 23 requests for assistance from 11 countries,
in addition to hosting three national delegations in
support of the ongoing national investigations or
prosecutions. As more national jurisdictions take on
their share of the responsibility for investigating and
prosecuting persons suspected of having committed
atrocities in Rwanda, that aspect of the workload of the
Mechanism will continue and will probably increase.
The service provided by the Office of the Prosecutor
is crucial to empowering national systems and plays an
effective role in combating impunity for mass crimes.
It should continue to be supported.

In accordance with the ICTR rules, I have already
appointed monitors to observe the proceedings in the
two cases that have been referred to France and in
the Jean Uwinkindi case, which has been referred to
Rwanda for trial. The investigations of the cases in
France are progressing. The trial of Uwinkindi, after
the conclusion of the preliminary proceedings, is
scheduled to commence in the Rwandan High Court on
14 January 2013.

I will also appoint a monitor in the Bernard
Munyagishari case if and when the Appeals Chamber
confirms the referral, as well as in respect of the cases
of the fugitives referred to Rwanda as and when they
are arrested and transferred to that jurisdiction for trial.

However, the biggest challenge that the Mechanism
faces is the tracking, arrest and trial of the three
fugitives reserved to its jurisdiction. The readiness
of the Office of the Prosecutor of the Mechanism for
the trials has been greatly enhanced by the rule 71 bis
evidence hearings already undertaken and the general
updating of the files carried out by the ICTR. Those
files have now been handed over to the Mechanism
Prosecutor. The trials, however, cannot proceed in
absentia and the arrest ofthe suspects continues to pose
a major challenge for international justice.

Tracking has been intensified in the past six
months and will continue to be our priority. Our work
in Kenya and Zimbabwe and with other countries
and organizations in the region has been ongoing and
expanded to other countries and institutions outside
Africa.

I had useful discussions in September with
Government officials in Harare, Zimbabwe, on the case
of the fugitive Protais Mpiranya. The investigations
of the activities of the fugitive in Zimbabwe by
Residual Mechanism investigators and Zimbabwe
law enforcement officials is now ongoing. I have
received assurances from Zimbabwean officials of the
commitment of their Government to collaborate with
the Mechanism in the search for the fugitive.

The cooperation of all States Members of the
United Nations is absolutely essential for the tracking
and arrests not only of those three fugitives but also
of the eight others whose cases have been referred
to Rwanda for trial. At the level of the ICTR and the
Mechanism, we can track but have no powers of arrest.
That is a responsibility reserved for Member States;
hence, their legal duty to cooperate with the Tribunals
in that respect. The Security Council should therefore
continue to call on all Member States to discharge that
legal responsibility of cooperation with the Tribunals.

For our part, we shall continue to make tracking the
top priority of the Mechanism. Some two weeks ago,
the Mechanism and the ICTR took time to review the
current strategies and to explore new methods that may
help the Mechanism to fulfil its mandate, including in
the challenging area oftracking. As a result, we shall be
looking at new ways of doing things and hope that they
will be truly productive.

For the fugitives themselves, the clear message is
that tracking will not cease. There is no time limit for
the prosecution of the offences with which they are
charged. The search for them will therefore continue
until they are found and brought to justice, either before
an international mechanism or an appropriate national
jurisdiction to account for their deeds.

