Mr. Sidikou: I thank you, Madam President, for
this opportunity to brief the Council. It is particularly
gratifying to me, as I amjust starting out with this very
important responsibility as the Head of the African
Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM). I would also
like to extend my appreciation to the Council for its
historic Visit to Mogadishu on 12 August 2014, a clear
demonstration ofthe Council's unflinching commitment
to peace, security and stability in Somalia.

Let me start by echoing a point that was noted by my
colleague, the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Somalia, Mr. Nicholas Kay. The overall
political developments in Somalia remain encouraging,
with evidence of progress in the State-formation
process, the constitutional review and the preparations
for elections by 2016. Those developments demonstrate
that the Federal Government of Somalia is functional,
has continued to make efforts in meeting its domestic
obligations and continues to receive enhanced
international recognition and support. My friend
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Kay
has already provided an extensive briefing, so we will
leave it at that. I will only highlight a couple of points
from the latter part of his briefing.

On the security front, AMISOM. and the Somali
National Army forces are concluding the second
phase of our joint Operation Indian Ocean, which was
launched on 25 August 2014. The primary objective
of the Operation is to seize, secure and stabilize keys
districts along the coastline. Planning for Operation
Indian Ocean was an inclusive process that involved
all our partners, including the United Nations. That
joint planning process reduced the problems faced
by the United Nations Support Office for AMISOM
in delivering logistical support to both the Somali
National Army and the AMISOM. forces. To date, the
Somali National Army, supported by AMISOM. forces,
have recovered eight towns, including Al-Shabaab's
stronghold and de facto capital, Baraawe. The
populations in those newly recovered areas are now
enjoying their right to live in freedom from the fear and
cruelty of AI-Shabaab.

Al-Shabaab has suffered military reversals,
including, as Mr. Kay mentioned earlier, the loss of its
leader, Ahmed Abdi aw-Mohamed, and the recovery of
most of its remaining strongholds. It appears, however,
that the group still retains appreciable numbers of its
fighters and equipment, mainly in rural areas. That is
clearly designed to keep it in readiness for a probably
prolonged asymmetrical fight against the Somali
Government and people. In the short term, therefore,
Al-Shabaab is likely to remain a threat to Somalia and
its immediate neighbours as well as to AMISOM's
police- and troop-contributing countries. In terms of
internal dynamics, there are indications that the group
may break up into several factions, with some elements
pondering a shift in allegiance from Al-Qaida to the
Islamic State in order to attract resources and profit
from the Islamic State brand.

I would like to highlight and convey a number of
key messages. On the political side, I should underline
the importance of unity of purpose among the Somali
political leadership at both the federal and regional
levels, in order for us to deliver on Vision 2016. In that
regard, the State formation process that will ultimately
facilitate holding elections in 2016 must be inclusive
and must maintain the current momentum. We must
also ensure that words are translated into action,
especially in delivering services to the populations in
the newly recovered areas. On the security side, while
it is true that Al-Shabaab has been weakened, it retains
the ability to carry out asymmetric warfare and inspire
would-be terrorists in neighbouring countries, thereby
achieving its goal of striking beyond the borders of
Somalia.

Going forward, therefore, the ultimate defeat of
Al-Shabaab will require the immediate provision
of basic services to the population by the Federal
Government of Somalia and AMISOM, as well as
by international partners. Time is not on our side.
Al-Shabaab will attempt to continue to create chaos
and fear at every opportunity in order to disrupt the
people's everyday life, prevent the resurgence of social
and economic activity and thus make the people doubt
the capacity of the Federal Government of Somalia
and AMISOM. to provide security in the country. As
we go forward, therefore, AMISOM. will adjust to the
asymmetrical warfare and will work with the Somali
Government and the people to neutralize the remnant
of Al-Shabaab. We will also continue to work with
our partners, especially the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Somalia, to facilitate the establishment
of governance and service-delivery structures in the
newly recovered areas.

I would like to conclude by informing the Council,
as I did earlier today when speaking to members of
the African Union Peace and Security Council, that
the Chairperson of the African Union Commission,
Ms. Nkosazana Dlamini Zuma, has established an
independent, multi-country panel to investigate the
allegations of rape and sexual exploitation by AMISOM
forces made in the Human Rights Watch report
entitled "The Power These Men Have Over Us: Sexual
Exploitation and Abuse by African Union Forces in
Somalia", which was released on 8 September.

I would like to thank the Council for its support
to the African Union and AMISOM's troop- and
police-contributing countries, as well as its support for
AMISOM's civilian personnel.

