Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): As this is the
first time that I personally take the floor during your
presidency, Mr. President, I would like to welcome
you to the position and pledge the United Kingdom's
support for Kuwait during this month. I would also like
to thank your predecessor.

This is a very difficult set of issues, as we heard
very graphically today. I want to start by making it
crystal clear how much we support the United Nations.
We support Special Envoy Martin Griffiths, Lieutenant
General Lollesgaard, the Head of the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and the Head
of the World Food Programme. I think that I speak for
all the Security Council when I say that, based on our
discussions so far.

When things do not happen on the ground that
ought to happen on the ground, the people responsible
for that - those responsible for not moving forward,
blocking access and preventing aid getting through
to starving people - need to know that they are not
just acting against the people of Yemen and against the
United Nations, but they are acting against the Security
Council and its manifestation in New York, given the
fact that the Council is charged by the membership with
the maintenance of international peace and security. I
therefore call on all the parties to redouble their efforts
to work with those representatives on the ground, on
behalf of all of us and the United Nations. I would like
to draw the audience's attention to the fact that the
Council was able to speak with one voice to that effect
in its press statement (SC/13834) issued on 10 June. I
therefore repeat that all parties have a duty to cooperate
with the manifestations of the United Nations on the
ground. I will come back to the aid question and
diversion later, if I may.

I want to talk about the military escalation. At one
level, it is remarkable that the Al-Hudaydah agreement
has held as long as it has, and we need it to continue
to hold. We need Mr. Griffiths and Lieutenant General
Lollesgaard to be able to continue their very important
work because, whatever the problems in Yemen are, the
fact that the agreement holds is very important to us.

But the recent escalation in tension is extremely
worrisome. I want to condemn the Houthi attack on
Abha airport. Twenty six civilians were injured. I want
to express concern about the seeming link between the
Houthis and Iran. I would also like to use this occasion
to urge all parties to show restraint from retaliatory
military actions. Escalations are not in the long-term
interests of any of the parties. It is not in the interest of
regional stability and security. And it is certainly not in
the interest of the people of Yemen.

On Al-Hudaydah, the initial redeployment of
Houthi forces from the ports of Al-Hudaydah, Saleef
and Ras Isa is very welcome, but we need the Houthis to
complete the process by clearing mines and removing
military manifestations. We need both parties to engage
constructively with the United Nations, as I said earlier,
on expediting the implementation of the Al-Hudaydah
agreement. A return to military operations really would
be catastrophic for the Yemeni people.

We all know - I think that the Council has been
very clear - that a political settlement is the only way
to bring long-term stability to Yemen. We must not lose
sight of how to enable those broader political efforts. I
think that we all know that a resumption of the political
process needs to take place in parallel to further the
implementation of the Stockholm Agreement.

I was very interested in what Mr. Griffiths had to
say about the prisoner and detainee exchanges. Given
the importance of that single issue to overall progress,
I have to say I am slightly mystified as to why more
progress cannot be made. I therefore hope that we can
pick that up in consultations.

On the economy, the United Nations mediated a
meeting in Amman between the Central Bank of Aden
and Sana'a, that is, both branches of it, on enacting
the revenue-management elements of the Stockholm
Agreement. I want to endorse what the Special Envoy
said about the importance of improving Yemen's
economy and ensuring the payment of public-sector
salaries across the country. We encourage both parties
to continue to engage with the Special Envoy on the
issue and to meet again to pursue an agreement. I also
want to reinforce the importance of donor countries
being able to support the United Nations in that regard,
both in terms of foreign exchange and, as we heard
from Mr. Lowcock, in terms of humanitarian aid and
its disbursement. There is a cruel irony in the fact
that Yemen is enduring what is currently the worst
humanitarian disaster in the world while the appeals for
it are underfunded. Between us, and appealing also to
the wider United Nations membership, that is something
we have to put right. For its part, the United Kingdom
has made available more than half of its $300 million
in support, and we are going to bring forward further
funds where we can.
To turn to the humanitarian arena, I think that
the figures we heard from Mr. Lowcock are shocking.
If this war continues until 2022, I do not think there
are enough superlatives to describe how awful the
human cost will be, and it is already awful enough. I
think we Council members must redouble our efforts
to help support humanitarian access. The issue that
Mr. Beasley raised about the manipulation of aid
is cynical, and in a way evil. When it is all over, the
Yemeni people will remember who it was that tried
to starve them of assistance. Not only for the sake of
the people, but for the sake of the future stability of
Yemen, it is therefore extremely important that this gets
sorted out, and quickly. We should also consider what
Mr. Beasley said about the existence of factions within
factions as to who supports the impartial delivery of aid
and who does not.

I hope that other Council members will be able to
join me in supporting the World Food Programme's
efforts and calling on the Houthis to comply with
resolution 2451 (2018) and facilitate unhindered
humanitarian access. It is extremely important to
convey that message strongly today. I note that not all the
problems are coming from Houthi-controlled areas, and
it is important to point that out, but ifI have understood
Mr. Beasley correctly, there is a way to resolve those
other issues on the ground, meaning that the Houthi
problem is the biggest obstacle overall. I therefore
appeal to anyone with any humanitarian instinct on the
ground to work with the United Nations Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and the World
Food Programme to get this sorted, because as we have
all heard, the people of Yemen cannot take much more.

