The President (spoke in Russian): In my capacity
as President of the Security Council, I would like to
underscore that anyone who wished to take the floor
has had the opportunity to do so.

We have listened very carefully to all of those who
asked to speak to address the main agenda item, Syria,
as well as broader, more regional issues. I think the
statements made by everyone today and the exchange
that ensued were undoubtedly useful and will be
continued in future.

I shall now speak briefly in my national capacity.

I would like to say that the exchange and statements
made in the past few minutes of our meeting showed
how all the peace and security issues in the Middle East
are interlinked. In my national statement, I underscored
the deep regional significance of our swift action with
regard to a lasting and reliable settlement in Syria, and
our exchange of opinions demonstrated that, yet again,
if we seize the present opportunity to move quickly
towards a good and reliable settlement in Syria in the
interest of all Syrians, I believe that would make a
decisive contribution to the architecture of peace and
security that we all are trying to create in the Middle
East and in the Persian Gulf.

The exchange of statements we have had just
now only reconfirms that fact. In this regard, I would
also like to express my certainty that the ideas and
proposals that the Council has heard from the Russian
Federation with respect to the creation of a reliable
security arrangement in the Persian Gulf is a necessary
and useful foundation for the discussion of how we
can all jointly - together - help to create such a
security arrangement. I propose that we do not waste
that opportunity in our future discussions.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

There are no more names inscribed on the list
of speakers.

Before I adjourn the meeting, as this is the last
scheduled meeting of the Council for the month of
September, I would like, on behalf of the Russian
Federation, to express our sincere appreciation to the
members of the Council and the Secretariat for all their
support to us. It has indeed been abusy month. And, while
I might not be the one to say this, as I witnessed it more
from Moscow, as I saw today, and know from the work
of our Permanent Mission, headed by our Permanent
Representative, it has indeed been a busy month in
which we rallied to consensus on several important
issues within our purview. Unfortunately, that was not
the case on all of them, as was mentioned today. But
the consensus we did reach we could not have achieved
alone or without the hard work, support and positive
contributions of every delegation and representatives
of the Secretariat, including the conference servicing
officers, the interpreters, the translators, the verbatim
reporters and the security staff.

As we end our presidency, I know I speak on behalf
of the Council in wishing the delegation of South Africa
good luck in the month of October.

I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on the subject.

The meeting rose at 12.50p.m.
