Mr. Granovsky (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We would like to associate ourselves with the
words of gratitude to Ms. McAskie for her very
informative and substantive briefing. Unfortunately,
this briefing reaffirms our own assessment of the
humanitarian situation in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo as being close to catastrophic. We have a
very high assessment of the efforts of the international
community aimed at not allowing a further
deterioration of the humanitarian situation. At the same
time, it is obvious that a long-term and stable solution
to the humanitarian crisis is possible only through a
political settlement of the conflict.

Our position of principle in favour of a speedy
political settlement in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, on the basis of the Lusaka Agreement, remains
unchanged. We believe that, through the adoption of
Security Council resolution 1304 (2000), the Council
sent the parties to the conflict in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo an appropriate signal
concerning the need for an immediate cessation of
hostilities, the withdrawal of foreign troops from the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
implementation of the commitments undertaken in
accordance with the Lusaka Agreement without
disruptions or backsliding.

Based on the lack of any alternative to a political
solution in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, we
consider the long-term cooperation of all parties to the
conflict with the United Nations Mission, in
accordance with the decisions of the Security Council,
to be of the utmost importance, as well as the
establishment of the inter-Congolese national dialogue,
with the participation of all political forces of the
country, in accordance with the Lusaka Agreement.

Now it is important to refrain from rash decisions
and, with coordination between the United Nations, the
Organization of African Unity, the Southern African
Development Community and the States involved in
the conflict, to continue to consider the most suitable
forms of United Nations assistance to the peace process
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, including the
establishment of conditions for the deployment of the
second phase of the United Nations peacekeeping
operation.

