Mr. Fowler (Canada) (spoke in French): We
should like to thank the delegation of the United
Kingdom, and Ambassador Greenstock in particular,
for their tireless work in preparing the resolution we
have just adopted. It is a constructive expression of the
Security Council's dedication to peace and stability in
Sierra Leone. We believe that the measures imposed by
the resolution will make it possible to shed light on and
discourage the trade in illicitly mined diamonds in that
country, which is one of the basic causes of the war
there.

As we have mentioned in the past, the natural
wealth of Sierra Leone must be used for the benefit of
the entire population, as prescribed by the Lome Peace
Agreement, if we are to put an end to the horrendous
conflict in that country. Recent violations of the Lome
Agreement have compelled the Council clearly to
declare its position on that principle.

(spoke in English)

Canada believes that curbing the trade in rebel
diamonds from Sierra Leone requires concerted action
at the source, within the region and within the market.
We welcome the balanced approach of this resolution,
which targets illicit Sierra Leone diamonds through a
certification regime, while also recalling the
responsibility of the diamond industry to be vigilant in
its processes and in its practices.

We look forward to the conclusions of the
exploratory hearing and to the findings of the panel of
experts created by this resolution, which we hope will
shed light on the link between the trade in diamonds
and the supply of arms to rebel groups in Sierra Leone.

Our principal concern must be to ensure that
these positive measures are not undermined from the
outset. In this regard, Canada believes that the Council
may need to take further action to tackle the regional
sources of support for the abhorrent actions of the
Revolutionary United Front (RUF), the group most
clearly responsible for Sierra Leone's suffering in
recent years. The complicity of certain West African
States in exporting illicit diamonds from Sierra Leone
and in supplying the RUF with arms, in violation of
Council measures, must be faced squarely. The role of
Liberia merits particular attention in this regard, but it
is not alone and our actions in addressing Liberia's
conduct candidly and resolutely, as the European Union
has done through its suspension of assistance to
Liberia, will determine whether other parties in the
region are deterred or emboldened.

When the panel of experts created in this
resolution reports its findings, the Council will need to
examine carefully whether States, such as Liberia, have
ceased their involvement in the illicit diamond trade
and whether additional measures might be required to
enforce the embargo on arms transfers to the RUF.

The Council has signalled its sustained
engagement in this process by expressing its
willingness to consider a range of options to ensure
compliance with this resolution, including involving
the Liberia and Angola sanctions Committees in
enforcement efforts. Canada will support these efforts
and will press for candour at every turn. We must
undertake, as Ambassador Kamara has just said so
forcefully, to name and shame those who sustain this
war, which, over the past eight years, has violated
every standard of humanity.

The United Nations credibility with regard to
Sierra Leone is at stake in this resolution. Certain
States may well choose to test the resolve of the
Council with respect to this resolution. As a country
that has worked to ensure that practical, effective and
credible action on sanctions becomes part of our
collective ethic, Canada believes that the Council must
be prepared to build steadfastly on today's
undertakings and to take clear-eyed further steps if our
efforts at gaining full compliance are to be sustained
and are to be effective.

This resolution is an important step in the right
direction and will provide a solid basis for further
action in addressing the roots of the shameful conflict
in Sierra Leone and in bringing the suffering of its
people to an end.

