Mr. Liu Yang (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
wishes to thank President Agius and Prosecutor
Brammertz for their briefings on the recent work of
the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals (IRMCT).

China takes note of the gradual progress in the
Mechanism's judicial activities in the past six months.
Based on the Mechanism's earlier projections, the
remaining cases will be completed by the end of 2020.
China hopes that the Mechanism can continue to make
headway with the cases concerned in a pragmatic and
efficient manner on the basis of the set timelines.

China notes that during the reporting period,
the Mechanism, led by President Agius, has made
continued efforts to ensure the efficient and timely
conclusion of residual judicial proceedings, enhance
inter-branch coordination and foster a better working
environment for its staff, inter alia. A remote plenary
was also held to increase communication among all
judges. The Office of the Prosecutor has continued its
efforts to track down and apprehend the fugitives at
large indicted by the International Criminal Tribunal
for Rwanda. All these measures have had a positive
impact on the advancement of the Mechanism's work.

China welcomes the measures taken by the
Mechanism to implement resolution 2422 (2018) in
order to take a more prudent approach to addressing the
issue of the early release of the persons convicted. We
hope that the Mechanism will continue to take steps to
implement the recommendations of the United Nations
Office ofInternal Oversight Services in its related audit
and evaluation reports, with a View to the continuous
improvement of its work.

China wishes to reiterate that, pursuant to the
Council resolutions adopted on this matter, the IRMCT
is a small, temporary and efficient structure, the
function and size of which will diminish over time.
We hope to see the Mechanism continue to carry out
its activities in accordance with Council resolutions in
this regard.

Finally, I wish to take this opportunity to thank
Peru, as Chair of the Informal Working Group on
International Tribunals, as well as the Office of Legal
Affairs of the United Nations Secretariat, for their
coordination between the Council and the Mechanism.

