Mr. Dolgov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We welcome the participation in today's
meeting of the President of the Republic of Djibouti,
Mr. Ismail Omar Guelleh. We listened attentively to his
statement. We also welcome the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Djibouti. We acknowledge the assessment, to
which we listened. We also listened with attention to
the representative of Eritrea.

A month ago the Security Council considered the
report of the fact-finding mission that visited the
region from 28 July to 6 August (see S/2008/602). The
Russian delegation notes that the report provides a
detailed picture of the history of that border dispute, as
well as the chronology of many events that led to a
drastic escalation of the situation and armed clashes
from 10 to 12 June.

The Russian Federation expressed serious
concerns regarding the June events, which claimed the
lives of dozens of individuals. Along with other
members of the Security Council, we condemned
Eritrea's military actions against Djibouti in Ras
Doumeira and the island of Doumeira. We again call on
both sides to undertake to respect the ceasefire and to
show maximum restraint. Eritrea should immediately
withdrawal its forces to the former positions.

We are carefully following the development of
the situation on the Djibouti-Eritrea border. We believe
border problems should be settled exclusively by
negotiations, and we call on both sides, especially
Eritrea, to cooperate with each other and to undertake
diplomatic steps to resolve the issue peacefully, in
strict compliance with international law and the United
Nations Charter.

We back the efforts by the African Union, the
League of Arab States and other organizations and
individual States aimed at the rapid settlement of the
crisis and at normalization of relations between
Djibouti and Eritrea. We call on both sides to fully
cooperate in this process. We await implementation of
the Security Council's recommendations to the
Secretary-General for the immediate use of his good
offices, in coordination with regional efforts, to help
promote bilateral negotiations between Djibouti and
Eritrea in order to ease tensions by political means,
developing methods to strengthen mutual trust and the
peaceful settlement of the border situation. We hope
that Eritrea will agree to such a good offices mission.

We back the idea regarding the usefulness of
international high-level mediation acceptable to both
Djibouti and Eritrea. We reaffirm our readiness to
carefully follow, along with other Security Council
members, developments in the situation between the
two States so that it does not grow into a dangerous
regional conflict in the Horn of Africa.

