Mr. Gonzato: I have the honour to speak on
behalf of the European Union (EU) and its 28 member
States. The candidate countries the Republic of North
Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia and Albania; the
country of the Stabilization and Association Process
and potential candidate Bosnia and Herzegovina; as
well as Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova and Georgia,
align themselves with this statement.

I would like to thank the Secretary-General for
his comprehensive report (S/2019/703). I would also
like to thank Special Representative Yamamoto and
Executive Director Fedotov for their briefings, as well
as Ambassador Raz for her statement. They all brought
important elements to our attention.

The EU strongly acknowledges the crucial role
played by the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) and all the United Nations
agencies in supporting the Afghan people, encouraging
peace and reconciliation, monitoring and promoting
human rights and implementing the commitments
from the November 2018 Ministerial Conference on
Afghanistan. The EU wishes to have the closest possible
relationship with UNAMA, in a spirit of transparent
and open cooperation on the ground and in international
formats, for the ultimate benefit of Afghanistan.

The European Union remains a steadfast supporter
of the current efforts to achieve lasting peace in
Afghanistan. In the light of the current momentum
in the peace process, for the EU it is more important
than ever to preserve the political, economic and social
achievements of the past 18 years, for which Afghans
and the international community have made enormous
sacrifices - particularly the rights of women, children
and minorities. It is crucial to continue to enhance and
build on those achievements.

That approach has been clearly expressed by the
EU and its member States, notably through EU Council
conclusions in November 2018 and April 2019 and the
EU five-point offer to support the peace process, as
announced by Federica Mogherini, Vice-President of
the European Commission and High Representative of
the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy, at
the Geneva Ministerial Conference in November 2018.
The five points are helping the Government making the
peace process more inclusive; supporting post-conflict
reforms, including security sector reform; reintegrating
ex-combatants; contemplating a possible EU role
as guarantor of the peace process; and supporting
cross-border trade and infrastructure, as well as
regional connectivity.

While political will and strong leadership are
needed, a peace deal can be lasting only if it is owned
by all parts of Afghan society and not perceived as
being imposed on the population. All Afghans need
to feel included in the peace process. Nothing could
demonstrate Afghan ownership more than achieving
a nationwide ceasefire that puts an end to violence by
the time inter-Afghan reconciliation talks are launched.
The EU is ready to play an active role in supporting the
peace efforts and to facilitate consultation processes
and dialogues that will contribute to inclusivity by
involving all segments of Afghan civil society. Particular
attention should be given to the full involvement of
women, in line with resolution 1325 (2000), on women
and peace and security, as well as to the protection of
their constitutional rights.

The EU strongly believes that peace must not be
pursued at the expense of Afghanistan's democratic
development. We therefore fully support the holding of
fair and transparent presidential elections to strengthen
the legitimacy of State institutions, and promote the
democratization and political stability of Afghanistan.
To that end, the EU will continue providing financial
support - over €18 million - to address some of the
technical difficulties of the previous parliamentary
elections in October 2018.

The cessation of violence and achieving lasting
peace are key. The EU stands ready to renew its
long-term commitment to Afghanistan after a peace
agreement has been signed. As we have said before, if
there are expectations for the EU to provide substantial
financial, political, diplomatic and development
support after a successful conclusion of a peace
agreement, the EU needs to be involved at all stages of
the peace process.

This year has been important for EU-Afghanistan
bilateral relations, with High Representative
Mogherini's visit to Kabul and several bilateral
meetings in the framework of the EU-Afghanistan
cooperation agreement on partnership and development.
The EU Special Envoy for Afghanistan, Roland Kobia,
continues to visit Kabul and the region to support the
peace process.

As progress towards a political settlement
continues, the coordination among development,
security and political actors is crucial. The EU
maintains close cooperation with key international
partners. In that regard, we reiterate our support to the
NATO-led Resolute Support Mission efforts to provide
further training, advice and assistance to the Afghan
security forces and institutions.

The EU is a strong development partner for
Afghanistan, and our development cooperation
responds to the officially defined and presented Afghan
Government's priorities. The EU will continue its strong
commitment to on-budget support, based on Afghan
progress in the implementation of its policies and their
impact. The EU is currently starting to work on the
next programming cycle for Afghanistan, which will
cover the period from 2021 to 2027, and the potential
priorities in the context ofa peace agreement.

The EU continues its structured dialogue with
Afghanistan under the cooperation agreement on
partnership and development. We are also following
up on the outcome of the EU-Afghanistan Special
Working Group on Human Rights, Good Governance
and Migration, held on 5 May in Kabul. In particular,
we encourage the Afghan authorities to continue to
implement the relevant legislation, with particular
focus on areas such as the elimination of violence
against women, the use of the national action plan
for the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), the
protection of children and the prevention of torture
and ill treatment. Promoting the rule of law and ending
impunity for corruption will also be core elements of a
future sustainable peace.

The EU remains deeply concerned about the
high level of civilian casualties and the increasing
number of displaced people, and reiterates the need to
protect the civilian population, especially women and
children. We need to continue to protect the vital role
of humanitarian agencies and respect their impartiality
and humanitarian space in addressing the most urgent
needs of the most vulnerable.

In conclusion, this is a very important moment
for Afghanistan. However, all peace negotiations
and agreements will be viable and accepted by the
population only if they support and maintain the
values and achievements of the past two decades. The
democratization of Afghanistan should continue, along
with better protection of the rights of all Afghans and
safeguarding the country's democratic institutions. For
peace to be enduring, the full support of all States of
the region is needed.

