Mr. McLay (New Zealand): I will deliver a
shortened version of my statement; the longer version
can go to the website.

Luxembourg's presidency for today's debate is
very fitting, given its tireless work on addressing the
plight of children engaged in armed conflict. We thank
Special Representative Zerrougui, Executive Director
Lake and Under-Secretary-General Ladsous for their
briefings, and above all we commend Mr. Alhaji Babah
Sawaneh, whose address provided insights rarely heard
by the Council and was powerful testimony to the
fundamental importance of the issue.

The abuse of children in armed conflict is
regarded as abhorrent by the vast majority of United
Nations Member States, and against that background
New Zealand welcomes the consensus behind today's
resolution 2143 (2014) as a proper reflection of the
views of the wider United Nations membership. What
is required now is to further strengthen the political
will and leadership of the Council. We must continue
to reinforce the architecture on children and armed
conflict, not least by adopting new initiatives and
innovating in order to ensure effective follow-up
and greater accountability. Today's debate provides
a catalyst for new ideas, in the context of which we
commend Ms. Zerrougui and her partners on their
ambitious launch of the "Children, not soldiers"
campaign, which New Zealand supports.

The Secretary-General's recent report on children
and armed conflict in Syria (S/2014/31) presents, in
the starkest terms, the deplorable costs in young lives
and lost futures exacted by that awful conflict. It is a
reminder of the real cost of failure to act, and should
galvanize the Council to redouble its efforts regarding
Syria. The Council's recent resolution 2139 (2014)
was, among other things, a much-needed step towards
addressing the humanitarian situation facing children
in Syria, particularly as a consequence of attacks on
schools and children's arbitrary detention.

Despite commendable progress in some areas of the
children and armed conflict agenda, serious problems
remain in many places. We commend the Council for
recognizing the need for innovative, practical solutions.
But more innovation is required, and that should be
regarded as an urgent task. For example, the number
of persistent perpetrators is of particular concern. New
Zealand suggests that the Secretary-General's annual
report on children and armed conflict focus on and
give even greater prominence to such perpetrators.
In addition to the information already provided in the
annex, the report should also detail the number of years
that each perpetrator has appeared on the list. That
would highlight the worst of the persistent perpetrators.
The Council could also incentivize progress through,
for example, periodic briefings of the wider United
Nations membership in a special open session of the
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict,
which could highlight positive progress on a country
basis and provide an opportunity to discuss lessons
learned for use elsewhere.

The challenge of reducing and eliminating the
abuse of children in armed conflict is made all the more
difficult by the fact that the large majority of violators
are non-State actors. Progress cannot be made unless
we develop techniques for influencing such groups. We
also call on the Council to give greater consideration to
providing better support for the Special Representative,
United Nations agencies and Member States to enhance
their ability to engage with non-State actors.

The concept note for today's debate touches on one
other aspect, on which I would like to focus: attacks on
and the military use of schools. It has been referred to
by many ofthose who have made statements. Education
provides the foundation on which the next generation is
built. New Zealand welcomes the Council's expression
of concern about attacks on and the miltary use of
schools but such violation continues. More must be done
in response. The draft Lucens guidelines for protecting
schools and universities from military use during armed
conflict deserve very serious consideration. They
involve a practical and voluntary approach based on
existing international humanitarian law and provide a
resource for use by States to improve their own military
policy and doctrines and to assist others to do likewise.
Those ideas must, of course, exist within a much wider
framework of initiatives.

New Zealand grieves that children are still forced to
see things that no child should see and to do things that
no child should ever do. We again place on record our
commitment to the urgent cause of protecting children
from armed conflict and from the scourge of war and
to maintaining the gains that we have already made.
Above all, New Zealand is committed to achieving
even better outcomes for children who are, through
no choice of their own, deprived of their childhood by
being forced into armed conflict.

