Mr. Elaraby (Egypt) (interpretation from Arabic):
It is almost four months since the Security Council
adopted resolution 1054 (1996), in which it reaffirmed its
demand that the Sudanese Government comply with two
clear, specific demands earlier set out in two resolutions
of the Organization of African Unity, which had taken the
view that this matter posed a threat to the security of the
African continent.

The first demand was the extradition to Ethiopia of
the three suspects sheltered in Sudan and wanted in
connection with the criminal assassination attempt on the
life of the President of the Arab Republic of Egypt in
Addis Ababa. The second demand was that Sudan desist
from supporting terrorist activities and from giving shelter
to terrorist elements.

Since the adoption of that resolution in April, and
despite the fact that it imposed limited diplomatic
measures to compel Sudan to comply with the demands
of the international community, we note that Sudan has
persisted in its attempts to avoid complying with the
Security Council's requests, as is clear from the July
report of the Secretary-General.

We in Egypt had hoped that the Sudanese regime
would fully understand the clear message of resolution
1054 (1996), namely, that the Council will never tolerate
the conduct of any Government anywhere in support of
international terrorism or in providing on its territory any
shelter or sanctuary for traitors who have sold out their
countries, consciences and religion and who are
determined to use terrorism as a means to their ends.

This hope was reinforced when President Hosni
Mubarak met with his Sudanese counterpart, President
Omer Al-Bashir, in Cairo at the Arab summit. At the time
Egypt thought that Sudan had the political will expected
of it by the international community. At that time Egypt
accepted Sudan's request to open a channel of
communications between the countries' security
 

authorities to discuss the subjects that represent real
problems in this respect.

Unfortunately, Egypt hopes were dashed when we
realized that Sudan's aim was not to enter into a dialogue,
but rather to try to take advantage of Egypt's assent to
starting that dialogue to give the false impression to the
international community that it was doing what was
expected of it.

Egypt thinks that the resolution just adopted by the
Council and sponsored by the African countries of the
Council, resolution 1070 (1996), is a mere wake-up call
addressed to Sudan. It says that Sudan must cooperate with
the Council and with the concerned countries - especially
Egypt and Ethiopia - in order to comply with the requests
of the Council contained in previous resolutions and
reaffirmed in today's resolution.

It is extremely difficult for Egypt to return to the
Security Council because of Sudan's refusal to cooperate in
the implementation of the resolutions of the Council. What
the international community has announced is that it must
combat international terrorism by all means. No one fully
knows how deep and friendly are the relations that link the
Egyptian people with the Sudanese people: their ties are as
old as the Nile, are enhanced by geographical proximity,
neighbourly relations, a common language, the similarity of
their social customs and the human relations between the
two peoples in the Nile valley since time immemorial.
Moreover, we in Egypt consider that the common destiny
of Egypt and Sudan is a fact. That is something we have
felt since the dawn of history.

On this basis, I would like to repeat here very clearly
what I said on behalf of my Government throughout the
consultations: Egypt finds it unacceptable to be behind
anything that affects the interests of the Sudanese people,
adds to its economic suffering in its daily life or harms its
territorial integrity.

On the other hand, our brothers in Sudan should
understand that the resolutions of the Security Council
should be respected and implemented. That is why we call
on the Sudanese Government to take advantage of the grace
period given it by the Council, until the middle of
November 1996, to translate sweet talk into proper action.
The old Arab verse that the representative of Sudan quoted,
describes, as a matter of fact, the feelings of the Egyptian
people, because the Egyptian people never expected the
infiltration of terrorism from brotherly Sudan.

Egypt - whose people feel real bitterness - hopes
that the coming period will witness positive developments
from Sudan, in terms of the extradition of the suspects,
the provision of any information Sudan has about them
and the severance of all relations - I repeat, all
relations - with terrorist organizations so that the
interests of the brotherly people of Sudan will not suffer.

Allow me to conclude today, as I concluded my
statement last April by saying that every Egyptian
understands and feels the special nature of the age-old
historical relations in the Nile valley that link the two
peoples of Egypt and Sudan. We in Egypt consider our
country a natural extension of Sudan and Sudan an
extension of Egypt. Whatever touches the people of
Sudan touches the people of Egypt, and Vice versa. Egypt
is very eager for the Sudanese Government to turn on to
the right path so that the Sudanese people will enjoy
prosperity and good relations with all their neighbours,
especially with us in Egypt. We are confident that the
deep-going ties that link our peoples in the north and
south of the Nile valley, and which have been enhanced
during the course of history, will, God willing, for ever
continue to grow stronger, like the waters of the Nile, the
life-line of Sudan and Egypt.

