Mr. Boukadoum (Algeria): Let me thank China for
the initiative to hold an open debate on multilateralism.
The time is always ripe to take stock of an issue that
deserves the fullest attention. Indeed, we should
ask ourselves how we can uphold multilateralism
when it seems to be challenged. Do we believe in
multilateralism? More precisely, do we have a common
understanding of what multilateralism is? The answers
to those questions are not easy to define, but there
is common ground that cannot be contested. We, the
Member States and beyond, have to take a closer look
at the frameworks that we have at hand, of which the
United Nations is a strong pillar, a beacon and a cradle
for multilateral action.

As indicated in the Preamble of the Charter of the
United Nations, it cost humankind two world wars to
bring about an instrument aimed at preventing another
cataclysm that would annihilate it. There is no better
success and faith in multilateralism than the very name
of our Organization, the United Nations, which means
just that - nations that are clearly united beyond
mere membership, acting together for the sake of the
whole world.

The United Nations Charter is aprecious instrument,
but do we really implement its full power? Do we respect
the full meaning of its principles and goals? It is clear
that after more than 70 years of existence, the United
Nations needs to adjust its structures and become more
relevant, more efficient and more respected.

There are steps that ought to be taken. In that regard,
reform of the United Nations would be an integral part
of strengthening multilateralism. Many important
issues have lingered for too long. The revitalization of
the General Assembly, reform of the Security Council,
an increase ofthe Council's membership and a review of
its methods of work would all lead to better efficiency,
relevance and credibility and, at the end of the day,
to multilateralism.

One of the major tracks to be reinforced is closer
work with regional organizations. In that vein, we salute
the cooperation and coordination that exist between the
United Nations and the African Union, and we strongly
urge its strengthening.

Addressing the issues still at stake also lies in
perceiving the United Nations through a lens of
efficiency in resolving regional conflicts. For every
tremendous success of the United Nations, as in
Namibia and Timor-Leste, how many failures are
unjustifiably placed on the United Nations shoulders.
Clearly some issues, such as the question of Palestine,
have haunted the agenda of the United Nations since
its founding, but that failure cannot be seen but as a
failure of multilateralism. Regional conflicts old and
new are constant litmus tests that hover over the United
Nations and multilateralism. But are we not all equally
responsible for those failures? If we stick to the letter
and spirit of the Charter, some Members, especially
here in the Council, have specific duties that they
cannot ignore.

Multilateralism also means protecting the lives of
every human being on Earth and the necessity to promote
their well-being. The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and what it encompasses - namely, our
common responsibility and solidarity and the very
idea of no one being left behind and the eradication of
poverty - are also tests of and for multilateralism.

No one can secure their own well-being if they
ignore the well-being of others. No one can be safe
if all are not safe. The questions of climate change,
migration and terrorism are global and require global
and coordinated action. This is therefore a strident call
for multilateral action and solutions, in which big and
small and the powerful and not so powerful must think
together, work together and act together with mutual
respect and shared responsibilities.

I wish that we could draw some optimism from
those who inspired the United Nations Charter while
the Second World War was not yet finished. All their
values, principles, goals and mechanisms created
an inspiring momentum that, unfortunately, narrow
visions later impeded.

To us, multilateralism and patriotism are not
contradictory and should not be opposed to one another.
Our world, this global village, cannot sustain being
disenfranchised or excluded. If we are to be forced
to accept that, then we will end up with beleaguered
citadels where the besieged and besiegers live not in
tranquillity but in dubious confrontation. Hurricanes
know no borders; neither does sunlight. There is one
way to alleviate hurricane damage, rebuild what is
destroyed and have sunlight shine on everyone - that
is precisely through multilateralism.

Let me conclude by appealing to you, Mr. President,
to achieve an outcome of this open debate that is in the
best interests of our records and history.

