Mr. Heller (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): Mexico
would like to express its thanks to you, Sir, as
President of Costa Rica, for the initiatives of your
Government and for convening this important debate
on an issue of such importance for maintaining
international peace and security. We welcome your
presence, as well as that of the Vice-President of
Panama and the High Representative for Disarmament
Affairs.

Mexico believes that strengthening collective
security is closely related to conflict prevention. In
View of the continuing increase in Violence associated
with conflicts around the world, it is necessary to
promote the active participation of the international
community, both through the search for solutions that
will lead to greater security, and through the regulation
and reduction of armaments and the promotion of
development, especially at a time of serious crises in
terms of food, energy and finance, whose consequences
we cannot yet fully comprehend.

At the 2005 World Summit, the heads of State
and Government recognized the link that exists
between development, peace and security and human
rights. In that context, Mexico has sought to promote
and support various initiatives associated with those
concepts, such as the establishment of the
Peacebuilding Commission, which is an institutional
link between security and development. My country
has worked actively on the Geneva Declaration on
Armed Violence and Development and the regional
Declaration of Guatemala, which drew attention to the
extremely negative effects of insecurity and armed
violence on development.

Mexico shares the View of Costa Rica that
reduction in and regulation of armaments around the
world would significantly contribute to strengthening
international peace and security. The international
community needs to promote initiatives on
disarmament, non-proliferation and arms control in the
context of working on the conflicts being dealt with by
the Security Council.

For more than sixty years, Mexico has stated that
the total elimination of nuclear weapons is the only
rational path to guaranteeing collective security. All
States that have nuclear arms and technology for
non-peaceful ends should carry out systematic and
transparent weapons-reduction actions, which would be
effective means to increase confidence and promote the
elimination of deterrence doctrine. States should
comply equally and with the same conviction with their
obligations on disarmament and non-proliferation,
because those are two sides of the same coin and are
definitely, politically and legally interdependent.

The same criteria should be applied to other
weapons of mass destruction, such as chemical and
biological weapons. Strengthening the framework of
the various legal instruments of the disarmament
regime and the Review Conference of the Parties to the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons in
2010 are essential priorities.

Mexico is concerned that the deployment of
conventional arms is an emerging threat to
international peace and security, to development and
even to the survival and well-being of some States. It
has been seen, and must be recognized, that the great
majority of arms on the black market today belonged at
some point to the legal arms trade.

Mexico is a country seriously affected by the
illicit trade in small arms and light weapons and we
attach the greatest priority to finding a solution for that
problem, which is also linked to organized crime. We
repeat that it is an issue that can only be solved through
international cooperation and agreement based on the
principle of shared responsibility, which requires the
active participation of both governmental and
non-governmental actors. All States, as well as
manufacturers, exporters, arms brokers,
non-governmental organizations and, obviously, the
appropriate intergovernmental organizations, need to
intensify their efforts to achieve the objectives of the
Programme of Action on Small Arms.

The full implementation of the United Nations
Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and
Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light
Weapons in All Its Aspects and the Protocol against the
Illicit Manufacturing of and Trafficking in Firearms,
Their Parts and Components and Ammunition, and the
regional conventions on the illicit trade in arms are
necessary tools to avoid the destabilization caused by
the arms trade. In that context, those instruments are a
significant contribution to the maintenance of
international peace and security.

In View of those elements, Mexico supported the
initiative initially presented by Costa Rica in the First
Committee to establish the feasibility of negotiating a
treaty on arms trade. Mexico believes that a future
arms trade treaty should establish arms trade criteria
that are objective, non-discriminatory and in
accordance with international law.

Mexico believes that a strong legal framework to
combat the illicit trade in arms, together with effective
controls on trade and the important work of the
Security Council on arms embargoes in cases of armed
conflict, are essential in order to guarantee
international peace and security.

I also wish to announce that Mexico will sign, in
Oslo in December 2008, the Convention on Cluster
Munitions that was recently negotiated.

I will conclude by noting that Mexico, as a non-
permanent member of the Security Council from 2009-
2010 hopes to contribute decisively with a
multidimensional security approach to the various
conflicts around the world and will work to strengthen
collective security based on international cooperation.

