Mrs. DiCarlo (United States of America): Let me
thank you, Mr. President, for organizing this important
debate and for your leadership on the presidential
statement that we adopted today (S/PRST/2010/25).
Let me also thank Under-Secretaries-General Amos
and Le Roy, High Commissioner Pillay and the
Director General of the International Committee of the
Red Cross, Mr. Daccord, for their valuable briefings
and their dedication to protecting civilians.

Today we commend the work of the United
Nations and the hundreds of thousands of brave
peacekeepers and humanitarian workers who put their
lives at risk to protect civilians living in harm's way.
We recognize the importance of the collective efforts
by the political, peacekeeping, human rights,
humanitarian and development components of the
United Nations to ensure proper protection from the
horrors of war. We have seen the impact the United
Nations and its partners have made in such places as
Burundi, Cote d'Ivoire, Haiti, Liberia, Sierra Leone,
the Sudan, Timor-Leste and other countries shaken by
armed conflict. The United Nations and regional
organization partners have also played an important
preventive and mediation role in countries such as
Guinea and Kenya.

The progress of the United Nations is the result
of years of hard work at Headquarters and in the field.
Resolution 1894 (2009) was a landmark in the global
effort to better protect civilians in conflict zones. So,
too, is this year's report from the General Assembly's
Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations
(A/64/ 19). Both documents called for mission-wide
planning, better predeployment training and stronger
protection strategies. We applaud the Organization's
recent development of mission-wide protection
strategies in Cote d'Ivoire, the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and the Sudan. We urge that those strategies
be implemented, and we look forward to the expansion
of similar approaches to other United Nations missions.

Despite those notable achievements, we are still
reminded every day of how far we have to go. We are
deeply concerned by the trends outlined in the
Secretary-General's report (S/2010/579), especially the
seemingly ceaseless unlawful targeting of civilians,
including women, children, humanitarian workers and
journalists. Children are still being forcibly recruited to
become soldiers. Women and girls in particular face
constant threats of rape and sexual abuse, and the
number of refugees and internally displaced persons
has only grown larger since last year.

All too often humanitarian workers themselves
are the targets of attack by warring parties and
terrorists. Such intimidation and violence is appalling
and unacceptable. While eight United Nations
peacekeeping missions are now mandated to protect
civilians from physical violence, many civilians suffer
not only from indiscriminate attacks but from attacks
directed at them deliberately. The United States calls
for more concrete actions to hold accountable those
who attack humanitarian and peacekeeping personnel.
We must also pursue accountability in places
where insurgents and terrorists hide among civilian
populations and turn communities into battlefields.
Those groups continue to inflict unspeakable crimes on
innocents. In some cases, they actively use religious
establishments, hospitals and neighbourhoods to launch
rocket and mortar attacks and compromise the
protection of civilians in such areas.

The United States hopes that we can work
together towards improvements in four key areas.

First, we must continue our efforts to better tailor
peacekeeping mandates to adequately address
situation-specific challenges on the ground. That
includes laying out a clear hierarchy of tasks so that
peacekeepers can understand the priorities. The
Secretary-General's report notes the progress that the
Council has made in mandating civilian protection in
peacekeeping missions. Nevertheless, better planning,
preparedness and policies are needed to support the
missions' efforts to reduce the vulnerabilities of
innocents in conflict zones.

Secondly, we should increase our ability to
provide peacekeepers and humanitarian organizations
with the knowledge, training and resources needed to
fulfil their protection mandates, including protection
against sexual and gender-based violence. Many
peacekeeping missions and humanitarian organizations
struggle due to inadequate resources and insufficient
communication with local communities. The United
States is proud to play a leading role in developing
peacekeeping capacity, particularly with regard to
military and police programmes.

Thirdly, we must ensure that the Council is not
being selective in its application of protection
principles. We are encouraged by the work of the
informal Expert Group on the Protection of Civilians.
We call for its focus to expand to consider cross-
cutting protection concerns and to monitor progress on
the benchmarks and indicators being developed by the
Secretary-General. We also welcome the updated aide-
memoire of the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, which will be useful in Council
discussions.

Fourthly, we must hold accountable groups and
individuals that flagrantly violate the laws of war,
including those who use rape and sexual violence as a
weapon of war. The primary responsibility for ensuring
accountability lies with States, but the international
community must be prepared to take action against
those who violate international humanitarian law,
including through the imposition of sanctions, such as
the freezing of assets, the banning of international
travel or restricting the flow of goods and arms. We
must help Governments create, maintain and operate
credible national courts, where possible, and support
international and hybrid tribunals, when necessary, to
end impunity. The International Criminal Court plays a
key role in bringing perpetrators of the worst atrocities
to justice.

We understand far better than we did a decade
ago what protecting civilians in armed conflict truly
entails. We are developing more tools and mechanisms
to implement lessons that have been painfully learned.
We must remain vigilant and address future challenges
together more consistently. We still have far more to do
to save the lives of civilians in conflict zones. The
situations differ from conflict to conflict, but all
civilian victims are innocent and they should all be
sheltered by the rule of law and the rules of war.

