Mr. Hoang Chi Trung (Viet Nam): First of all,
like others, I wish to thank Mr. Jan Eliasson, the
United Nations Special Envoy, and Mr. Salim Salim,
the African Union (AU) Special Envoy on Darfur, for
their respective presentations to the Council this
morning.

Viet Nam shares the Secretary-General's concerns
about the deteriorating humanitarian conditions in
Darfur, where tens of thousands of people continue to
be homeless, to live in dire conditions and to fall
victim to various violent acts. We condemn all acts of
violence against civilians and humanitarian aid
workers. My delegation is also deeply concerned over
the worsening security and humanitarian situation in
Darfur. Military actions have further complicated the
situation and the political process. We call on the
parties concerned to exercise the utmost restraint and
to cease military and violent activities. We urge the
rebel groups, in particular those that have not signed
the peace agreement, to renounce the use of force and
to engage in the peace process, with a view to reaching
a comprehensive solution ensuring the legitimate
interests of all parties concerned.

My delegation highly commends the activities of
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID), especially under such difficult
circumstances on the ground, where the force has not
been enhanced in terms of either manpower or
equipment. The deployment of UNAMID on time and
in full capacity in accordance with resolution 1769
(2007) is extremely important to promote the political
process and to improve the humanitarian and security
situation in the region. Member States should fulfil
their committed contributions to UNAMID promptly so
that the force can fulfil its mandate. My country highly
values the roles played by the United Nations and the

African Union, and strongly supports the efforts made
by the Secretary-General and the United Nations and
African Union Special Envoys, Mr. Jan Eliasson and
Mr. Salim Salim, in promoting the peace process in
Darfur. We also support the appointment of a United
Nations-AU joint chief mediator, who will assist the
work of the Special Envoys and promote the peace
process.

Finally, we note with profound regret the recent
events taking place in the border area between Chad
and the Sudan, which have strained bilateral relations
and complicated the regional situation. Viet Nam
wishes to call upon the Governments of both Chad and
the Sudan to exercise the utmost restraint and to
comply with the provisions of the Dakar Accord,
particularly to resolve the conflicts through peaceful
negotiations.

