Mr. Giacomelli da Silva (Brazil) (spoke in French): I thank France for convening today's debate. I
commend the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Ms. Sandra Honore, for her detailed briefing
and reiterate my Government's appreciation for her
leadership. I also thank the Permanent Representative
of Haiti, Mr. Denis Regis, for his statement.

I would like to begin by acknowledging the
efforts of the United Nations Stabilization Mission
in Haiti (MINUSTAH) to support that country's
political process over the past 13 years. MINUSTAH
has demonstrated the potential that innovative
approaches offer and that could serve as a model for
future peacekeeping operations elsewhere in the world.
Its positive efforts include its coordination between
civilian and military personnel on the ground, its
community outreach strategies aimed at building trust,
and the remarkable role played by women in all areas of
the stabilization process.

We would also like to emphasize the importance
of tools such as the community-violence reduction
programme and the quick-impact projects that have
played an important role in supporting the primary
objective of stabilization and have been crucial in
strengthening the rule of law in Haiti. As highlighted
in the Secretary-General's report (S/2017/840), the
Mission has implemented 1,788 such quick-impact
projects covering areas as wide-ranging as human
rights, the rule of law, good governance, the protection
of the environment and the supply of drinking water.

The past 13 years have been a unique and
unprecedented experience for Brazil, which has
served as commander of MINUSTAH's troops and
deployed more than 37,000 soldiers to help the Haitian
authorities ensure a stable and secure environment
for its inhabitants and rebuild the country following
various natural disasters. Brazil's commitment
throughout the Mission's mandate was affirmed once
again by our troops' decision to temporarily reactivate
their operations to support Haitians when Hurricane
Irma passed through.

Brazil will continue to support a peacekeeping
doctrine that truly contributes to the sustaining peace.
We are in favour of integrated mandate approaches
that promote stabilization, dialogue, reconciliation,
development and human rights. We were pleased to
see in the report of the Secretary-General that the
planning for the establishment of the United Nations
Mission for Justice Support in Haiti (MINUJUSTH)
is well advanced, in line with the parameters set out
in resolution 2350 (2017). We commend the smooth
transition of tasks from MINUSTAH to MINUJUSTH,
the Haitian authorities, the country team and other
partners, which required close consultations between the
Mission's management team and the local authorities.

We would like to emphasize that among
MINUJUSTH's many tasks, developing the police
force is very important. Although the capacities of the
Haitian National Police have improved, that relatively
young institution is still facing considerable challenges.
We commend the efforts to fully implement its strategic
development plan, particularly the goal of increasing
the ratio of the number of police officers to the
population, as well as the percentage of women in the
police force, and we support the Secretary-General's
call to international partners to increase their support
for the Government of Haiti's efforts in this area.

We agree with the Secretary-General's assessment
that further measures are needed to protect and
promote women's rights. For example, the role of the
Victims' Rights Advocate should be transferred from
MINUSTAH to MINUJUSTH in order to address
the problem of sexual exploitation and abuse. Sexual
violence in peacekeeping operations is a major concern
for the United Nations. MINUSTAH has always
been very rigorous in dealing with the rare cases of
sexual exploitation and abuse, none of which were
committed by Brazilian peacekeepers. Brazil reaffirms
its commitment to supporting all initiatives aimed at
combating such crimes.

We thank the Special Envoy for Haiti for her
strategy in the fight against cholera. We take note ofthe
reduction in the number of cases of the disease during
the past year. We call on States to redouble their efforts
to secure the funds necessary for the implementation of
national and international plans aimed at stopping the
spread of the disease.

The work of the United Nations in Haiti is not
finished. We agree with the Secretary-General's
observation that the success of MINUJUSTH will
depend, in large part, on its ability to rapidly establish
a relationship of partnership, mutual understanding and
cooperation with the Government.

The end of MINUSTAH and the transition to
MINUJUSTH represent a step forward in building
a culture of peace, but, as stated by the Secretary-
General in his report, the security and development of
Haiti can be ensured only by the national authorities
and the Haitians themselves.

We are paying close attention to recent political
developments and call for moderation from all parties
at such an important juncture for the country.

Let me conclude by reaffirming Brazil's long-term
commitment to and solidarity with Haiti, as well as our
confidence in the determination and perseverance of
the Haitian people to succeed in their quest for stability,
democracy and prosperity.

