Mr. Apakan (Turkey): I would first like to thank
you, Mr. President, for organizing this open debate on
the Security Council's working methods. This is an
issue of great importance to the entire United Nations
membership, and regular exchanges in such settings are
extremely helpful in understanding and addressing
mutual concerns and expectations.

Indeed, the Security Council is the principal
organ responsible for the maintenance of international
peace and security and, as such, not only what it does,
but also how it does it are matters of legitimate interest
to the entire international community. In that regard,
although there is broad recognition of the seriousness
and productivity of the Council, criticism of its
working methods and, in particular, of the way in
which it interacts with the outside world is abundant.

The debate on the matter revolves mainly around
a number of shortcomings that are seen to undermine
the work of the Council. Indeed, there have been
repeated arguments about the deficit of democracy,
legitimacy, legality, accountability and
representativeness in the Council. I am not arguing
about whether these are right or wrong, but I believe
that we need to be aware of these perceptions if we are
to address them properly. After all, legitimacy and
credibility are products of performance and develop in
line with the fulfilment of expectations.

Of course, given the special nature of the
Security Council, one has to be aware of the inherent
limitations of what can be achieved through an
exercise focused only on working methods in the
absence of a wider reform initiative. In fact, all
principal organs of the United Nations, including the
General Assembly, must go through a reform process to
ensure the coherence and integrity of the Organization.

However, this does not mean that improvements
in working methods are either impossible or ineffective
without reforming the Council. On the contrary, many
10-32351
of these negative perceptions have been somewhat
alleviated by small but effective measures taken over
the years regarding the Council's working methods.
The presidential note in document S/2006/507,
prepared under Japan's presidency in 2006, is an
excellent example of what could be done through such
initiatives. Furthermore, it would be artificial and
distorting to see the Council through the lens of
permanent-versus-elected members, as they all bear
collective responsibility for international peace and
security. The Council belongs to us all - not only to
the 15 but to the entire United Nations membership.
Hence, there is a collective responsibility to make it
work better.

Therefore, it would be wiser for us today to
approach this issue in a practical rather than a
philosophical manner. We need to be realistic and to
focus on what is feasible as opposed to what is ideal.
We must act with common sense and with a View to
finding the right balance between effectiveness,
transparency and credibility. In this regard, the full and
effective implementation of the agreed measures in
S/2006/507 and subsequent notes is certainly what is
needed most. Of course, we should also continue trying
to further improve and expand on document
S/2006/507 in light of the evolving practices of the
Council and the specific needs of international
relations, and taking into account the views of
non-members. The ongoing process in the Working
Group on Procedures presents an important opportunity
in this direction, and we very much welcome Japan's
leadership in this regard. Given the excellent working
relationship currently prevailing in the Council, I have
full confidence that a satisfactory outcome will be
achieved to that process.

The Council's working methods, I believe, can be
taken up in two distinct but related categories. One is
related to the Council's internal working culture and
the other pertains to its relationship with interlocutors
outside the Council. Today, in view of the time
constraints and public nature of this debate, I will
focus on the latter aspect and try to offer some
practical ideas and suggestions, many of which are in
fact already cited in document S/2006/507.

The primary aim in addressing the Council's
relations with non-members should be to increase the
transparency of its work, to make it more interactive
with partners, and to ensure that it is better informed
on issues it is dealing with. Any success in this
10-32351

direction will make the Council more effective and its
decisions more implementable. To that end, we should
fist continue trying to have more open formal meetings
as opposed to closed consultations. The statistics show
that this is indeed possible without having any negative
effect on the work of the Council. On the contrary, it
makes the Council more accessible and credible.

We should also try to have a closer working
relationship with the troop- and police-contributing
countries, especially with respect to the missions in
which they participate. There are many ways of doing
this, but more frequent and substantive meetings with
them come at the top of the list. We are already making
some strides in this direction in the context of the
peacekeeping reform we embarked upon last year, but
there is room for more progress. In this regard, we can
also consider sharing the reports and draft resolutions
concerning their missions with the troop-contributing
countries, simultaneously with the Council members,
and seek their views and inputs in a timely manner.

Likewise, organizing informal, interactive
dialogue meetings with countries that the Council deals
with as part of its agenda can also be a step in the right
direction. Those "15+n" meetings will give us the
opportunity to listen to their side of the story and
receive first-hand information as to the situation on the
ground. Such exchanges need not always be at the
ambassadorial level, and we can consider also holding
them among the experts or coordinators.

Another valuable idea that I understand is
repeated almost every time we have this discussion is
the utility of having regular meetings with the
Presidents of the General Assembly, the Economic and
Social Council and the Peacebuilding Commission. In
addition to the Presidents of the Council meeting with
them every month, which has been partly implemented,
we might also consider inviting them to our working
luncheons with the Secretary-General.

Of course, I would be remiss ifl did not mention
the need for and benefit of regular consultations with
regional and subregional organizations, such as the
African Union, which can complement the work of the
Council and create a synergy of efforts. Given the
overlapping agendas and common objectives, that point
needs no further explanation but full implementation.
The same is valid for the Arria Formula meetings,
whereby we have the opportunity to listen to
non-member stakeholders and representatives of
3
non-governmental organizations, who often provide
clear, uncensored and eye-opening assessments of the
questions we grapple with in the Council. The informal
character of these meetings is in itself an advantage
that needs to be tapped more often.

In the same vein, the Security Council's missions
could and should be used more effectively in
communicating our messages, contacting our
interlocutors on the ground and getting a better first-
hand assessment of the situation. The terms of
reference and objectives of these missions should thus
be prepared very carefully so as to better serve our
larger purposes.

Finally, the Presidents of the Council should be
given a more systematic role in conveying the gist of
our closed consultations to non-members and the
media. The practice of issuing oral remarks after
consultations is thus very useful, but we should avoid
micromanaging the exercise and allow more leeway to
the Presidents in informing the interested parties about
the Council's deliberations.

Before concluding, I would like to touch very
briefly upon another issue that is somewhat pertinent to
our internal working culture, but is also of critical
importance to the legitimacy and credibility of the
Council's decisions. It concerns how we prepare and
negotiate the Council's documents, be they resolutions
or press and presidential statements. Indeed, the
tendency in the Council is to hold advance
consultations on many of those documents among a
limited number of countries, such as groups of friends,
before sharing them with the rest of the Council
members.

One might argue in favour of the practical utility
of having directly interested countries agree on the
basic parameters of documents in a way that facilitates
consensus-building. However, that should by no means
limit the full involvement of all Council members in
the work of the Council. Otherwise, the ownership and
thus the implementability of the Council's decisions
would be weakened. Moreover, the fact that the
Council often acts as a quasi-judicial body whose
decisions, such as sanctions, affect international law as
well, involving every member fully in decision-shaping
and decision-making processes, is of even further
significance in that respect.

I have spoken at length. I know that there are
many more speakers on the list, so let me stop here and
congratulate you once again, Sir, not only for this
particular meeting, but for Japan's continued leadership
in improving the working methods of the Council. I am
confident that today's meeting and our efforts within
the Council will empower the Council and make it a
more effective, transparent and coherent body - a goal
commonly shared by the United Nations membership.

