Ms. Rodriguez Gomez (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We would like to begin
by thanking the Deputy Secretary-General for his
presence today. We also commend the initiative of the
Spanish presidency of the Security Council, because
we know that the Middle East is passing through a very
dangerous period, not only for the subregion but for
humankind as a whole.

My delegation aligns itself with the statement to
be delivered by the Permanent Representative of the
Islamic Republic of Iran on behalf of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries.

The situation in the Middle East, in particular in
Palestine and its occupied territories, is a matter of
deep concern for the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.
The recent wave of violence that has lashed the
occupied territories for the past 19 days has left more
than 53 dead and thousands wounded. That cannot be
interpreted in isolation. It is the result of the prolonged
illegal occupation for almost 60 years that has denied
the Palestinian people their human rights and the right
to self-determination as a free and independent country.
I especially welcome the presence of the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the State of Palestine at this meeting.
We also welcome the efforts of the Secretary-General
during his recent Visit to Palestine and Israel aimed at
persuading the parties to put an end to violence in the
occupied territories.

I will pause here to make a clarification. Language
is important. If we look at the agenda item of today's
meeting - "The situation in the Middle East, including
the Palestinian question" what we face in Palestine
is no longer a "question". We should be speaking of
the tragedy of Palestine, because for seven decades
the Palestinian people have faced terrorist assaults,
massacres and the complete denial of the human rights
of men, women, children and the elderly.

 

A conflict, as we have indicated on other occasions
in this Chamber, presupposes equality between the
parties. But we cannot equate victims with those who
victimize them. That is not correct. We need to clarify
our language. However, we appreciate the efforts of
the Secretary-General. And we believe it is necessary,
as has been said before, for the Security Council to
visit the region so as to reaffirm the responsibilty of
the Organization and promote of a political solution
to the conflict, which has become a permanent act of
aggression by the State of Israel against the people of
Palestine and even, I dare say, against its own people.
We are certain that the great majority of the Israeli
people yearn for a permanent peace. My country is
aghast at the historic level of violence and damage
that Israel has caused the Palestinian people, who find
themselves without due international protection. We
echo the request by the Palestinian delegation for the
Security Council to shoulder its responsibility in this
situation, all the more so now that the population of
Israel has begun to take up arms to create paramilitary
militias that will exacerbate the conflict.

Over the course of seven decades, the toll has been
42 massacres and hundreds of thousands of people
killed. We must speak clearly and firmly on that
point. Throughout the 70 years of the existence of the
United Nations, the people of Palestine have faced a
continuous state of complete lack of respect for their
most fundamental rights. It is unfortunate that, ever
since the Organization was established, no political
solution to that bloody conflict has been found. That is a
subject of frustration for the Organization, and no doubt
for the international community as a whole. Israel's
systematic policy of denying the Palestinian people's
right to self-determination and the existence of their
own sovereign State has created the conditions under
which extremism and Violence win over the civilian
population, especially young people. The deliberate
intention of the State of Israel to impede the success
of every attempt to negotiate a firm and lasting peace
should capture the attention of the entire international
community. The occupying Power generates brutal
cycles of violence in order to justify its oppression
and control of the territory in a permanent process
of colonization. In just 10 years, from 2004 to 2014,
Israel's military spending has been almost €110 billion.
I do not know whether the representative of Israel, in the

statement he made earlier, was referring to the amount
spent to fight defenceless children. This photograph
was taken just one day ago. Has the military spending
been devoted to fighting those children? Or perhaps to
flouting the rights of children, as members can see in
this other image.

One year after the military aggression against Gaza,
we must not forget the suffering of the victims of the
ill-named Operation Protective Edge, which, according
to information in the Secretary-General's report
(S/2015/677), led to the death of 551 children out of a
total of 2,251 victims altogether. That paints a picture
of war crimes committed by the occupying Power and
demands international punishment for the perpetrators.
That was one year ago. Those are only a few images,
but we know that the international community was
horrified, and there are even more tragic and dreadful
images that, perhaps, we have not brought into this
Chamber because the day is far from over.

In Gaza, the ongoing crisis is the worst of the
past decade in humanitarian terms. Israel is hindering
the work of reconstruction by obstructing imports of
medicines and access to school supplies and sanitation
and farming equipment. This initiative, which has
depended on the support of the international community,
has been cut short by the occupying Power's refusal
to relax its control of access to Gaza. Israel's aim is
perfectly clear. It wants to divide the Palestinians and
render the existence of an independent State of Palestine
impossible. I cannot fail to mention the situation in
Palestine right now, in which more than 300 children
have been detained, in contravention of international
law and in violation of their human rights. Their
status as minors has been ignored and they have been
subjected to cruel, inhumane and degrading treatment
by the occupying Power. Where Palestinian children are
concerned, Israeli jails bring us back to humankind's
darkest times, in which torture and persecution have
become the rule rather than the exception.

The acquiescent attitude that some States exhibit
vis-a-vis the Palestinian question should draw the
attention of the Council and the entire international
community. Every effort to resume political talks is
blocked by the hegemonic centre. It would appear
that the only path for Israel is colonizing Palestinian
territory and denying that nation its right to self-
determination. The result, paradoxically, is that since
the Quartet began using its good offices to get peace
talks started, the Government of Israel has unleashed
a new wave of oppression and widespread Violence that
has blocked the path we need to ajust and lasting peace.

We call on the Security Council to speak out
immediately, demand that Israel end this new cycle
of Violence and put the Palestinian people under
international protection, in accordance with the Fourth
Geneva Convention and the Council's own resolution
904 (1994). Palestine's appeal for the protection of
the lives of its citizens from the occupying Power's
continued and systematic aggression must be heard.
In this context, the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
rejects the use of the veto, which only promotes terror
through impunity. In the context of the Palestinian
tragedy, it is a veto of shame. Venezuela reaffirms its
full support for the right of the citizens of the State
of Palestine to self-determination and to live within
internationally recognized borders, in accordance with
the Charter of the United Nations and the relevant
resolutions of both the General Assembly and the
Security Council.

On 30 September, we witnessed the raising of the
Palestinian flag as part of the Organization's seventieth
anniversary celebrations, testifying to the commitment
of the majority of the Members of the United Nations
to the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people.
This organ should therefore act in accordance with the
decision and the voices of the majority of its members.
It is high time that the State of Palestine became a full
Member, and that the threat of a veto by one member
of the Security Council cease being used as a weapon
prolonging the suffering of the Palestinian people. It is
a veto of shame that encourages terror and impunity.

We support every initiative aimed at achieving a
lasting solution to this tragedy. It is vital that the Security
Council act urgently to advance the negotiations, in View
of the fact that the failure to resolve the issue is having
a serious impact on peace and stability in the Middle
East. We will give unreserved support to a resolution
aimed at contributing to a definitive solution to this
prolonged conflict that includes an immediate halt to
Israel's occupation of the territory that historically
belongs to the Palestinian people, as well as an end to
its racially and religiously discriminatory policies and
efforts to crush the people of Palestine.

I cannot conclude without expressing, on behalf of
the President and people of the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela, our full support for the Russian Federation's
action in Syria. We know that right now President Putin
is giving the entire Western world a history lesson by
fighting terrorism directly, without double standards
or politically exploiting an issue as sensitive as that of
terrorist violence, but which other Governments have
used to ignore or strike down Governments that are not
useful to their imperialist purposes.

