Allow me to address the Security Council in my capacity as Chair of the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC). Even as we continue to adapt to the global challenges and uncertainties presented by the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, the threat posed by terrorist groups, including the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant, Al-Qaida and their affiliates, continues to pose grave threats to peace and security around the world, in particular in Africa and South and South-East Asia. A further major concern for us all is the increase in terrorist acts committed by lone actors, individuals and groups embracing what is referred to by a number of Member States as "extreme right-wing" or "racially and ethnically motivated" terrorism. These various groups and individuals have demonstrated their ability to adapt to the current unprecedented situation resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic by, inter alia, continuing to exploit new technologies for radicalization, recruitment and fundraising purposes. The Committee has worked to ensure business continuity, with the support of its Counter-Terrorism Executive Directorate (CTED), including by convening regular informal-informal meetings through closed and open video-teleconferences (VTCs). The assessment of Member States' implementation efforts, of course, remains central to the work of the Committee and CTED. During the second half of 2019, prior to the onset of the pandemic, CTED conducted 12 assessment visits on the Committee's behalf. Due to the travel restrictions imposed by the pandemic, the Committee was able to conduct only two assessment visits earlier this year - to Equatorial Guinea and Qatar. In order to continue dialogue and engagement with Member States, the Committee is currently considering a proposed modality for conducting hybrid assessment visits to Member States on a temporary basis, through a virtual component and, subsequently, as soon as circumstances permit, through a physical on-site component. Conducting hybrid visits would allow the Committee to carry on its core mandate of monitoring, facilitating and promoting Member States' efforts to implement the relevant Council resolutions, without altering its established procedures. In the meantime, the updated framework document for Counter- Terrorism Committee visits to Member States, aimed at monitoring, promoting and facilitating the implementation of resolutions 1373 (2001), 1624 (2005), 2178 (2014), 2396 (2017), 2462 (2019) and 2482 (2019) and other relevant Council resolutions, has been issued as a Security Council document and is now available on the CTC website (S/2020/731, annex). The Committee has also accelerated its review and adoption of the overview of implementation assessment and detailed implementation survey of Member States, prepared by CTED. Thus far, the Committee has reviewed the documents of 177 Member States. Pursuant to paragraph 17 of resolution 2395 (2017), CTED has also been working to strengthen its desk-review assessment tools, including by developing the electronic Detailed Implementation Survey and revising the overview of implementation assessment, to enhance their utility to Member States, donors and partner agencies in the context of designing targeted technical assistance programming. An increasing number of visited States have given their consent for the Committee to share their respective visit reports, either partially or in full, with key United Nations partners and technical assistance donors. That facilitates the sharing of technical assistance needs and good practices in a transparent and proactive manner, and it should be encouraged. The Committee also regularly invites Member States to deliver briefings on their ongoing implementation of the recommendations set forth in their respective visit reports. The Committee welcomes CTED's enhanced dialogue with relevant United Nations entities as well as with Resident Coordinators and country teams of States recently visited or about to be visited. The ongoing dialogue helps integrate the technical assistance needs identified by CTED into their work. The Committee also welcomes CTED's ongoing monitoring and analysis of the implications of the pandemic for Member States' counter-terrorism and countering- violent-extremism measures. In the context of its work to identify emerging terrorism-related issues, trends and developments, while working together with its partners, including the member entities of its global research network, CTED has also issued a number of analytical publications, including the recent trends tracker on the integration of gender considerations into counter-terrorism responses in accordance with resolution 2242 (2015). Furthermore, CTED has continued conducting in-depth deep-dive missions, including virtually, in the context of the United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism (UNOCT) global programmes, such as the United Nations Countering Terrorist Travel Programme and the Fusion Cells programme. The Committee and CTED thereby continue to follow-up with UNOCT in designing, programming and funding capacity-building projects and activities, based on their recommendations. The Committee and CTED have a clear mandate, pursuant to the relevant Security Council resolutions, to monitor, promote and facilitate Member States' implementation of Council resolutions on counter-terrorism. In order to ensure the continuity of that work in the current exceptional circumstances, the Committee has continued to hold open briefings through informal-informal VTCs. This practice also keep States informed about the policy implications of newly adopted Council resolutions. One such example was the open briefing held in August to present the Committee's updated technical guide to the implementation of resolution 1373 (2001) and other relevant resolutions. In October, the Committee organized an open VTC on emerging trends in violent extremism conducive to terrorism and addressing violent extremism through a human rights-based approach, which was an opportunity to explore possible responses to emerging threats in full compliance with international human rights obligations. In October, the Committee also held a closed VTC on maritime security, during which the participants stressed the vulnerability of porous maritime borders that could be exploited by terrorists for travel and cross-border criminal activities, such as trafficking in arms, persons, drugs and cultural property. The maritime domain offers a set of possible opportunities for terrorist attacks against vulnerable and soft targets, such as cruise ships and critical infrastructure, including port facilities and offshore fixed platforms. Countering terrorism financing also remains a major focus of our attention. The pandemic has increased the risk that terrorists and terrorist organizations will exploit new financial instruments, including virtual assets, to raise and move funds. Because of the pandemic, it was necessary to postpone the planned joint special meeting of the Committee and the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999), concerning Al-Qaida and the Taliban and associated individuals and entities, on terrorism-financing threats and trends. However, a closed joint VTC was held in June, during which CTED and the Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team presented the findings of their joint report on countering terrorism financing issued pursuant to resolution 2462 (2019). Earlier this month, the Committee also held a virtual open briefing on the role of judges, prosecutors and defence counsel in bringing terrorists to justice, including the effective use of battlefield- or military-collected evidence. The Committee continues to stress the importance of promoting gender-sensitive and a whole-of-society approaches to countering terrorism and violent extremism that is conducive to terrorism, including by encouraging the participation of civil society organizations, women's groups, youth, religious leaders and other actors concerned. In that regard, the Committee welcomes CTED's ongoing virtual consultations with civil society organizations on counter-financing-of-terrorism measures and their implications for human rights. The lockdowns imposed by Governments in response to the pandemic have led to a global increase in the use of social media. That has provided terrorist groups with an opportunity to further broaden and target their online messaging. The Committee has therefore strengthened its focus on the need to assist States to identify ways to counter terrorist online narratives. In January, the Committee and CTED organized an open briefing on countering terrorist narratives and preventing the use of the Internet for terrorist purposes, in accordance with the guidelines set forth in resolution 2354 (2017). The requirement for us to meet virtually is of course unfortunate, but it is a clear sign of the unprecedented time in which we are all currently living. I look forward to an opportunity to brief the Council in person as soon as circumstances permit. During this time of unprecedented challenges, we may wish to focus our attention on the following areas. First, we should continue to pay particular attention to the possible short-, medium- and long-term impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic on the global terrorism landscape, including the exacerbation of the underlying drivers of terrorism and violent extremism conducive to terrorism. Secondly, we need to ensure that counter-terrorism and countering violent extremism remain high on the international peace and security agenda in the context of the COVID-19 pandemic, in the light of Member States' numerous competing priorities, and thatthe Committee maintains its essential role in monitoring, facilitating and promoting the implementation of the relevant Security Council resolutions. Thirdly, it is essential to further strengthen international collaboration and cooperation between Member States and United Nations entities and between Governments and civil society organizations to achieve the objectives set forth in the relevant Council resolutions on counter-terrorism and countering violent extremism. Lastly, let me assure the Council that the Committee and CTED will continue to assess the impact of the pandemic on the global terrorism landscape and proactively support the efforts of the Council and Member States to address the ever-evolving global terrorist threat.
