Mr. Sahovic' (Yugoslavia): Allow me at the outset
to congratulate you, Madam President, on the
outstanding manner in which you have presided over
Security Council deliberations on a number of
extremely important issues during this month. My
delegation listened with great attention to the
introductory interventions of the Presidents of the
International Criminal Tribunal for Yugoslavia (ICTY)
and of the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda
(ICTR), as well as the Prosecutor, Ms. Carla Del Ponte.

Yesterday and today, the activities of the ICTY
have been the focus of our attention here at the United
Nations, first in the General Assembly and now in the
Security Council. From what has been heard so far, it
appears that the prevailing assessment is that both the
general climate for the Tribunal's work, especially in
the area of the former Yugoslavia, and its actual
performance in the course of the past year have
improved. We share this view. Indeed, the present
Governments of the countries directly concerned -
and of course, I include my own country - adopted in
the past year a constructive and cooperative approach
towards the Tribunal. The ICTY, on its part, is
implementing measures aimed at improving its
proceedings to make them more expeditious and
efficient in order to fulfil its envisaged task in the
foreseeable future.

However, it has also been stressed that much
more needs to be done to achieve that objective. In this
connection, one of the issues that has been raised both
yesterday and today was the need for more consistent
and comprehensive cooperation on the part of the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia with the Tribunal.
Allow me therefore a few comments on the subject.

On many occasions in the past month, it has been
emphasized from the highest levels of our Government,
including by the President, the Foreign Minister and
the highest Serbian and Montenegrin authorities, that
the cooperation with the Hague Tribunal is of crucial
importance for the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. My
country is well aware of its international obligations in
that respect and is committed to fulfilling them. The
federal Government and the Governments of both
Republics are making serious efforts and have taken a
number of concrete measures to enhance cooperation
with the Tribunal. The transfer of Slobodan Milosevic'
to The Hague is one of those measures which has been
widely recognized as a major development and a
turning point in that respect. A number of other
indicted persons from the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia have been transferred to The Hague, as well
as some from elsewhere in the region who resided in
Yugoslavia. Some important voluntary surrenders also
took place, including those connected to the Dubrovnik
case, which was facilitated by the authorities of the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and of the Republics.

Cooperation with the Prosecutor's Office in
Belgrade is also proceeding well, we believe. The staff
of the Office has full freedom of movement and the
ability to discharge their duties unimpeded including
interviews with victims and witnesses. Tribunal
investigators participated in a number of investigations
in the territory of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia.
What we consider very important at this stage is that
the work on formulating an internal legal framework
aimed at facilitating cooperation with the Tribunal is
under way. A law on cooperation with the Tribunal,
once finalized a and I hope and am confident that it
will be soon - will regulate the cooperation with the
ICTY in the most comprehensive manner.

Cooperation with the ICTY is a process, and it
should be understood as such. If we look back at the
last 12 months, we will see significant improvement. I
am confident that in the coming period it will improve
further. It should also be understood that cooperation is
a two-way process. For its success, as eloquently stated
yesterday in the General Assembly by the Ambassador
of Norway, it is important that the population in the
region be informed about and understand the
significance of the Tribunal's work. Therefore, we
believe that the ICTY should make consistent efforts to
explain its mission as a balanced and impartial one. It
is also extremely important to strictly preserve the
Tribunal's role as a judicial mechanism for determining
individual responsibility for crimes committed in the
territory of the former Yugoslavia since 1991.

There were some attempts in yesterday's
discussion on the report of the Tribunal to connect
ICTY cases to issues related to State responsibility,
which is completely outside the scope of the Tribunal's
jurisdiction. Such an approach will not help efforts to
achieve wider reconciliation and improvement in
relations within the region. I will not elaborate here on
issues related to the importance of improving the
Tribunal's functioning, such as those related to sealed
indictments, the frequent change of its rules of
procedures or compensation for those who were
acquitted, since I mentioned them yesterday in the
General Assembly.

The same applies to the contribution we would
like to see the ICTY make in dealing with cases of
crimes committed against Serbs and other non-
Albanians in Kosovo and Metohija since the
deployment of UNMIK and KFOR in the province in
June 1999.

However, I would like, in conclusion, to point out
that all concerned should concentrate on their own
responsibilities towards the Tribunal, rather than
looking elsewhere or in the neighbourhood. This is
what we in the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia are
trying to do. Only in such a manner can we improve
our capabilities to cope with the past and gradually
take over, with full responsibility and in a manner
consistent with the principle of the rule of law, cases
that the Tribunal wishes to refer to national
jurisdictions. That, I believe, should become a trend in
the future, and only that can bring peace, reconciliation
and recovery to the region.

