The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as representative of the United States.

I would like to thank Ambassador Umarov for
his briefing. We warmly welcome him in his new role
as Chair of the Committee pursuant to resolutions
751 (1992) and 1907 (2009) concerning Somalia and
Eritrea, and have full confidence in his ability to lead
the Committee as it oversees the important role these
sanctions play in advancing peace and security in the
Horn of Africa.

I would also like to thank the Somalia-Eritrea
Monitoring Group for its efforts to report on the
implementation of the sanctions and to keep the
Council and the Sanctions Committee informed on a
range of issues affecting the Horn of Africa, including
counter-Al-Shabaab efforts, corruption, piracy,
international human rights and humanitarian law
violations, and violations of the sanctions measures.

Turning first to Somalia, the Chairman's briefing
highlighted many of the ongoing reasons why the
Council must remain committed to supporting Somali
efforts to pave the way towards a stable, prosperous
and peaceful future. We share Ambassador Umarov's
concern about the ongoing threat Al-Shabaab poses
to Somalia and the region. Today, we are witnessing
increasing depravity from Al-Shabaab as it intensifies
its asymmetric attacks against civilian targets,
security services and Government officials. We must
maintain robust counter-AI-Shabaab efforts to prevent
backsliding on the tentative security gains achieved in
recent years.

The cycle of violence in Somalia and the region
cannot be broken without good governance. We
strongly support President Farmajo's and Prime
Minister Khayre's focus on combatting corruption, and
welcome the new Federal Government of Somalia's
financial disclosure and code of conduct requirements
for ministers. We are ready to lend greater support
to strengthen the Federal Government's fiscal
transparency and oversight efforts. We support the use
of sanctions as a tool and as part of a comprehensive
United Nations strategy to deter violence and corrupt
activities. We welcome President Farmajo's call for
security sector reform and encourage improved,
transparent and inclusive governance. It is imperative
that Somali resources benefit all Somalis, that Somali
security services be well trained and adequately
compensated, and that security forces respect human
rights and be held to high standards of accountability.

On the arms embargo, we urge the Federal
Government of Somalia and Member States to increase
their efforts to comply with existing measures and
to notify the Committee promptly when making use
of the relevant exemptions when supporting Somali
security sector institutions. We are particularly keen
to understand more about the potential plans of a
Member State to build a military base in Berbera and
the discovery of 25,000 blank-firing pistols in the port
of Kismaayo. We urge the Federal Government of
Somalia and Member States to redouble their efforts to
implement the embargo and share information in order
to ensure that weapons do not fall into the hands of
Al-Shabaab or others with malicious intent.

We also encourage the Joint Verification Team
to continue to make progress on its important goal
of improving the Federal Government of Somalia's
management of weapons and ammunition. Illegal
activities such as illegal, unreported and unregulated
fishing and illicit trade in charcoal contribute to
corruption and instability in Somalia and the region.
As the Chair raised in his briefing, we continue to
express our concern over illicit, unreported and
unregulated fishing in Somali waters, which poses a
threat to coastal communities' livelihood and food
security. We welcome any Somalia-Eritrea Monitoring
Group reporting on the recent uptick in piracy activity,
as well as on the nexus between illicit, unreported and
unregulated fishing and piracy.

On the illicit charcoal trade, while the Somalia-
Eritrea Monitoring Group has reported some indication
that Al-Shabaab may be shifting away from this trade,
we still believe that the group is attracted to this kind
of financing. Member States should remain vigilant and
cooperative, and actively share information as it relates
to the charcoal ban in order to more robustly enforce it.

Turning to Eritrea, the Council will have a number
of serious issues on its agenda to consider as it prepares
for the upcoming review ofUnited Nations sanctions on
Eritrea. These include the need for a full and transparent
accounting of the whereabouts of remaining Djiboutian
prisoners of war, assessing the extent of Eritrea's arms
embargo violations, Eritrea's support for armed groups
that seek to destabilize the region, and the extent to
which Eritrea is willing to cooperate with the Somalia-
Eritrea Monitoring Group.

Related to cooperation between the Somalia-Eritrea
Monitoring Group and the Government of Eritrea, it
will be important for the Monitoring Group to travel to
Eritrea with the Chair during his proposed visit to the
region. Without Eritrea's engagement with the Somalia-
Eritrea Monitoring Group, including by allowing the
Monitoring Group to visit Asmara, the Council will
not be able to make a fully informed decision about
the future of these sanctions. We believe that it is only
through open dialogue here and in Asmara that we can
address remaining peace and security challenges. We
sincerely hope that the Government of Eritrea will seize
the opportunity to take a first step towards improving
engagement with the Somalia-Eritrea Monitoring
Group through this proposed visit.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I now give the floor to the representative of Djibouti.

