Mr. Ouane (Mali) (spoke in French): At the
outset I would like to thank you, Sir, for having
convened this meeting of the Security Council so that
Ambassador Chowdhury, the Chairman of the Security
Council Committee for Sierra Leone, could introduce
to us the report of the Panel of Experts set up pursuant
to paragraph 19 of section B of Council resolution
1306 (2000) on Sierra Leone. We thank Ambassador
Chowdhury for his introductory remarks, and we
welcome here the members ofthe Panel of Experts who
are here today.

The report before the Council contains
information and recommendations regarding many
countries of West Africa, in addition to Sierra Leone.
In this regard, we welcome the convening, in the next
few days, of another meeting between the Security
Council and an important delegation from the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), led by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Mali. This meeting, which is a carry-over of the
meeting of 21 June 2000, will be broader and more in
depth. I will therefore confine myself here to a few
preliminary comments.

First, ECOWAS is greatly concern about the
conflicts ripping apart the subregion of West Africa, in
particular because of the continuation of the conflict in
Sierra Leone. Confronted with this situation, in 1998
ECOWAS adopted a moratorium on the import and
export of light weapons in West Africa. Also, in a more
limited fashion the twenty-third summit of ECOWAS,
held in Abuja in May 2000, called for a regional
investigation of trafficking in arms and diamonds. The
upcoming meeting of the Security Council with the
ECOWAS ministerial delegation will provide a useful
opportunity for an update on this investigation.

Secondly, the United Nations and ECOWAS must
work together to restore peace in Sierra Leone and the
entire West African region. In this connection, we are
greatly pleased by the mission of the Security Council
to Sierra Leone and the West African region last
October, and the subsequent recommendations it made.
We also welcome the decision by the Secretary-General
to conduct a United Nations inter-agency mission in
West Africa, which from 9 to 24 February will visit 10
countries in our region. It is important that the mandate
of this mission include assessing the needs and
priorities of West Africa for peace and security.
We have great hopes for that mission. Under its
terms of reference, it should submit recommendations
for and elements of a regional strategy to be
implemented by the United Nations or, possibly, by the
United Nations in cooperation with ECOWAS, with a
view to meeting the needs and dealing with the
problems that are identified.

Thirdly, ECOWAS will do everything it can to
work with the Security Council, in particular in the
search for a solution to the Sierra Leone conflict. The
report before the Council is intended to contribute to
this goal, and the comments by ECOWAS on this
report will be given at the upcoming meeting of the
Council with the ECOWAS ministerial delegation.

