Mr. Ward (Jamaica): My delegation, too, wishes to
associate itself with the warm welcome extended to
Ambassador Levitte and we look forward to continued good
relations with his delegation.

We also wish to thank Mr. Annabi for bringing us up
to date on the situation in East Timor. Over the past few
months since the adoption of resolution 1272 (1999), the
Secretary-General's Special Representative and the United
Nations Transitional Administration in East Timor
(UNTAET) have worked tirelessly in the face of numerous
challenges and extremely high expectations to ensure the
implementation of resolution 1272 (1999) and to lay the
foundation for East Timor's eventual transition into the
international community as a viable, democratic and
independent country. My delegation wishes to reiterate its
full support for the work of UNTAET and we attach
particular importance to the full implementation of
resolution 1272 (1999). We wish to commend UNTAET for
its work as it seeks, in collaboration with the East Timorese
people, to lay the foundation for the transition to
independence.

At the last briefing, we were informed by Mr. Vieira
de Mello that, by the end of February, the transfer of the
International Force in East Timor (INTERFET) to the
United Nations Transitional Administration would be
completed. This was on target. INTERFET and UNTAET
must be commended for this smooth transition and we are
confident that UNTAET will carry forward INTERFET's
work in a manner which will continue to focus on the
entrenchment of law and order and the restoration of peace
and stability in East Timor.

Several positive developments have indeed occurred
since we were last briefed. We have noted the
establishment of the East Timor postal service in
collaboration with the Portuguese postal service and the
Universal Postal Union; the approval of regulations for a
new border regime; and the approval of regulations for
the organization of the courts and public procurement for
civil administration. These regulations, we understand,
will provide the framework for the future development of
East Timor. We would be interested in hearing about
continued progress in this regard.

The signing of the agreement with the World Bank
is a significant and welcome development. Early
implementation of these initiatives and the requisite
disbursement of funds are crucial to the process of
rebuilding and reconstruction, particularly at the
community level. The recent visits of the Secretary-
General and President Wahid of Indonesia were also
positive developments.

We remain concerned, however, about the pervasive
unemployment and the generally precarious economic and
social situation in East Timor, which seem to be
contributing to some criminal activity. Of grave concern
to us also are the reports of recent incursions, particularly
by the militia. These incidents can only serve to
undermine the generally stable situation. UNTAET must
continue to maintain a firm security presence throughout
East Timor. We note the efforts of UNTAET, in
collaboration with the Indonesian authorities, in dealing
with this matter. In no way must these incursions or
incidents of violence be allowed to derail the process in
East Timor. We hope that the steadily increasing numbers
of civilian police and the strengthening of the rapid-
reaction unit will greatly assist in addressing situations
such as these and, in general, the maintenance of law and
order.

The rate of refugee return has been encouraging. As
reported, the rate now stands at over 153,000, with
another 50,000 indicating their desire to return. This
indicates that there is a greater level of confidence among
the East Timorese people regarding the situation there.
We are concerned, however, about the continued activities
of militia groups aimed at frustrating the process and we
urge the Indonesian Government to take whatever action
is necessary to remedy this situation. We also strongly
urge flexibility to the Government of Indonesia with
regard to the deadline for the return of the refugees.

The long-term sustainable development of East
Timor must continue to be given priority attention. In this
regard, the international community must continue to
focus its attention on capacity- and institution-building. It
is critical that efficient systems of governance and public
administration be established, which would allow for a

 

smooth and eventual transition from UNTAET to local
governance. Although it is early in the process, we believe
that attention must be given to this from the very outset. In
this regard, we note UNTAET's close involvement with the
National Consultative Council (NCC). We realize that this
has set the stage for the broad-based participation of
various groups in East Timor. It is encouraging that the
NCC has been promoting transparency and visibility in its
work. This is evidenced by the recent participation of
representatives of non-governmental organizations and civil
society in the 8th meeting of the NCC. This, we are
confident, will create a sense of ownership and a spirit of
reconciliation among the East Timorese people. My
delegation firmly believes that if a spirit of confidence,
reconciliation and cooperation is fostered among the East
Timorese, significant progress will continue to be made.

Finally, we are fully cognizant of the will of the
Government of Indonesia to bring to justice the perpetrators
of gross human rights violations in East Timor. In this
regard, we note the invitation to three respected Indonesian
human rights groups to join investigators in probing the
violations in East Timor. It is our hope that the ultimate
aim of meting out justice to those responsible for these
violations will be achieved.

