Mr. Mashabane (South Africa): South Africa
would like to congratulate Mr. Farid Zarif on his
appointment as the new Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Kosovo and Head of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo. We
also thank him for his briefing. We also join others in
welcoming Foreign Minister Jeremie of Serbia to the
Council and in thanking him for his statement. We also
welcome Mr. Hoxhaj and thank him for his statement
as well.

South Africa remains concerned about the
developments in North Kosovo. We condemn all forms
of violence by all sides, including the shooting that
wounded NATO soldiers and injured more than 20
others, as violence threatens peace and stability in the
region. All parties should exercise restraint and refrain
from unilateral actions and the use of force, since that
would reverse the gains made by the parties in their
dialogue processes and ultimately make reconciliation
more difficult to achieve.

My delegation is also concerned about the
deterioration in inter-ethnic relations throughout
Kosovo, which in our view does not contribute to the
reconciliation and dialogue process. A number of
incidents that have been reported by the Secretary-
General are of concern to us, including the
contamination of a well supplying potable water and
the desecration of cemeteries.

Tensions are worsened by the perception of
Kosovo Serbs regarding the lack of status neutrality of
the international presence, especially following the
actions of the Kosovo Force (KFOR) and the European
Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) in
north Kosovo.

South Africa reiterates its position that Security
Council resolution 1244 (1999) remains in force and
forms the basis for resolving the situation in Kosovo. It
is therefore incumbent on the international presences in
Kosovo, including KFOR and EULEX, to maintain a
status-neutral position in the execution of their
respective mandates, in line with the presidential
statement (S/PRST/2008/44) adopted by the Council in
November 2008.

South Africa continues to support the dialogue
process between the parties, as mandated by the

General Assembly. Moreover, we believe that the
resumption of talks between the parties is an important
confidence-building measure that should improve trust
and allow them to address all outstanding issues. We
agree with the Secretary-General's observation that
unresolved issues threaten peace and stability in the
region. In that regard, my delegation urges all parties
to show cooperation and flexibility in finding solutions
to the outstanding issues, including border concerns.
Negotiations remain the only way to produce a
mutually beneficial and sustainable solution.

With regard to the allegations of trafficking in
human organs, we reiterate our position that a credible,
thorough, impartial and independent inquiry into those
allegations should be conducted. The death of a key
witness in a war crimes case raises concerns about
witness protection. In that regard, we share the
concerns of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights that an independent
witness- and victim-protection system is necessary.

In conclusion, South Africa once more urges both
sides to refrain from taking any actions that will
undermine the achievements attained in the dialogue
process. We therefore call on the parties to show
flexibility, with a view to enhancing their engagement
in order to resolve outstanding matters and for
reconciliation to prevail.

