Mr. Simonovic': I would like to thank you, Sir,
for your invitation and am pleased to participate in this
meeting in my capacity as President of the Economic
and Social Council.

In the light of the encouragement expressed in the
Millennium Declaration for regular consultations and
coordination among the principal organs of the United
Nations in pursuit of their functions, I hope that this
meeting will help lay the foundation for greater
cooperation between the Security Council and the
Economic and Social Council, as envisaged in the
United Nations Charter.

The multidimensional nature of conflict
prevention and post-conflict peace-building demands a
multidisciplinary approach tailored to the unique
circumstances of each situation. The Security Council
and the Economic and Social Council could work
together more effectively within the purview of the
mandates set for each body by the Charter. Mindful of
the independence of the two Charter bodies, the aim
would be to ensure that effective collaboration takes
place between them so that all the United Nations
actors in the field may work in a complementary
fashion.

In recent years, the Economic and Social Council
on various occasions has devoted its attention to the
issue of development in Africa, the most recent being
the high-level segment of its substantive session in July
2001. A Ministerial Declaration was adopted which
reiterated the support expressed at the Millennium
Summit for the consolidation of democracy in Africa
and assistance to Africans in their struggle for lasting
peace, poverty eradication and sustainable
development. The ministers also called on the United
Nations system and the international community to
support the New African Initiative adopted by the
Organization of African Unity at its Lusaka summit,
which is now the New Partnership for Africa's
Development. Furthermore, in accordance with General
Assembly resolution 55/217, this year the Economic
and Social Council will consider the creation of an ad
hoc advisory group on countries emerging from
conflict.

I should like to express my appreciation for this
opportunity and my intention to continue discussion
with the members of the Economic and Social Council
on ways to enhance the cooperation between the two
Councils.

