Mr. Almunayekh (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic):
At the outset, I would like to thank Ms. Rosemary
DiCarlo for her valuable and comprehensive briefing.
I would also like to thank Ms. Nada Majdalani and
Mr. Gidon Bromberg for their comprehensive and
important briefings.

Today we commemorate 52 years of Israeli
occupation, as well as the twenty-fifth anniversary
of the Oslo Accords, the twenty-fifth year of the
Hebron massacre and the first anniversary of the
Great March of Return protests. Meanwhile, Israeli
aggression continues to entrench its occupation and
undermine any chance for genuine peace that would
grant the Palestinian people their legitimate rights. The
occupying Power is continuing its arbitrary detentions
and the demolition or seizure of Palestinian buildings.
It is also continuing its unprecedented illegal settlement
activity in the occupied Palestinian territories, including
East Jerusalem.

In addition, the occupying Power has continued
its forced displacement of Palestinian civilians and its
intensification of the siege on Gaza, which has now
lasted for 12 years. It continues its acts of aggression
and its violations against Muslim and Christian holy
sites, while making peremptory and illegal unilateral
decisions, such as partially withholding Palestinian
tax revenues and refusing to renew the Temporary
International Presence in Hebron. Furthermore, it
is attempting to change the historical nature, status
and demography of Jerusalem and to impose a de
facto policy of entrenching its sovereignty in the
occupied territories.

With regard to occupied Golan, it is Syrian
territory occupied by Israel, as stressed by Security
Council resolution 497 (1981). Israeli laws, control
and administration over the Syrian occupied Golan
are null and void and have no legal validity. The
recognition of Israel's sovereignty over the Golan is
in violation of the Charter of the United Nations, the
principles of international law and the relevant Security
Council resolutions.

We would like to focus our statement today on the
report (A/HRC/40/74) of the International Independent
Commission established by the Human Rights Council
to investigate violations committed during protests
held in the occupied Palestinian territories.

First, with regard to civilian victims, we were not
surprised that the report recognized the use by Israeli
forces of weapons and live ammunition leading to the
deaths of 183 persons, including 32 children, in addition
to the injuring of more than 6,000 persons, including
159 women and 940 children. Three paramedics and
two journalists were also killed. The Commission
concluded that Israeli soldiers had fired intentionally
at civilians.

Secondly, with regard to violations of international
law, the Commission stressed that the protests
were conducted by civilians who had clear political
objectives. In addition, it concluded that the sniping
operations by Israeli forces using live ammunition led
to the killing and injuring of civilian demonstrators,
in violation of humanitarian international law and
international human rights law. The majority of such
acts of aggression against demonstrators amounted to
war crimes or crimes against humanity. Even those
people protected by the international laws, norms and
conventions, such as the Convention on the Rights of the
Child, the Fourth Geneva Convention and it Protocol
Addional I, among others, were not spared the crimes
perpetrated by the Israeli forces.

Thirdly, with regard to the impact of the siege
on the medical sector, the Commission found that the
siege imposed on the Gaza Strip has had a detrimental
impact on the health-care system, representing a
violation of the fundamental rights of the population,
especially injured protesters, to life and health care.
The Commission also concluded that the injuries of
Palestinian protesters caused by the Israeli security
forces, which often required specialized medical care,
constituted a challenge to the health-care system in
Gaza and placed it under overwhelming pressure.

In the light of those documented atrocities, the
Commission called upon Israel to undertake an
immediate, neutral and independent investigation in
accordance with international standards. It also called
upon Israel to lift the unjust siege imposed on the Gaza
Strip in violation of international laws and norms.
Consequently, we call for serious follow-up to those
conclusions in order to ensure that the perpetrators of
those crimes are held accountable and ensure redress
for the victims, especially given the ongoing escalation
of violence that places civilians in danger.

That will require the international community
to demand that Israel, the occupying Power, cease
all acts of aggression against the Palestinian people,
while protecting civilians and ensuring respect for
international law and all resolutions of international
legitimacy. Palestine cannot be the exception to the
rule. The international community must be committed
to the international mandate of the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East and provide its budget and activities with the
necessary financial resources and contributions.

In conclusion, we are afraid that we may find
ourselves commemorating the tenth or twentieth
anniversary of the Great March of Return. The
conclusions of the first Arab-European Summit, held
in Sharm Al-Sheikh in February, and of the Arab
Summit held in Tunisia in March create momentum to
prevent that from happening by adhering to peace as a
strategic choice.

The Arab countries launched the Arab Peace
Initiative in 2002, which is based on international
law, the resolutions of international legitimacy and the
principle of land for peace. We cannot reach a solution
to the Arab-Israeli conflict that is not in line with
such international terms of reference. Such a solution
must be preceded by an end to the Israeli occupation
of the Palestinian and Arab territories held since 1967,
including East Jerusalem, and by the recognition of
the State of Palestine, the inalienable rights of the
Palestinian people to self-determination, their right to
return and the need to compensate Palestinian refugees
while justly resolving their status in accordance with
General Assembly resolution 194 (III).

