Mr. Vervaeke: I have the honour to speak on
behalf of the European Union and its member States.
The candidate countries the former Yugoslav Republic
of Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia and Albania; the
country of the Stabilization and Association Process
and potential candidate Bosnia and Herzegovina;
and the European Free Trade Association country
Liechtenstein, member of the European Economic
Area; as well as Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova and
Armenia, align themselves with this statement.

Upon your request, Mr. President, I will deliver a
condensed version of my statement.

I am very pleased to be taking part, also on behalf
of the European Union High Representative for Foreign
Affairs and Security Policy, Federica Mogherini,
in this meeting on the situation in the Great Lakes.
Holding this meeting in the presence of the Secretary-
General and several Foreign Ministers of the region is
a testament to the importance attached to this region. I
would also especially like to welcome the impetus given
by the Angolan presidency of the Security Council to
this subject.

The European Union has been deeply engaged in
the Great Lakes region over many years. Our consistent
belief has been that a transition from fragility to
resilience, and from conflict to peace is achievable, but
only with strong local ownership and strong cooperation
between the countries of the region.

The Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework
for the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
Region remains the best blueprint for common progress.
The fulfilment of commitments must be more closely
monitored, as they address all the key obstacles to long-
term stabilization, including armed groups, the illegal
exploitation of natural resources, the encouragement
of good neighbourly relations, gender-related issues,
economic aspects and the encouragement of regional
integration and democratic governance. We welcome
the efforts of Special Envoy Djinnit and the launch
today of the United Nations Great Lakes Regional
Strategic Framework. The European Union will be
using its own financial instruments, both at national
and regional levels, to support the Framework.

We have to face the fact that there are still serious
challenges before us. In recent years, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo has made great progress, but
the problem of armed groups remains a serious threat
to stability in the eastern Democratic Republic of the
Congo, despite the efforts and sacrifices of the Forces
armees de la Republique democratique du Congo
and the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUSCO) and despite an improving cooperation
between them, which we welcome. That is also why we
support the position taken by the Security Council in
resolution 2211 (2015) that any future reconfiguration
of MONUSCO and its mandate should be based on the
evolution of the situation on the ground and, in light
of progress, in the protection of civilians, stabilization
and the implementation of the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework.

However, the most critical challenge in 2016
will be to organize free and fair elections in order to
consolidate gains achieved. A political consensus is
urgently needed on seeking a focused set of steps to
deliver inclusive and transparent elections within the
framework of the Constitution. The European Union
stands ready to support the efforts of African Union
Envoy Edem Kodjo to facilitate such a dialogue. The
political and financial commitment by the Democratic
Republic of the Congo Government to take the necessary
steps without further delay to ensure that elections take
place as planned will create the environment in which
the European Union can support the electoral process.

Resolution 2211 (2015) in its entirety should
continue to guide our work. That includes the context of
elections, with a focus on the presidential and legislative
elections, and the monitoring of human rights and
international humanitarian law. Fundamental civic and
human rights need to be fully respected in line with
international obligations.

The European Union pursues a coherent approach
across the Great Lakes region. The importance of
ensuring the right political climate for democracy to
work applies to all countries in the region, whether
in Rwanda, Burundi, the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, the Congo, Uganda, Gabon or elsewhere.
Inclusive and open societies, democratic transitions
and accountable Governments mean stronger societies.
Recent elections in the Central African Republic Show
that it is possible even in a very fragile context.

The situation in Burundi shows how much is
at stake. We strongly condemn the violence, from
whichever side, which has cost too many lives and
made close to 250,000 citizens flee their country. We
are supporting all initiatives of the United Nations, the
African Union and the East African Community that
could help to lead to a political solution within the spirit
of the Arusha Agreement. Highest among those in
terms of priorities is the establishment ofa functioning
and inclusive inter-Burundian dialogue mediated by
the East African Community. We welcome the recent
appointment of former President Mkapa to assist in
that process. We call on the Government, as well as
the armed opposition, to abandon the logic of violence.
The people of Burundi have demonstrated in the past
their incredible capacity to transcend divides; all sides
should revive that same spirit with determination.

It is also essential that sufficient capacity be
given to independent monitoring of the human rights
situation in the country, and we especially underline
the positive role played by the African Union and the
United Nations in that respect. Last week, the European
Union adopted a Council decision ending the special
consultations we held with Burundi under the Cotonou
Agreement. That decision sets out concrete steps that
could help to re-establish the rule of law in Burundi and
get our relations fully back on track, but they are also
specifically designed to support a political solution.
First steps have been announced by the Government;
they need to be implemented and enhanced.

The state of relations between Burundi and
Rwanda and the impact on the unity of the East African
Community also demand our attention. We call on all
neighbouring countries to contribute to the solution
in Burundi.

Angola has shared a concept note (S/2016/223, annex) for the discussion today. It rightly notes the need
for a number of support measures to ensure effective
implementation of the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework. The European Union fully supports that
focus and stands ready to support it.

