Mr. Ettalhi (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya): We thank
you, Mr. Minister, for presiding over this important
meeting of the Security Council. We wish, at the
outset, to extend our sincere thanks to the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict, Ms. Radhika Coomaraswamy, for
the valuable briefing in which she presented the annual
report of the Secretary-General (S/2007/757). We
would also like to thank the Executive Director of
UNICEF and the representative of the Watchlist on
Children and Armed Conflict for their two valuable
briefings.

The Libyan Arab Jamahiriya is greatly concerned
about the abuses children are exposed to - including
abductions, killings, maimings, sexual abuse and
recruitment in armed conflict - as listed in the
consecutive reports of the Secretary-General, which
highlight the increase and frequency of such shameful
acts. My country strongly condemns all such practices.

In this context, we support the recommendation
of the Secretary-General that calls upon the States
concerned to take strict measures within their national
legislation and in accordance with the provisions of
international humanitarian law to hold the perpetrators
of such crimes accountable and to impose upon them
the maximum deterrent penalty without any
opportunity for impunity.

We also support the opinion of the Secretary-
General that the detention of children in various
conflict zones, based on claims that they are associated
with different armed groups, is a direct violation of
international legal standards. In particular, we would
mention the cruel treatment suffered by Palestinian
children detained in Israeli prisons. The Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya calls upon the international community to
take the necessary deterrent measures in this regard.
We strongly condemn Israeli military operations that
have led over the past few years to the killing of more
than 800 Palestinian children and the displacement of
thousands of other children because of the destruction
of their family homes. In addition, thousands of
Palestinian children are subjected to suffering on a
daily basis while trying to reach their schools because
of the racist separation wall constructed in the
Palestinian occupied territory and the hundreds of
checkpoints in the West Bank. We regret that the
briefings this morning did not deal with that unique
case of suffering, because of its long-standing nature. It
is a deliberate policy that has been adopted by the

occupiers and must be criminalized, just as other
harmful practices that impact children have been
criminalized.

We also agree with the Secretary-General
concerning the importance of the development and
revitalization of long-term programmes and plans of
action. Moreover, disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programmes should emerge from local
communities, so that the reintegration of children in
those societies can be permanent and successful. We
call upon the international community and its donors
and financial institutions to provide a helping hand and
assistance for implementing such programmes.

The Working Group on Children and Armed
Conflicts endeavours to protect children and save them
from areas of conflict and deserves our praise and
appreciation. We would like the Working Group to
avoid selectivity and double standards in formulating
its recommendations and in carrying out its work. Its
recommendations should not be politicized. The
Security Council should stay away from taking
punitive measures of imposing punishment against
countries whose nationals commit criminal acts against
children. Instead, it should place the responsibility for
imposing punishment squarely within the competence
of national legislation subject to the provisions of
international humanitarian law.

