Mr. Ipo (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation thanks Her Excellency Ambassador Joanna
Wronecka, Chair of the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1591 (2005), concerning the Sudan, for
her briefing on the activities of the Committee for
the period of 4 October 2018 to 17 January 2019. We
commend her for her outstanding work at the healm of
the Committee and assure her of the support of Cote
d'Ivoire in the exercise of her functions.

The informal consultations of 24 October gave
the members of the Committee an opportunity to
hear a briefing from the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict.
Cote d'Ivoire welcomes the improved security situation
in Darfur, but it deplores the increase in sexual violence
against women and girls. My country maintains
that those responsible for those actions must be held
accountable for them before the competent authorities.
It is also necessary to strengthen protection for those
victims and better prevent those crimes.

Cote d'Ivoire also welcomes the Special
Representative's visit to the country at the initiative
of the Government of the Sudan, which represents an
important step in the establishment of a cooperation
framework between the Government of the Sudan and
the United Nations with a View, among other things,
to preventing sexual violence in conflict and holding
accountable the perpetrators of those heinous acts.

The presence in Libya of Darfuri rebel groups
and their financing by warring Libyan parties, as well
as the ability of Sudanese armed groups to generate
funds in the region and beyond, as indicated in the
Panel of Experts report (see S/2019/34), are a source
of great concern for the Council. It seems necessary
to strengthen collaboration among the various
expert panels and sanctions committees in order
to establish information-sharing frameworks that
would undoubtedly enhance the work of the panels
and committees.

In conclusion, Cote d'Ivoire once again congratulates
the Chair of the 1591 Sanctions Committee and calls
for increased collaboration between the Sudanese
Government and the United Nations with a view to
restoring lasting peace and stability to the Sudan.

