Mr. Gopinathan (India): We thank you,
Mr. President, for providing the general membership
with an opportunity to proffer their views on the
situation in the Middle East by scheduling this open
debate of the Security Council. We would also like to
take this opportunity to congratulate Mr. Alvaro de
Soto on his recent appointment as the United Nations
Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process
and for his comprehensive briefing this morning.
This meeting of the Security Council comes at a
critical time in the Middle East. The Secretary-General
recently noted the prospects for a positive conjuncture
in the Middle East peace process when he said:

"Recent events in the Middle East have
raised hopes of a possible resumption of the
peace process between Israelis and Palestinians.
We have witnessed the successful completion of
Palestinian presidential elections on 9 January
2005, which was followed by the convening of
the Summit at Sharm el-Sheikh on 8 February
2005, where Israeli and Palestinian leaders
announced a series of commitments to end
violence, and to rebuild trust and mutual
confidence". (S/2005/432)

Israel's proposed withdrawal from the Gaza Strip
and parts of the northern West Bank is scheduled to
take place next month. The international community is
hopeful that the withdrawal will represent a step in the
broader peace process, and that it will be used as a
springboard to revitalize the road map. It is essential
for the Israeli and Palestinian sides to coordinate the
economic, civilian and security aspects of the
withdrawal. The withdrawal must take place as
scheduled. In that context, the decision of the Israeli
Knesset yesterday to vote down three resolutions
aimed at delaying the withdrawal is a welcome
development. We hope that the withdrawal will be full
and complete, and that it will be followed by
negotiations on final status issues.

Unfortunately, recent events, including an
escalation in violence, have threatened the hopes for
progress that the past few months had represented. The
recent suicide bombing in Netanya, Israel, and the
firing of rockets from Gaza were condemnable acts.
We call upon the Palestinian Authority to continue to
make every effort to prevent such actions. At the same
time, Israel's resumed forceful actions in response to
those attacks, including targeted killings, could
seriously compromise the calm that has prevailed in
the past few months. While we recognize Israel's
legitimate right to self-defence, we have also cautioned
that any such moves should be exercised
proportionately and in conformity with international
law.

Israel's ongoing construction of the separation
wall remains a source of deep concern to the
international community. As we have stated in the past,
no one could have objections to the construction of the
wall in areas coinciding with the Green Line. Its
encroachment on Palestinian land and interests creates
great hardships for the people affected by its
construction and exacerbates the situation. Besides,
continued construction of the wall on Palestinian land
threatens to prejudge the eventual outcome of the final
status negotiations between the parties.

In that connection, we recall the advisory opinion
of the International Court of Justice on the legal
consequences of the construction by Israel of the wall
in the occupied Palestine territory. The Court opined
that the wall is contrary to international law and should
be dismantled. We called on Israel, in keeping with
overwhelming international opinion on the matter, to
take full account of the advisory opinion with a view to
its early implementation. We once again renew our call
on Israel to take note of the recommendations in
General Assembly resolution ES-10/15 of 20 July
2004, based on the advisory opinion of the
International Court of Justice. We also call upon the
Secretary-General to establish the register of damage,
as recommended by the same General Assembly
resolution, at the earliest date.

One of the primary obligations under the road
map was the requirement for Israel to halt all
settlement activity, including natural growth, and to
dismantle settlement outposts erected since March
2001. We call upon Israel to fulfil its obligations and to
desist from any further settlement construction activity.
That would also serve as an important confidence-
building measure.

At this juncture, it is critical for the international
community, in particular the Middle East Quartet, to
carefully monitor the situation and to work closely
with the parties with a view to encouraging them to
fulfil their commitments and obligations. At the same
time, it must be ensured that vested interests on both
sides are not allowed to derail the process, thereby
once again damaging the real prospects for peace in the
Middle East.

Notwithstanding the recent discouraging events,
we are confident that a just and comprehensive
solution to the conflict is attainable. We call upon all
sides to work together assiduously to achieve the
vision of two States living side by side in secure and
recognized borders, based on Security Council
resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973), 1397 (2002) and
1515 (2003).

