The President (interpretation from Arabic): I thank
the representative of the United Kingdom for the kind
words he addressed to me.

I shall now make a statement as the representative of
Bahrain.

As I am the last speaker before the Security Council
this morning, let me express my gratification at hearing
such valuable thoughts on the matter before the Council
today: the maintenance of peace and security and post-
conflict peace-building, an item that demonstrates the need
for several more meetings of this kind. Such meetings give
Council members an opportunity to express their views on
general topics of interest to the United Nations, outside the
context of debating specific items on the Council's agenda.
They also give non-members of the Council an opportunity
to address the general topics of mutual concern.

Post-conflict peace-building and peacekeeping are
among the important topics that the international
community must address. The taking of effective post-
conflict measures would further peace and prevent the
recurrence of armed confrontation. Experience has shown
that post-conflict peace consolidation calls for intensified
efforts to address the root causes of conflicts.

Peace-building and peacekeeping call for building
and consolidating national institutions, reforming and
bolstering governmental organizations and strengthening
those in charge of public order to protect the nation. It
also calls for reintegration and rehabilitation programmes
and for creating opportunities to resume the development
process. Maintaining internal security, rebuilding
confidence and invigorating socio-economic machinery in
the country are critical for post-conflict peace-building.

For this to take place, the time factor is extremely
important in peace-building. A multidisciplinary approach
must be pursued to include all social and economic
aspects simultaneously. To avoid the risk of a renewal of
hostilities, there should not be a long interval after the
end of the peacekeeping efforts. Moving speedily to post-
conflict peace-building is critical.

The establishment of structures to support peace-
building should be considered, and a study should be
undertaken to evaluate the basic requirements of peace-
building and how it should be carried out once the
elements of peace-building have been clearly determined.

The priorities of post-conflict peace-building require
solid foundations for development. To arrive at this
objective, we must underline the need for reconciliation,
the promotion of national unity, the repatriation of
refugees and displaced persons and their safe resettlement
in their homelands, the reintegration of former combatants
into society and the mobilization of national and
international resources in support of reconstruction and
economic recovery. This calls for tremendous efforts on
behalf of everyone.

Post-conflict peace-building is a multidimensional
process. It calls for tremendous efforts and effective
coordination on the part of the international community.
The role of the United Nations in support of peace and in
coordinating efforts is extremely important. The efforts of
the United Nations in Liberia are a case in point.

The establishment of United Nations peacekeeping,
peace-building or humanitarian missions requires the
United Nations to guarantee the safety of United Nations
personnel. The number of those who have died while in
service has been on the rise; this is totally unacceptable.

The presence of the United Nations after the end of
a conflict has a stabilizing and reassuring effect. It helps
prevent a renewal of hostilities.

 

Development is considered a primary objective for
all countries. Development is essential for reducing the
number ol'conflicts. Sustainable development can enhance
and accelerate the post-conflict peace-building process.

In conclusion. my delegation would like to stress the
importance of the United Nations organs" implementation
of their mandates as provided for by the Charter.

1 now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

There are a number of speakers remaining on my
list. With the concurrence of the members of the Council,
I intend to suspend the meeting new and to resume it at
3 pm.

The meeting was suspended at 11.40 am.
