The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Sweden
and the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, in which they
request to be invited to participate in the discussion of
the item on the Council's agenda. In conformity with
the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the
Council, to invite those representatives to participate in
the discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Zivalj
(Bosnia and Herzegovina) took a seat at the
Council table; Mr. Norstro'm (Sweden) and
Mr. gahovic' (Yugoslavia) took the seats reserved
for them at the side ofthe Council Chamber.

The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations and in the absence of objection, I shall
take it that the Security Council agrees to extend an
invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of
procedure to Mr. Jacques Paul Klein, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and
Coordinator of United Nations Operations in Bosnia
and Herzegovina.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite Mr. Klein to take a seat at the Council
table.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the
report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina, document
S/2001/57l.
Members of the Council also have before them
document S/200l/542, containing the text of a letter
dated 30 May 2001 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council,
transmitting a letter dated 28 May 2001 from the
Secretary-General of the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization, enclosing the monthly report on
Stabilization Force (SFOR) operations.

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Mr. Jacques Paul Klein, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and
Coordinator of United Nations Operations in Bosnia
and Herzegovina. I give him the floor.


