The President: I thank Mr. Schwarz-Schilling for
his thoughtful and comprehensive briefing.

I now invite His Excellency Mr. Nikola Spirie,
Chairman of the Council of Ministers of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, to make a statement.

Mr. Spiric' (Bosnia and Herzegovina) (spoke in Bosnian; English interpretation provided by the
delegation): In January of this year, I addressed the
House of Representatives of the Parliamentary
Assembly of Bosnia and Herzegovina, and presented
the next four-year programme with enthusiasm and a
desire to achieve crucial changes across the board. A
brief summary of the programme is as follows: a
general mobilization of positive forces in our country
and a need to reach compromise and find common
interests everywhere. At the very beginning of my
mandate, I clearly stated that between inertia and
action, I would choose action as the only way to move
forward.

Aware of the significance of this historical
moment and the challenges that Bosnia and
Herzegovina is facing, I emphasized that the most
important programme goals of my office were police
reform, continuation of defence reform in line with
Partnership for Peace membership, continued efforts on
constitutional reform, economic reform and intensified
cooperation with the International Criminal Tribunal
for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY). During my mandate,
I will be fully committed to the reform process. I
would like to briefly inform the Security Council about
the obstacles we have faced and the progress that we
have made so far.

With regard to police reform, in the previous
period we held intensive negotiations but did not reach
an agreement. Regrettably, some political groups have
ignored the efforts and readiness of others to
compromise, maintaining their extreme positions.
Because of their take it or leave it attitude, we were
unable to reach an agreement which would lead us
directly to the signing of a stabilization and association
agreement with the European Union.

I am surprised to see such a lack of responsibility
in governing on the part of the representatives of those
political groups as well as their lack of understanding
that the reforms are a matter of the process and not a
matter of the moment. The question is how to proceed
and how to achieve the much-needed agreement. There
is only one answer: constant dialogue among the
democratically elected political leaders.

In a country like mine, dialogue should be
permanent. For that reason, I use every opportunity to
stress that the only thing that should never stop in
Bosnia and Herzegovina is dialogue. Unfortunately, we
in Bosnia and Herzegovina are well aware of what
happens when dialogue ceases and of the enormous
price we paid in the past war. Currently, the basic
problem in Bosnia and Herzegovina is the lack of
political dialogue. As a matter of fact, such dialogue
exists only when it is initiated and assisted by
representatives of the international community.

As for constitutional reform, I would like to take
this opportunity to reiterate my determination and
decisiveness in resolving this issue. Unfortunately, this
issue has caused many divisions in the past. Even
though this was against the interests of Bosnia and
Herzegovina citizens, some were cunning enough to
use the issue merely to achieve election gains. That
false expression of love and care for Bosnia and
Herzegovina has frozen the further development of
State institutions. It is time to leave it behind and to
start negotiations in a spirit of full respect and
understanding and with a sense of compromise. I
cannot accept that all of us, together with the
representatives of the international community engaged
in this issue, should surrender to those who think that
compromise means only the unconditional
abandonment by their political opponents of all their
ideas.

This should not be a win-lose situation. That is
not progress but stagnation. My country should not be
in a state of paralysis; it should be in constant motion
towards the goal of Euro-Atlantic integration.

Regardless of what I said earlier, I do not want to
sound completely pessimistic. By nature, I am an
optimist, and, given the position I hold, I could not
behave differently. Nevertheless, Bosnia and
Herzegovina has achieved a great deal recently. As the
Council is aware, we have been admitted to the
Partnership for Peace Programme. For us, that was a
reward for everything that has been achieved in the
field of defence reform.

Bosnia and Herzegovina has successfully
concluded technical negotiations on the signing of a
Stabilization and Association Agreement with the
European Union. I can therefore say with pride that
Bosnia and Herzegovina has shifted from the so-called
Dayton era to the "Brussels era". Thus I have
submitted to all ministries the list of laws deriving
from European partnership, and I have asked them
urgently to start work on this issue and to report, on a
monthly basis, on the progress achieved.

I am aware that much more could have been
done, while acknowledging that, on the path towards
our final goal, we have faced several obstacles, mainly
of a political nature. At the very beginning of my
mandate, I insisted on stronger State patriotism, but I
regret to say that some people, intentionally or by
chance, have persisted in ignoring my appeals. I have
also consistently stressed the importance of
confidence-building within Bosnia and Herzegovina. It
is clear, I believe, that confidence-building is the
solution to many of the problems in our country and
that it is a "reform above all other reforms". I am
afraid that, should we fail in this undertaking, none of
our other efforts will produce any significant results
and that recently implemented reforms will appear
unsuccessful.

Regarding cooperation with the International
Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia, I should
like to take this opportunity to stress that my position
is clear: It is necessary to have full cooperation with
the ICTY in order to overcome this issue, which has
been a burden for such a long time. In the past, there
has been, within the State framework, a great deal of
arguing about who is cooperating and who is not. But
my personal opinion is that we should put aside those
accusations in order not to waste energy but to achieve
concrete results.

Allow me to say a few words about the role of the
international community in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
First of all, I would like to express my sincere gratitude
to the High Representative for everything he has done
for Bosnia and Herzegovina and for the new political
philosophy that he inaugurated during his mandate. I
would like to thank him for having invested his
wisdom, patience and diplomatic experience in sending
a clear message to domestic leaders that he would

rather see "one gram of domestic compromise than a
ton of Bonn powers". That policy is pushing us to work
together and consistently to seek compromise
solutions. Some, however, have not understood the
policy properly and continue to wait for a High
Representative who would impose solutions and cover
up for their failure to move ahead and for their
irresponsibility.

I would also like to take this opportunity to thank
the High Representative and this body for having
resolved the issue of decertified police officers. We
appreciate that very much, because the issue had
caused an upheaval in the public and political arenas in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. I am aware that this is not an
ideal solution, but I am aware also that nothing more
could have been achieved in that respect.

The international community has done a great
deal in Bosnia and Herzegovina. However, there is an
expression in our country that says: "Those who make
no mistakes do nothing." I fear that the dependence of
domestic politicians on the international community
has been created by the latter, which is not helpful.
Elected representatives should become the main
stakeholders in the future of our country; they can, and
should be allowed to, do so.

What I cannot accept is the view that we in
Bosnia and Herzegovina have an ideal relationship
with the international community but bad and
irresponsible domestic politicians. I should also note
here that Bosnia and Herzegovina is a State in which
all projects of the international community have been
assessed as successful, while the general assessment of
that same international community is that Bosnia and
Herzegovina has not achieved sufficient progress and
that it cannot move forward. I think that Bosnia and
Herzegovina is a State where there is neither absolute
guilt nor absolute innocence and that everyone should
shoulder his or her share of the responsibility for
delays and failures. In future, we have to take a joint
step forward.

I believe that the Council is aware of the situation
in Bosnia and Herzegovina following the judgment of
the International Court of Justice relating to the request
for special status to be given to Srebrenica. My
position is clear: Srebrenica deserves special attention,
but not special status. I am not sure that that country,
which itself has special status, could afford to have

special status for part of its territory without serious
consequences.

Finally, allow me to stress the fact that progress
in Bosnia and Herzegovina depends entirely on
agreement between its peoples, because it is only
dialogue and not a solution imposed from outside that
can provide a prosperous future that is acceptable to
all. We have always been grateful to the international
community for its assistance and efforts, but the final
decision on the future of my country must be taken by
its elected representatives. We are certain that the new
High Representative will accept that idea, as has Mr.
Schwarz-Schilling, whom I would like to thank once
again for everything he has done.

