Mr. Laher (South Africa): South Africa
welcomes the High Representative for Bosnia
Herzegovina to the Security Council and thanks him
for his briefing, which we have taken note of with
concern.

The Dayton Peace Accords are a peace
experiment aimed at achieving, as President Clinton
said at the time, "unity in diversity". In
commemorating its fifteenth anniversary last
November, Secretary Clinton in her statement
reminded us that

"the Dayton Agreement is a cornerstone of peace
and stability in Bosnia and Herzegovina today. It
has provided a framework for rebuilding the
nation's infrastructure, returning refugees and
displaced persons to their homes, and helping
citizens resume a normal life."

These are assessments that my delegation agrees with
and strongly supports.

It is therefore with deep concern that we have
taken note of recent developments in Bosnia, which
hold the potential to undermine its unity, sovereignty
and territorial integrity. As the country lies at the very
heart of Europe, such a development would damage
peace and stability in the Balkans and must be avoided
at all costs.

It is our View that the peace and stability in
Bosnia are dependent on a number of elements. The
first is that all parties, including the international
community, must respect the rule of law and the legal
instruments that underlie the political structures in the
country. It is crucial that the political leadership and
the international presence remain focused on
recognizing the balance brought about by Dayton and
the subsequent political structures, and that they exert
all efforts to ensure that this balance is respected and
maintained. This is especially important in the
completion of the Government formation process.

We are reminded of the fact that the Dayton
Accords were supposed to be replaced by a permanent
constitution in Bosnia, and we call on all parties
involved to again start focusing on constitutional
reform, which is the second element required for
sustainable peace. No one is served by actions that take
the country backwards from the constitutional reforms
already agreed. The purpose of constitutional reform is
to establish strong and representative State structures
that supersede all other structures.

The third element is the need for dialogue
between the parties, as none of what I have mentioned
can be achieved without dialogue among the various
ethnic groups and entities. Dialogue among the various
structures and the High Representative is also crucial.
Dialogue is essential for the adoption of the final
Constitution. It will also facilitate the completion of
the five objectives and two conditions, which, in turn,
is required for the High Representative to complete his
work and for Bosnians to take full responsibility for
their country. Our delegation is concerned about the
fact that no progress has been made in the
implementation of those commitments. We call on all
parties to redouble their efforts in that regard.

The fourth element is reconciliation. This should
be the ultimate aim of continued dialogue. Essential for
reconciliation is the commitment by all parties to fight
impunity by brining to justice those accused of
committing war crimes. This process must be executed
in an impartial manner and by the judicial instruments
agreed to by the various parties in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. Reconciliation is undermined by rhetoric
and inflammatory actions aimed at undermining the
Bosnian State.

In conclusion, I want to quote President Clinton's
statement when the Dayton Accords were completed, in
1995. He reminded us that

"After so much bloodshed and loss and so many
outrageous acts of inhuman brutality, it will take
an extraordinary effort of will for the people of
Bosnia to pull themselves from their past and
start building a future of peace".

This is the final element that my delegation wants to
highlight, namely, political will. We want to encourage
all parties in Bosnia and Herzegovina to recommit
themselves to the full implementation of their
commitments under the Peace Accords and agreements.
South Africa will remain dedicated in its task as a
member of the Security Council to support Bosnia in
those efforts.

