Ms. Kamara (Liberia): I thank you, Madam
President, for the opportunity to participate in this
briefing to the Council on the implications of the
continuing spread of the Ebola virus disease on peace
and security in the Mano River Basin.

I would also like to thank the previous
speakers - the Head of the United Nations Mission
for Ebola Emergency Response (UNMEER),
Mr. Anthony Banbury; the Under-Secretary-General
for Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Herve' Ladsous; and
the Assistant Secretary-General for Political Affairs,
Mr. Taye-Brook Zerihoun - for their enlightening
presentations and the insights they have shared.

Allow me to pay tribute to the fallen heroes and
heroines: - the medical staff, national and expatriate
alike, such as those of the United Nations Mission in
Liberia (UNMIL), and others who have died in the
course of the Ebola response.

In the month of September alone, this body was
addressed on two separate occasions by the Minister of
National Defence and the Minister of Foreign Affairs
ofLiberia (see S/PV.7268). They outlined in great detail
the multidimensional impact of the disease on our
country and its citizens: the erosion of the very fabric
of the society, the assault on culture, the deepening of
existing divisions, the loss of lives and livelihoods, the
dwindling revenue, and the dire projections of economic
growth. The Council is aware of all of these things.

The welcome initiatives undertaken by the
Secretary-General, the Council and the General
Assembly brought into sharp focus the urgent need for
international action. And we have indeed witnessed a
higher level of engagement. The actions taken to rapidly
establish UNMEER in Accra were but one example;
there are many others - of people dipping into their
pockets and of action being taken.

While the situation on the ground is undoubtedly
improving a little, we must be honest and admit that it
has not changed substantially. Liberia, with a population
of 4 million, the smallest of the three most affected
countries, is still leading in the rate of infections and
deaths. The spread of the disease continues to outpace
action; meaning that we are not yet ahead of the curve.

The Government, with support of UNMIL, the
United States military and many other faithful partners,
is racing against time to establish new isolation and
treatment centres, which remain the single most critical
need, because if we cannot take in people reporting the
disease, we can do nothing - we cannot do a contact
trace or manage the case until we have the facilities
to bring people in when they report themselves. Such
facilities do not exist at present.

Other needs include professional medical staff,
medical supplies, including protective gear and
equipment, and transport facilities. There are also
important non-medical needs, such as upgrading the
airport tarmac, augmenting storage facilities and
increasing food stocks. Liberia is immensely grateful
for all of the expressions of solidarity, which have taken
various forms, including from the media. We are grateful
for the very generous contributions and commitments
made by Member States. Our common challenge now is
to urgently translate those commitments into tangible
and impactful support on the ground. It is a challenge
we all share.

As Council members are aware, Liberia was actively
engaged in the implementation of a joint programme
with the Peacebuilding Commission when the Ebola
virus struck. We were focused on strengthening the
rule of law, implementing measures for security sector
reform and promoting national reconciliation, as
well as very much engaged in a constitutional review
process, all in an effort to consolidate peace and
reinforce a fledgling democracy. Even the formula for a
responsible drawdown of UNMIL had been agreed and
was under implementation. Youth unemployment and
containing the spread of small arms and light weapons
and transnational crime were challenges high on the
national agenda. On all of these fronts, much progress
had been registered and Liberians had begun to enjoy
some dividends of peace.

The Ebola onslaught, because it is nothing less
than that, interrupted these activities and now presents
some risks to the gains that we had made. Our society
has been placed under immense stress by this virus.
Access to food is limited by the high prices of local
and imported goods. Livelihoods have been lost or
threatened. The movement of and interaction among
people are restricted by necessity. A state of emergency,
the closure of educational institutions and extended
leave for non-essential civil servants - all of these
measures remain in place. The senatorial elections,
scheduled to take place this month, have had to be
postponed to 2015. Paltry resources, already almost
exclusively reallocated to the Ebola response, are still
inadequate to address the demands of health workers
threatening strike action.

I hope that I have provided insights, in addition to
what was said by Assistant Secretary-General Zerihoun
and Under-Secretary-General Ladsous said, into a set
of circumstances full of triggers for conflict. Injected
into an already fragile post-conflict country, this could
be a recipe for disaster. Or this could be the fuse that
ignites the international community to do even more.

In the spirit of my President's statement to the
World Bank last week, Liberia urges that all efforts
be made to contain the disease through a more timely
and decisive response. This means the construction of
treatment and testing centres that are fully staffed and
functional as soon as possible and the identification of
burial sites. It also means improving and strengthening
the regular health-care system because many deaths are
resulting from a lack of access to health facilities to
treat routine illnesses. Concurrently, we must remain
mindful of the imperative of mitigating the economic
consequences of the Ebola crisis, which have caused
a shifting of resources from ongoing development
activities under our Agenda for Transformation.
This will require support to stimulate our productive
sectors, in particular agriculture, and enable our people
to resume self-sustaining livelihood endeavours. The
more they remain idle, the greater the prospects for
trouble.

As we have heard in many forums, especially from
the Deputy Secretary-General, peace, development
and human rights are intertwined. We must protect
the gains made in Liberia on all three fronts, to which
the Council has contributed immensely, and we must
support and protect those on the front lines. We should
also continue to bring all our energies to bear in the
response at the national level and with our regional and
global partnerships.

Liberia looks to the future with what I would say
is guarded optimism, inspired by the resilience of its
people and the heartwarming demonstration by the
international community of care and belief in our
common humanity.

