Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I would
like to congratulate you, Mr. President, and the Chilean
Mission on guiding the Council smoothly through a
hectic first month of 2015. I would also like to welcome
once again our five new colleagues, whose contributions
we are already appreciating.

I am grateful to you, Mr. President, for convening
today's wrap-up meeting, and pleased that we are
again holding it in public. We have covered a broad
range of issues in January, including the worrying
developments in Yemen, the escalating violence in
Ukraine, the situations in the Middle East, Syria, Mali
and the Democratic Republic of the Congo, as well
as emergency discussions on Lebanon and Nepal. I
congratulate you on the informative open debate on
inclusive development and the prevention of conflict
(see S/PV.7361), and I look forward to tomorrow's
debate on the important role that women must play in
the protection of civilians.

Together with the United Nations community,
we commemorated the seventieth anniversary of the
liberation of Auschwitz and expressed our solidarity in
the fight against anti-Semitism. In addition, the Council
travelled to Haiti to see at first hand the work of the
United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti. And
sadly, we have already agreed on five press statements
this year condemning new terrorist atrocities.

Equally sadly, we have also started this year as
we finished the last, addressing a series of seemingly
intractable conflicts that have divided us. In this
seventieth anniversary year of the United Nations, it
is more important than ever that we face up to those
challenges and work harder to overcome the divisions
that have prevented the Security Council from taking
action. I would like to mention three such conflicts.

First, we have already met twice this year to discuss
the worrying escalation in violence in eastern Ukraine.
The separatist attack on Mariupol last Saturday that
killed 30 people was a provocative and indiscriminate
act that risks increasing the scope and severity of this
crisis. This was not the first separatist attack targeting
civilians this year. They could not have carried these
attacks without Russian support and military hardware.
Because despite our calls, the Minsk agreements
of 2014 in September remain unfulfilled and the
Russian military support for the separatists continues

unabated, in clear violation of Ukrainian sovereignty
and territorial integrity. If Russia wishes to work for a
peaceful solution, it needs to match its leaders' words
with deeds. Trust in Russia is currently at a low and
hard work will be required to regain it, but a political
settlement should be achievable and Russia will find
willing international partners, ifit is prepared to change
course on Ukraine.

We have also discussed the brutal conflict in
Syria. An additional 76,000 people were killed in
Syria in the course of last year, the majority through
the regime's barbaric actions, including indiscriminate
shelling of civilian areas. Persistent, credible reporting
of continued regime use of chemical weapons, in the
form of chlorine, is an outrage which warrants Council
attention. And, despite adoption of resolution 2191
(2014), the grave humanitarian situation continues to
worsen.

Let us not sit and watch another year go by as the
toll of death and misery mounts. It is more imperative
than ever that we come together to support a political
process, in line with the Geneva communique of the
Action Group for Syria (S/2012/522, annex) that brings
an end to the violence. We look forward to Staffan de
Mistura briefing the Council on his latest efforts next
month and working with Council colleagues to find a
viable end to this appalling conflict in the course of
2015.

This month we also discussed perhaps the most
intractable issue of all - the Middle East peace process.
For over 50 years, the Council has toiled with this issue,
and a solution is long overdue. The Council shares the
same core commitment to a negotiated settlement that
leads to a safe and secure Israel living alongside a
viable and sovereign Palestinian State. But last year the
prospects for a two-State solution moved backwards.
This year we must turn that momentum around. We
must remain open to working with partners to revisit the
parameters resolution. With sufficient time for proper
negotiation, we may yet secure the full support of the
Council for a resolution of this nature, which could help
to kick-start a sustainable peace process.

The challenge for the Council during this
anniversary year will be whether we can make progress
on these and other seemingly intractable conflicts. The
overlap of views between us is greater than many give
us credit for. The differences are relatively few, but
they are acute. To succeed we will need to focus on
these differences and not let them disrupt the areas that
we do agree on. We owe it to all those suffering from
the effects of conflict to do our utmost in these efforts.

