Sir John Sawers (United Kingdom): May I begin
by saying that the United Kingdom welcomes the
adoption of resolution 1828 (2008) by the Security
Council today and that, as the informal coordinator of
the resolution, I am very grateful to all Council
members for their help. We came very close to
achieving a consensus, and I regret that it was only
lack of time, really, that prevented us from being able
to address the outstanding concerns of one delegation.

I want to make two fundamental points about
today's discussions. The first is that the entire Council,
we believe, is behind the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) and
wants it to succeed. I think that will become clear in
the statements that we are making after this vote.

When in 2007 the Security Council first
mandated the African Union-United Nations force in
Darfur, we made a commitment to help bring security
to the people of Darfur. We have renewed that
commitment today. It is not a commitment that we take
lightly. The recent attack in which seven peacekeepers
were killed was a grim reminder of the difficulties and
dangers that UNAMID peacekeepers face daily. I pay
tribute once again to those who died. We owe it to
them and to their colleagues to renew our efforts for
peace and stability in Darfur, throughout Sudan and
throughout the region.

The second point I want to make about today's
discussions is that no position has been taken by the
08-44474

Security Council on the question of whether to take
any action in the light of the proposal of the Chief
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court (ICC) to
indict President Al-Bashir. That issue is to be addressed
on another day.

Let me be clear about the United Kingdom's
position. The United Kingdom did not believe that it
was right to consider such an important issue as part of
a resolution renewing UNAMID's mandate. It was of
course the Security Council that decided in resolution
1593 (2005) that the situation in Darfur warranted
investigation by the ICC. We will not stand in the way
of a Security Council discussion of whether there is a
case for invoking article 16 of the Rome Statute in
relation to President Al-Bashir, but that discussion will
raise profound questions about the relationship
between peace and justice. It is not something that the
Security Council should rush into.

Building on the support for today's resolution, the
Security Council and the Secretariat are facing three
tasks in the future. First, we should do all we can to
accelerate UNAMID's deployment. This resolution
endorses the Secretary-General's target of having
80 per cent of the force in place by the end of this year,
that is, in five months' time. We all know the obstacles,
but much more needs to be done to overcome them.

Secondly, the Council has to give its unstinting
support to the political process. We very much
welcome the appointment of Mr. Bassole as Chief
Mediator; he has our full backing.

Thirdly, the Council will need to continue
considering the important issues of justice and
impunity in Darfur. Article 16 of the ICC Statute will
be part of that discussion, but it will not be only the
part. Sudan's lack of cooperation with the ICC will
also be directly relevant, as will other factors.

The Council's discussions on Darfur have made
clear that, while there are different views on tackling
the issue of impunity, our support for UNAMID and
the efforts of the United Nations and the African Union
to bring security and stability to Darfur is unstinting.
Those efforts are central to the pursuit of peace in
Darfur, and the Security Council cannot give up on that
goal. It is still some way off. It will require patience,
determination and a willingness to grapple with
difficult decisions along the way, but peace is
attainable, and we must continue to strive for it.
08-44474

