Mr. Brammertz: I thank the Council for this
opportunity to speak on our progress towards the
completion of our mandate.

The major development over the last reporting
period has been the arrest of the Tribunal's last
fugitive, Goran Hadzie, and, as President Meron
already mentioned today, of the 161 persons indicted
by the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
(ICTY), none remain at large.

The significance of that development is multi-
layered and goes well beyond simple statistics. The
arrests mean that no individual has ultimately escaped
the ICTY's reach and that the final impediment to
completing our mandate has been removed. The arrests
also mean that an important and problematic chapter in
Serbia's cooperation with the ICTY has been closed,
even if it took too long and redress for the victims was
much too delayed.

We hope that the arrests also mean brighter
prospects for international justice. Over the past two
decades, international justice has spread to more and
more parts of the globe, but difficulties in arresting key
suspects are all too common.

It is worth reflecting on the ICTY's success and
applying the lessons we have learned to other courts
and tribunals. If the ICTY has no more fugitives, it is
because the international community understood that
sometimes justice is a long-term project. It is because
the international community maintained pressure and
provided positive incentives for Serbia to choose
accountability over impunity and the rule of law over
misplaced loyalty to war criminals.
With Radko Mladic' and Goran Hadzic' in custody,
we are now fully occupied with finishing our trials and
appeals. The completion strategy is fast becoming a
reality. The evidence presentation in the majority of
our trials will likely conclude in the next reporting
period. Our focus will then be on the remaining
trials - Karadzie, Mladie and Hadiie - as well as on
managing our appellate case load as it rapidly expands
throughout the course of next year. The departure of
key staff in the midst of our cases is an ongoing
problem requiring careful consideration and smart
solutions.

As long as we have ongoing cases, the
cooperation of States, particularly in the former
Yugoslavia, will remain essential. When it comes to
Serbia, the arrest of the final two fugitives put our
cooperative relationship on a new, more positive
footing. In my written report, I have acknowledged the
good work done by the authorities in Belgrade under
the leadership of the President, particularly the
National Security Council, the action team established
to track the fugitives, and the Security Service
operatives who carried out the arrest operations. We
are also grateful to Serbia's National Council for
Cooperation with the Tribunal, which coordinates
responses to our requests for assistance. Thanks to the
Council's work, we receive the information we need
for our cases promptly, allowing us to meet our tight
court deadlines.

In the next reporting period, we want to see
results from Serbia's investigation into how ICTY
fugitives, including Mladie and Hadzic', managed to
evade justice for so many years. Following the final
two arrests, Serbia undertook to hold accountable any
individuals who assisted the fugitives. During my visit
to Belgrade in November, I saw very little follow-
through on this issue, and we expect more to be done
by Serbia.

I turn now to cooperation between my Office and
Croatia. With no ongoing trials involving Croatian
accused persons, my Office is making far fewer
requests for assistance to the Croatian authorities. The
limited requests we have made were adequately dealt
with by the department for cooperation with
international courts.

During my last statement to the Security Council
(see S/PV.6545), I mentioned our concern about
statements from high-level Croatian authorities
questioning the validity of the ICTY's work. Our
concerns have been reinforced in the present reporting
period. State officials at the highest level in Croatia
continue to glorify illegal wartime conduct and
question the impartiality of the ICTY's judgements.
Legislation recently passed to annul war crimes
indictments issued by Serbia against Croatian citizens
reinforces our concerns.

In relation to Bosnia and Herzegovina, I can
report that the day-to-day cooperation with my Office
is proceeding well. However, we see troubling signs
that the national war crimes strategy is struggling and
urgent action is required to turn the situation around.
The case of Radovan Stankovie is symptomatic of the
broader problems. Stankovie, a so-called Rule 11 bis
transferee from the ICTY, was convicted by the State
Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina and sentenced to 20
years of imprisonment. He escaped from prison in Foea
more than four years ago, yet very little has been done
to return him to custody. We struggle to understand
why the authorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina appear
unconcerned about a fugitive who has committed
crimes against its own citizens and who has scorned
their judicial process. Neighbouring countries also
have a role to play in resolving the Stankovie situation.
Here, too, little action is visible, despite our repeated
requests that more be done.

More generally, during my trip to Sarajevo a
month ago, I noted limited political will and
insufficient resources to complete the remaining war
crimes prosecutions. There is a large backlog of cases,
including investigation files transferred by the ICTY,
and cases are not efficiently moved between State and
entity-level prosecutors. We also remain deeply
concerned by frequent political attacks on the judiciary
in Bosnia and Herzegovina, which undermine the
national war crimes strategy. We ask the international
community to help Bosnia and Herzegovina steer a
more successful course towards accountability for
wartime atrocities.

As the completion strategy builds momentum, so
too do our preparations for the Residual Mechanism. In
this reporting period, we continued to work together
with our colleagues in the ICTY Registry and the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda Office of
the Prosecutor to facilitate a smooth transition. We
have heard and understood the Council's message that
the Mechanism must be a small and efficient operation.
Our first budget proposal for our counterpart office

within the Residual Mechanism was drafted with that
message firmly in mind. We have kept costs to a
minimum by ensuring that the majority of posts are
double-hatted with the ICTY for the first phase of the
Residual Mechanism's operations.

Sixteen years after the Dayton Peace Accord, we
have delivered the long-awaited news that all ICTY
indictees have been, or soon will be, held accountable.
That positive development renews our energy for the
work ahead, but at the same time we see another
significant challenge looming. National war crimes
strategies in the region, particularly in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, are floundering. If they are left to fail,
the ICTY's legacy, along with reconciliation and the
rule of law, will be endangered.

It would be easy to dwell on those problems.
Instead, I want to end by emphasizing the opportunity
that now presents itself for leaders in States of the
former Yugoslavia. If they have the courage and
commitment, those leaders could choose a future built
on accountability and the rule of law, instead of
nationalism and strife. But to succeed they will have to
put aside narrow-minded and short-term political
agendas. The international community, too, has a
critical role to play. We ask the Security Council to
show the same commitment and vision in helping
States in the region cement their commitment to
justice, as it has shown over the past two decades in
building the ICTY's success.

