Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China thanks the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and head of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK),
Mr. Tanin, for his briefing. China welcomes the presence
of Her Excellency Ms. Nela Kuburovie, Minister of
Justice of Serbia, and thanks her for her statement.
I have also listened attentively to the statement of
Ms. Vlora Citaku.

China respects the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Serbia, understands the country's legitimate
concerns on the question of Kosovo and appreciates its
positive efforts to achieve a political settlement of the
question of Kosovo. At present, the security situation
on the ground remains relatively stable, although some
underlying complex issues remain unresolved. China
welcomes the holding of another high-level meeting
between Belgrade and Pristina. We hope that the
parties will remain committed to the general direction
of a political settlement, work in a spirit of mutual
understanding and trust, and implement all agreements
already reached as soon as possible.

Resolution 1244 (1999) provides the important
legal basis for resolving the question of Kosovo. All
sides should uphold the purposes and principles of
the Charter of the United Nations, work under the
framework of relevant Security Council resolutions
and find a solution acceptable to all through dialogue
and negotiation.

National reconciliation is in the common interest
of all sides. We hope that parties will always put the
welfare of people first, take concrete measures to protect
the legitimate rights and interests of all communities
in Kosovo, and safeguard the peace, stability and
development of the Balkans. The Security Council
should keep its attention focused on the question of
Kosovo, remain committed to promoting its proper
settlement and send a clear signal to the public.

China appreciates the work carried out by UNMIK
under the leadership of Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Tanin. We support UNMIK as it
continues to discharge its duties in accordance with its
mandate and cooperate constructively with all sides.
We hope that UNMIK, the European Union Rule of Law
Mission in Kosovo and the Kosovo Force will work in
close collaboration, make steady headway in improving
the situation on the ground and play a positive role for
the early settlement of the question of Kosovo.

