Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I thank the High
Commissioner for Human Rights, Mr. Zeid Ra'ad Al
Hussein, and Mr. Miroslav Jenca for their harrowing
words on the dire situation in the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea.
Sadly, it is unsurprising that the regime maintains a
stranglehold on every aspect of its citizens' lives. Like
other Security Council members, the United Kingdom
Views the human rights situation in North Korea with
deep concern and dismay. The regime's treatment of its
own people is yet another example of its unashamed
contempt for the international rules-based system. That
is why we fully support the Security Council's wish
to draw attention to the shameful living conditions of
the North Korean people, as well as to North Korea's
illegal nuclear and ballistic missile programmes, which
we have condemned in resolutions 2371 (2017) and
2375 (2017). We must maintain international focus on
the human rights situation in North Korea, through
both the United Nations in New York and the Human
Rights Council in Geneva. We welcome the visit of the
United Nations last week and we encourage the regime
to engage in a meaningful way.

Evidence of the leadership's appalling behaviour
towards its own people is impossible to ignore. People
lack freedom of religion and expression. They have
minimal control over their livelihoods and resources.
The State controls what they see, what they consume
and how they behave, using the threat of extreme
punishment to keep people under its thumb. Naysayers
are disappeared, jailed or publicly executed to
demonstrate the price of freedom. The Global Slavery
Index estimates that more than 1 million people are
victims of modern slavery in North Korea.

Yet, we know from defector testimonies that
despite the fear instilled in every North Korean,
there are many brave individuals who would rather
take their chances fleeing than remain gagged and
bound by the regime, such as the soldier who recently
defected across the Demilitarized Zone. His daring
escape was an act of desperation, as well as of hope.
His starved physical condition speaks volumes about
the standards of health and welfare in a country that
professes to put the military first, thereby speaking to
how the regime treats those who are most vulnerable.
We urge all members not to return defectors back to
such a miserable situation, which would send a message
that we condone the behaviour of the regime. We also
urge all members not to profit from the North Korean
people's misery by employing North Korean nationals
who are sent abroad to generate foreign currency,
which is used by the regime to fund its illegal missile
programmes, as stated in resolution 2321 (2016).

The systematic violations of human rights by the
regime go beyond its own citizens or borders. The
death of United States citizen Otto Warmbier following
his detention, the abduction of 17 Japanese nationals
by the regime and the assassination of Kim Jong-nam
in Malaysia are all examples of the North Korean
regime's contempt for the international rules-based
system Such contempt is further exemplified by the
regime's denial of access to independent observers
of the human rights situation, its refusal to engage in
meaningful dialogue and its lack of action on the 2014
commission of inquiry's report, which highlighted
wide-ranging and ongoing crimes against humanity.
The regime has rejected draft resolution A/C.3/72/L.40
of the Third Committee, which calls upon it to respect
the basic rights of its people. Today, I repeat the United
Kingdom's call on North Korea to allow human rights
actors immediate and unhindered access to assess the
human rights situation in the country.

Our message to the regime must be clear and united.
We must use all of the diplomatic and economic tools
at our disposal to deliver that message. There is a very
different path that is still open to the regime. That path
leads to security and prosperity. It leads to improved
lives for its citizens. All of the members of the Council
and beyond must work together to persuade the North
Korean leadership to pursue that path. In order to do
so, it must end illegal missile tests. It must genuinely
engage with the international community. It must take
serious steps to improve the human right situation for all
of its citizens. Real, positive change to the livelihoods
of the North Korean people will not happen overnight,
but it will not happen at all for as long as North Korea
pursues its current course.

We are committed to working with partners on
the Council and beyond to tackle that challenge. The
world looks to us all and, above all, to the North Korean
regime to support a change for the better.

