Mr. Abdelaziz (spoke in Arabic): Today's meeting
of the Security Council is being held in the absence of
any clear prospect for a peace process in the Middle
East, and in the light of intentional disregard for the
main international terms of reference of the peace
process, including Oslo and Madrid accords, including
the Arab Peace Initiative, the international Quartet
road map, the principle of land for peace, the two-
State solution and the 4 June 1967 borders. That in
itself constitutes a terrible failure of the international
multilateral order and the steadfast positions laid out
in the resolutions of the Security Council and the
General Assembly, which indicate broad international
consensus in support of the just Palestinian question
and rejection of the Israeli occupation of Palestinian
territories and all unilateral Israeli practices in violation
of international agreements.

The League of Arab States supports the
commendable stand taken by States and peoples of
all geographical groups to resist pressures to move
their embassies to Jerusalem, which runs contrary to
international legitimacy and all relevant United Nations
resolutions. Accordingly, the League of Arab States
reaffirms the illegality of the United States decision to
recognize Jerusalem as the capital ofIsrael and to move
its embassy there. Furthermore, the League thanks
those States that refused to cede to the pressure and
decided not to relocate their embassies. We also express
our gratitude to those States that rejected implementing
prior decisions in that regard as a sign of upholding
international multilateral legitimacy. The League calls
on all States to remain committed to rejecting the fierce
campaign to remove the issue of Jerusalem from the
five final-status issues.
We welcome the strong international support that
has been provided for the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA), enabling it to carry out its noble mission to
respond to the humanitarian needs of the Palestinian
people and to counter the negative effects of the United
States decision to cease its financial support for the
Agency, which resulted in a budget gap that was more
than bridged by States which believe in the just cause of
refugees, most notably the Arab States.

In that regard, the League of Arab States
reaffirms the need to guarantee the right of return of
the Palestinian refugees to the occupied Palestinian
territories, in accordance with General Assembly
resolution 194 (III) of 1948, and to uphold the cause
of refugees as a final-status issue that must be settled
definitively through direct negotiations between both
the Palestinian and Israeli parties.

At the same time, the increased pace of Israeli
settlement activities presents a great challenge to the
peace process in the Middle East, as well as a gross
violation of international law and resolution 2334
(2016). The League of Arab States therefore condemns
all Israeli settlement activities, including attempts by
Israel to control the nomad communities in Abu Nuwar
and Khan Al-Ahmar in order to establish a connection
between Israeli settlements and East Jerusalem, the
capital of the Palestinian State. Israel also continues
to besiege Jerusalem by surrounding the outer band of
the city with settlements, in addition to other projects
implemented under the guise of tourism, such as the
high-speed train that is on its way to be expeditiously
implemented. Another project is the creation of a
recreational park connecting the Mount of Olives
settlements facing the Al-Haram Al-Sharif from
the east.

The League of Arab States calls on the Security
Council to oppose those colonial and expansionist
plans, which are intended to change the historic, legal
and demographic status of occupied Jerusalem, in order
to protect the religious sites, sacred to all religions, and
defend the identity of the historic character of Jerusalem
by preserving the established and steadfast rights of the

brotherly Palestinian people.

At the same time, it is incumbent upon the
international community to reaffirm the illegality of
such heinous racist laws as the new nation-State law
adopted recently by the Knesset, which seeks to deny
the Palestinian people of their rights to their historic
territories by legislating settlement activities, the
confiscation of land, the demolition of homes and the
displacement of populations in flagrant violation of
international law, international humanitarian law and
international human rights law, including the Fourth
Geneva Convention. The League of Arab States calls
attention to the ramifications of those laws and their
racist effects, which undermine the solid, inalienable
rights of the Palestinian people, which are fully
supported by the international community.

The Security Council should also intervene to
protect the right of the Palestinian people to protest
peacefully and express their legitimate stand against
the occupation without being subject to vicious attacks
by the occupying forces. Since the Land Day incidents
of30 March 2018, more than 300 Palestinians have been
killed and tens of thousands of others wounded. The
demonstrators in question were all peaceful, defenceless
civilians demonstrating for the right of return to their
occupied territory. The occupation forces attacked them
with live ammunition, in flagrant violation of every
relevant law, without any accountability whatsoever.
There is a dire need to create a mechanism under the
auspices of the United Nations to protect the Palestinian
people through a group of observers who submit
periodic and prompt reports to the Security Council.

The Secretary-General has submitted a report
(A/ES-10/794) to the Security Council and the General
Assembly on the establishment of an international
mechanism to protect the rights of the Palestinian
people, as requested in General Assembly resolution
ES-10/20 of 13 June 2018. Despite that effort, the report
remains dead letter and the Security Council has taken
no measure relevant to it. In that regard, we call on
the Council to take action aimed at establishing such a
mechanism, based on the report and in cooperation with
the Group ofArab States and the League ofArab States,
and to ensure that it is under the supervision of the
United Nations to protect the Palestinian people. Such
action would be akin to the dispatch of 90 international
unarmed observers by the Security Council to Yemen
in order to monitor the situation there, in accordance
with Stockholm Agreement. That could be duplicated
on a larger scale in the occupied Palestinian territories.

Despite the suspension of Syria's membership
in the League of Arab States, which was done in
accordance with the rules of the League, the issue of
Syria remains a fundamental one for the Arab world,
and the League remains interested in a comprehensive,
peaceful settlement of the Syrian issue so as to
ensure maximum protection for the brotherly Syrian
people. The League reaffirms the need to promote its
participation alongside the Arab States concerned in the
negotiating process to implement the relevant Security
Council resolutions. In that regard, I underscore that the
League of Arab States is strongly opposed to any and
all illegal attempts to codify the occupation of Syrian
or Lebanese territory - be it in the Syrian Golan or the
Shaba'a farms. We call for Israel's immediate, complete
and unconditional withdrawal from those territories, in
accordance with resolutions of international legitimacy.

At the same time, the League of Arab States calls
on the Security Council to deal effectively with the
blatant Iranian interference in Arab affairs, in support
of the implementation of the League's decisions
adopted at summit and ministerial levels. The League
also calls for the immediate withdrawal of Iran from
the three Emirati islands that it occupies. That should
take place in parallel with steady progress on other
main issues connected with establishing peace and
stability in the Arab world, foremost of which is the
peace process in the Middle East; establishing the
independent Palestinian State, with East Jerusalem as
its capital along the 1967 borders; and restoring peace
and security in Syria, Libya, Iraq, the Sudan, Yemen,
Somalia and other hotbeds of tension and instability
that continue to impede the efforts of Arab States to
achieve progress and prosperity.

