Mr. Mahbubani (Singapore): You have asked us
to dispense with formalities, Sir, so we will not
congratulate you on your assumption of the presidency.
But we would like to say publicly what we have told
you privately: that we strongly support your efforts to
reform the working methods of the Council. The
interactive meeting we are having today is, I think, a
good development.

I want to apologize to my good friend Mr. Annabi
for not having been present when he gave his briefing.
But I have since then been briefed. And, speaking of
the word "brief", I shall try to be brief, but I have a few
substantive points to make.

When we look at East Timor, I guess that the
traditional thing is to say that we can look at it as a
glass half full or as a glass half empty. As optimists, we
like to look at it as a glass half full. But this time
around, as we look at the situation in East Timor, let us
consider the possibility that we may be looking at a
glass that is half empty. In that regard, let us consider
the possibility that 2001 is a very important and crucial
year for East Timor, and that things may not go
smoothly in the coming months. Several speakers have
referred to the disturbing developments about which
we have heard.

Of course, the most disturbing development is the
resignation of Mr. Xanana Gusmao. I am a bit surprised
that this is being taken relatively calmly. The political
significance of this event is similar to that of a
hypothetical event such as President Mandela resigning
before the transition took place in South Africa. I know
that Mr. Ramos-Horta has stepped in, and I know that
Mr. Gusmao is continuing to play an active role in East
Timor. But this is an indication of political troubles.

At the same time, there are reports of growing
Violence. I note from Mr. Annabi's remarks that there
is a trend towards more and more frequent violence.
We should also bear this in mind.

Given that context, I should like to make five
points on this issue. The first point is that the exit
strategy for East Timor may not necessarily be an easy
one. We would like, of course, to hope that everything
will go smoothly. But if it does not, we have to
consider a possibly difficult exit strategy. Here I want
to refer to remarks made by the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello,
at a recent conference in Singapore on the report
(S/2000/809) of the Panel on United Nations Peace
Operations chaired by Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi, which
took place a few days ago, on 2 and 3 April. He said
that the United Nations should apply the lessons
learned from previous peacekeeping operations and
ensure that the departure of a peace operation does not
lead to a vacuum in the country in question or to a
sense of abandonment. There is therefore a need for the
United Nations and the international community to
show flexibility and to continue to provide political
support and resources both to the United Nations
Transitional Administration in East Timor (UNTAET)
and directly to East Timor itself. We know that these
issues will be addressed in the July report, but we have
to reflect carefully on them in the coming months.

The second point I want to emphasize is that
there is clearly a need for a strong United Nations
presence in the coming months. Here, I was pleased to
hear what Mr. Annabi just said: let us not tamper with
force levels at this stage; let us wait and see what
actually happens. Here, one important point that needs
to be put on the record is that there is a distinction
between the holding of elections and the achievement
of independence. These are two different events. Let us
not tie the reduction of force levels to the election date;
it should be tied to the question of independence and
what comes after independence.

The third point is that we obviously need to help
the East Timorese more in terms of their preparations
for the nationhood that is to come. I can say
candidly- in line with your request for us to speak
openly at these meetings, Sir - that when I met Mr.
Jose Ramos-Horta privately I noted that the lesson of
the past 40 years has been that, while achieving
independence has been relatively easy, ensuring the
success of that independence has always been a
challenge. He acknowledged that point in private, and
he acknowledged that a lot of work needs to be done.
Perhaps, as the United Nations prepares for the future
of East Timor, it should look at the big picture and at
the full range of institutions and institutional
frameworks that are needed for a society such as that of
East Timor to succeed. It is good to get assistance from
the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank,
but at the end of the day you have to put together a
country almost from scratch. It is the big picture we
need to look at. Here again, I was pleased at what Mr.
J ose Ramos-Horta - until recently the foreign minister
and now the President of the National Council - said,
when he spoke about independence:

"This could happen by the end of this year; or, if
we see that some of the conditions that are
essential for the foundation of independence are
not there yet, we could very well postpone it until
2002."

I think we should listen to voices like that in
making any decision on the timing of the transition and
of independence. We have to look carefully at the
overall state of East Timorese society and ask ourselves
how ready they are to sail on their own.

The fourth point is that, in looking at the East
Timor issue, we should not look at it in isolation. It has
a regional context. It has an impact on the region a the
region that Singapore belongs to, which is South-East
Asia. We should take note of the fact that even though
Indonesia is going through all sorts of difficulties, it is
taking steps, within its limited resources, to
demonstrate its commitment to resolving the refugee
problem in West Timor. We note that quite a few
refugees have since gone back. Whatever happens in
East Timor will have an impact on the region. One
point I would like to emphasize is that, just as our
colleagues in Europe worry about developments in the
Balkans and have asked us to be sensitive to the
regional dimension of many of those issues, we hope
that our colleagues will take note of the fact that East
Timor also has regional dimensions and that they too
should be factored in. If you look overall at the
quantity of resources that Asia takes from the United
Nations system, it is, frankly speaking, relatively small.
East Timor is probably the single major United Nations
operation in the entire continent of Asia.
My fifth and final point - and an equally
important point - is that Singapore will remain
committed, within its means and where it can make a
useful contribution, to supporting the United Nations
and international efforts to help East Timor become a
normal and productive member of the international
community. A new development is that starting next
month Singapore will be deploying, with the New
Zealand composite battalion in the western sector, a
reinforced battalion of up to 70 regular combat troops
for a period of one year. The number 70 may be small
for big countries, but for a small country like
Singapore that is a significant number, and it indicates
the level of commitment we have to helping East Timor
achieve independence smoothly.

In conclusion, we look forward very much to the
reports that are going to be issued by the Secretariat on
the situation in East Timor, but as it does this, we hope
it will bear in mind one of the most striking lines in the
Brahimi report, which is an appeal to please not tell us,
the Security Council, what you think we want to hear.
Please tell us how you think the situation actually is
one the ground. What is actually happening? How
ready is East Timor for the various transitions taking
place? How many resources will we need, and what
will we need to do to ensure that, when history is
finally written, the history books will say that the
United Nations finally did a great job in its exit
strategy from East Timor?

