Mrs. Ashipala-Musavyi (Namibia): I would like
to thank Mrs. Ogata for her briefing. For 10 years, she
and her staff have done magnificent work on behalf of
millions of women, children and men who have lost
their identities and are now known merely as refugees
or internally displaced persons. We have witnessed an
increase in the number of conflicts; as a result, the
number of the people to whom I have referred has also
increased. This was indeed a challenging period for
Mrs. Ogata, but she met the challenge head-on. We
applaud her tireless efforts and wish her the best in her
future endeavours.

Those whom the staff of the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR)
seek to help have become a weapon of war. Over the
past months, deliberate attacks on humanitarian
workers have occurred. It is thus essential to preserve a
safe environment to enable humanitarian workers to
reach those in need. In this regard, States must carry
out their obligation to protect humanitarian personnel.
Those who attack humanitarian personnel must be
brought to justice.

Many factors have an impact on the situation of
refugees and of humanitarian workers. The easy
availability of the small arms and light weapons that
fuel armed conflict is a major factor. It is therefore
essential that arms-producing countries exercise
restraint and ensure that the arms they produce do not
reach the areas in question.

Without downplaying the severity of the situation
of all refugees and internally displaced persons, I wish
to place particular emphasis on the situation of women
and girl refugees. That group of civilians have special
needs that require special attention.
Despite the continuing efforts of UNHCR and
other humanitarian agencies, the refugee population
has not decreased.

My delegation notes that internally displaced
persons do not necessarily draw the attention of the
international community, but that their situation is just
as critical as that of refugees.

It is imperative that we all work together to
ensure that conflict does not occur. In that way, we
avoid an increase in the number of the people about
whom we are speaking today. We wish to emphasize
the need for the international community to support
post-conflict peace-building activities where conflicts
have taken place, by assisting countries in their
reconciliation and economic reconstruction efforts,
which will ensure long-term security. In her briefing,
Mrs. Ogata did a good job of discussing that issue.

We have noted the shortfall in funding for
humanitarian activities, and we call on the donor
community to provide the funding required to enable
UNHCR and other humanitarian agencies to bring
relief to civilians in need.

In her briefing, Mrs. Ogata raised many important
issues and made concrete proposals. I believe that
those proposals are timely as the Council considers,
inter alia, the report (S/2000/809) of the Panel on
United Nations Peace Operations chaired by
Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi, on which she also touched. My
colleague from the United States delegation referred in
his statement to Security Council resolution 1325
(2000), on women and peace and security. In our view,
the study to be undertaken in accordance with one
provision of that resolution needs to take into account
some of the issues that Mrs. Ogata raised today. For
our part, we shall study Mrs. Ogata's briefing notes for
maximal use in relevant forums.

When we were commemorating the fiftieth
anniversary of UNHCR, Mrs. Ogata said, among other
things, that there was really nothing to celebrate,
because we do not need refugees or internally
displaced persons in the first place. None the less, my
delegation would like to thank Mrs. Ogata for having
placed herself at the service of those who needed her.
Her successor, High Commissioner-elect Ruud
Lubbers, hails from a country - your country,
Mr. President - with a long and outstanding record on
humanitarian assistance. My delegation looks forward
to working with him.

