Mr. Weisleder (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish):
At the outset, my delegation would like to thank the
presidency of the Security Council and the Croatian
delegation for organizing this open debate. The
presence of President Stjepan Mesic' offers a timely
opportunity to consider our role in the fight against
terrorism. It is an honour to have you presiding over
this session, Sir. We also wish to welcome the
significant presence of the Secretary-General and of
the Deputy Secretary-General at this meeting.

Costa Rica must begin by unequivocally and
firmly condemning terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations, regardless of where, why or by Whom it
is committed. There is no possible justification for the
commission of terrorist acts.

We are living in times marked by constant savage
and underhanded acts of aggression against innocent
persons, who are by far the most common victims of
fanaticism simply because they happen to be waiting
for a bus or having a coffee or an ice cream with
friends, or are just going about their daily work, as we
witnessed a few days ago in India. We condemn that
act, as well as all previous acts such as those
perpetrated in Buenos Aires, Beirut, Caracas, Bali or
Tel Aviv. Therefore, this is a timely opportunity to
exchange ideas on the contribution of the United
Nations in the fight against terrorism, in particular
within the Council, which is mandated to maintain
peace and security on the planet, and above all seven
years after the adoption of resolution 1373 (2001).

Less than a decade ago, there was no apparent
relationship between measures to address breaches of
peace and security caused by terrorist acts and human
rights. Even today, there are those who are not
sufficiently concerned with that relationship, which
must form part of the fight against terrorism, or with
the need to raise such issues frequently.
The act of recalling that all counter-terrorist
measures must strictly comply with international law
must not be considered to weaken that struggle. On the
contrary, our country is of the view that it makes the
fight more effective in the medium and long terms.

That perspective is appropriately reflected in the
resolution on the United Nations Global Counter-
Terrorism Strategy, which clearly indicates that those
two objectives are complementary and mutually
reinforcing.

Indeed, that issue is one of the great challenges
faced by the Security Council on that subject. We must
ensure that repressive measures that are adopted to
neutralize the terrorist threat and terrorist actions are
matched by an analysis of the socio-political roots that
fuel the scourge. My delegation is not of the view that
it is only the lack of socio-economic opportunity or the
feeling of political marginalization that explain
terrorism. We are convinced, however, by the abundant
existing evidence that the fight against terrorism must
be comprehensive and cannot be restricted to military
options.

In the latter approach, the promotion of education
is fundamental. However, Council members know full
well that education is not a panacea either, and that in a
number of cases it has instead become a weapon to
promote fanaticism, intolerance and hatred. Therefore,
what should be a path towards peace, reconciliation
and the creation of opportunities for younger
generations often becomes instead a trigger that sends
many young people to their deaths and results in the
deaths of thousands of innocent victims.

As part of its overarching efforts to address
terrorism and to preserve human rights and freedoms,
the Organization must work deliberately and
ceaselessly to incorporate its principles, pillars and
values into educational programmes and curricula, in
particular in those societies where it has been
ascertained, deplorably, that many centres of education
have served to train future human bombs. Those efforts
must be made in cooperation with the authorities and
Governments and must never go against their will or
resolve. In that manner, we will not only preserve the
sovereignty of States - which is a sine qua non
condition for any multilateral efforts - but we will
also obtain better results, as there is no legitimate
Government of any United Nations Member State that
would not be ready to cultivate peace or understanding
as the road towards the resolution of conflicts and
disputes.

The challenge facing the Council also lies in
improving its internal procedures to make them fairer
and clearer, thus guaranteeing their efficiency and
transparency. But how can that effectiveness be
guaranteed in view of the numerous widely divergent
mandates related to the counter-terrorism struggle. For
a number of years now, Costa Rica has submitted for
the consideration of Member States a proposal for the
establishment of an integrated counter-terrorism office.
We are convinced that the United Nations must play
leadership role in the fight against that terrible
phenomenon, and we are of the view that such
leadership could be facilitated by consolidating the
numerous mandates that exist on that subject.

In the absence of such an integrated office, we
will limit ourselves to reiterating our call for the three
subsidiary bodies of the Security Council in the field of
counter-terrorism to continue to pursue better
coordination among themselves, their groups of experts
and other international and regional organizations.

It is certainly our duty within the Council to
continue to provide those entities with the necessary
guidance for the implementation of better protocols
that will facilitate joint visits, which have already
begun, as well as a better exchange of information and
coordinated participation in regional activities,
whenever possible.

Costa Rica has closely followed the questioning
of the measures adopted by States to implement the
Security Council sanctions regime. It is worrying that
those measures are still being called into question by
national and regional jurisdictional entities for their
alleged lack of compliance with the law and with due
process. As an elected member of this Council, Costa
Rica will continue to cooperate to ensure fairer and
clearer procedures for the listing and de-listing of
individuals and entities on the sanctions list, as well as
for the granting of exemptions on humanitarian
grounds, in accordance with the constant requests of
the General Assembly in that regard.

This Council has launched significant initiatives
in that regard, and we hope that negotiations will soon
begin with a view to establishing mechanisms to ensure
that the individuals on the consolidated list of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1267 (1999) can exercise their right to be
heard and to submit their defence through an
independent sanctions review mechanism. However,
we reiterate that that is not a step towards weakening
the fight against terrorism; to the contrary, it is a step
towards strengthening it. Our delegation is ready to
support the statement that will be drafted in
consultations as the outcome of this debate.

Lastly, as a country without an army, Costa Rica
has decided to use international law as its only
instrument of defence. For that reason, we eagerly
await the international community's efforts to establish
as soon as possible, after more than eight years of
discussion, a comprehensive convention on
international terrorism.

