Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We welcome the participation in this meeting
of the First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Serbia, Mr. Ivica
Dacie. We agree with the comments he made and
we took note of the statement by Mr. Enver Hoxhaj.
We thank Mr. Zarif for his presentation of the report
(S/2014/558) of the Secretary-General on the activities
of the United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo (UNMIK) and his assessment ofthe situation
in the region.

The United Nations Mission remains the main
international presence in Kosovo. European Union
mediation in the dialogue between Belgrade and
Pristina and the transfer of the functions from UNMIK
to the European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo
does not diminish the role of the United Nations in
Kosovo. We share the concerns expressed in the report
of the Secretary-General about the lack of progress in
the area of national reconciliation, the failure of the
Kosovar authorities to implement a language policy and
the continued desecration of religious shrines.

Unfortunately, the report does not mention the
illegal and corrupt practice of usurping Serb property
in the region, carried out by Kosovar authorities under
the guise of privatization. Against the backdrop of
problems related to the return of Serbian refugees and
internally displaced persons and the restoration of their
property rights, Pristina's actions deprive the remaining
Serbs of their sources of livelihood. In essence, we are
talking about a continuation of ethnic cleansing by
economic means. In such circumstances, there can be
no meaningful talk of progress in the process of the
return of refugees or internally displaced persons.

All such systemic problems related to the violation
of minorities' rights have significant potential for
conflict and could lead to the escalation of violence
at any moment. Unfortunately, that proved to be true
in June in the ethnically mixed neighbourhoods of the
Kosovar town of Mitrovica, where a wave of incidents
unfolded culminating in the clashes on the bridge
across the Ibar river.

Given the wide range of problems, we call on the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo to fully and proactively fulfil its mandate. To
do so, it must have all the necessary resources. We
should consider significantly enhancing the Mission
by providing it with experts in the fields of human
rights, the rule of law and reconciliation between
communities. We condemn attempts to undermine
UNMIK's role and call on the Kosovo Albanian side
to encourage meaningful cooperation with the United
Nations presence.

We are not inclined to share the optimism expressed
about the elections held in the region. Only 41 per
cent of registered voters took part in the elections and
the participation of Kosovar Serbs was even lower,
demonstrating their continued deep distrust of the
region's institutions. In fact, these institutions are not
really being established. We are seeing the ongoing
protraction of the political crisis. The delayed formation
of a Government also hinders the resumption of
negotiations between Belgrade and Pristina. We believe
that the interest of the Serbs and other non-Albanian
communities of the region should be fully taken into
consideration in the formation of new Government
institutions. To protect the interests of the Kosovo
Serbs, it is essential to create a community of Kosovo
Serbian municipalities, in accordance with the Brussels
Agreement, as quickly as possible.

We draw attention to the published interim results
of the investigations related to the report of Dick Marty,
which clearly state that there is sufficient evidence to
bring charges against certain senior officials of the
former Kosovo Liberation Army (KLA). The report
speaks ofmany cases ofmurder, abduction, rape, illegal
detention, inhumane treatment and the desecration of
churches, which resulted in ethnic cleansing and the
expulsion of Serbs from southern and central Kosovo.
Those activities were organized, widespread and
systematic. The interim report also confirms cases of
organ trafficking in the region.

The public results of the investigation clearly dispel
the myth of the just struggle for liberation of the KLA,
which was used in particular to justify the unilateral
declaration of independence of the Serbian region of
Kosovo by the former leaders of that organization.
Those guilty of crimes must be punished, independent
of the position they occupy now. We were worried by
Mr. Clint Williamson's mention of the active resistance
to the investigation of the crimes of the KLA, which
clearly illustrates Pristina's attitude and readiness to
cooperate with the inquiry.

The report does not say a great deal about the topic
of the participation of Kosovars in conflicts in the
Middle East. Nevertheless, since early August several
dozen individuals have been arrested and accused of
fighting in the ranks of terrorist and extremist groups
in the conflicts in Syria and Iraq. Such activity needs to
be stopped. We are happy to hear Mr. Zarif raise these
issues in his briefing today.

In conclusion, we confirm that Russia's position on
the problems of Kosovo remains unchanged. We believe
that resolution 1244 (1999) remains fully in force and
binding on all parties as the international legal basis for
the resolution of the conflict in Kosovo.

