Baron Ahmad (United Kingdom): I thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this debate and for your
contribution at this most opportune and important time.

May I also take this opportunity to thank Secretary-
General Guterres for his leadership and his commitment
to reform on peacekeeping, Chairperson Mahamat
and Ms. Toure, who gave a passionate, powerful and
poignant reminder through her reflections on the role
of peacekeeping and how its effectiveness can be
improved. I am sure we all heard her voice, her plea and
her contribution in very clear terms.

As we mark 70 years of United Nations
peacekeeping, it is right that we pause and reflect on the
many lives saved and on the regions and countries that
have been stabilized over the years. There are millions
of people living in some of the most challenging places
on Earth. They have been given hope; they have been
given opportunity. That is the proud legacy of the toil
and sacrifice of hundreds of thousands of men and
women who have put their lives at risk. Some, indeed,
have lost their lives to protect the most vulnerable. In
this 70th anniversary year, we salute their service and
the service of those who support United Nations efforts
through regional bodies like the African Union Mission
in Somalia.

Over the past seven years, the challenges that
peacekeepers face have evolved. Disputes are
increasingly complex. Mission settings are increasingly
dangerous, and too often our collective contribution in
this building has failed to keep pace. United Nations
peacekeeping is far too important to fail. In recent
years, we have indeed made progress, for example
in planning and force generation. The Peacekeeping
Defence Ministerial Conferences in London in 2016
and Vancouver in 2017 delivered 80 new pledges of
personnel and capability. This progress must continue.

We welcome the Secretary-General's call to
action this year, and also I welcome his statement
today on a sharpened focus on the safety and security
of peacekeepers. The United Nations action plan
to implement some of the recommendations is also
very timely. I also welcome the Secretary-General's
statement today that he will provide regular updates
on the delivery of the action plan. As we embark
on this collective effort to improve United Nations
peacekeeping, the United Kingdom would suggest
three areas on which to focus.

First, the Security Council must take its
responsibilities seriously and have the information
available in order to do so. We must set clear, achievable
objectives for peacekeeping operations and not be afraid
to sequence so that mandates provide the right direction
and the right resources at the right time. We should go
further, setting mandates that are most strategic and
take a longer-term view. To do this, the Council needs
high-quality, timely and accurate information and
analysis. We, States and institutions alike, need to work
together better to achieve this.

Secondly, to succeed peacekeeping operations need
to be complemented by all the tools that the United
Nations and the international community have at our
disposal. We need better coordination at Headquarters
and in the field with peacebuilding, better development
and all other arms of the United Nations to support. That
is why we support the vision and themes underpinning
the Secretary-General's sustaining peace proposals and
his peace and security architecture reforms.

Thirdly, we must improve performance, and
strengthen accountability for underperformance. There
needs to be a better match between the capacity of the
troops and the tasks that they are asked to perform. That
requires the Department for Peacekeeping Operations
to reinforce work on force generation, training,
performance monitoring and, indeed, evaluation. It also
requires Member States to deliver the capabilities that
they have committed. We must continue to recognize
the essential role of women in ensuring the successful
delivery of peacekeeping, and engage more women in
all components of all missions.

Above all, we must stop sexual exploitation and
abuse by those sent to protect civilians, and we must
offer real protection for women, children and all
vulnerable communities, as Ms. Toure highlighted in
her contribution this morning. Furthermore, addressing
conflict-related sexual violence is equally crucial. The
United Kingdom plans to host an international meeting
in 2019 marking progress made and the next steps to take
since the Global Summit on Ending Sexual Violence in
Conflict was held five years ago. Although we welcome
the progress made, in particular the United Nations new
victim-centred approach, too many incidents of concern
across the United Nations system remain.

Through the leadership of the Secretary-General,
we have an opportunity to make United Nations
peacekeeping fit for our times. It is the responsibility
of all of us to work together to seize that opportunity.
That means the Council, the Secretariat, regional and
subregional bodies, host States and those who provide
troops, police and financing. Let us not forget that
those United Nations peacekeepers, under the banner
of the United Nations, act in the name of each and every
one of us. It is therefore our responsibility to ensure
that they embody the ideals of the Charter of the United
Nations because, through them, we ultimately unite our
strength to maintain international peace and security.

