Mr. Fall (spoke in French): Allow me at the
outset to thank you, Sir, for inviting me to participate
in this meeting. I also thank your country for the
important role it has played and continues to play in
stabilizing and bringing peace to the Great Lakes
region. During my four-and-a-half year tenure, which
ends in a few days, I have enjoyed the unswerving
support and wise counsel of your Government.

I also need to thank the Republic of South Africa
for the important political and diplomatic role it has
played and continues to play in Burundi, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and other parts of
the region. The International Conference on the Great
Lakes Region would not have been a success if the
peace processes in Burundi and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo had not also proceeded
smoothly. Once again, I thank you. Your presidency of
the Security Council this month and the convening of
this meeting are further testimony to South Africa's
commitment.

On 20 December 2006, in the wake of the Nairobi
summit of 14 and 15 December - which represented
2

the culmination of the preparatory process for the
International Conference, adopting the Pact on
Security, Stability and Development in the Great Lakes
Region - the Security Council decided to hold a
meeting to hear the conclusions emanating from that
important summit. On the basis of the Council's
conclusions, an additional and final three-month
mandate was given to the Office that I have the honour
to head in order to ensure a harmonious transition
between the Office of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for the Great Lakes Region and the
Executive Secretariat of the Conference established at
the Nairobi summit.

I will brief the Security Council today on the
basis of two themes. The first is the process of
transferring competencies from the Office of the
Special Representative to the Executive Secretariat of
the Conference, which has been under way since
lJanuary. I will then try very briefly to outline the
lessons learned from the experience of preparing for
the International Conference on the Great Lakes
Region.

With respect to the transfer of competencies, in
accordance with the statement issued by the Council on
20 December 2006, we have been working since 1
January with Ambassador Mulamula, Executive
Secretary of the Conference, to undertake the transfer
from my Office to the Executive Secretariat. In that
context, we have worked in three areas.

First, we transferred the institutional memory of
the preparatory process for the International
Conference. We assembled and transferred all of the
documents drafted from June 2003 to March 2006. The
transfer is now complete and we are simply waiting for
the Executive Secretariat to acquire the necessary
facilities in Bujumbura to allow it to finalize the
transfer of the documents in hard copy and electronic
versions.

Secondly, we assisted in the establishment of the
new Executive Secretariat. That primarily involved the
drafting and adoption of management, legal,
administrative and financial manuals. We then assisted
the Executive Secretary in drafting and preparing the
headquarters agreement with the Government of
Burundi. In the same vein, we helped the Executive
Secretary in her other efforts with respect to the
Government of Kenya, which holds the Conference
presidency. Even as I speak, the Minister for Foreign
07-26496
Affairs of Kenya is hosting his counterparts at a
meeting of the Regional Inter-Ministerial Committee,
to which I will refer again later.

Thirdly, we assisted the Executive Secretary in
implementing the recruitment of consultants to the
Executive Secretariat for the transition period. As
Council members know, the Executive Secretariat does
not yet have any real budget. We also helped the
Executive Secretary to convene a number of meetings
and organized a meeting of national coordinators to
adopt the Executive Secretariat's management
manuals. We further assisted the Executive Secretary
and the Association of European Parliamentarians for
Africa in organizing in Kinshasa a regional meeting for
parliamentarians of the Great Lakes region. That
meeting succeeded, first, in terms of the attendance of
representatives of all countries of the region, including
a number of delegations led by speakers of senates or
houses; and secondly, in adopting a declaration and a
report in which the parliamentarians undertook to assist
in the prompt ratification and speedy implementation
of the Pact on Security, Stability and Development in
the Great Lakes Region adopted at the Nairobi summit.

We are currently assisting the Executive
Secretariat in preparing and organizing a meeting of
the Regional Inter-Ministerial Committee for the Great
Lakes region, a body established under the Conference.
The meeting is to be held in Bujumbura on 22 and
23 March.

Lastly, we are working with the Executive
Secretary to prepare for a meeting of the Peace and
Security Council of the African Union to be held on
13 March in Addis Ababa, which will focus
specifically on assessing the preparatory process for
the Conference and the joint role played by the African
Union and the United Nations.

We therefore believe that, as of 31 March, the
transfer of competencies will have been carried out in
its entirety. In that respect, at our suggestion the
Executive Secretary has written a letter to the
Secretary-General requesting that all of the equipment
from the Office of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General be transferred as a donation to the
new Executive Secretariat of the Conference. The
Secretary-General, with whom I met yesterday, is
monitoring this request very closely and has issued
guidance so that a positive and rapid response may be
given to him.
07-26496
Perhaps the time has now come to try to draw
some lessons from this entire preparatory process. The
first lesson to be drawn is clearly the importance of the
role of the Security Council in the preparatory process
and, as a result, the importance of the role that the
Council should play in the implementation of the Pact.

Throughout the preparatory process, the Office of
the Special Representative has received diplomatic and
political support from the Council here in New York
and in the field. This support could have been more
effective if it had been accompanied by support in
terms of staff recruitment. The Council preferred to
maintain the Office's staffing at the skeletal level.
Without the support of the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP), which backed us up
with two officers, the United Nations Development
Fund for Women (UNIFEM), which provided an
officer, and the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights, which also seconded
one person, the Office of Special Representative of the
Secretary-General would not have been in the position
to carry out its function of facilitating the preparatory
process.

It is essential that the Council acknowledge the
consequences. The Council cannot issue a mandate as
important as organizing an international conference on
the Great Lakes region that includes 11 countries -
and the Council had insisted that the conference be
expanded to 11 countries - without providing the
resources necessary to complete the task.

The second lesson to be drawn is to look into the
future with respect to the Council's role. It is important
that the process of ratifying the Pact be done as soon as
possible. I will come back to this point. But the
Council needs to support and accompany this
ratification process in order that it take place as quickly
as possible. The region is still fragile. The Conference
process has created an atmosphere of trust, but this
atmosphere is tenuous and, without prompt ratification
and rapid implementation of this Pact, it could
deteriorate at any moment. Therefore, I urge the
Council to use its moral authority to support and boost
prompt ratification of this Pact.

The third lesson to be drawn is one concerning
the member countries. The preparatory process was
built on three principles - the principle of ownership,
the principle of inclusion and the principle of
partnerships.
3
The principle of ownership is essential. Today,
more than ever, the countries of the region need to
effectively exercise their ownership of the process,
which, beyond establishment of the secretariat,
encompasses the rapid ratification of the Pact, the
payment of assessments to the regular budget for the
secretariat and the creation of the Special Fund for
Reconstruction and Development.

This political commitment was reaffirmed by the
heads of State, but it is essential that the commitment
be confirmed by action. To date, only two countries
have paid their assessments to the Conference
secretariat. Furthermore, with respect to ratification,
the Office of the Special Representative is not yet
aware of any State having ratified the Pact. It is
therefore essential that this primary responsibility of
countries of the region be highlighted, and for that I
also call here on the Council's authority.

It is essential that the priorities adopted by the
Conference with regard to programmes of action and
protocols be implemented effectively. On this point,
there are number of key projects, some of which have
received financing upstream. That is the case with
reviving the Economic Community of the Great Lakes
Countries, for which the European Union has already
committed to contributing $5 million for relaunching
the secretariat and $45 million for project
implementation.

As we know, the Economic Community of the
Great Lakes Countries includes the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Rwanda and Burundi, that is to
say that, together with Uganda, it is a circle of fire, the
most unstable part of Great Lakes region. Thus is
urgent that these projects be quickly implemented.

Similarly, the Pact also laid out transborder areas
of development and established border areas for shared
management of border problems. Here again, the
Conference could anticipate implementation,
particularly by drawing on an already existing
initiative, namely, the Tripartite Plus One initiative,
which includes the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Rwanda, Burundi and Uganda, under the authority of
the United States of America. It is essential that, as in
the work of the preparatory process for the Conference
with the authorities in Washington, there be better
synergy between the Tripartite Plus One and the
projects of the International Conference on the Great
Lakes Region with respect to transborder zones
involving those four countries.

Lastly, it is essential to maintain the momentum
from the Conference. For that, during the Security
Council's periodic visits to the region, particular
importance needs to be given to implementation of the
Pact. That could also draw upon peacekeeping
missions that the Council has decided upon,
specifically, with regard to the Sudan, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and Burundi.

Moreover, I should say that, with respect to the
Conference, the principle of inclusiveness needs to be
maintained. That means giving non-governmental
players, particularly women and young people and civil
society, but also parliamentarians, the possibility to
take part in the process of implementing the Pact. The
Pact, if it is properly applied, could provide an
example of a regional, comprehensive approach that
could be duplicated in some other regions in Africa or
elsewhere because, from experience, we know that this
kind of regional comprehensive approach, bringing
together peace and security, democracy and good
governance, economic development and regional
integration, is the only likely way to tackle all of the
problems of human security in a comprehensive
manner.

Mr. President, I conclude by saying to you, with a
sense of pride, what a privilege and honour it has been
for me to serve both the United Nations and Africa
through this preparation for the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region.

