Mr. Sajdik (Austria): I have the honour to
address the Council on behalf of the informal group of
like-minded States on targeted sanctions. This group
comprises Belgium, Costa Rica, Denmark, Finland,
Germany, Liechtenstein, the Netherlands, Norway,
Sweden, Switzerland and my own country, Austria.

Let me join others in thanking the Chairs of the
three Committees for their informative briefings. As
the focus of our group is on strengthening the United
Nations sanctions regimes through the implementation
of fair and clear procedures, my remarks will
concentrate on the Committee established pursuant to
Council resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011)
concerning Al-Qaida and associated individuals and
entities. Our group considers that targeted sanctions are
a useful and necessary tool in maintaining international
peace and security, including in effectively combating
international terrorism. We therefore support
strengthening the effectiveness of the Al-Qaida
sanctions regime.

Almost a year after the adoption of resolution
1989 (2011), on 17 June 2011, it is suitable to take
stock of its implementation. The members of our group
were pleased to see that that resolution has given both
the Ombudsperson and the designating State the
mandate to recommend de-listings. This procedure, in
particular by requiring consensus on the part of the
Committee to reject a delisting recommendation, has
already proved to be a significant step in providing
due-process guarantees for listed individuals or entities.
We applaud Ombudsperson Kimberly Prost for her
highly professional and dedicated work and steadfast
efforts to examine whether the criterion for a continued
listing is fulfilled. For that to be the case, there must be
an association of the individual, entity, group or
undertaking with Al-Qaida.

Our group is of the firm View that the success of
the Ombudsperson's work and the credibility of the
Committee hinge in particular upon the following
conditions. The provision of all relevant information,
including confidential information, is key to enabling
the Ombudsperson to carry out her mandate effectively
and examine whether a de-listing request is justified.
We therefore encourage all States to consider
concluding agreements or arrangements for sharing
confidential information with the Office of the
Ombudsperson. Switzerland, Belgium, Costa Rica,
Germany and Liechtenstein have already concluded
such arrangements, while other members of our group,
including my own country, will soon follow suit.

One of the cornerstones of the rule of law and of
due process is the obligation to provide reasons for
decisions affecting the rights of individuals or entities.
Whereas situations might occur in which the
Committee will not follow the Ombudsperson's
recommendations, resolution 1989 (2011) obliges the
Committee to give reasons for its decisions under all
circumstances. This must apply all the more if
recommendations are rejected by the Council on appeal
by a member of the Committee. The rule of law must
apply not only outside the United Nations, but also
within the United Nations, in particular in situations in
which actions by the United Nations may directly
affect individual rights. The United Nations should
lead the way in that regard.

Therefore, it is crucial that the Committee's
procedures be closely followed. Resolution 1989
(2011) provides for a three-phase process: an
information-gathering period, a dialogue phase and,
finally, the Committee discussion. Respect for those
procedures, including time limits, by the Committee,
the Ombudsperson and all other relevant actors is
essential for fairness and transparency and impacts on
the overall image of the Committee.

The like-minded States reiterate their strong
support for the mandate of the Ombudsperson and the
strict implementation of resolution 1989 (2011) in
order to safeguard the Council's commendable efforts
in advancing fair and clear procedures and due process.
We urge all Member States to take note of the fact that
the Ombudsperson is mandated to conduct her work in
an independent and impartial manner.

With a view to the renewal of the mandates of the
Ombudsperson and the Monitoring Team at the end of
this year, the like-minded group reaffirms its continued
commitment to improving fair and clear procedures for
targeted sanctions and to making United Nations
sanctions more effective. On the basis of its letter to
the Security Council of April 2011, the group is
committed to tackling the remaining challenges and
weaknesses of the current Al-Qaida sanctions regime
and to supporting the Council in further improving the
regime. Safeguarding the transparency of the process is
definitely a key element. In that regard, the disclosure
of the identity of the designating State is crucial.

Another very important issue impacting on the
Office of the Ombudsperson concerns the duration of
its mandate, which should be extended beyond the
existing 18 months. In addition, adding a sunset clause
for all designations would underline that the measures
taken against individuals and entities are by nature
preventive and temporary, and not punitive.

The need to strengthen fair and clear procedures
is not limited to the Al-Qaida sanctions regime, but is
relevant to the other sanctions committees. A person
de-listed by the Al-Qaida Committee upon
recommendation of the Ombudsperson, but thereafter
listed by another sanctions Committee can only
approach the focal point for de-listing pursuant to
resolution 1730 (2006), but no longer the
Ombudsperson. However, the mandate of the focal
point does not provide for procedures comparable to
those of the Ombudsperson. That inequality of due
process lacks justification.

We therefore continue to call for further steps to
improve the procedural fairness and clarity of other
sanctions regimes. Such steps should include aligning
listing and de-listing procedures with resolution 1989
(2011) and the Ombudsperson process. That would
greatly enhance the observance of the rights of the
affected individuals and entities and thereby improve
the legitimacy and effectiveness of the Security
Council's work.

Finally, let me state in my national capacity that
Austria aligns itself with the statement to be made by
the observer of the European Union.

