Mr. Salam (Lebanon) (spoke in French): I would
first like to thank the French Mission for organizing
this important debate on the situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, as well as for the
quality of the concept paper it prepared in that regard
(S/2011/282, annex). I should also like to thank
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and Minister
Raymond Tshibanda for their very useful contributions
to this debate.

Almost a year to the day, the Security Council
adopted resolution 1925 (2010), by which the United
Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo was succeeded by the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO). The
international community also expressed its support for
the efforts of the Democratic Republic of the Congo to
assume greater autonomy in managing its conflicts. For
its part, the Democratic Republic of the Congo was
able to associate this change with the fiftieth
anniversary of its independence. MONUSCO is today
active in numerous areas, in particular in the protection
of civilians, disarmament and stabilization. It is also
participating in the preparations being undertaken by
the Independent National Electoral Commission for
next November's election.

We would like to commend the efforts of the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
to bring peace to the country and strengthen State
institutions. However, we must nevertheless emphasize
that the tasks to be carried out are still onerous and the
needs enormous in a country whose eastern part alone
is larger than the entire territory of France.

The challenges in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo are numerous and complex, on both the
humanitarian front as well as in the area of security.
Combating the activities of armed groups requires
working together more closely with Government
forces, as well as increased support for the process of
integrating militants, who must form part of the reform
of the security sector. Moreover, the frequency and
brutality of attacks by the Lord's Resistance Army
against the civilian populations of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo as well as of many of the
countries of the region call for stepped up cooperation
on the part of the States of the region.

The latest reports on rapes committed in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo are exceedingly
alarming. While the statistic of 15,000 rapes having
taken place last year in the eastern part of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo last year was cited
in this Chamber last October, current reports mention
400,000 - an average of 48 rapes per hour. This
confirms the fears expressed by Ms. Wallstrom about
the country's reputation being tarnished for being
known as the rape capital of the world. The
international community must respond firmly and in a
concerted manner in the face of the scope of this
tragedy. Rapes must end and the perpetrators of this
heinous crime must face justice. Women in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo must suffer no
longer and should take their full place in society.

The measures taken to resolve the problem of
refugees and internally displaced persons should be
encouraged, as should steps to limit infections and
contain epidemics, including cholera and polio.

We must also underscore the close link that exists
between stabilization and development. In that regard,
it is crucial to support the economy of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo through material assistance and
concrete programmes.

In addition, we must demand an end to the illegal
exploitation of natural resources, which would
contribute to putting an end to violence.

The international community should continue to
support the authorities of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo in all the efforts being made to ensure
conditions for stability and prosperity in the country.
MONUSCO should have all the necessary means to
carry out its tasks, including helicopters and planes.

In conclusion, I should like to express the
Mission of Lebanon's sincere condolences to the
families of the 32 passengers aboard the plane that
crashed tragically on 4 April. Our sympathies also go
out to their friends and colleagues, MONUSCO, the
United Nations Development Programme, the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, the
World Food Programme and the United Nations Office
for Project Services.

