Mr. Luik (Estonia): I would like to start by saying
that United Nations peacekeeping operations have
played a unique role in securing peace and stability
globally for a very long time. We thank the Kingdom of
Netherlands for organizing today's open debate on this
highly relevant topic.

Estonia also aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the observer of the European Union.

The international security environment has
significantly changed in recent times. The threats we are
facing are more complex, asymmetric and sometimes
difficult to attribute. Correspondingly, there has
been a change in the peacekeeping environment. Our
peacekeepers can rely less and less on the protection
provided by the colour blue as they are increasingly
being targeted themselves, as highlighted in the Cruz
report. At the same time, United Nations peacekeeping
missions carry greater mandates and demands: they no
longer only keep the peace, but are on the ground to build
peace, protect civilians, help address the root causes of
conflicts and assist in finding political solutions.

It is our belief that the United Nations will maintain
its leading role in bringing peace and stability to
different regions. In order to successfully continue to
do so, the United Nations needs to adapt to the new
security environment. In the light of this, we welcome
the Secretary-General's push to reform how the United
Nations manages peacekeeping missions and the whole
peace and security pillar. Accordingly, I would like to
make a couple of more specific remarks.

First, we share the idea that Security Council
mandates for peacekeeping operations could be more
realistic and robust. The Council is the primary political
body responsible for giving guidance and consulting
with partners in the field. The Council should increase
its focus on adopting more mission-specific and tailored
mandates. Closer coordination with the United Nations
mission commanders would also help to achieve tasks
for the successful fulfilment of mandates.

Secondly, decision-making should be improved.
The United Nations could become quicker and more
flexible in addressing the dynamics of crisis areas.
To that end, we support greater delegation of power to
the field, which would help guarantee that operations
are reactive and can rapidly and effectively respond to
complex and changing circumstances on the ground.
We believe that approach would also benefit from
improved gender balance in peacekeeping.

Thirdly, Member States have a responsibility to
provide adequate troops and capabilities to United
Nations operations. It is not by chance that the year
2017 saw the highest number of peacekeeper fatalities
from acts of violence in absolute terms in the last two
decades. We are sad witnesses to the simple fact that in
crisis areas where more than one mission is ongoing,
United Nations missions are less equipped and not as
well trained as operations led by other actors.

Also, restrictive national caveats make it more
difficult for our Blue Helmets to achieve the overall
success of the missions. Adequate training and
equipment of forces is the responsibility of all of
the States Members of the United Nations. Stronger
implementation of accountability measures and
remedial action should be adopted in order to ensure
that our troops are prepared and able to carry out the
tasks we ask them to do. It must also be noted that we
have zero tolerance for sexual exploitation and abuse.

Fourthly and finally, I would like to underline that
creating security and stability requires cooperation
and coordination with other actors in the field who
are working towards a similar goal. In this regard, the
Government of Estonia has recently decided to deploy
troops within the French-led Operation Barkhane to
help improve stability in the Republic of Mali and the
wider Sahel. Our troops will be based in Gao, right
next to the much larger base of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali. These two missions work to bring stability and
safety to the population of Mali, and it is crucial that
they continue to support each other's efforts.

I would like to conclude by emphasizing that
every peacekeeping or military operation encounters
challenges. In our view, to keep pace with changes in
the field, the United Nations could focus on a couple
of key themes: tailored country- and region-specific
mandates, and better prepared forces with greater
capabilities and fewer caveats. Estonia will continue
to contribute so as to make a difference in favour of a
peaceful world and promote these ideas throughout our
bid for the non-permanent seat on the Security Council
for the biennium 2020-2021.

