Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I, too,
thank Mr. Taye-Brook Zerihoun, Assistant Secretary-
General for Political Affairs, and Mr. Ivan Simonovic',
Assistant Secretary-General for Human Rights, for
their briefings.

Luxembourg welcomes the resolute action taken by
the democratically elected President of Ukraine, Petro
Poroshenko, to restore peace and stability in eastern
Ukraine. We welcome his decision to take a first

essential step towards de-escalation by announcing the
comprehensive 15-point peace plan and by establishing
a unilateral ceasefire to allow the peace plan to be
implemented. That decision has already had a positive
effect, since last night it led to a separatist leader of the
Donetsk region responding to the presidential initiative
by committing, for his part, to observing a ceasefire
until next Friday. We welcome the constructive role
played by the current chairmanship of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) in that
regard.

Russia has a key role to play in achieving a
sustainable de-escalation of the situation. We call on
that country to use all its influence with the separatists
so that they stop the violence, lay down their arms once
and for all and release the OSCE observers. We also call
on Russia to take effective steps to stop the continuous
flow of weapons and fighters to Ukraine and thereby
to establish conditions conducive to the implementation
of the peace plan announced on Friday by President
Poroshenko.

A political solution is crucial to improving the
living conditions of the Ukrainians in the areas
controlled by separatist armed groups in the Luhansk
and Donetsk regions. Luxembourg shares the concern
of the Assistant Secretary-General for Human Rights
over the collapse of public order and respect for the
rule of law in those areas. We are very concerned
about the increasing number of abductions, detentions,
cases of torture and killings by the separatists. The
crimes and human rights abuses no longer target only
local politicians, activists and independent journalists
but also now affect the population of those regions in
general.

The combined effect of the presence of armed
groups committing illegal acts and the increased
exchange of fire between separatists and the Ukrainian
armed forces has had a negative impact on the human
rights of the people living in areas that are under the
control of separatists. The public services are severely
disrupted. We are also concerned about the number
of internally displaced people, which continues to
increase.

The situation in Crimea is of concern, as well. The
monthly reports of the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights show that the
human rights situation has severely deteriorated since
the holding of the illegal referendum on 16 March and
the annexation by Russia. Residents of Crimea who
support the unity of Ukraine are intimidated and subject
to discrimination. The fundamental freedoms ensured
by Ukrainian law are being challenged and minorities
live in fear.

Luxembourg remains firmly committed to the
sovereignty, political independence, unity and territorial
integrity okaraine within its internationally recognized
borders, which are basic principles affirmed by the
General Assembly in resolution 68/262 of 27 March.
Pending the restoration of the territorial integrity of
Ukraine, we call on the authorities that are controlling
Crimea to allow access for international observers, in
particular, the United Nations human rights monitoring
mission.
The third report of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights underscores the
practical steps taken by the Ukrainian Government to
fulfil its obligations under the joint statement adopted
on 17 April in Geneva by Ukraine, Russia, the United
States and the European Union. A second crucial step
was taken with the presentation of the peace plan and
the establishment of a ceasefire.

The international community expects Russia also
to send a clear signal of its willingness to achieve a true
de-escalation. Apart from increased monitoring of its
border and condemnation of violence by armed groups
in eastern Ukraine, we call on Russia to continue to
withdraw its troops from the Ukrainian border and to
refrain from a build-up of troops on the border. We also
call for the order of the Federation Council authorizing
the presence of Russian armed forces on the territory
of Ukraine to be overturned. We note the step that has
been taken today in that regard by the President of the
Russian Federation.

The election of a President whose legitimacy is
unquestionable, the dialogue established between Kyiv
and Moscow since the election of President Poroshenko,
his announcement of a peace plan and the declaration
of a ceasefire are encouraging elements. We hope that
they will be a decisive turning point in the search for
a political solution to the crisis in Ukraine. All good
will must now be mobilized to take advantage of this
opportunity and put an end to a crisis that has already
caused too many casualties and suffering among the
civilian population in eastern and southern Ukraine.

