Mr. Ryan (Ireland): We appreciate this important
meeting, and we are grateful to Under-Secretary-
General Guehenno, Deputy Emergency Relief
Coordinator McAskie and Assistant Secretary-General
Fall for their valuable briefings.

Assistant Secretary-General Fall's recent Inter-
Agency Mission report provides an important
framework for addressing the interrelated problems of
the West African subregion. It details the need to
develop a comprehensive and integrated approach to
the priority needs of the subregion and a regional
approach to conflict prevention.

At last September's Millennium Summit, our
heads of State or Government resolved to achieve a
fully coordinated approach to the problems of peace
and development. The inter-agency report is a
significant attempt by the system to play its part and
act on that promise. The report shows that the political
and the developmental issues faced by the peoples of
West Africa are inextricably linked, and that we cannot
tackle successfully one cluster of issues without being
coherent in our approach to all.

For the United Nations system it is now very
clear that peace-building requires the closest
cooperation and coordination between all parts of the
United Nations system, at Headquarters, in the region
and at country level, in particular the Department of
Political Affairs, the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA), the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations, the United Nations
Development Programme and the resident coordinator
system. Other agencies, such as the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights,
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees, the Joint United Nations Programme on
HIV/AIDS, the United Nations Children's Fund and
other parts of the United Nations system, can all play
crucial roles. The role of the World Bank and the
International Monetary Fund, for example, in relation
to poverty reduction strategies and debt alleviation, can
also be crucial. All parts of the United Nations system
play mutually reinforcing roles at all levels. They can
add value to each other's work.

As Member States and members of the Security
Council willing to assist, we must, as a minimum,
ensure an entry point for the longer-term development
perspective, both on the ground at a regional level and
at Headquarters. We must ensure that the United
Nations has clear lines and definitions of authority, and
clear organizational structures to deal at the same time
with those parts of the region so tragically in crisis and
with the long-term development implications for them
and for their neighbours. In the past several years the
United Nations has had considerable experience in the
areas of crisis management, peace-building and
development. We can now draw on that experience, as
the inter-agency report attempts to do, and learn the
lessons on how to do better in the future. We would
hope, for example, if a new United Nations office is to
be opened in the region, that any deputy or special
representative of the Secretary-General would have
significant development experience to match the
political skills required.

On a national basis, Ireland has increased
significantly our funding to the United Nations funds
and programmes because we see their role, and
particularly the role of the resident coordinator, as
crucial in bringing coherence to the approach of the
international community in partnership with the
Governments concerned. We have also made multi-
annual commitments to the United Nations funds and
programmes so that their planning will be based on
some predictability of funding. The grant aid nature of
United Nations development work, in our View, can be
a very significant catalyst in the peace-
building/development area. The United Nations inter-
agency appeal launched this year by OCHA is an
example of an integrated subregional initiative which
could assist coordination efforts and help bridge the
gap from crisis to development. We in Ireland are
currently reviewing our aid programme with a view to
seeing what more we can do. We support the
recommendation in the report calling on the
international financial institutions to review the
conditionalities relating to financing arrangements for
crisis countries. The impact of HIV/AIDS on the
subregion must also be borne in mind.

The inter-agency report also makes a number of
recommendations on targeted sanctions as these relate
to Liberia. The Security Council recently determined
that Liberia had failed to provide satisfactory evidence
of a wholehearted, genuine commitment to
disengagement from the Revolutionary United Front
(RUF) and that, therefore, additional sanction measures
would come into effect. We would urge the Liberian
Government to provide real proof of a change of policy
which would enable the Council to review the
sanctions measures and, in the interim, we urge it to
afford its full cooperation to the Panel of Experts
recently appointed by the Liberia sanctions Committee.

We are most grateful for the briefing given by
Under-Secretary-General Guehenno. There have been
encouraging signs that the two-track approach in Sierra
Leone - the extension of legitimate political authority
and the continuation of dialogue with the RUF to direct
the rebels towards a democratic process - is showing
some positive results. It is essential that the machinery
of civil authority be restored as quickly and effectively
as possible in the areas into which the United Nations
Mission in Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL) has deployed.
The Abuja ceasefire review meeting on 2 May
produced promising commitments on the part of the
Government of Sierra Leone and the RUF. The
confidence-building measures proposed by the Sierra
Leone Government are welcome. I agree with Under-
Secretary-General Guehenno that we are seeing a good
first step in the right direction. It is important that these
developments be followed through. We are hopeful of
further encouraging signs at the meeting scheduled for
tomorrow in Freetown.

In this context, I might refer to the inter-agency
report recommendation that consideration be given to
expanding the mandate of UNAMSIL. We wish to flag
that a substantial change to the mandate of a
peacekeeping force already in operation presents
practical difficulties which we should very carefully
bear in mind. However, we would echo very strongly
the Mission's recommendation that the United Nations
and the Government of Sierra Leone maintain the two-
track approach to the resolution of the Sierra Leone
conflict. We, too, are encouraged by the further
deployment of UNAMSIL and the pledges of
cooperation from the RUF interim leader, Mr. Sesay.
But, given the history of the RUF reneging on
agreements, we will remain cautious and watchful. We
note the extremely positive role that the Economic
Community of West African States has been playing in
the peace process.

There are also positive indications of an
improvement in the level of coordination between the
United Nations peacemakers and the development and
humanitarian parts of the system. We welcome the
opening of the humanitarian office at Kenema. This
also is an important step, and we look forward to
continued developments in this direction. The
appointment of a distinguished Deputy Special
Representative of the Secretary-General in Sierra
Leone, drawn from the development community, would
appear to be working well. There are obvious lessons
to be learned here. I agree fully with Assistant
Secretary-General McAskie, that this work will include
close coordination with all players, including non-
United Nations players; and I note that OCHA's
presence may be reviewed upward.

We welcome very much the briefing given by
Assistant Secretary-General McAskie. The conflict in
the Mano River Union has created a humanitarian crisis
with between 1 million and 1.5 million refugees and
internally displaced persons in the region. It is
imperative that the Governments in the region be
assisted in developing the capacity to absorb returning
refugees and internally displaced persons when the
security situation permits this. In the interim, it is vital
that all parties to the regional conflicts permit complete
access by the humanitarian agencies to those in need of
assistance, as well as safe passage to those same
refugees and internally displaced persons. We
acknowledge the heavy burdens imposed on countries
in the region in accommodating enormous numbers of
refugees, in particular Guinea and its people.

We have noted carefully Assistant Secretary-
General McAskie's recommendations, including the
strengthening of OCHA's subregional capacity and the
important potential represented by women's
organizations. Assistant Secretary-General Fall also
stressed this point.

The three briefings we have heard today illustrate
very clearly the need for and high value of an
integrated and holistic approach to the priority issues
of West Africa and the interlocking efforts required in
the areas of development and crisis management.

