Ms. Qwabe (South Africa): South Africa joins
others in thanking you, Mr. President, for having
convened this open debate on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict, and we would like to
commend the Under-Secretary General for
Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief
Coordinator, Mr. John Holmes, for his briefing.

Despite positive political developments in
achieving peace in many conflict areas, our world
continues to be ravaged by violent armed conflicts that
claim the lives of thousands of civilians and leave even
more permanently displaced. The deliberate targeting
of civilians in armed conflicts, together with the
indiscriminate use of force, gender-based violence,
forced displacement and the lack of safety and access
of humanitarian personnel all have a detrimental effect
on civilians.

We are therefore of the view that finding a
common solution for the protection of civilians would
need the cooperation of each Member State and all
parties involved in a conflict. We recognize the need
for a coherent, comprehensive and coordinated
approach by the principal organs of the United Nations,
cooperating with one another and within their
respective mandates when dealing with the issue of the
protection of civilians. General Assembly resolution
46/ 182, amongst others, highlights the important value
that humanitarian assistance should be assigned in
accordance with the principles of humanity, neutrality
and impartiality and, consequently, that assistance
should not be given on the basis of geopolitical
considerations.

We should therefore avoid the politicization of
humanitarian assistance and, in that context, we urge
the international community not to ignore the occupied
Palestinian territory in Gaza. Just yesterday, Mr. David
Shearer, the head of the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) in the occupied
Palestinian territory, told reporters at the United
Nations that the humanitarian situation in the Gaza
Strip could worsen unless Israel eases the restrictions
and closures at its border crossings with the area. South
Africa supports the call by OCHA for the reopening of
Karni crossing, the main commercial crossing point
into Gaza.

It will be recalled that, during its presidency of
the Council in March 2007, South Africa convened an
open debate on greater cooperation and coordination
between regional organizations and the Security
Council, in particular the African Union. We believe
that the protection of civilians and humanitarian
assistance would be better addressed in partnership
with regional mechanisms and that strengthening
dialogue and cooperation between the Security Council
and regional organizations would contribute to tackling
common security challenges. Furthermore, the role of
regional organizations should be strengthened to allow
them to act more effectively when future conflicts may
arise, as they are closer to the area of concern and can
thus, in principle, act more speedily.

As stipulated in Security Council resolution 1265
(1999) on the protection of civilians in armed conflict,
the Council has expressed its willingness to consider
how peacekeeping mandates might better address the
negative impact of conflict on civilians. We are
therefore pleased to note that United Nations
peacekeeping mandates now include the specific
protection needs of women and children, including
those of humanitarian personnel, due to the Council's
adoption of landmark resolutions 1325 (2000) on
women, peace and security; 1612 (2005) on children
and armed conflict; and 1502 (2003) on the protection
of United Nations personnel, associated personnel and
humanitarian personnel in conflict zones.

In conclusion, the four resolutions the Security
Council has adopted on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict have established a good framework for
the international community to actively and
collectively address the challenges of protecting
civilians in armed conflict. Those resolutions
reaffirmed the importance of preventing armed conflict
and its recurrence, while stressing the need for a
comprehensive approach through the promotion of

economic growth, poverty eradication, sustainable
development, national reconciliation, good governance,
democracy, the rule of law, and respect for and
protection of human rights.

In addressing violations of international
humanitarian law, South Africa supports the work of
the International Criminal Court and the various
international tribunals, and believes that all
perpetrators, regardless of nationality and geopolitical
status, should be properly and fairly tried. It is
therefore hoped that the challenges of protecting
civilians in armed conflict will be addressed in a way
that will increase respect for the principles of
international humanitarian, human rights and refugee
law, human dignity and the legitimacy of the United
Nations.

