Mr. Portas (Portugal): Thank you very much,
Mr. President, for expeditiously convening this
important meeting.

(spoke in Portuguese; interpretation provided by the delegation)

We deeply appreciate the presence of Minister
Pires in the Council as the representative of the
legitimate and democratically elected Government of
Guinea-Bissau. I also welcome the relevant statements
by Minister Chikoti, in his capacity as Chair of the
Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries (CPLP);
by Ambassador Viotti of Brazil, in her capacity as
Chair of the Guinea-Bissau configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission; by the Permanent
Representative of C6te d'Ivoire, on behalf of the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), and by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Guinea-Bissau, who is playing
an important role in that country.
(spoke in English)

Let us be clear. One month ago, Guinea-Bissau
was on the path to complete a full democratic
legislature for the first time in decades. In the first
round of the presidential elections, which were
internationally recognized as regular, transparent and
free, Prime Minister Carlos Gomes Junior received
49 per cent of the vote; the second round had been
scheduled. Today he is illegally detained, as is the
interim President. The electoral process was violently
cancelled; the Government was forcefully seized.
Ministers are in hiding and their families are under
threat. The house of our colleague Mr. Djalo was
pillaged. Journalists have been detained and beaten.
Looting by some military personnel is ongoing.

Had it nor been for the clear and united message
of the international community, the interim President,
the Prime Minister and other senior officials would
probably be dead by now and there would be no hope
of restoring basic freedoms.

The international community has spoken with one
voice. The Secretary-General, the Council, the African
Union, ECOWAS, the CPLP, the International
Organization of la Francophonie, the European Union
and many others have unreservedly condemned the
illegal seizure of power in Guinea-Bissau by some
elements of its armed forces. A few hours after the
military coup, the Council clearly set out three
conditions that are non-negotiable, namely, the
immediate release of the interim President, the Prime
Minister and all senior officials detained illegally; the
full and immediate restoration of constitutional rule
and of the legitimate Government; and the completion
of the electoral process.

It cannot be business as usual in Guinea-Bissau.
The time has come to draw the line. The time has come
to say no - no to the prominence of arms over votes.
The zero-tolerance principle regarding access to power
through unconstitutional means declared by the African
Union and ECOWAS and supported by the CPLP must
be fully upheld. Otherwise, what message would we be
conveying to the people of Guinea-Bissau and to the
region?
This crisis has wider and very relevant
implications related to the serious increase in the
instability of the situation in Western Africa. The
threats, which are connected, include increased
proliferation and trafficking in arms and drugs; the

growing threat of the Maghrebi version of Al-Qaida;
and indications of serious internal problems in other
countries in the region. Clearly, regional peace and
stability are at stake. This is not only an internal issue
for Guinea-Bissau, this is a regional challenge to
stability. If we do not take action, this will become a
problem for international security.

What is at stake in Guinea-Bissau is a choice
between a State based on constitutional rule or a failed
State based on the power of drug trafficking. The
people of Guinea-Bissau, who voted just four weeks
ago, are not responsible for this vicious cycle of
instability, trafficking and violence. I recall that since
1998 we have had one war, four military coups and the
murder of one President and four joint chiefs of staff of
the armed forces, in addition to the assassination of
several other senior officials. That is enough. We
cannot tolerate murder and military coups as political
means for solving problems.

The responsibility for those acts belongs to
certain elements of the armed forces and a few
politicians who keep fuelling instability to achieve, by
illegal means, the political power they could not win at
the polls, as well as the economic profits that arise
from illegal trafficking, in particular of drugs.

The people of Guinea-Bissau, as any other around
the world, aspire to overcome injustice and poverty, to
live in peace, dignity and prosperity and to be ruled by
a legitimate and democratic Government.

It is up to the international community to seize
this crucial moment in the history of Guinea-Bissau as
an opportunity to put an end to the spiral of violence
and disruption of constitutional order and to move
effectively forward with the reform of the security
sector. We cannot miss this opportunity. Conceding or
compromising in this context, allowing for anything
less than the full restoration of the constitutional order
and of the legitimate authorities - obviously including
the interim President and the Prime Minister - as well
as the completion of the electoral process would send a
terrible signal and set a dangerous precedent. There are
no transitional authorities, there are democratic and
legitimate authorities.
Among the tools that the United Nations Charter
and practice offer us, we should consider two, namely,
restrictive measures and the establishment of a United
Nations-mandated stabilization mission.
An illegal seizure of power must not go
unpunished. Therefore, those responsible for the coup
and those who politically support it should be targeted
with restrictive measures, namely, visa bans and the
freezing of assets. That notwithstanding, we will
distinguish between those who persist in wrongdoing
and those who repent.

The European Union, beyond suspending its
cooperation with Guinea-Bissau, will be ready to move
forward with sanctions on individuals who continue to
obstruct peace, security and the normal functioning of
constitutional institutions. We call on the Council to
consider similar targeted measures.

We also believe that the Council should assume
its responsibility and seriously consider the call of the
legitimate Government of Guinea-Bissau for a United
Nations-mandated multilateral stabilization mission,
including contingents from members of ECOWAS, the
CPLP and the African Union - a comprehensive and
combined effort to tackle the root problems in Guinea-
Bissau.

Allow me to conclude my remarks in Portuguese,
as I would like my words to be clearly understood in
Bissau.

(spoke in Portuguese; interpretation provided by the delegation)

The international community is united on the
situation in Guinea-Bissau and speaks with one voice
in vehemently condemningly the coup perpetrated by
some military personnel.

The solution for this crisis is based,
unconditionally, on the release of all the officials
illegally detained, the re-establishment of
constitutional order and the conclusion of the electoral
process, which was internationally recognized as free
and transparent. Those who persist in unconstitutional
actions and those who actively support them will be
subject to restrictive measures and should be held
accountable. They should think twice about their
actions.

The international community, and Portugal in
particular, stands side by side with the people of
Guinea-Bissau and their legitimate Government in
pursuit of a resolution to this crisis to allow Guinea-
Bissau to finally follow the path to peace, justice and
development. As we say in Bissau, we are together.
(spoke in English)
As we say in the United Nations, let us act together.

