Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I,
too, would like to thank the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo, Mr. Farid
Zarif, for his briefing. I welcome the President of
Kosovo, Her Excellency Ms. Atifete Jahjaga, and the
President of Serbia, His Excellency Mr. Tomislav
Nikolic'.

At the outset, I would like to express Luxembourg's
solidarity with and compassion for the victims of the
floods in the Western Balkans. Our thoughts are with
all those affected by the disaster.

During the period covered by the most recent report
of the Secretary-General (S/2014/305), elections were
held in Kosovo and Serbia. Despite the relative slowing
in the pace of implementation of the agreements
reached in the dialogue between Belgrade and
Pristina, facilitated by the European Union, important
progress has been made since the beginning of the
year. Discussions on the organization and scope of the
judicial institutions in northern Kosovo have made
good progress and will, we hope, he concluded shortly.
The integration of police officers into Kosovo's police
continued. The partial elections to elect the mayors of
Mitrovica North took place without incident, and all the
mayors were sworn in.

The Serb Government elected following the
16 March parliamentary elections has demonstrated its
intention to pursue the European integration process,
and we welcome that fact. That process requires a
normalization of relations with Kosovo. Kosovars,
for their part, will have a chance to make their voices
heard at the polls on 8 June. We welcome the European
Union's launching, on 20 May, of an electoral observer
mission, which is working in close cooperation with the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe.
The quality of the electoral process in Kosovo will be
important in gauging the young country's maturity,
and we hope that the positive developments that began
with the municipal elections in November 2013 will
continue. We also encourage all Serbs in Kosovo to
exercise that democratic right, which is also their duty
as citizens.

Once the new Government of Kosovo is in place,
the normalization process will be able to resume
with renewed momentum. The implementation of
the agreements reached thus far should continue. I
would highlight in particular the establishment of an
association of Serb municipalities in Kosovo, which is
at the heart of the historic agreement of 19 April 2013.

The pursuit of reforms aimed at guaranteeing the
rule of law is crucial to Kosovo's European integration.
It is therefore commendable that, on 23 April, Kosovo's
parliament approved an exchange of letters between
the President of Kosovo and the High Representative
of the European Union, Catherine Ashton, with a view
to extending the mandate of the European Union Rule
of Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) to 15 June 2016.

Significant progress has been made since the
deployment ofEULEX in 2008. While adapting its work
to promote enhanced responsibility for the Kosovars,
EULEX will continue to play a key role in three areas:
support to the Kosovar authorities to strengthen their
institutions, the fight against organized crime and
corruption, and bringing to justice perpetrators of war
crimes and the most serious crimes, including through
investigating the allegations contained in the report
on inhumane treatment and human organ trafficking
in Kosovo. We welcome the progress achieved by the
Special Investigative Task Force and the preparations
under way aimed at establishing a special tribunal to
try those allegedly involved.

Luxembourg attaches particular importance to
the fate of the 1,712 people missing since the end of
the conflict in Kosovo. The exhumation work in the
Rudnica quarry must continue with support from
international partners and in the presence of Kosovar
authorities in order for the victims' families to learn the
fate of their loved ones.

We recognize the efforts by the Government of
Kosovo to increase the rate of voluntary returns and
promote the reintegration of those displaced. The
strategy for communities and for returns of displaced
persons for 2014-2018 in Kosovo is a step in the right
direction. We welcome President Jahjaga's remarks
reaffirming Kosovo's determination to eliminate the
obstacles to the return of displaced persons, including
Serbs.

For more than a year now, Serbia and Kosovo have
been resolutely committed, under the auspices of the
European Union, to the normalization their relations.
The determination of their leaders has allowed the two
countries to take crucial steps. Serbia began negotiations
on joining the European Union on 21 January, and
Kosovo concluded on 2 May its negotiations with the
European Commission with a view to reaching in
the coming months a Stabilization and Association
Agreement between the European Union and Kosovo.
These positive developments should encourage
Belgrade and Pristina to make irreversible progress
on the path of reform and in the normalization of their
relations. We are confident that the leaders and citizens
of the two countries will show the commitment and
courage necessary to realize their European future. As
a faithful partner of solidarity of Serbia and of Kosovo,
Luxembourg will spare no effort in supporting them in
their endeavours.

