Mrs. Adnin (Malaysia): 1 take the floor to explain
my delegation's vote today on resolution 2216 (2015),
on the situation in Yemen. I would also like to take this
opportunity to commend you, Madam President, for the
way in which you have guided the Council towards the
resolution's successful adoption today. In that regard,
Malaysia thanks the Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC)
for its engagement with the Security Council.

We consider it most unfortunate that the
deteriorating situation in Yemen has compelled us to
adopt this resolution. Today the parties in Yemen seem
ever further from the promising steps they had taken
towards a peaceful transition. Today the conflicting
parties are no longer engaging in dialogue, and the
situation has degenerated into an all-out war.

Malaysia wishes to emphasize that the success of
a Yemeni political transition hinges on the political
will to negotiate of the parties in Yemen themselves.
However, without good faith, sincere commitment and
political will on all sides, any such negotiations are
doomed to failure. Nevertheless, in his role in leading
the negotiation process on behalf of the international
community and the United Nations, Malaysia would
like to pay tribute to Mr. Jamal Benomar, Special
Adviser ofthe Secretary-General, for his tireless efforts
to salvage the dialogue between all the parties. We
strongly condemn the spoilers of Yemen's democratic
transition for their disregard for previous commitments
and their pursuit of a power struggle at the expense
of the country's unity and stability. In our view, their
pursuit of narrow self-interest has betrayed the hopes
and aspirations of the Yemeni people for a brighter
future.

The brazen attack last month by the Houthi
militias, in collaboration with forces loyal to former
President Ali Abdullah Saleh, on the presidential palace
of President Abdrabuh Mansour Hadi Mansour in Aden
was simply unacceptable. In the face of such blatant
disregard for various Security Council resolutions, the
Council must discharge its duty and responsibility by
calling on the parties to exercise restraint and return
to the country's road map for an inclusive, democratic
transition. For that and other reasons, Malaysia supports
resolution 2216 (2015), including its provision for
expanding targeted sanctions against Yemen's peace
spoilers.

At the same time, we are deeply concerned about
the worsening humanitarian situation in Yemen owing
to the escalation of the conflict. Even prior to the latest
escalation, 16 million of Yemen's 25 million citizens
required humanitarian assistance to meet their basic
needs. The already dire humanitarian situation has now
worsened as the population faces severe food insecurity
and a lack of basic needs, such as drinking water and
health services.

Malaysia is deeply concerned about reports from
humanitarian agencies such as UNICEF, the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and the
International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) on
the difficulties they are encountering in their efforts to
provide emergency assistance and deliver humanitarian
aid, including medical supplies, to those in need. We
have seen reports of ICRC workers being shot and killed
while trying to retrieve the bodies of victims left lying
in the streets after military clashes. UNICEF has also
highlighted that children continue to be killed, injured,
displaced and put at increasing risk of disease as the
conflict continues in Yemen. Almost a quarter of those
killed in the recent conflict have been children. Schools
and hospitals have also been attacked. In view of the
deteriorating situation on the ground, we urge all parties
to the conflict to make every effort to protect civilians
from violence, especially women and children, who are
the most vulnerable in any armed conflict. We call on
all the parties to adhere to international law, including
international humanitarian and human-rights law.

Malaysia welcomes the ongoing mediation efforts of
some countries aimed at arriving at a peaceful solution
to the conflict. We reiterate the call in resolution 2216
(2015) to all Yemeni parties to resume United Nations-
brokered negotiations for completing the final phases of
the road map for Yemen's democratic transition, based on
the GCC Initiative and its Implementation Mechanism,
the outcomes of the National Dialogue Conference
and the Peace and National Partnership Agreement.
We believe that this remains the only legitimate path
towards a democratic, stable and inclusive Yemen, and
we will continue to support Yemen in that endeavour.

