Mr. Kumalo (South Africa): Once again, the
Council is being asked to vote on a draft resolution that
will not include any mention of human rights
violations in Western Sahara. The Secretary-General, in
his observations and recommendations contained his
report on Western Sahara, writes:

"I would like to repeat my call (8/2006/817, para. 60 and S/2007/202, para. 52) to the parties
to remain engaged in continuous and constructive
dialogue with the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights with a
view to ensuring respect for the human rights of
the people of Western Sahara. I would like to
reiterate that, although MINURSO does not have
the mandate or resources to address this issue, the
United Nations remains committed to upholding
international human rights standards."
(5/2007/619, para. 67)

The least that would have been expected from
this Council would have been for it to support the
Secretary-General in his warning to the parties,
contained now in his past three consecutive reports, to
respect the human rights of the people of Western
Sahara. But the Council, which is very vocal about
human rights issues in other parts of the world, has
decided to be silent on the human rights of the people
of Western Sahara. This double standard is the reason
that people sometimes do not take the decisions of this
Council seriously.

My delegation is not only surprised but also
wishes to record its deep regret that, even worse, the
Council could not even welcome the report of the
Secretary-General, presumably because the Secretary-
General dared to raise the issue of the human rights
violations against the Saharawi people. Yet, in this
Council we routinely welcome reports of the Secretary-
General that are presented to the Council. This time,
however, some did not like what was in the Secretary-
General's report on Western Sahara. The Council
therefore finds itself paralysed and made to appear as if
we are choosing one side or the other on this very
difficult issue.

We also continue to be amazed by the relentless
attempts by some members of this Council to try to
describe the Moroccan proposal as being a "serious and
credible effort to move the resolution forward". The
fact is that the Moroccan proposal for autonomy is a
unilateral attempt to prevent the Saharawi people from
07-57264
claiming their right to self-determination, which is
enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations. Two
plans have been presented to the Council: one by the
Frente POLISARIO and another by the Kingdom of
Morocco. Those are the plans that should be the basis
for a negotiation by the parties. As we have often
stated, the only solution for Western Sahara is a
negotiated settlement. So any attempt to place one
proposal over the other would undermine the
negotiations process and would be counterproductive
to the spirit of future negotiations based on the two
proposals.

The Council should remain objective without pre-
empting any final status of the negotiations. While the
parties are continuing to engage without any
preconditions, we believe that it is important for the
United Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western
Sahara (MINURSO) to remain on the ground and for
the Council to support the peace process.

The Secretary-General asked, in his report, that
the Council extend the mandate of MINURSO for a
further six months and provide support for the
negotiating process. We believe that that request by the
Secretary-General is important enough for us to
support draft resolution S/2007/637 in spite of our
07-57264

reservations. My delegation will vote in favour of the
draft resolution in the hope that through the negotiating
process and with the support of MINURSO, the people
of Western Sahara can one day achieve their right to
self-determination, because that may be the only way
for them not only to be in charge of their lives, but
even to protect their own human rights.

