The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as representative of Malaysia.

I join others in thanking the Permanent
Representative of Spain for his briefing on the work
carried out by the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1737 (2006) during the reporting period.
My delegation commends the Chair for steering the
Committee through a particularly significant period,
against the backdrop of the P5+l and Iran's negotiations
on Iran's nuclear programme. The Chair's previous
briefing to the Council in March (see S/PV.7412) came
at a time when the P5+l and Iran were close to reaching
an understanding on a favourable agreement on Iran's
nuclear programme. Today, we meet again at a similar,
if not a more importantjuncture. In a matter of days, the
parties are expected to finalize the technical annexes
and conclude a comprehensive solution to the issue.

Malaysia is of the view that the P5+l and Iran
negotiations on the framework agreement constitute
an important development in efforts to promote
regional and international peace, security and
stability. The commitment and flexibility shown by
all parties in reaching an initial agreement constitute
positive steps towards non-proliferation and nuclear
security - particularly in View of the lengthy and
difficult negotiations that have taken place for nearly 10
years. In that regard, Malaysia welcomes the political
understanding on the parameters reached by the parties
in Lausanne in April 2015. We hope that the talks will
continue to pave the way for all parties to conclude a
long-term comprehensive solution.

Malaysia remains optimistic for a positive outcome
from the talks, and we also underline the Committee's
support to all parties in the negotiations. However,
the present measures, established under the relevant
Council resolutions, remain valid, and the Committee
remains committed to carrying out its responsibilities.
Accordingly, at the present stage, the Committee
should maintain its function of providing guidance
and assistance to Member States and international
organizations on the implementation of the relevant
Security Council resolution, upon request. My
delegation believes that the Committee will continue
to deliberate its decisions in a cautious and thorough
manner, in accordance with its mandate.

Finally, on the Panel of Experts established pursuant
to resolution 1929 (2010), Malaysia congratulates the
members of the Panel on the renewal of its mandate
earlier this month. My delegation thanks the Panel for
its final report, which is currently under consideration
by the Committee. We hope the Panel will soon have a
full complement of members, given the important tasks
that lie ahead of it.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

The meeting rose at 3.55 pm.
