Mr. Takasu (Japan): I should like to thank Judge
Robinson, Judge Byron, Prosecutor Brammertz and
Prosecutor Jallow for their useful briefings on the
completion strategies of their respective Tribunals. I
extend our appreciation to all the judges, prosecutors
and staff of the Tribunals for their efforts to ensure the
fair and expeditious operation of these important
judicial bodies. The International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) have made
significant contributions to the development of
international criminal law.

The original intention was to complete all judicial
proceedings by the end of 2010, in accordance with
Security Council resolution 1503 (2003). However, as
the respective representatives of the two Tribunals
clarified, that expectation has proved to be unrealistic.
On the basis of the latest estimate, the ICTY is forecast
to complete its trial work by the end of 2012 and
appeals by mid-2014. The ICTR is forecast to complete
its trial work before the end of 2011 and appeals by the
end of 2013.

Japan attaches great importance to the rule of law
and appreciates the efforts made by the two Tribunals
to expedite proceedings, while ensuring fair trials. We
acknowledge the circumstances that have led to this
delay. We strongly urge the Tribunals to make every
effort to work expeditiously and to bring about
completion ahead of the projected dates.

In response to resolutions 1900 (2009) and 1901
(2009), the Presidents of the Tribunals submitted to the
Council updated schedules and requests for the
extension of the terms of judges, measures which are
necessary for them to accomplish their work. We
should take into account the need for staff retention for
the work of the Tribunals. Japan is ready to work
constructively with other Council members for an
appropriate response to these requests.
The Tribunals are unable to fulfill their
responsibility until the remaining fugitives are arrested
and brought to trial. It is regrettable that two suspects
indicted by the ICTY, Ratko Mladic' and Goran HadZic',
and 11 under indictment by the ICTR, including
Felicien Kabuga, are still to be apprehended. We
strongly urge the States concerned to cooperate fully
and take action to arrest all fugitives as early as
possible.

The referral of cases to national jurisdictions is
an essential element of the completion strategies. We
appreciate the effort made by the Rwandan authorities
and the Prosecutor of the ICTR to facilitate the referral
of cases, including addressing issues related to the
Witness Protection Service within the Rwandan
judiciary. We look forward to the application for the
referral of future cases to Rwanda starting this year.

With regard to the ICTY, it is essential to secure
the full and positive cooperation of the States of the
former Yugoslavia on access to archives, documents
and witnesses. We take positive note of the continued
efforts of the Croatian authorities to further improve
the quality of the investigation into missing documents,
in compliance with the request of the Prosecutor. We
also take positive note of the response of Bosnia and
Herzegovina and the improved cooperation of Serbia
with the requests of the Prosecutor. We trust that those
States will continue their efforts to cooperate with the
Office of the Prosecutor.

The ICTY and ICTR face challenges that are
unique to ad hoc tribunals as organs established by
Security Council resolutions under Chapter VII, in an
exceptional manner. For instance, the need for a
residual mechanism after completion was not fully
explored at the time of their establishment. The
residual mechanism should meet the principal
objectives that impunity must not be condoned and that
individuals involved must be brought to justice in
accordance with international standards of due process.
At the same time, every effort must be made to ensure
as cost-effective a mechanism as possible. With those
criteria in mind, Japan is open to examining the most
appropriate residual structure. We appreciate both
Tribunals having described in their reports (see S/2010/270 and S/2010/259) the preparatory measures
taken to facilitate a smooth transition, in response to
the request of the Informal Working Group on
International Tribunals.
We are also grateful to the Office of Legal Affairs
for the report on the declassification of documents and
the review of witness protection ordered by the
Tribunals. Japan will participate actively in the
discussion on a draft resolution and draft statute of a
residual mechanism in the Informal Working Group on
International Tribunals, under the very able
chairmanship of Austria.

