Mr. Gonzalez (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): We
are grateful for the concept note (S/2019/ 1, annex)
circulated in support of our discussions on this topic, and
we thank the briefers for their valuable contributions.

This debate is taking place in a decisive year in
which we will hold the Secretary-General's climate
summit with the presence of world leaders, in search
of heightened international commitment to combating
climate change. That effort is reinforced by the high-
level dialogue on financing for development called for
by the presidency of the General Assembly, as well as
the High-level Political Forum, at which progress will
be reviewed on Sustainable Development Goal 13, on
climate change. Those spaces will also promote, in
addition to an exchange of views on this phenomenon
and its close relationship with the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development, the optimization of a global
response to this threat. The coming decade will be
decisive in terms of climate action. Therefore, if we
do not act now and do not face this phenomenon in a
determined and coordinated way, achieving the goals
set for 2030 will be almost impossible.

The science is clear in that the current nationally
determined contributions under the Paris Agreement
on Climate Change are not sufficient to limit the
temperature increase to 15°C by 2030, and that the
countries located in the tropics and subtropics of the
southern hemisphere will experience the greatest
impact on economic growth due to climate change.

As stated in the concept note for this debate,
climate change and its disaster risks are global, but also
differentiated. The Latin American region, including
Colombia, is highly vulnerable to the adverse effects of
climate change. In the case of our country, that is due
to its high level of biodiversity, geographical location
and specific development challenges. That has been
evidenced by the increasingly intense and frequent
phenomena of El Nifio and La Nina, which have caused
enormous human, economic and environmental losses.
Between 2010 and 2011, the La Nina phenomenon cost
the country approximately 2.2 per cent of its gross
domestic product. Then, in 2015-2016, we suffered the
El Nifio phenomenon, which turned out to be the second-
strongest occurrence in history, with catastrophic
effects that resulted in forest fires, water scarcity and
many hectares of agricultural land being impacted
upon, leading to a dramatic increase in food prices.

That is why adaptation to climate change is a
priority for our country and the region, as it is the only
way to reduce our vulnerability. However, in order to
reduce the impacts of this phenomenon, a substantial
reduction of greenhouse-gas emissions is essential. It is
also crucial that we bolster implementation measures,
namely, the provision and mobilization of financial
resources, technology transfer and capacity-building
in developing countries, with a view to enhancing
responses and solutions for the mitigation of, and
adaptation to, climate change.

My country wishes to take this opportunity to
reiterate the importance it attaches to the work of the
Security Council in maintaining global peace and
stability. We also believe that the natural forum in
which to initiate debates and make decisions related to
the causes and impacts of climate change, in addition to
the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change and the Paris Agreement on Climate Change,
is the General Assembly. That universal organ not only
ensures an inclusive and comprehensive approach and
the participation of all Member States, but also takes
into account the intrinsic relationship between climate
change and the social and economic dimensions.

Finally, allow me to reiterate my country's total
commitment to comprehensively pursuing matters
related to climate change.

