Mr. Donoso (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): We
would like to thank the Presidents and Prosecutors of
the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
(ICTY) and the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda (ICTR) for their briefings. The assessment
report provided by the President of the ICTY in
accordance with resolution 1534 (2004) contains a
detailed report of the progress achieved on the
completion strategy. The report reveals progress in
trials at first and second instance and in investigations
by the Prosecutor's Office.

We note with concern that there is lack of
cooperation on the part of States of the former
Yugoslavia and that this continues to make
implementation of the completion strategy difficult. We
believe that the Security Council must draw the
appropriate conclusions so that the resultant impunity
can be avoided.

The completion strategy calls for a War Crimes
Chamber to be established in Bosnia and Herzegovina
as soon as possible, as provided in resolution 1503
(2003). In that connection, we are pleased to note that
the report indicates that in January of 2005 that
Chamber will begin work. We agree with the
assessment that the work of the new Chambers requires
considerable supervision to ensure that international
standards are complied with. In addition, we believe
that it is essential to ensure the appearance before the
ICTY of Radovan Karadzic, Radko Mladic and Ante
Godovina, as called for by Security Council
resolutions. It appears that the cooperation of the States
of the former Yugoslavia is key in this area.

With respect to the ICTR, we are pleased to note
that this jurisdictional body is now in a position to
conclude all trials by 2008, as required by resolution
1503 (2003). We further believe that efforts should be
redoubled so that Felicien Kabuga can be brought
before the Tribunal.

In conclusion, I wish to we reiterate the support
of my country for the completion strategies of both
Tribunals and for the efforts that are under way to
ensure that that is accomplished.

