Mr. Dejammet (France) (interpretation from French):
The French delegation is happy for you and for the country
you represent because your presidency was marked
throughout this month by energy, dynamism, great
kindness, understanding and, fortunately, also a good dose
of humor. All this has been crowned with success by the
unanimous adoption of resolution 1048 (1996).

This outcome is especially pleasant for me because it
responds to the request of a country dear to us, Haiti. The
Permanent Representative of Haiti expressed this request
with great skill and conviction, and we are happy to
congratulate him on his first appearance in this forum. The
request is proof of Haiti's commitment to democracy, and
it also ties in with the United Nations effort to nurture the
beneficial effect it has had in Haiti. I think that this success
must be highlighted, because it is a success for the
Organization, for the Member States, for the Secretariat and
also for the Secretary-General's Special Representative,
Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi, who has brought to bear in Haiti a
degree of energy, doggedness and patience to which we
must all pay a tribute.

This success of the United Nations deserves support
because, after the deployment of the multinational force,
which allowed for the return of the president to Haiti, the
presence of the UNMIH Blue Helmets allowed Haiti to
experience, for the first time in its history, a peaceful
political transition. It led to the taking of office by the new,
democratically elected president, Mr. Preval which we
welcomed. It made it possible to maintain a safe and stable
environment, and it is this safe and stable environment that
we have supported today.

The role played by the United Nations in Haiti could
have been completed after the presidential elections. But the
new President felt that his country needed, for a few more
months, the presence of an international force that would
maintain security and stability and, especially, as the
representative of Haiti quite rightly pointed out, to continue
the training of the police. The resolution we have just
adopted responds to that request. It is the expression of the
international community's continuing solidarity with
Haitians, which we welcome.

The resolution provides for the deployment of
contingents and policemen. It requests all States to provide
appropriate support for the actions undertaken by the United
Nations and its Member States pursuant to this resolution
to ensure the implementation of the mandate, as set out in
paragraph 5. In this regard, we are aware of the measures
taken by certain States, and France can only take delight in
the intentions indicated in this area by the Government
of Canada. We congratulate Canada for its generosity.

France, for its part, will continue to offer the
Haitians its full support, primarily by putting a police
contingent at UNMIH'S disposal, but it will also continue
to provide Haiti with economic assistance which, together
with the aid from the international community - and we
all hope that this will be the case - will enable Haiti to
continue along the path of progress and development.

