Mr. Elmajerbi (Libya) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, Sir, I would like to thank you for organizing
this important debate on maintaining international
peace and security, in particular in the Middle East and
North Africa.

With the regard to the Middle East, the Palestinian
question remains the core issue for the peoples of the
Arab and Islamic world, and the Israeli occupation
of Arab territories is the source of all crises in the
Arab region. We believe that the only solution to the
Palestinian question is the two-State one, in accordance
with the relevant Security Council resolutions and the
Arab Peace Initiative. We should also eliminate the
settler plague, whose spread undermines the prospects
for such a solution. The status of Jerusalem is important
as well and should remain one of the final-status issues.
It is important to refrain from any policies of fait
accompli, such as the opening ofembassies in Jerusalem,
that violates the relevant Security Council resolutions.
Reinvigorating the Quartet is now an imperative.

Regarding the questions raised in the concept
note (S/2018/524, annex) on the causes of conflicts
in the region, we believe that there are internal and
external factors.

First, with respect to internal factors, there is a
lack of a genuine development vision for the region
that would meet the aspirations of its peoples and help
them emerge from the cycle of poverty. We should also
reconsider the educational and cultural systems in the
region, in line with the realities and the situation on
the ground. Greater attention should be paid to the role
of youth and women by engaging them at all stages
of political and economic development, starting with
planning and ending with implementation.

Secondly, external factors include interference
in the internal affairs of sovereign States and the
exploitation of a political vacuum in order to impose
policies and visions aimed at reshaping the region in
accordance with an opaque political narrative. There
are also conflicting interests on the part of the major
Powers as well as the imposition of certain perspectives
on governance, the rule of law and human rights. There
has also been a transfer of the domestic crises of major
Powers to the region, such as illegal migration and
financial crises.

Why does the policy of taking unilateral steps
prevail over that of collective measures approved by the
United Nations? We believe that the concept ofa unified
vision on the part of the international Community is a
double-edged sword, as some are calling for a reshaping
of the concept of nation States on the basis of flawed
logic. These efforts are doomed to failure.

Terrorism and the combat against its financing
relate to the first question. I spoke earlier about
reshaping and revisiting the educational and cultural
system, as we all know that the scourge of terrorism
starts with an ideology propagated by certain political
or religious leaders, as well as media that is financed to
that end. Of course, such ideas belong to those who put
them forward, but some States may provide funding,
training, political cover and political justification in
order to exploit such ideologies and groups.

Regarding the issue of peaceful coexistence, we
believe that there are two reasons for the failure to
achieve it. First, internal reasons: there has been no
genuine political vision that would enable the countries
of the region to integrate all socioeconomic issues.
There is, of course, some coexistence, but at the same
time narrow interests are being pursued at the expense
of national identities. The second reason is an external
one. Marginalization and non-integration are being
exploited, and some are fuelling tribal strife in order to
tear apart the nation to serve their own ends.

We must avoid any escalation ofthe conflicts in the
region on a religious or political basis. The exploitation
of religions and its use by political parties is very
dangerous, and history is witness to the seriousness
of such an undertaking. When a politician wages war,
he knows full well the danger. If we enter an era of
religious wars, we will not be spared the consequences.
All parties think that they have a divine mandate and
that killing the other will bring them closer to God. No
one will be able to stop such bloodshed and insanity
except those who propagated such ideas.

The concept note also addresses the issue of
the Security Council sanctions regime and the need
to review it comprehensively. In this respect, the
sanctions imposed on Libya in terms of an asset
freeze was not a punishment but aimed at protecting
the funds in question. We have called on the Security
Council more than once to revisit this regime in order
to enable State institutions to manage these assets,
which are now being dissipated, for many reasons. But
the Security Council has not taken any serious steps to
address this issue. We call for support for our appeal
to carry out a comprehensive review of the sanctions
regime, especially given the fact that from time to time
we witness attempts by some States, under various
pretexts, to control frozen Libyan assets. I wish to put
on record here our rejection of any attempt by any State
to control Libyan assets.

In closing, despite of the fact that the concept note
addresses the situation and the crises in the Middle
East and North Africa, we would have hoped to see
two other elements put forward: the role of the media in
fuelling conflict and that of civil-society organizations
that are funded and play a role in covering and
supporting terrorism.

