Mr. Norstriim (Sweden): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the European Union. The Central
and Eastern European countries associated with the
European Union - Bulgaria, the Czech Republic,
Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Romania,
Slovakia and Slovenia - and the associated countries
Cyprus, Malta and Turkey, as well as the European
Free Trade Association country member of the
European Economic Area, Iceland, align themselves
with this statement.

I would like to thank the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and Coordinator of United
Nations Operations in Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Mr. Jacques Paul Klein, for his comprehensive and
encouraging briefing.

The Secretary-General's report refers to
significant achievements in the implementation of the
mandate of the United Nations Mission in Bosnia and
Herzegovina (UNMIBH). Mr. Klein and his team
deserve full credit for the dedication and work that has
brought about these successes. These include, inter
alia, police reform, the participation of multi-ethnic
Bosnian contingents in United Nations missions and
the establishment of a State Border Service.

In spite of tangible progress in many areas,
certain types of action and thought based on ethnic
approaches continue to manifest themselves in Bosnia
and Herzegovina. The European Union has condemned
recent acts of violence in Mostar, Trebinje and Banja
Luka, as well as actions taken by Bosnian Croat
nationalists to place themselves outside the provisions
of the Dayton-Paris Accords.

We fully support the measures taken by
UNMIBH, the Stabilization Force (SFOR) and the
High Representative to minimize the possible
destabilizing effects of those events. We welcome the
efforts taken by UNMIBH to enhance its capacity to
monitor and, where necessary, to sanction local police
performance in order to prevent new cases of non-
compliance.

The European Union notes the problems
described in the report that impair police performance
but that are outside of the mandate of UNMIBH. In
particular, the creation of an efficient and impartial
judiciary remains a major challenge ahead in the efforts
to establish the rule of law in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

The return of refugees and displaced persons to
their homes remains a top priority of the international
community's efforts in Bosnia and Herzegovina. The
European Union notes with satisfaction the significant
increase in the number of minority returns this year. It
is imperative that the Bosnian authorities fully
implement measures likely to foster returns, such
property legislation, and cease obstructing legal
evictions. Progress on that front will be critical in
measuring the real commitment of Bosnia's authorities
to a lasting peace within the framework of the Dayton
Accords.

When considering the situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina we cannot overlook the wider regional
context. Constructive and transparent support from
Zagreb and Belgrade is vital in implementing the
Dayton Agreement, and in strengthening State-level
institutions. The recent statement made by the
Presidents of Croatia and of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia on the occasion of the Forum of Presidents
of Central European States, held at Verbania, Italy, in
which they affirmed their commitment to a stable and
democratic Bosnia and Herzegovina, is particularly
welcome.

In conclusion, let me once again express our full
support for Mr. Jacques Paul Klein and his staff, and
wish them further success in pursuing our common
strategy aimed at restoring lasting peace and stability
to Bosnia and Herzegovina.

