Mr. Galvez (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): We welcome
the High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Mr. Valentin Inzko, and thank him for his report
(8/2014/314, annex) and his important work for peace
and stability in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

We would like to start by expressing our regret that
the implementation of the Dayton Peace Agreement
remains a daily challenge because of the differences
between the political parties, the political stalemate, the
failure to implement the rulings of the European Court
of Human Rights and the negative and secessionist
rhetoric of Republika Srpska, which should be
denounced by the international community. Those acts
undermine national cohesion between the different
ethnic communities in the country, hinder national
reconciliation and delay the country's progress towards
Euro-Atlantic integration. In that respect, we call on
the country's political class to shoulder their agreed
responsibilities and work in a spirit of reconciliation
to deal with the challenges facing the country. A
fundamental change is needed in the political class,
as Mr. Inzko stated. In that context, Chile reiterates
its support for the Dayton Peace Agreement, the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Bosnia and
Herzegovina and respect for the rule of law at the
national and international levels.

We are concerned about the deteriorating situation
in Bosnia and Herzegovina, which highlights the
failure to make progress in the implementation of the
Dayton Peace Agreement, which was signed 19 years
ago. The violent demonstrations in early February in
several major cities were, above all, a call for elected
officials and political parties to change course in order
to effectively support the country's progress. It was
a call on the political class to focus its energy on the
interests of the people.

We appreciate the efforts of the High Representative
and we support the important work he carries out to
strengthen the rule of law, comply with the rulings of
the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia,
facilitate reforms to ensure national prosperity and
oversee the return of displaced persons in the country.
However, the lack of progress on the five objectives
and two conditions for the closure of the Office of
the High Representative is an indication of Bosnia
and Herzegovina's lack of commitment to the future.
We urge the leaders of all parties involved to work
constructively to break the impasse.

We support Bosnia and Herzegovina's efforts to
overcome its past. We underscore the progress that has
been made, such as the amendments to legislation that
regulates the issuance of citizen identification numbers,
which were finally adopted and which allow citizens
to once again receive those numbers from the central
State. We also urge all political leaders to refrain from
negative rhetoric and do their utmost to achieve genuine
integration and national reconciliation.

I would like to conclude by reiterating the firm
commitment, which my country has demonstrated
since the beginning, to the process of moving towards
a stable Bosnia and Herzegovina that is committed to
defending its territorial integrity in a politically stable
State and with institutions that work to serve its people,
in particular with regard to job creation for youth, in
peace and prosperity.

Chile participated in the United Nations Mission
in Bosnia and Herzegovina with police personnel and
continues to work within the European Union-led force
Operation Althea. It has thereby maintained 10 years of
uninterrupted Chilean military presence there.

We call on the international community to maintain
its commitment to support the aspirations of the people
ofBosnia and Herzegovina to a peaceful and prosperous
Euro-Atlantic future. We also wish to support initiatives
aimed at national reconciliation. In that connection, it is
important to provide the necessary resources to ensure
that the mandate under the framework of the Dayton
Agreement of 1995 is fulfilled.

Finally, I want to reaffirm our support and
commitment to the Office of the High Representative,
which must continue to receive the political support and
resources necessary to carry out its important work.

