Mr. Powles (New Zealand): Mr. President, may I say
at the outset that it is a particular honour to be able to
address the Security Council at a meeting over which you,
personally, are presiding. May I also congratulate you on
your initiative in calling this debate. This is another
valuable opportunity for the wider membership of the
United Nations to contribute constructively to the important
work of the Security Council. It will also serve to keep the
issue of children in armed conflict at the forefront of all
delegations' minds.

May I begin by making reference to the fine work
being done by the Secretary-General's Special
Representative, Olara Otunnu. Mr. Otunnu is very
effectively raising awareness of the issues concerning
children in armed conflict and securing commitments for
children's better protection. We applaud his contribution.

The United Nations has a central role in the protection
of children. This role is expressed in a broad range of
treaties, including Protocol I and Protocol II to the Geneva
Conventions and of course the Convention on the Rights of
the Child. Shielding children from the effects of armed
conflict, both as victims and as participants, is an
inseparable part of the United Nations responsibility to the
world's children. The United Nations must also be active in
ensuring that international standards of protection are
adhered to. In this respect, New Zealand welcomes the fact
that the use of children in armed conflict is a war crime
over which the International Criminal Court will have
jurisdiction.

The statement of the President of the Security Council
in June 1998 regarding the question of children and armed
conflict rightly condemned the targeting, recruitment and
deployment of children in violation of international law.
The President called upon all parties concerned to put an
end to such activities.

Today we welcome recognition by the Council through
the draft resolution currently before it that attention to the
special needs of children affected by conflict is an essential
aspect of efforts to build lasting peace. The Council
should have regard to children's needs whenever it
considers measures to assist communities and nations in
the transition from conflict to peace.

It is for the Member States of the United Nations to
set the standards which will shelter children from the
anguish and suffering of wars, large and small. Current
negotiations on an optional protocol to the Convention on
the Rights of the Child concerning children in armed
conflict are particularly important in raising the legal
standards of protection for children in this regard.

We must redouble our efforts to bridge differences
and reach consensus on the optional protocol. Otherwise,
we risk losing an important opportunity to improve the
legal protection for children. Once concluded, the optional
protocol would be a powerful tool for all those, including
Mr. Otunnu, who are working to protect the rights of
children affected by armed conflict. It would send a clear
message to those involved in recruiting child soldiers, and
those targeting children in times of conflict, that their
actions are unacceptable to the international community.

Finally, I wish to commend particularly the
important work of UNICEF in assisting the child victims
of armed conflict. My delegation encourages the closest
possible cooperation between UNICEF and the Special
Representative in working towards their mutual goals. For
example, Security Council resolution 1260 (1999),
adopted just last Friday, calls for the Special
Representative and UNICEF, along with the Government
of Sierra Leone, to give particular attention to the long-
term rehabilitation of child combatants in Sierra Leone, as
well as their disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration. New Zealand has contributed on several
occasions to UNICEF's focused and practical work in
Sierra Leone and elsewhere. Clearly there are
opportunities for us all as Member States, as well as our
international agencies, to work together and share
experience in all such situations, to bring about the best
outcomes for those children affected by armed conflict.

