Mr. Onanga-Anyanga: It is a great pleasure, Sir,
to see you as President of the Council and to see your
country as a Council member for the next two years.
Please allow me to congratulate you on your already
impressive contribution to the work of this body.

(spoke in French)

Let me also warmly welcome His Excellency
Mr. Laurent Kavakure, Minister for Foreign Affairs
and International Cooperation of Burundi, with whom
I have had the privilege of working closely since I
took office. I thank him profusely and convey once
again my gratitude to the Government of Burundi
for its warm welcome and our excellent relationship.
They demonstrate, without doubt, the importance that
Burundi attaches to the United Nations.
(spoke in English)

The Council has before it the comprehensive report
of the Secretary-General on the situation in Burundi
(S/2014/36). The report was informed by the strategic
assessment mission that was conducted pursuant to
resolution 2090 (2013). The findings of the mission
and the final assessment by the Secretary-General
are compelling. I shall therefore limit myself to a few
comments.

(spoke in French)

I come to the Council today with my heart full
of hope and optimism for Burundi's future. I come
to the Council emboldened by the echo of what we
may now call the spirit of Kigobe, where the National
Assembly of Burundi met from 19 to 20 December 2013
and the President brought together all political actors
and representatives of Burundian civil society for
national consultations on Burundi's future constitution.
The Burundian nation and international observers
unanimously welcomed that great moment of harmony,
which entrenched the Virtues of dialogue and the search
for consensus on major issues of national interest. For
those who know a bit about Burundi, what happened
at Kigobe was in line with the Arusha Peace and
Reconciliation Agreement for Burundi, which remains
to this day a strong expression of Burundians' desire to
forge a common destiny.

Since then, Burundi has continued its progress
towards building a lasting peace and strengthening
its democratic institutions. In particular, the country
successfully held two elections in 2005 and 2010, and
established national armed forces that form the bedrock
of security throughout the country. Those forces are
now the pride of Burundi, and their role in maintaining
international peace and security and the sacrifices they
have made in doing so inspire respect and admiration.

However, I also come here in the awareness that, as
far as our wonderful peacebuilding work in Burundi has
come, it remains unfinished. That fact has been noted
by more people than just the Secretary-General. It is the
conviction first and foremost of the Government and
people of Burundi. It is indeed at the very heart of the
efforts to build a consensual society that are expressed
in several national policy documents, including
the Vision Burundi 2025 and the second version of

Strategic Framework for Growth and the Fight against
Poverty, which Ambassador Paul Seger and all of
Burundi's development partners tirelessly support. The
fragility and volatility of a number of key indicators
indeed justify such commitment. Giving Burundi every
chance to set its development process on a firm footing
and win the fight against poverty is indeed vital to
lasting peacebuilding and social cohesion.

More recently, the Burundian political class met
from 27 to 29 November 2013 in Bujumbura to evaluate
for the first time the road map adopted by consensus
at the workshop held from 11 to 13 March 2013. They
recognized, without skirting the issue, that the climate
of mistrust among the main political actors, the absence
of a consensual process for revising the Constitution,
intolerance and political violence involving, in
particular, young people affiliated with certain political
parties, and the limitations to the exercise of public
freedoms were among the pressing challenges that had
to be urgently addressed.

You yourself, Mr. President, have taken the
initiative to convene tomorrow, 29 January, an
important thematic debate on the lessons to be drawn
from war and the search for a permanent peace. I heed
your warning that a poor management of collective
memory can threaten the future peace and stability of
nations. That warning applies to Burundi, where the
process of taking ownership of the justice mechanisms
transition remains unfinished.

For all those reasons, the Secretary-General himself
has endeavoured to raise awareness among Burundian
authorities at the highest level of the need for sustained
political support by the United Nations. The Secretary-
General's offer is aimed at supporting national efforts
in the delicate transition towards enhanced political
dialogue, respect for and the protection of the rights
of all, and the establishment of strong democratic
institutions, including through the upcoming 2015
elections. The Government is committed to ensuring
that those elections are transparent, fair and peaceful.
If they are well organized, the elections could mark
the end of the transition in Burundi's peacebuilding
process. The peacebuilding priority plan that we jointly
drafted and signed in December 2013 should facilitate
the achievement of that important goal.

The Secretary-General's recommendation fully
takes into account the desire for greater national
ownership expressed by the Government of Burundi.
However, it also relies on the assessment of the
benchmarks that structure our peacebuilding efforts
in Burundi, in agreement with the Government and in
accordance with the relevant mandates of the Security
Council. Finally, this recommendation also takes into
account the fact that the United Nations country team,
which should bear most of the responsibilities assigned
to the United Nations Office in Burundi, may not be
equipped in the short term to effectively undertake
those important tasks. The same can be said of the role
that regional and subregional African organizations
could play.

I welcome the efforts of the Government and of
millions of Burundians who strive daily for a future
Burundi that is more united, peaceful and prosperous.
However, that task, as appreciated as it is, is not over
and requires the support of the Security Council and
the international community, in particular in a regional
context that is constantly changing.

I am pleased about the friendly dialogue that is
continuing on that issue with the Burundian authorities
so that the noble goals of peacebuilding and conflict
prevention can unite and strengthen in a timely way
the legitimate will for greater national ownership.
Minister Kavakure will certainly be able to give us
more information on the views of the Government of
Burundi in that regard.

(spoke in English)

The Secretary-General has called upon Burundians
to show visionary leadership going forward, particularly
in view of the major challenges still ahead. I have no
doubt that they will, and I know that the Council will
remain at their side. Let us not tire of doing what is
good for at the right time we will reap an abundant
harvest if we do not give up. Of course, we must and
can do that only with the full consent and support of the
Government of Burundi.

In closing, I would like to thank members of the
Council for their outstanding support to Burundians
and to me personally since I assumed my duties. I
would also like to thank the Chair of the Burundi
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission, my
dear friend Ambassador Paul Seger, for the excellent
collaboration that we have so effectively developed over
the past year. In him, Burundi has a strong advocate.

Please allow me to extend my thanks and
appreciation to the Government of Burundi for their
hospitality, cooperation and willingness to work with me
for the advancement of peace in Burundi. I will be ever
indebted to the Secretary-General for the opportunity
to assist him in the pursuit of world peace and security.
Last but not least, I am most grateful to my colleagues,
both in Bujumbura and here at Headquarters, for their
invaluable support.

