Mr. Inderfurth (United States of America): May I
begin, as other members of the Council have this afternoon,
by congratulating you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency for January. We hope the work of the Council
this month will be more tranquil than the weather we are
experiencing outside. Under your able and experienced
leadership, we have no doubt it will be. You will have our
full cooperation in this regard. My delegation would also
like to express its appreciation and admiration to
Ambassador Lavrov and his delegation for their excellent
work during the month of December. Finally, my
delegation would like to take this opportunity to express
again its sincere welcome to the five new members of the
Council. We look forward to working with all of them in
the months ahead.

The United States would now like to take this
opportunity to express its firm support for the extension of
the United Nations Observer Mission in Georgia
(UNOMIG). UNOMIG has served as a positive element in
the international community's efforts to resolve the conflict
in Georgia, and the United States is pleased that, through
this resolution, UNOMIG will be able to continue
operations over the next six months.

The United States deeply regrets the lack of progress
between the parties in achieving a political solution to the
conflict in Georgia. The resolution adopted today calls upon
the parties, in particular the Abkhaz side, to achieve
substantive progress without further delay towards a
comprehensive political settlement. The Abkhaz side
should take note that the Security Council has not
wavered in its absolute support for the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Georgia. And yet, broad autonomy
is available to the Abkhaz people - with their own
parliament, constitution, courts and other state symbols -
if they would negotiate within the parameters suggested
by Special Envoy Brunner and the Russian Federation.

The Abkhaz-Georgian conflict created a quarter of
a million refugees and displaced person. Only an
insignificant trickle have returned to their homes. The
resolution demands that the Abkhaz side accelerate
significantly the voluntary return of the refugees.
Moreover, the Council calls upon the Abkhaz, as a first
step, to promote the return of refugees and displaced
persons to the Gali region, a traditional Georgian area.

The human rights situation in Gali and throughout
Abkhazia is of great concern. We support the efforts of
Deputy Special Envoy Bota, working in conjunction with
the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights, Mr. Ayala Lasso, and the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) to establish
a programme for the protection and promotion of human
rights in Abkhazia. The pervasive lawlessness and
incidents of ethnically based abuse throughout the security
zone have had a destabilizing effect. The sort of killings
described in the letter from the Ambassador of Georgia,
although still under investigation, contribute to this
instability and thus discourage the return of refugees and
displaced persons.

The United States calls on all parties in Georgia to
cooperate with UNOMIG and to allow its personnel to
carry out their mission without interference or opposition.
UNOMIG can maximize its contribution to bringing peace
and stability in Georgia only if it can operate freely and
with the cooperation of all parties to the cease-fire it is
charged with monitoring.

The resolution just adopted contains a provision
allowing the Security Council to review UNOMIG's
mandate if there are changes in the recently expired
mandate of the Commonwealth of Independent States
(CIS) peace-keeping force operating in Georgia; we
expect that the mandate of the CIS peace-keeping force
will be renewed and that UNOMIG will consequently be
able to maintain its operations as contemplated in the
resolution. The United States would like to commend the
excellent cooperation between UNOMIG and the CIS

 

peace-keeping force and hopes that such cooperation will
continue as long as both are operating in Georgia.

The resolution properly recognizes the positive effect
of the presidential and parliamentary elections held in
Georgia in November 1995, which resulted in the election
of Eduard Shevardnadze as President.

Finally, the United States would like to express its
appreciation to Special Envoy Brunner and to the Russian
Federation, as facilitator, for their efforts and cooperative
initiatives in trying to lead the parties to a negotiated
settlement and also to resident Deputy Special Envoy Bota,
whose fine work has had a positive effect on UNOMIG and
its operations.

