Ms. Al-Thani (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): I thank
the French delegation for convening this open debate to
address an issue ofthe utmost importance to us, namely,
the protection of children in conflict situations. We
welcome this discussion on children and armed conflict,
which is being presided over by a fraternal country. We
thank the Secretary-General and Ms. Virginia Gamba,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, for
their efforts regarding children and armed conflict,
as well as Mr. Mubin Shaikh, for the quality of their
briefings delivered this morning.

The Security Council ongoing discussion of this
issue, which has persisted for many years, demonstrates
the international community's commitment to the
protection of children and to strengthening the hope
that people have to achieve safe and stable societies
and a respect for the obligations stemming from
international law on parties to conflict with regard to
the protection of the rights of children during armed
conflict. That is critical if we seek to protect civilians,
particularly children, who pay the highest price in
such conflicts because they are the most vulnerable.
In the armed conflicts raging today, Violent extremist
groups show contempt for those obligations under
international humanitarian law; they have perpetrated
grave violations against children and show no hesitation
in doing so.

The State of Qatar is convinced of the importance
of addressing the root causes of violent extremism
and armed conflict. We attach great significance to
education in our policies and development projects at
the national and international levels, given the positive
effects of education on children, especially in safe
areas far from violence, terrorism and extremism. We
are further convinced that access to education remains
a right even in armed conflict, and we have undertaken
significant efforts to provide children with education
during periods of violence, particularly during armed
conflict. That focus is reflected in our Education
Above All initiative and others launched in conjunction
with other international organizations. As a result, we
delivered high-quality education services to millions of
children throughout the world in 2016.

Furthermore, in 2016 the State of Qatar launched
an initiative, jointly with the President of the General
Assembly at the current session and a large number
of Member States, to organize a high-level thematic
debate at the General Assembly focused on the
protection of children and young people affected by
Violent extremism. We reached conclusions and made
recommendations, which represent significant progress
in that area. On the basis ofthose efforts, we also signed
an memorandum of understanding on 18 September
with the United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism
and Silatech, with a view to strengthening capacity-
building among young people throughout the Arab and
Muslim world. We seek to build their capacity to launch
projects to protect themselves from violent extremism.

We are committed to protecting the right to
education in emergency situations and to ratifying
the Safe Schools Declaration, adopted at the Oslo
conference. In that regard, we welcome the working
framework of the Global Coalition to Protect Education
from Attack. Our hope is that other initiatives and
examples will emerge enabling States to uphold their
obligations under those declarations.

We are also deeply troubled by the Violations
afflicting children in the occupied Palestinian territories
and Syria, as was mentioned in the Secretary-General's
report. It is important for the international community
to categorically and tirelessly seek to arrive at a fair and
lasting solution to those conflicts, where children once
again pay the highest price.

To conclude, the State of Qatar will spare no effort
to support international efforts to protect children under
all circumstances with all means at our disposal, so that
they may grow up in a safe and healthy environment,
develop their skills and enjoy a future of peace and
prosperity for all people throughout the world.

