Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): On behalf of the Russian Federation, allow me
once again to convey our condolences to the families of
all of those who lost their lives and to the Governments
of those countries whose nationals were aboard the
plane that went down in Ukraine on 17 July.

There is the need for a full, impartial, independent
and open international investigation into the Malaysia
Airlines disaster. That is the aim of resolution 2166
(2014), which was prepared with our active participation
and which we support. Clarifying the context of this
event should take place with the International Civil
Aviation Organization (ICAO) in a leading role, as
well as with the participation of all who stand ready
to shed light on the truth. All evidence, including the
black boxes, should be provided to ICAO to examine
under the framework of an international investigation.
Conditions must be created on the ground to facilitate
access for international teams of experts. Every
possible effort must be made to focus on guaranteeing
full security for international experts at the crash site
and on providing them with, as it were, humanitarian
corridors.

Representatives from Donbass, Donetsk, the
Ukrainian Ministry of Emergencies and experts from
interested countries are already present on the ground.
But that is not enough. A full team of experts must be at
the crash site, under ICAO and a relevant international
commission. For its part, Russia stands ready to provide
all the assistance necessary to organize and conduct
impartial international investigations. In that context,
Russian military personnel and civilian bodies have
already received the necessary instructions. We are
ready to provide experts to participate and carry out
investigations.

However, it is not the time for snap conclusions
or political statements. What is happening today is
absolutely inadmissible. It seems that Kyiv is attempting
to draw on the shock of the international community in
the light of the downing of Flight MH-l7 in order to
step up its punitive operations in the eastern part of
the country. Indiscriminate artillery and air strikes
are targeting cities and killing civilians. We would
like to ask those Council members that affirmed in
this Chamber that Kyiv would act with "restraint" to
explain the strange meaning they assign to that word.

We understand how the people who lost family
and friends feel. Russia found itself in a similar
tragic situation in October 2001 when, in the skies
over the Black Sea, an anti-aircraft missile downed
a Russian passenger flight flying from Tel Aviv to
Novosibirsk. Seventy-eight people aboard were killed.
The circumstances became clear immediately after
the accident and were confirmed by independent
international experts. However, to this day Ukraine
rejects its legal responsibility in that regard. Given that
record, it would be quite reckless to give Kyiv a leading
role in conducting an international investigation into
the 17 July incident.

In the course of the investigation, Ukraine will
have to answer several questions with regard to the
activities of its air traffic controllers and the reason that
a Ukrainian Buk missile system was in the area directly
controlled by rebels. Why was it that, immediately
following the downing of the flight, that missile
battery was hastily removed from the area? Why was
Ukrainian anti-aircraft radar working at maximum
capacity on 17 July? Those are some of the questions
raised by Russia's Ministry of Defence, about which
international investigators will have to be informed.

Up to now, Kyiv has provided doctored evidence to
the Security Council - for example, the controversial
recordings of the radio communications involving rebel
commanders, which seem to have been altered to refer
to negotiations that took place before 17 July. Ukraine's
Minister for Internal Affairs put forward a video
that somehow showed a surface-to-air Buk system
on Russian territory, but which was in fact filmed on
Ukranian territory and thus could not have been under
rebel control.

Let us not forget that an armed clash in the area of
the crash site was the reason for the 17 July incident.
Today's priority is to put a swift end to clashes and
violence and to establish peaceful negotiations on the
basis of the 17 April Geneva declaration and the 2 July
Berlin statement. We continue to fully participate in
that effort.

I was going to conclude there, but I have an
additional comment to make.

I had thought that today's meeting would not have
been controversial. However, the representative of
the United States opted for a literary track. Perhaps
Washington does not know about the efforts that Russia
has made in the context of the contact group, among
others, to ensure that international experts can go to
the area of the crash as soon as possible. If that is so,
then the American Embassy should be better informed.
Indeed, there is no need to turn the discussion of this
tragedy into a farce.

