Mr. Martin: Four weeks after the formation of
Libya's interim Government, it is urgently formulating
plans to respond to its pressing priorities. It faces a
dual challenge: first, to address the most immediate
needs of the Libyan people and meet high expectations
regarding the responsibility of the new authorities to
2

deliver results, and, secondly, to begin to reform and
build accountable institutions that will meet the
aspirations for change and modernity. It is embarking
upon those tasks in a security climate that will remain
uncertain until decisions are taken, and begin to be
implemented, regarding the future of the revolutionary
fighters. It has only six months before elections to a
national congress become the basis for the formation of
another Government as well as for constitution-
making.

The public mood in Libya is changing gradually
as it becomes increasingly focused on issues that were
central to the demands of the revolution. Those include
improved institutional performance that meets popular
expectations, and accountability and transparency in
public affairs. As the countdown begins towards
elections next June, civil society is becoming
increasingly assertive in monitoring and critiquing the
performance of the National Transitional Council
(NTC) and the Government, reflecting the democratic
atmosphere that is now finding expression in Libya.

In my last briefing (see S/PV.6669), I stressed
that the stabilization of the country and the success of
the Government depended on it having sufficient liquid
funds to meet its urgent needs. The agreement of the
Sanctions Committee to the delisting of the Central
Bank of Libya and the Libyan Foreign Bank has been
warmly welcomed by the Government, and should
overcome the popular perception that Libya was being
denied access to its assets. On Tuesday, I took part,
together with United Nations colleagues, in a meeting
convened in Tripoli by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs,
with our support and that of major asset-holding
countries. That represented the coordinated approach to
overcoming the requirements for funds to flow that was
proposed in Council discussions following my last
briefing. Further technical steps still need to be
discussed bilaterally, and it remains important that all
parties do what is necessary to accelerate the
Government's earliest access to sufficient funds. But I
hope that the liquidity crisis will soon be at an end.
Prime Minister El-Keib this morning asked me to
convey his appreciation for the action taken.

According to the timetable of the NTC, only a
month remains for electoral legislation to be passed
and an electoral commission established. The United
Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL) electoral
team has been working intensively with the NTC's
Elections Committee. While the Committee has yet to
11-64750
make any final decisions, steady progress has been
achieved in analysing options with regard to the
complex political and technical issues that must be
defined in the electoral legislation. Our electoral team
has continuously provided technical advice, guidance
on best practice and comparative analysis of examples
from different countries. Key topics have included
electoral system options, voter eligibility, approaches
to the development of the voter register and the
establishment of the electoral commission. The nature
of constituencies and the allocation of seats are the
most difficult political decisions to be made, with
regard to geography and population distribution. The
Committee has expressed the intent that any solution
chosen will take into consideration provisions for
representation of women and minorities.

Our electoral team, in close cooperation with
Libyan authorities, has conducted an assessment of the
existing civil registers of persons, to assess the quality
of current systems and how they could be used to
support the development of the voter register. Findings
have been presented to the Elections Committee,
together with alternative options for voter registration
systems and eligibility criteria. It has consistently been
emphasized that inclusivity is an essential principle.

The Committee recognizes that major decisions
regarding elections must be broadly accepted by
Libyan stakeholders, and has expressed a commitment
to engage the public. It has begun using the media to
inform the public about the activities that the
Committee has conducted so far and has commenced
public consultations on the electoral law, although as
yet those remain limited. The United Nations and other
international organizations stand ready to support civic
and voter education to encourage informed
participation.

The Committee appears close to finalizing the
details related to the establishment of the electoral
commission. Appointments of a chairperson and
deputies are expected before the end of the year. The
Committee wants the United Nations to continue to
lead and coordinate fully all international electoral
assistance. The United Nations electoral support team
will grow significantly in January in order to provide
support to the newly formed electoral commission.

Security is of course essential for a successful
election. Our police advisers have already begun
discussing election security training with the Ministry
11-64750

of the Interior. But that is part of a far wider challenge.
The new Libyan authorities need to start work on
establishing a new professional army whose doctrine is
based on allegiance to the modern democratic State,
and a police force fully committed to the rule of law
and respect for human rights. Building those security
forces will be a lengthy and difficult task. At the same
time, they have to begin rapidly the process of
integrating a large number of revolutionary fighters
into civil and military State institutions and of
demobilizing others into job or educational
opportunities.

That will require close consultation with the
leaders of the revolutionary brigades in order to ensure
their full cooperation. They are a key element in the
new Libya, whose contributions in the service of the
revolution must be duly recognized. The Government
has begun its planning for some 75,000 former
fighters, with responsibility divided equally among the
Ministries of Defence, Interior and Labour. The latter
is developing an employment scheme that will allow
ex-combatants access to further studies, vocational
training and employment opportunities that will
facilitate their return to civilian life. The United
Nations has already deployed an early scoping mission
to explore possible support to those reintegration plans.

Meanwhile, although the security situation across
the country has largely stabilized, the potential for
localized clashes to escalate remains real. That is partly
because of the numerous, sometimes rival,
revolutionary formations, lacking fully effective
coordination mechanisms among them, or between
them and the Government. That situation is further
complicated by tensions that exist in part because of
historical local conflicts between communities, which
the former regime had exacerbated and exploited to its
advantage. The past few weeks have witnessed a series
of armed clashes of varying seriousness, giving rise to
growing popular pressure, in particular in Tripoli, to
put in place security arrangements that do not rely
heavily on the armed brigades. Unless the security
situation is addressed quickly and effectively, interests
of various stakeholders may become entrenched,
undermining the legitimate authority of the State.

UNSMIL has made progress in supporting Libyan
authorities in coordinating bilateral and multilateral
assistance to the rehabilitation of the Libyan police
force and a strengthened border security and
management service. UNSMIL and the newly
3
established coordination unit in the Ministry of the
Interior convened, on 20 December, a meeting of key
partners to support the rehabilitation of the Libyan
police service. It was agreed to support the Ministry in
developing a detailed plan by mid-January that would
identify urgently needed assistance in training,
equipment and the restoration of destroyed police
stations.

A first coordination meeting on border security
and management, on 19 December, brought the
Ministries of Defence, Interior and Foreign Affairs
together with representatives of Member States and
organizations that have offered assistance in that area.
The meeting highlighted the urgent need to strengthen
both security and civilian border management
capacities at Libya's land and maritime borders, in
order to tackle more effectively issues such as drugs
and weapons trafficking and illegal immigration, in a
manner consistent with international standards. In that
respect, the creation of the National Agency for the
Security of Borders and Strategic Installations under
the Ministry of Defence is a welcome development.
The Ministry of the Interior will oversee the civilian
management of border installations and facilities.

The Ministry of the Interior has just completed
the first training course since the outbreak of conflict,
preparing 170 ex-fighters in passport control and
investigation measures. UNSMIL is working with the
ministries and international partners on a consolidated
six-month training plan in support of those efforts and
a list of priority needs and requirements to facilitate
effective international assistance. UNSMIL has been
asked to convene regular coordination meetings on
support to the Libyan police and on border security and
management.

Those coordination roles have been added to
UNSMIL's continuing role in convening those assisting
the Libyan authorities in addressing the threats from
the potential proliferation of arms, ammunition and
other explosive remnants of war. While the focus of
international concern continues to be the potential
proliferation of man-portable air defence systems
(MANPADS), as yet there seems to be little evidence
of such weapons appearing in neighbouring countries.
Visits of weapons storage sites and brigades throughout
Libya suggest that most looted arms may be held by
revolutionary brigades or local militias within a limited
distance from the looted site, thereby rendering it
primarily a national Libyan arms control and
disarmament concern.

In the most recent coordination meeting,
UNSMIL agreed with the Ministry of Defence and
bilateral partners to establish an operational task force
on MANPADS to facilitate a country-wide mapping of
weapons and storage sites and to coordinate the
identification, collection and disabling efforts of all
operational partners involved. UNSMIL, with the
United Nations Mine Action Service (UNMAS), is also
working closely with the Ministry of Defence on
developing a programme for the registration of such
weapons held by the revolutionary brigades. In early
December, the United States Government signed a
technical agreement with the Ministry of Defence for
the inventory of all weapons and ammunition storage
areas in Libya and the destruction of conventional
weapons, the implementation of which is being
coordinated with UNMAS and other partners through
the operational task force.

There has also been progress in accounting for
the additional chemical materials and weapons found at
two previously undeclared sites. On 28 November,
Libyan authorities officially submitted to the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW) a detailed declaration of those materials,
which in the meantime have been transferred to the
previously declared storage site. The OPCW intends to
return to Libya in mid-January to support Libyan
authorities in further detailing their declaration, verify
the declared materials and review their safe storage.
UNSMIL is supporting the visit through logistics,
security and coordination arrangements.

Similarly, on 9 December, the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) completed its visit to
Libya, during which its representatives inspected the
Tajoura nuclear facility in Tripoli and the yellowcake
storage facilities in Sabha. In an initial debriefing, the
IAEA conveyed its overall conclusion that none of the
previously recorded nuclear materials in either facility
had gone missing. However, while there was no
immediate health or radiation risk, an expeditious sale
and transfer of the approximately 6,400 barrels of
nuclear materials in Sabha was strongly recommended,
as the storage condition of the barrels is deteriorating
and the present safety and security measures at the
facility are not deemed sufficient for the longer term.
There appears, however, to be no risk of proliferation,
given the weight and state of the barrels.

Mine action partners continue their efforts, with
26 clearance teams and 28 education teams currently
operational on the ground. A positive development has
been the recent formation of the Libyan Centre for
Mine Action and Remnants of War. The fact that that
was the subject of the first decree of the new Minister
of Defence indicates the high priority that the Libyan
authorities have placed on the issue. On 15 December,
my Deputy launched a mine action donor appeal in
collaboration with the Ministry of Defence, the Libyan
Centre for Mine Action and the UNMAS team. Until
Libyan funds become available, urgent international
donor funding is still required in order to ensure that
current mine action capacities can be continued and
expanded to address the emerging threat as further
areas of contamination are reported throughout the
country.

UNSMIL has continued to monitor the situation
of detainees and to press upon the authorities the need
to bring all places of detention within a framework of
law. In a recent meeting, the Minister of Justice
informed me that his officials had begun visiting
detention centres to bring them under the control of the
judicial police and had received agreement from the
relevant brigades. The Ministry is recruiting additional
judicial police to expedite the process of transfer. Four
detention centres have so far been transferred, and the
Minister was optimistic about bringing all the
detentions centres under the judicial police in the near
future.

The Minister also assured us that prosecutors will
review all cases and will not rely on processes carried
out by the brigades, which do not meet legal standards.
A significant development is the decision issued by the
Minister of Interior on 29 November, specifying which
State authorities had jurisdiction to arrest, detain and
investigate, outlawing arrests and investigation made
by brigades, and ordering them to refer case files to
properly competent authorities as soon as possible.
UNSMIL continues to press for the improvement of
conditions of detention and the proper and swift review
of all cases, leading to release or fair trial.

With regard to transitional justice, the Minister of
Justice informed me that his Ministry had submitted a
draft law, on which the United Nations had commented
in accordance with international standards and best
practice, to the NTC for its consideration and adoption.
The NTC demonstrated its continued commitment to
pursue reconciliation by organizing a national
conference on reconciliation on 10 December, which
was attended by about 500 participants. Civil society
actors, religious leaders and tribal elders have
embarked on various reconciliation initiatives at the
local level.

Among reconciliation efforts under way are those
for thousands of involuntarily displaced persons,
including some 35,000 Tawerghans who have still not
been able to return to their homes following allegations
of involvement by some of their community in abuses
during the conflict. The challenge remains to bring
local initiatives within a national transitional justice
framework.

While humanitarian operations will come to a
close at the end of this year, the United Nations will
continue to support national authorities in assisting
those Libyans who remain internally displaced within
the country. According to the Libya Humanitarian
Relief Agency, there are almost 63,000 registered
internally displaced persons in need of humanitarian
assistance in Libya. More than 75 per cent of the
population of Bani Walid has returned, but the level of
return to Sirte is below 50 per cent, owing to security
concerns, widespread damage to housing and
infrastructure, and the high presence of explosive
remnants of war. Internally displaced persons, as well
as returnees to Bani Walid and Sirte, continue to
receive humanitarian assistance.

UNSMIL is discussing with the Government its
wishes regarding coordination of assistance from
multilateral and bilateral sources. Given its limited
term and urgent priorities, the process for a Libya
coordinated needs assessment agreed with the former
Executive Committee is unlikely to be deemed
appropriate to respond to the new Government's needs.
A January workshop with key ministries is proposed, to
take account of their most urgent plans and identify
forms of immediate international assistance. While that
approach could lead to quick assessments in some
sectors or subsectors, fuller needs assessments may be
more appropriate later once an elected Government can
plan in a longer time frame. Meanwhile, the field-led
integrated mission planning process has begun in Libya
and will be joined by a small team of Headquarters
colleagues in mid-January, to make recommendations
on an UNSMIL mandate beyond its current term. I am
very pleased to report that agreement has been reached
with the Government on the status of mission
5
agreement for UNSMIL, and it will be signed in the
coming days.

The quickened pace of activities I have referred
to reflects the fact that a Government is in office and
that the United Nations now has Libyan interlocutors
to whom it is offering its support. Three months after
our initial deployment, UNSMIL now has just over
100 staff in total, nearly half of them national staff;
24 of its international staff are in substantive
categories. With those limited numbers we are, I
believe, working in accordance with the principles we
set out and the Council welcomed: respect for Libyan
national ownership, speed of response and effective
coordination of international efforts. The pace will
further accelerate as we enter 2012, which will be
another critical year in Libya's remarkable history.

