Mr. Bessho (Japan): First of all, I would like to
welcome Ambassador Maria Emma Mejia Velez to
the Chamber. Japan offers its deep condolences to the
people of Colombia on the tragedy caused by the terrible
landslide and flooding. As a nation that often suffers
from such tragedies, we express our deep sympathy and
solidarity with the people of Colombia.

I thank Mr. Jean Arnault, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Colombia, for his informative
updates. Japan is very encouraged that under his
leadership the United Nations Mission in Colombia is
laying a solid foundation for a successful peace process.
Japan appreciates his commitment and dedication.

In reiterating Japan's full support to the people of
Colombia, I will focus on three points today.

First, we welcome the fact that the peace process
is largely on track. We commend the efforts and firm
commitment of all parties, which constitute the most
important part of the peace process. Keeping in mind
the result of the referendum held in October 2016, we
hope that the overall success of these early stages will
contribute to a firm national consensus towards the
Peace Agreement.

Secondly, it is important that the Council be
united in its commitment to this issue. In that regard,
the Security Council's visit next month will be an
important opportunity to convey to the parties the
Council's strong commitment to the peace process in
Colombia and its support for the implementation of the
Final Peace Agreement.

Thirdly, the presence and the role of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General is vital in
bridging gaps between the parties and in reducing
mistrust. We fully support the work of Special
Representative Arnault, and particularly urge him to
ensure the successful completion of the laying down of
arms. It is important that this effort succeed in order to
secure ustained peace in Colombia.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate Japan's
firm commitment to supporting Colombia's efforts
towards peace.

