Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): The
delegation of Senegal supported the draft resolution
(S/2017/1060) submitted by the delegation of Egypt, as
we are absolutely certain of the need to underscore the
parameters and principles underpinning the historic
and legal issues on Jerusalem, which are very deeply
held by the parties to the conflict - the Israelis and
the Palestinians - as well as the entire world, given
the symbolic importance of the holy city for the three
monotheistic Abrahamic religions. Senegal therefore
pays tribute to Jordan, in its capacity as custodian of
places holy to Islam, Christianity and Judaism.

It is absolutely imperative to preserve the
international consensus on the status of Jerusalem,
which the Israeli and the Palestinian parties are to
consider as part of final status negotiations, with
the unanimous support of the United Nations, and in
particular of the Security Council. It is necessary to
preserve the legal and historic status of Jerusalem in
order to ensure that the Holy City retains its diverse
identity, as well as its spirit of tolerance, openness and
sharing that have always characterized it. That is why
Senegal once again calls for strict respect for the status
quo regarding Jerusalem, in line with the parameters
that are internationally established and recognized - in
particular through Security Council resolutions 476
(1980), 478 (1980) and 2334 (2016).

Those parameters were previously defined by the
founding resolution of General Assembly resolution
181 (II), which enshrined the two separate States of
Israel and Palestine, with Jerusalem as the capital of
both States. The final status of Jerusalem is qualified
as a corpus separatum in resolution 181(II). I take this
opportunity to launch an appeal to the parties to display
the utmost restraint and to avoid escalation at this very
difficult and impassioned moment.

The outcome of the vote this afternoon should not
lead to desperation or cause us to give up. Quite the
contrary is true. We need to strengthen our resolve
by building on the long-standing agreed parameters,
but also on the already existing initiatives, including
the Arab Peace Initiative and, let us say very loudly,
the commendable efforts made by the United States
Administration on the ground.

