Mr. Sangqu (South Africa): We thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Jan
Kubis, for introducing the quarterly report of the
Secretary-General on Afghanistan (S/2012/ 133). South
Africa welcomes the participation of the Permanent
Representative of Afghanistan, Ambassador Zahir
Tanin, at this debate, and we thank him for his
statement.

There has been notable progress in Afghanistan
over the past few months, particularly towards
strengthening Afghan leadership and ownership.
Significant progress has also been achieved towards
inclusive national and regional processes to enhance
peace, reintegration and reconciliation in Afghanistan.

Nonetheless, Afghanistan continues to face
challenges in its endeavour to achieve stability and
development. Key among them are the security
situation, a worsening humanitarian situation, rule of
law and human rights challenges, and continued
violence that has resulted in civilian casualties, which
continue to increase. South Africa stresses that, given
the magnitude of those challenges, a comprehensive
strategy incorporating security, humanitarian efforts,
good governance and socio-economic development is
required. In that regard, we would like to underscore
the central role of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) in supporting the
Government of Afghanistan and in coordinating
international assistance to the country. Crucially, the
continued role played by bilateral and multilateral
partners remains indispensable.

Political dialogue and reconciliation is a critical
factor for the Afghan people and its Government to
ensure sustainable peace for the country, which has
suffered severely as a result of continued insecurity.
We wish to affirm our principled view that there can be
no military solution to the conflict in Afghanistan.

In that regard, we welcome the Afghan
Government's initiatives to engage with the armed
opposition and the continued calls by President Karzai
for the armed opposition to lay down its arms.
Engagement with all elements of the armed opposition
should be viewed as moving the country forward and
should not in any way compromise the achievements of
the past 10 years.

With regard to efforts to strengthen political
outreach activities, we welcome the implementation of
the Afghanistan Peace and Reintegration Programme,
which has already resulted in the reintegration of
thousands of ex-combatants. The Traditional Loya
Jirga, held in November 2011, was an important
catalyst in that regard. Security at the national level
should continue to be reinforced by efforts to
consolidate peace, stability and development at the
regional level.

We welcome the political dialogue and
cooperation between Afghanistan and its neighbours
during the reporting period. There has been significant
bilateral contact between Afghanistan and countries of
the region, which has resulted in strengthened
economic, political, security and socio-cultural links.
Those initiatives intensified following the Istanbul
Conference, jointly convened by Turkey and UNAMA,
which developed confidence-building measures to
improve regional cooperation. We welcome the follow-
up ministerial conference in Kabul, tentatively
scheduled for 11 June, to continue expanding regional
cooperation.

We further welcome the improved operational
effectiveness of the Afghan National Security Forces.
Efforts to operationalize and professionalize the
Afghan national security forces have seen
improvements at both the quantitative and the
qualitative levels. That is demonstrated by the
increased number of Afghan-led and Afghan-partnered
operations. It is an important development that should
be sustained as the International Security Assistance
Force (ISAF) gradually transfers full security
responsibility to the Afghan National Security Forces
by 2014.

However, we are concerned by recent
developments, which have witnessed increased
tensions between members of local communities and
ISAF forces. We call on ISAF to undertake efforts to
mitigate the loss of civilian life and to respect the
cultural and religious heritage of the population.

My delegation continues to believe that there is a
close link between development and security in
Afghanistan. The socio-economic challenges facing
Afghanistan are significant. It is therefore important
that, despite the financial situation facing the
international community, we should continue our
support to the Government and people of Afghanistan,
in line with the commitments of the Bonn Conference,
in the area of direct financial support towards its long-
term economic growth. The upcoming Tokyo and
Chicago conferences will therefore be important in
consolidating global support for Afghanistan's long-
term economic sustainability.

Over the past 10 years, UNAMA has played a
crucial role in assisting the people of Afghanistan in
laying the foundations for sustainable peace and
development. South Africa supports the
recommendation of the Secretary-General that
UNAMA's mandate be extended for a further
12 months and that it continue its integrated mandate,
which should, inter alia, include its good-offices role
and political outreach in support of Afghan-led
processes and the promotion of the human rights of all
Afghans and a coherent international civilian
engagement with the Government's development
agenda and programmes.

In conclusion, national ownership and leadership
remain crucial to achieving political, security and
socio-economic progress in Afghanistan as it enters the
next phase of its transition. For its part, the
international community should continue its supportive
role in the country's move from conflict to stability and
prosperity.

I wish Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Jan Kubis and his team, including his new
deputy, Mr. Michael Keating, the best. South Africa
fully supports him as he diligently implements
UNAMA's mandate.

