Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): I thank our briefers.
I thought their briefings today were particularly
insightful and clear.

While it is good to hear that security has broadly
improved in some areas over the past six months, I
would like to start by offering my condolences to the
families of those killed in the attacks by members of
the Retour, reclamation et rehabilitation group near
Paoua on 21 May. That kind of violence, perpetrated
by members of armed groups that are signatories to the
Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in
the Central African Republic, demonstrates a flagrant
disregard for the integrity of the peace process. The
United Kingdom fully supports the peace process in
the Central African Republic, just as we supported
the African Union-led peace agreement on which it
is founded. I again congratulate the African Union on
its leadership and ongoing work. It is vital that we all
send our clear and unambiguous backing for the peace
agreement and the peace process. With coordinated and
sustained international support, especially from the
region, the Central African Republic can achieve long-
lasting peace and stability. We call on all the armed
groups to cease all forms of violence and engage in the
implementation of the peace agreement.

We also reiterate the Secretary-General's call to
reinforce local peace and reconciliation committees,
which offer agency to women, members of civil society,
religious leaders and young people. As we know from
many of the conflicts discussed in this Chamber,
an inclusive peace agreement is more likely to be
a sustainable one. It is vital that the Central African
people feel ownership of the peace agreement and its
implementation. We need to see a better understanding
ofthe peace process take shape, taking into account the
views and needs of Central Africans.

There can be no peace without justice. I am
afraid that incitements to violence, including on
religious and ethnic grounds, and attacks on civilians,
peacekeepers and humanitarian workers will continue
if the perpetrators are not held to account. Again, as
we have seen in so many conflicts, accountability is
vital if the people of the Central African Republic are
to see peace and stability in their country. The United
Kingdom recognizes the efforts by the Government of
the Central African Republic, together with the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA)
and the United Nations Development Programme,
to bring some of the perpetrators of serious crimes
to account. In particular, we welcome the progress
made in establishing the Special Criminal Court and
initiating the first investigations. We note that the
Court is conducting a nationwide campaign to raise
awareness of its mandate. But more has to be done,
and we urge the Central African Republic to work with
the international community to expedite progress on
transitional justice, which is an essential component of
peace and stability.

More than one in four Central Africans are
displaced and half of the population is in desperate need
of humanitarian assistance. The United Kingdom is
committed to supporting the humanitarian effort in the
Central African Republic and since 2014 has provided
more than $140 million in funding in that regard. In
2018, however, only 36 per cent of the humanitarian
response plan was funded. A stable, secure and peaceful
Central African Republic continues to be in all of our
interests and we encourage all Member States to help
fill the gap.

The United Kingdom fully supports the work
of MINUSCA and is committed to working with the
Security Council in support of MINUSCA's stabilization
mandate. We agree with the Secretary-General's
observation that there should be a renewed focus on
the peace process, with MINUSCA's participation,
and that more responsibility should be taken by the
guarantors and facilitators of the peace agreement.
Enhanced United Nations political engagement will
support political, peacebuilding and security efforts
in the Central African Republic. Today I want to pay
tribute to all the work done by MINUSCA and send our
thanks, via the Special Representative, to those who
represent the Council in blue on the ground. However,
we should also be communicating clearly with the
people of the Central African Republic in order to show
them and help them understand how much MINUSCA
is delivering for them.

In conclusion, the international community and
the Government of the Central African Republic are
making progress towards implementing key elements
of the peace agreement. But there is much at stake. We
must continue to focus on building peace and stability
and creating the conditions for safe and credible
elections in 2020, which will help us achieve the long-
term protection and prosperity that the people of the
Central African Republic deserve.

