Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I thank
and welcome you, Sir. Your presence here today
demonstrates the importance of this meeting.

France warmly welcomes the unanimous adoption
ofresolution 2307 (2016), which is a major step and pillar
in the establishment of this historic peace in Colombia.
It establishes the size, operational aspects and mandate
of the United Nations mission created by the Council
in order to monitor and verify respect for the ceasefire
between the Colombian Government and the Fuerzas
Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia (FARC), as
well as the laying down of arms agreed to last year
in accordance with the provisions of the Agreement
concluded on 23 June in Havana. The Council's new
resolution, for which we are grateful to the United
Kingdom, will enable the mission to begin working to
deploy on the ground as soon as possible with the goal
of being fully operational as soon as the Agreement
enters into force. It concludes an exemplary planning
and preparation process in which the United Nations
has taken all necessary steps to respond effectively to
the joint call by the parties concerned for support in
implementing the peace provisions. Once again, France
heartily welcomes this outcome.

Adopted only days after the conclusion of the Final
Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building a
Stable and Long Lasting Peace between the Colombian
Government and FARC, which has paved the way for
ending a conflict that has lasted more than 50 years,
today's resolution shows that our Organization as a
whole, and the Security Council in particular, has
lived up to expectations. It demonstrates once again
the degree to which the United Nations is a central,
legitimate and trusted actor in the maintenance of
international peace and security all over the world.

France would like to once again congratulate
President Santos Calderon, who had the courage and
foresight to begin negotiations with FARC in 2012, and
to acknowledge the role played in the Agreement by
the guarantor States, Cuba and Norway, as well as the
supporting States, Chile and Venezuela. I would like to
take this opportunity to reiterate that as a nation, France
stands in support of the Colombian people on their
historic journey towards peace. Besides working on the
issue in the Council, we will continue to support the
peace process bilaterally, specifically by contributing
to funding rural development and demining, and as part
of the European Union, which also has an important
part to play in implementing the Agreement.

The resolution we have just adopted is one of
the final, essential bricks in the wall that is peace in
Colombia. It is up to the Colombian people to complete
it on the basis of the plebiscite to be held on 2 October.
France will continue to work diligently to ensure that
the peace process in Colombia succeeds, not only, of
course, for Colombia and its people first and foremost,
but also for the United Nations.

