Ms. Flores Herrera (Panama) (spoke in Spanish):
First, I want to welcome New Zealand's presidency
of the Security Council. I also welcome Mr. Murray
McCully, Minister for Foreign Affairs ofNew Zealand.

I cannot think of a better setting or physical space
than the territories of the SIDS where we can so clearly
see the inextricable link between peace and security,
sustainable development and climate change. The
reality faced by the SIDS compels us to realize that
we cannot continue to work on those issues, which
are so fundamental for the United Nations agenda, in
an isolated fashion. I therefore thank New Zealand
for this open debate, which enables us - apart from
exchanging ideas on how to tackle the peace and
security challenges of small island developing States
from a global standpoint - to think outside the box. It
compels us to seek innovative ways of building bridges
and to link themes and realities that, through force of
habit, we have so far been dealing with separately.

In any territory, peace and security becomes
consolidated when we have inclusive development,
namely, a development with healthy ecosystems, a
development that promotes equality and respect for
human rights. That is how democracy is strengthened,
which leads to greater peace and security. Every nation
in the world aspires to that kind of a chain of progress.

But the SIDS face additional challenges in their
efforts to strengthen their peace and security. Although
they are among the countries with the greatest
biological, cultural and linguistic diversity and their
inhabitants have a wealth of resources and are extremely
resilient, the small island developing States continue to
face many vulnerabilities. All those who have taken the
floor before me have already mentioned that we must
bear in mind that those more than 50 nations, which
are scattered between Africa, the Atlantic, the Pacific
and the Indian Ocean, and the Caribbean and the
Mediterranean Seas and China, are disproportionately
limited in their development because of dangers, threats
and other security issues that are multidimensional and
transnational and which involve political, economic,
social, environmental and geographical factors as well.

My country Panama is a Caribbean State. The
Antillean presence during the construction of the
Interoceanic Canal in Panama helped in forming the
Panamanian nationality, and that ethnic group became
part of the very expression of our nation. Therefore,
Panama is truly interested in working with and for
the small island developing States: in the framework
embodied by the results achieved at the Samoa
Conference on SIDS in 2014, bilaterally and on a
subregional basis, in order to overcome the obstacles
on the path to the full development of those countries.

Last April, my country hosted the Seventh Summit
of the Americas, which succeeded in relaunching
hemispheric relations, with the attendance of all the
heads of State and Government of our island neighbours.
During the Summit Panama expressed its intention to
become an observer in the regional group known as the
Caribbean Community.

It also seems appropriate to mention that as a
contribution to the intergovernmental negotiations on
Security Council reform, Panama has made a proposal
that could be gradually completed in two successive
stages and would lead, by the United Nations centenary,
to a Security Council with 24 members, two of which
we propose should be SIDS. In that Council all members
would be equal and elected for three years, with the
possibility of consecutive re-election.

In conclusion, I am proud to point out that, as
destiny would have it, in this case because of the
alphabetical order, Panama is seated in the General
Assembly between two small island developing States:
Palau and Papua New Guinea. That has helped us
acquire special knowledge and experiences from their
representatives and to become more familiar with the
realities of those small island developing States beyond
our own geographic region.

We are able, therefore, to connect the regional with
the global. Like all systems, what happens in one part of
the world has repercussions throughout the whole world.
So if we look at that from the standpoint of solidarity
and of survival, we are committed to ensuring peace
and security in the small island developing States.

