Mr. Al-Nasser (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): First,
Madam, I would like to congratulate you on your
delegation's successful presidency of the Security
Council and on having selected this important topic as
a basis for today's discussion. I would also like to
commend the Secretariat's efforts in support of
peacebuilding.

I associate myself with the statement made by the
representative of Jamaica on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement.

The Security Council's debate on peacebuilding
centres on the role that the Council can play in conflict
or post-conflict environments in the maintenance of
international peace and security - in keeping, of
course, with its mandate - including by authorizing
multidimensional missions. We encourage coordination
with the General Assembly and other relevant organs
on peacebuilding and development.

The 2005 World Summit decided to establish the
Peacebuilding Commission as an advisory body to both
the General Assembly and the Security Council.
Therefore, when the Council addresses issues of
peacebuilding and development or the role and
mandate of the Peacebuilding Commission, it is
essential to coordinate those efforts with the Assembly,
which established the Commission under its resolution
60/180, in parallel with Security Council resolution
1645 (2005). The Council is not in a position to assume
alone the responsibility for long-term peacebuilding,
given the scope and complexity of peacebuilding,
which extends beyond threats to international peace
and security. Post-conflict peacebuilding has thus
become a multidimensional issue that requires
concerted efforts by all United Nations agencies and
partnerships with the international community based on
national ownership and full respect for the sovereignty
of the State in question, in accordance with the
principles of the Charter and international law. Those
principles are stipulated in the mandate of the
Peacebuilding Commission.

The first year of the peacebuilding architecture
that emerged from the 2005 World Summit witnessed
the launching of the Peacebuilding Support Office
within the Secretariat and of the Peacebuilding Fund,
which provides funding for many development
projects. Much progress has been achieved with regard
to the organizational and procedural aspects of the
Commission's work. We should therefore continue to
build on the progress achieved thus far, such as the
concrete results achieved on the ground in Burundi,
Sierra Leone and, more recently, Guinea-Bissau.

More States must benefit from peacebuilding
programmes, while due consideration must be paid to
the differing conditions of each situation - and hence
to the differing ways in which the peacebuilding
process should be managed in different countries.
Countries emerging from conflict must also have full
national ownership of their peacebuilding process in a
manner that serves the interests of their peoples. In
accordance with the principle of sovereignty, their
voluntary approval must be sought on programmes
implemented within their borders, especially since
those States have themselves sought the support of the
international community.

It is imperative to formulate a United Nations exit
strategy from post-conflict countries: countries
emerging from conflict cannot remain on the United
Nations agenda forever. Coordination with the State
concerned is needed to develop a comprehensive
development and capacity-building strategy, including
an education strategy to teach young people about the
culture of peace. We cannot expect a State to be in a
position to achieve sustainable development without
building its production capacity and without enabling it
to enjoy economic and political independence. The role
of the United Nations should therefore not be
understood as that of an open-ended aid provider, but
rather as that of a builder of sustainable projects.
Relationships with international partners or United
Nations missions should not be defined on a financial
basis alone.

We regret that the Council is still unable to make
use of Chapter VIII of the Charter with regard to
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
and subregional organizations and bodies, especially in
the adoption of Council resolutions involving
collaboration between the United Nations and other
organizations. During our membership of the Security
Council, we long stressed the need to adopt such
resolutions under Chapter VIII of the Charter so as not
to sideline the role that the regional arrangements
could play.

We hope that we have contributed to developing
some ideas. It would be useful for the report of the
Secretary-General called for in the draft presidential
statement to include a positive clarification of these
ideas and practical recommendations, in partnership
with the General Assembly and other relevant organs
of the United Nations.

