Mr. Mayr-Harting (Austria): Let me start,
Mr. President, by thanking you for taking the initiative
to organize this important briefing on drug trafficking
and transnational organized crime as a threat to
international peace and security. Austria attaches great
importance to the ongoing fight against drug trafficking
and organized crime. We also highly appreciate the
efforts of the delegation of France and support the draft
presidential statement that will be adopted today.

I would like to express my gratitude to the
Secretary-General for his personal interest in and
commitment to this matter. Let me also thank Under-
Secretary-General Antonio Maria Costa for his

valuable input and for his committed leadership of the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC).
Let me say that my country is honoured to host that
important Office in Vienna. That gives us a chance to
observe its work and the exceptional leadership of the
Under-Secretary-General on a daily basis. We also
appreciate the initiative of UNODC and France to
present, in Vienna in the run-up to today's briefing, a
report on crime and instability.

At various recent meetings of the Council,
delegations, including my own, have underlined the
need to develop a better understanding of the root
causes and aggravating factors in situations of armed
conflict and post-conflict situations. We thank UNODC
for contributing to our better understanding of the
interlinkages among data on illicit trafficking routes,
conflicts, per capita income and other matters important
in this context. All of these data illustrate convincingly
the links that exist among drug trafficking, transnational
organized crime, conflict and, as others have already
said, underdevelopment.

The globalization of transnational criminal activity
and finance has also benefited illicit business and
criminal groups, allowing them to organize themselves
and operate transnationally. To put it more bluntly, the
globalization of organized crime has so far moved
much faster than the globalization of law enforcement.
As a result, crime is being transformed from a threat at
the personal and national levels to a strategic menace
that can affect international peace and security.

It is only by acting in concert that the
international community will be able to prevail in the
fight against drug trafficking and other forms of
organized crime such as human trafficking, migrant
smuggling and money-laundering. We must help States
develop their own capacities to rebuild and strengthen
their institutions, to administer justice and ensure the
rule of law and to provide security. Here too, UNODC
can make an important contribution. The Council itself
should duly take this into account when designing
sustainable strategies for conflict areas.

Universal adherence to and accurate
implementation of pertinent international legal
instruments, such as the United Nations Convention
against Transnational Organized Crime, the United
Nations Convention against Corruption, the United
Nations drug control conventions and the international
conventions related to terrorism, should be our
common goal. In the process of implementation,
international human rights and the standards of due
process will have to be fully respected. Furthermore,
we must constantly improve the existing instruments,
with a view to keeping pace with the changing nature
of transnational crime. Having agreed on a mechanism
to monitor the implementation of the United Nations
Convention against Corruption, the international
community should now focus on a strong and effective
review mechanism for the United Nations Convention
against Transnational Organized Crime.

The Council has repeatedly recognized the close
connection between international terrorism and
transnational organized crime in its various
manifestations and has underlined the need to enhance
coordination of efforts at the regional, global and
national levels. Here again, UNODC and its Terrorism
Prevention Branch can play an important role when
delivering assistance. The Terrorism Prevention Branch
also plays a very important role in the Counter-
Terrorism Implementation Task Force.

Recent studies have confirmed the relationship
between corruption and organized crime, suggesting
that corruption facilitates all forms of organized crime,
which in turn foments renewed corruption. The seventh
Global Forum on Reinventing Government, which was
held in Vienna in June 2007, underlined in the Vienna
Declaration the need to increase transparency and
accountability to combat corruption. More cooperation
on implementation of the United Nations Convention
on Corruption will be needed, including the
development of anti-corruption policies and institutions
as well as preventive anti-corruption frameworks.

In this context, we would like to draw the
attention of the Council to the upcoming establishment
of the International Anti-Corruption Academy in
Laxenburg, Austria, near Vienna. This Academy, based
on the United Nations Convention against Corruption,
aims at promoting anti-corruption measures through
academic research and professional academic training.
The main audience of the International Anti-Corruption
Academy will be, inter alia, law enforcement officers,
judicial staff, private sector representatives and
representatives from non-governmental and international
organizations. The establishment of the International
Anti-Corruption Academy will be another important
step in the fight against corruption worldwide.

We fully support the invitation to the Secretary-
General, in the draft presidential statement before us
today, to include information on transnational threats in
his reports to the Council when analysing conflicts,
assessing or planning missions, and making
recommendations for future action. More regular
briefings by the Executive Director of UNODC will
further contribute to our understanding and help the
Council to integrate these issues into its work in a more
consistent manner.

