The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received a letter from the representative of
the Sudan, in which he requests to be invited to
participate in the consideration of the item on the
Council's agenda. In accordance with the usual practice,
I propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite that
representative to participate in the consideration of the
item, without the right to vote, in accordance with the
relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Mohamad
(Sudan) took a seat at the Council table.

The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Following consultations among the members of
the Security Council, I have been authorized to make
the following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council strongly condemns
the attacks of 10 May perpetrated by the Justice
and Equality Movement (JEM) against the
the

Sudanese Government in Omdurman, and urges
all parties to cease violence immediately, respect
their obligations under international humanitarian
law and commit to a peaceful resolution of all
outstanding issues.

"The Security Council urges restraint by all
parties and, in particular, warns that no retaliatory
action should be taken against civilian
populations, or that has an impact on stability in
the region.

"The Security Council reiterates the urgent
need for all parties to engage fully and
constructively in the political process. The
Security Council calls upon the States of the
region to implement their commitments under the
Dakar Accord, and to cooperate with a view to
putting an end to the activities of armed groups
and their attempts to seize power by force.

"The Security Council strongly condemns
all attempts at destabilization by force, and
reaffirms its commitment to the sovereignty,
unity, independence and territorial integrity of
Sudan."

This statement will be issued as a document of
Security Council under the symbol

S/PRST/2008/15.

The Security Council has thus concluded the

present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 3.10 p.m.
08-3374]

