Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, we very much thank Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix
and Mr. Sma'il Chergui for their briefings.

We sincerely congratulate the leadership,
Government and the brotherly people of the Sudan on
the political achievements and the agreement reached
by the Transitional Military Council and the Forces
for Freedom and Change on 17 August pertaining to
the transitional period. We reiterate our support for
the Sudan at this delicate stage and beyond, while
we eagerly await the concerted efforts that will help
achieve the aspirations of our brothers in the Sudan
for a promising future. We reaffirm our support for the
Sudan, its unity, sovereignty, stability and territorial
integrity. In this regard, we commend the role of the
African Union and Ethiopia in ensuring mediation and
helping all parties to reach this historical agreement.

I would like to address three basic aspects today:
the situation in Darfur, the withdrawal of the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID) and the upcoming mandate.

We have monitored the situation in Darfur over the
past two months as the Sudan was witnessing positive
developments. It was clear that, as in previous years,
there has been continued stability in the security
situation around Jebel Marra. UNAMID's exit strategy
has had little impact on that situation in most parts ofthe
province. This reaffirms that the gradual withdrawal of
UNAMID has achieved its objective. We look forward
to the armed groups participating in good faith and
without preconditions in a dialogue to join the political
process, reach a political solution and strengthen peace
in Darfur.

The current and future issues to be addressed in
Darfur with regard to land ownership, climate change
and the safe, dignified and voluntary return of internally
displaced persons are all related to post-conflict
peacebuilding. Peacekeeping is no longer the best way,
as in the past, to address such issues. We therefore call
on UNAMID to continue on its current path, in line
with resolutions 2479 (2019) and 2429 (2018), as well
as last year's presidential statement (S/PRST/2018/19).

Regarding UNAMID's exit, we commend its
dedicated efforts to achieve a smooth transition in
Darfur. We condemn any attack against UNAMID by
any party. We call for the achievements of UNAMID
over the past 12 years to be maintained. We are
responsible for those achievements and encourage
and support the measures of the Sudan to extend its
sovereignty throughout Darfur.

We also stress the importance of continuing the
mission's gradual withdrawal until next month, in
line with UNAMID's mandate. We recall the 14 June
resolution of the African Union Peace and Security
Council - the Security Council's counterpart and
partner in UNAMID - which calls on the Security
Council to extend the UNAMID mandate for 12 months.

With regard to the upcoming mandate, we will
continue to work with our colleagues inside and outside
the Council to guarantee that the upcoming UNAMID
mandate, given the joint assessment to be presented
to the Security Council in September, will be short

and clear in confirming one of the exit options. We
furthermore hope that it will be in line with the wishes
of the Sudan, the host country, and its capacities; focus
on specific areas, such as capacity-building, supporting
the rule of law and enhancing national ownership; and
strengthen the transitional process by consolidating
cooperation and coordination with the United Nations
country team in Darfur.

We thank the brotherly Sudan for its cooperation
and look forward to further cooperation during
the remaining period of mandated drawdown and
withdrawal in a smooth and safe manner.

