Mr. Simonovie (Croatia): First of all, let me
thank you, Mr. President, for organizing this
discussion, and High Representative Petritsch for his
comprehensive report. Let me also greet the new
Permanent Representatives of Tunisia and especially of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, who arrived in New York just
at the most appropriate time.

Croatia remains vitally interested in
developments in Bosnia and Herzegovina. The fact that
Croats are one of the three constituent peoples in
Bosnia and Herzegovina is far from being the only
reason for our interest in that country. The stability of
Bosnia and Herzegovina bears direct relevance for the
stability and, moreover, the prosperity of Croatia itself.
The shape and the length of our country's border with
Bosnia and Herzegovina alone supports this argument.
Moreover, Croatia's aspirations towards European
integration are greatly influenced by developments in
Bosnia and Herzegovina, and Croatian foreign policy
has often been evaluated in terms of its policy towards
Bosnia and Herzegovina. Both countries rely heavily
on each other's traffic infrastructure and are important
trade partners.

It is therefore self-evident why my Government
firmly supports a stable, politically and economically
self-sustainable Bosnia and Herzegovina. Croatia
supports a Bosnia and Herzegovina that will be able to
take its place in the European integration processes.
However, we recognize that these goals still lie a long
way ahead. Croatia is unsatisfied with the progress
made so far, and is concerned with the present state of
affairs. It is an appropriate time to assess where we
stand now, where are we going and what we can do to
speed up the attainment of a self-sustainable Bosnia
and Herzegovina.

The major problems in Bosnia and Herzegovina
remain refugee returns, economic revitalization and
proper functioning and development of its institutions.
So far, no substantial refugee returns have occurred,
particularly in regard to minority returns in Republika
Srpska. Just as an illustration, only 1 per cent of Croats
have returned to their homes in Republika Srpska since
1995. As time goes by, fewer and fewer people,
especially Croats, see their future in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. They have already settled in
neighbouring or third countries, and they are losing
hope. Despite the fact that the international community
spent more then $5 billion trying to sort things out in
Bosnia and Herzegovina, the economic development
and substantial growth have not yet taken place.

The present constitutional arrangement in Bosnia
and Herzegovina is the one that could have been agreed
upon by all sides at the time when it was negotiated.
Even though it has not been fully implemented, it
served the primary purpose of the Peace Accords: to
stop the bloodshed. Today, the major task that the
international community and the people of Bosnia and
Herzegovina face is to prevent the constitutional
structure of the country from becoming its permanent
source of instability. The constitutional structure of
Bosnia and Herzegovina must continue to develop and
evolve with the dynamics of the country's political,
economic and social life.

For a long time, Croatia has been drawing the
attention of the international community to the main
contradiction within Bosnia and Herzegovina's
constitutional structure: namely, the integrity of the
country on the one hand, and its de facto partition, on
the other. Dayton tried to reconcile the peoples of
Bosnia and Herzegovina via pledges to create joint
institutions which, in turn, were to secure their
respective basic interests and preserve the values of a
multi-ethnic society. The pledge to reverse ethnic
cleansing and to restore the pre-war demographic
composition fed people's hopes and raised
expectations. At the same time, Dayton did not provide
any guidance as to how to manage this inbuilt
conceptual contradiction in the Peace Agreement. It
thereby froze the lines of confrontation between the
Republika Srpska and the Federation to a certain
extent, legitimizing the borders drawn by force. In this
regard, Dayton remains unfinished business.

Besides refugee returns, the crucial test of
implementing both the letter and the spirit of Dayton as
a living document lies in the full implementation of the
decision of the Constitutional Court on the
constitutionality of all three constituent peoples, as
well as in bringing the Constitution of the Republika
Srpska and the structure of its Parliament into line with
the spirit of Dayton and the Constitutions of Bosnia
and Herzegovina and the Federation. As long as some
of the three constituent peoples are excluded from
exercizing their rights in Republika Srpska, the
integrity and self-sustainability of Bosnia and
Herzegovina remains unrealistic.

The Republika Srpska has led its own life as an
ethnically, almost pure, para-State of Serbian people,
whilst the Federation has been struggling to maintain a
proper balance between its lesser Croat and larger
Bosniac population.

The Croatian Government regrets that some of
the political grievances of the Croatian population in
Bosnia and Herzegovina have been addressed in an
inappropriate manner by some of its elected
representatives. Primarily, I refer to unilateral decisions
taken by some Croatian political actors at their recent
gathering in Mostar. The Mostar Declaration leads the
Croatian community in Bosnia and Herzegovina onto
the road of isolation and, thereby, furthers
marginalization. This course of action, can by no
means, be of any benefit to them. At the same time, it
is damaging both for the interests of Bosnia and
Herzegovina and for Croatia. As a matter of principle,
ultimatums are not the method that we approve of now,
or in the future, when it comes to dealing with sensitive
issues. This principle applies equally to all parties,
including international actors involved in settling
political problems in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
We understand the reaction of the High
Representative to the Mostar Declaration. My
Government views the High Representative's
intervention as an act directed only against individuals,
and not as an action directed against the Croatian
community in Bosnia and Herzegovina as a whole. We
see it as a reaction against radical methods being used,
and not as a step against the legitimate interests of the
Croatian community in Bosnia and Herzegovina as
recognized by Dayton. We do hope that the Croatian
people in Bosnia and Herzegovina will also see it in
this way.

Leaving aside the radical and inappropriate
reaction by some political forces, the existence of real
problems and legitimate fears held by the Croatian
community in Bosnia and Herzegovina cannot simply
be ignored. A striking indicator that something is not
right is the systematic departure of the Croatian
population from Bosnia and Herzegovina, which has
continued even after Dayton. Altogether, in the past ten
years the proportion of the Croat population in Bosnia
and Herzegovina dropped from 17 to 10 per cent.
The Croats form the smallest constituent nation in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. They live in ethnically mixed
territories of Bosnia and Herzegovina and they do not
have their own entity. Consequently, they cannot rely
on the same factors as the other two constituent nations
in Bosnia and Herzegovina for protecting their identity
and interests, such as size or having a separate entity.
They can only rely on the functioning institutions of
the Bosnian State, that is, the institutions that reflect
fully the decision of the Constitutional Court of Bosnia
and Herzegovina regarding the equality and
constitutionality of all three constituent nations
throughout the entire territory of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. Croats in Bosnia and Herzegovina can
lend their trust only to a political system that
guarantees them the preservation of their national,
cultural and religious identity, and allows them to be
genuinely represented in all joint institutions. These are
also the very goals ofthe living Dayton Peace Accords.
Have they been achieved? Have the measures
undertaken by the international community facilitated
their achievement?

On the eve of the elections in October last year,
my Government expressed its concern about some of
the regulations of the Provisional Election
Commission. Croatia approached the officials of the
Organization for Security and Development in Europe
(OSCE) and advised them that the adopted regulations
were contrary to the Constitution of the Federation of
Bosnia and Herzegovina and the spirit of Dayton. We
expressed our concerns that the Croats in Bosnia and
Herzegovina could perceive these regulations as a
threat to their genuine representation in joint
institutions. Croatia feared that, if those regulations
were to be implemented, they could backfire and
radicalize the Croatian community in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. Unfortunately, we were right.

Croatia believes that the Dayton goals must be
implemented. However, we do not conceive the project
of implementation as a static notion, but rather as a
dynamic one. It requires an appropriate evolution of
joint institutions, which must ensure genuine
representation and protection of all three constituent
peoples throughout the territory of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. All problems must be resolved within
these joint institutions through a democratic process.
This is the road to a democratic and self-sustainable
Bosnia and Herzegovina. Croatia stands ready to
facilitate this process.

Following the elections in the Republic of Croatia
in January last year, Croatia's assistance to the
Croatian people in Bosnia and Herzegovina changed in
terms of method and substance. It became transparent
and oriented towards economic, cultural and social
programmes instead of military ones. At the same time,
Croatia will continue to support the territorial integrity
of Bosnia and Herzegovina and the efforts to develop
democracy and preserve the equality of all the
constituent peoples. In this respect, the admission of
Bosnia and Herzegovina to the Council of Europe can
be an important contribution, and should therefore be
speeded up. We will do our utmost to provide help and
assistance to Bosnia and Herzegovina because we need
a stable neighbour - a partner we can count on in our
joint quest for a European future.

