Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): We
welcome you, Sir, in presiding over this important
meeting. I am delivering this statement on behalf
of Kuwait and Sweden. At the outset, I would like to
thank the Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator, Mr. Mark
Lowcock, for his briefing.

Today I will address three main areas: first, the
status of the implementation of resolution 2401 (2018);
secondly, measures needed to improve the humanitarian
situation; and thirdly, the responsibility of the parties to
implement the resolution.

First, on the status of the implementation of
resolution 2401 (2018), we are meeting today one month
after its unanimous adoption by the Security Council,
calling on all parties to cease hostilities Without delay
for 30 days following the adoption of the resolution. We
deplore the fact that it has not yet been implemented.
However, we must continue to do everything in our
power to ensure the resolution's full implementation
throughout Syria. The increased number of humanitarian
convoys entering the besieged areas during the month
of March shows that partial delivery was achieved
by comparison to the complete deadlock in access in
previous months. That indicates that progress can be
made in implementing the resolution, and we must
build on that progress.

We affirm that the provisions of the resolution
will remain valid beyond the first 30 days after its
adoption. We look forward to continued reports from
the Secretariat on the status of implementation through
monthly briefings, as stipulated in the resolution. In
that regard, we support the proposal for providing the
Council with further regular updates.

We appreciate the continued efforts of the United
Nations to facilitate talks among all parties in eastern
Ghouta with the goal of securing a ceasefire. We are
particularly concerned about the continued military
offensive by the Syrian authorities in eastern Ghouta,
as well as air strikes on Dar'a and Idlib. The shelling
of Damascus from eastern Ghouta is also a matter of
concern. All of those acts of violence have claimed the
lives of hundreds of innocent civilians.

Secondly, on measures needed to improve the
humanitarian situation, we must take the necessary
measures to protect civilians fleeing eastern Ghouta
and to improve the humanitarian situation in collective
shelters. As we have said before, implementing the
provisions of resolution 2401 (2018) is the only way
to improve the humanitarian situation and to achieve
tangible progress in that regard. Those provisions
stipulate that there must be a cessation of hostilities
and that access for humanitarian aid to reach the
civilian population must be enabled. Regarding the
humanitarian situation in eastern Ghouta, we have five
points to convey to the relevant parties, which represent
our special concerns about the protection of civilians.

First, all evacuations must be voluntary. People
must have the right to return and to choose safe places
to go to. Secondly, any negotiations on the evacuation
of civilians should include civilian representatives,
such as local councils. Thirdly, humanitarian aid
convoys should continue to enter eastern Ghouta for
the benefit of those who decided to stay there. Those
convoys should occur on a weekly basis, as stipulated
in resolution 2401 (2018), according to the United
Nations assessment of needs, including medical
supplies, and with full access for United Nations staff.
Fourthly, human rights violations, including detentions,
disappearances and forced conscriptions, must end.
Those are serious protection concerns for civilians
staying in eastern Ghouta and for those leaving it. We
therefore encourage the United Nations to register the
names of those evacuated and their destinations and
to reinforce its presence in the collective shelters for
internally displaced persons, including through the use
of monitors to protect them and prevent sexual violence.
We call on the Syrian authorities to grant immediate
permission for that. Fifthly, the deteriorating situation
in the collective shelters for the internally displaced
persons should be improved as quickly as possible as
the number of new arrivals continues to rise.

We are deeply concerned that the United Nations
partners are bearing the brunt of a burden beyond
their capacity. It will therefore be essential to make the
maximum use of the United Nations, its staff and its
resources in order to assist in managing the increasingly
crowded collective shelters. We welcome the United
Nations plans to increase staff on the ground to that end,
and we encourage the United Nations to do the same for
eastern Ghouta as soon as the security situation allows.
We call on the Syrian authorities to grant visas for
additional United Nations staff immediately.
Thirdly, on the responsibility of the parties
to implement the resolution, we have a collective
responsibility, as members of the Council and,
specifically, as parties with influence, to work with
the Syrian authorities and urge them to implement
the provisions of resolution 2401 (2018) according
to international humanitarian law. We expect the
guarantors of the Astana agreement, Russia, Iran and
Turkey, to achieve progress towards the fulfilment of the
commitments undertaken in the statement they issued
on 16 March in advance of their summit meeting, to be
held in Istanbul on 4 April. Those commitments include,
first, ensuring rapid, safe and unhindered access for
humanitarian aid to areas affected by the conflict;
secondly, increasing their efforts, as guarantors of
the ceasefire agreement, to ensure observance of the
respective agreements; and thirdly, pursuing their
efforts to implement the provisions of resolution 2401
(2018).

In conclusion, we affirm our full commitment to
continuing to follow up closely on the status of the
implementation of the resolution in the monthly reports
to the Council. We will spare no effort to make progress
in its implementation. This month marks the beginning
of the eighth year of the conflict in Syria. Sadly, there
is still a need for an end to the violence, sustained
humanitarian and medical aid through weekly convoys
across conflict lines, evacuation operations, the
protection of civilians and hospitals, and the lifting of
the siege.

