Mr. Woldegerima (Ethiopia): We thank Mr. Staffan
de Mistura, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
Syria, for his briefing today. We highly appreciate and
support his continued and tireless efforts to facilitate a
peaceful solution to the Syrian crisis.

While he informed us in his most recent briefing
(S/PV.8373) of his plan to move on after November, we
have full confidence that he will do everything possible
until the last day to help to move the political process
forward. In that context, we welcome his meeting with
the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign

Affairs and Expatriates of the Syrian Arab Republic in
Damascus a few days ago.

We note that the Special Envoy had, to use his
own words, "a very frank and very intense exchange of
views" on the constitutional committee and the political
process in general. We thank him for sharing with us
what transpired during the meeting. We understand that
the discussion on that issue has not been easy and that
finding common ground will continue to be a challenge.

Nevertheless, we believe that Special Envoy De
Mistura should continue his efforts to convene the
constitutional committee as soon as he possibly can.
We all agree that the agreement reached between Russia
and Turkey on Idlib provides a window of opportunity
that should be seized in order to revive a credible,
inclusive and Syrian-owned political process, starting
with the establishment of a United Nations-facilitated
constitutional committee.

We note that there was a meeting of the Astana
guarantors in Moscow this week, which we hope will
be helpful in sustaining the engagement to move the
political process forward, particularly the formation
of the constitutional committee. At the same time, we
also look forward to the four-way summit on Syria to
be held in Istanbul this weekend. We hope that all those
diplomatic initiatives at the various levels will contribute
to reinvigorating the United Nations-facilitated political
process. As the process of the constitutional committee
should be Syrian-led and Syrian-owned, we encourage
all Syrian parties to constructively engage with the
Special Envoy.

Finally, this is the time to further coordinate and
accelerate diplomatic efforts to support the Special
Envoy in his endeavours to establish the constitutional
committee. The Council should also continue to put its
full weight behind the Special Envoy, whose efforts will
be extremely critical over the coming days and months.

