Ms. Bahous (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for your
efforts at the helm of the Security Council this month.
I would also like to thank you for having convened this
important debate. I thank Secretary-General Antonio
Guterres for his briefing and for his report on today's
agenda item (S/2017/939) and its recommendations.
We also thank Mr. Yury Fedotov, Executive Director
of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, and
Ms. Maria Grazia Giammarinaro, Special Rapporteur
on trafficking in persons, as well as all of this
morning's briefers.

One year has passed since we adopted resolution
2331 (2016), in which we vehemently condemned
instances of human trafficking in armed conflict, and
yet we continue to be confronted with that alarming
phenomenon, specifically after seeing the revolting
images shown by the media recently. Those images
showed trafficking in persons in Libya. Human beings
were sold like merchandise, despite the international
community's efforts to combat terrorism and the
barbaric ideas of terrorist organizations. The conflicts
plaguing our world today, as well as unprecedented
waves of refugees, have contributed to that phenomenon,
which is rising to a crescendo.

The 2016 Global Report on Trafficking in Persons
of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
(UNODC) shows an increase in the number of victims
in countries plagued by conflict, such as Syria, Iraq
and Somalia, but also in Europe, Asia and the Middle
East. For that reason, we emphasize the importance of
arriving at political solutions to the crises facing us
so that we can put an end to violence and bloodshed
and safeguard the dignity of people. It is also our duty,
as the international community, to maintain a holistic
vision of those issues. We must not focus solely on the
hot spots. We must have a comprehensive overview of
all parts of the world. We need programmes providing
interregional responses aimed at combating such
phenomena and the underlying causes thereof. For
that reason, Jordan will continue to work at the United
Nations with our various partners to achieve that goal.

We also need a holistic approach to the issue,
not merely a political one. We must take into account
security and human-development issues and we must
link them to our efforts to implement the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development and the sustaining
peace agenda in order to achieve a peaceful world
in which societies are fair and nobody is left behind.
Our societies must be prosperous and should provide
freedoms for all. All people must be able to live without
the fear of violence.

In our view, it is critical to redouble our efforts
to fight human trafficking, specifically trafficking
perpetrated by terrorist groups. For that reason, we
must work nationally, regionally and internationally to
fight terrorism and extremist thought by prioritizing
women, girls and children, who remain the weak links
in the chain. We must also empower young people
and build capacity through technical assistance to
all countries in need. That must be part of a global
preventive strategy. In that regard, we underscore the
fundamental link between trafficking in persons and
the crises afflicting our societies, specifically the
phenomena of terrorism and extremism. We need to
a comprehensive understanding of that link. We must
analyse all its dimensions and implement strategies and
programmes to combat that scourge.

To that end, Jordan and Norway created the Group
of Friends of Preventing Violent Extremism in New
York, which comprises some 40 countries. We are
striving to ensure empowerment for young people
and women in the fight against violent extremism. In
particular, we are striving to build the capacities of
women at the international level so as to ensure conflict
prevention and effectively respond to urgent crises in
order to build a lasting peace where all people can work
and live in prosperity.

We also emphasize the importance of stepping
up cooperation in the exchange of information and
capacity-building between States and international
organizations, together with the UNODC, which plays
a critical role in the fight against the scourges we have
been discussing. Treatment and recovery for victims
must also be ensured, and I would like to emphasize the
role of women and children in that process.

The Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan lauds the
Political declaration on the implementation of the United
Nations Global Plan of Action to Combat Trafficking in
Persons, and it emphasizes the importance of General
Assembly resolution 64/293, adopted in 2010. That
resolution is a testament to the robust political will
of the international community to fight such heinous
crimes. We also emphasize the importance of the
recommendations contained in the latest report of the
Secretary-General (S/2017/939) and its analysis of the
control of illicit financial flows as a means of fighting
trafficking in persons.

Jordanian law has criminalized all types of human
trafficking. We have also ratified the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime,
as well as the Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and
Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women
and Children, supplementing the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime. We
have also criminalized forced labour, modern slavery
and trafficking in persons through our Anti-human
Trafficking Law No. 9 of 2009.

We have created a national commission tasked with
fighting human trafficking. The commission brings
together representatives from various ministries and
governmental and non-governmental bodies. We have
also set up a national strategy for the prosecution of
and fight against trafficking in persons for the period
2010 to 2012. We are currently working on follow-up
measures to that strategy. We have created hot lines
for victims to report instances of human trafficking.
We have also set up a mechanism to refer instances
of human trafficking to the competent authorities and
to law enforcement, hospitals and various treatment
centres. We have also set up a national strategy, with
a mandate through 2025. It brings together the various
aspects of the 2030 Agenda, and it addresses violence
against children and sexual exploitation linked to
human trafficking.

We have also set up an entity called the Home
of Dignity, which is an organization linked to the
Ministry of Social Development. It enables assistance
to be delivered to human trafficking victims of
all nationalities. Other relevant authorities also strive
to deliver all necessary assistance to victims, in
particular the children of Syrian refugees. We enable
those children to have access to high-quality education
through assistance provided by UNICEF. We have also
established a fund to combat violence against women of
Jordan and of other countries.

Finally, Jordan will continue to step up its efforts
to combat the phenomenon of human trafficking, in
particular crimes perpetrated by terrorist organizations.
We stand ready to cooperate with various regional and
international bodies to raise awareness among all of
such phenomena and to fight against those scourges.

