Mr. Kydyrov (Kyrgyzstan): Let me at the outset
sincerely thank you, Sir, for convening this very
important open debate on a topic that reflects the
Security Council's special responsibility for
maintaining international peace and security in
conformity with the principles of United Nations
Charter. I would also like to extend my gratitude to the
Secretary-General for his comprehensive statement.

Kyrgyzstan welcomes the recent report of the
Secretary-General on the subject of the rule of law and
transitional justice in conflict and post-conflict
societies (S/2011/634*). Kyrgyzstan fully supports the
Secretary-General's commitment to continuing to
promote initiatives aimed at strengthening the rule of
law, increasing the capacity-building of justice and
security institutions around the world, and ensuring the
prompt and holistic response of the United Nations to
national requests to assist with legislative reform
processes.
The United Nations Charter clearly indicates that
any acts occurring in the world that might lead to a
breach of the peace should be settled by peaceful
means and in conformity with the principles of justice
and international law. In that regard, the role of the
International Court of Justice as the principal judicial
organ of the United Nations is significant. The Court
should be one of the key mechanisms for the peaceful
settlement of international disputes. We therefore
commend the Court for its contribution to that end, as
well as its valuable contribution to the evolution of
international law.

Kyrgyzstan recognizes the importance of the
United Nations Programme of Assistance in the
Teaching, Study, Dissemination and Wider
Appreciation of International Law and fully supports
the activities of the Rule of Law Coordination and
Resource Group, which is responsible for the overall
coordination and coherence of the rule of law within
the United Nations. We also support the important
work done by the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights, particularly in
capacity-building activities to strengthen national rule
of law systems and respect for human rights around the
world. As a member and as the Vice-Chair of the
Human Rights Council, my country actively stands for
the necessity to respect human rights in all situations,
including conflict and post-conflict situations.

I would like to stress the importance that
Kyrgyzstan attaches to justice and the rule of law in
rebuilding post-conflict societies as part of a
comprehensive approach to peacebuilding strategies
aimed at achieving reconciliation, stability and lasting
peace. As members are well aware, in 2010,
Kyrgyzstan overcame conflict and is now at the stage
of post-conflict reconstruction and peacebuilding. We
strongly believe that transitional justice and restoring
the capacities and the legitimacy of national
institutions should continue to be at the very heart of
United Nations rule of law efforts.

Since 2010, Kyrgyzstan has made significant
progress. Despite all the difficulties, my country has
adopted a new Constitution, held two successful
presidential and parliamentary elections and carried out
reforms aimed at the improvement of the judicial
system, at increasing the capacity of law enforcement
agencies, and at empowering women and youth, as well
as ensuring their active involvement in the decision-
making process. Today, Kyrgyzstan is deeply
committed to enduring legal principles such as due
process, equal protection under the law, judicial
independence and justice for all. Lasting peace and the
reconciliation of society in post-conflict areas is the
top priority on the agenda of the Government of
Kyrgyzstan. For that reason, the special concept of
ethnic development in the consolidation of society was
adopted by the Assembly of the Peoples of Kyrgyzstan
in 2011, and is now being successfully implemented
throughout the country.

In conclusion, it is incumbent upon the Security
Council to pay due regard to the value of the rule of
law as an end as well as a means. Our quest for justice
and the rule of law should not be limited to the
domestic sphere. The same standards should apply at
the international level as well. It is our collective
responsibility to manifest a just international order, and
thus to empower all peoples on our planet to live in
peace and harmony. At the same time, however, there is
a fragile balance between the need to respect human
rights and the rule of law in States, and interference in
the internal affairs of States, which must be considered
and taken into account.

