Mr. Amolo (Kenya): Kenya is delighted to see the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam, His Excellency Mr. Pham Binh Minh, preside this historic session. Kenya warmly congratulates Viet Nam for three things: its election to the Security Council; its accession to the presidency of the Security Council as we enter the third decade of the twenty-first century; and its accession to the presidency of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations, following the sterling stewardship of its predecessor, the Kingdom of Thailand. I also bring special warm greetings from his colleague and friend, Minister of Foreign Affairs Monica Juma. She fondly recalls a successful visit to his great country not two months ago. We commend Viet Nam for timing this debate to mark the end of a turbulent decade and to spark a reflection on the direction humankind should take in the next. By reviewing our contract with this body and in particular with the Charter of the United Nations, we hope we can recommit and rededicate ourselves to the letter and spirit of the Charter, underpinned by international rule of law and buttressed by robust multilateralism, so that all voices are heard on the world stage and the toolkit available to resolve the world's challenges reflects the complexity and diversity of humankind. The insightful statements by the Secretary-General and Chair of The Elders Mary Robinson enrich our common understanding of the myriad challenges and clarify the importance of approaching solutions in a collaborative, coordinated and respectful manner. Seventy-five years ago, the hopes and dreams of humankind, left in tatters by another devastating war, were renewed, rekindled and revalidated by the establishment of this body, the United Nations Organization, which was witnessed by 51 States, and by the reaffirmation of its raison d'etre as enshrined in the seminal contract with all people, the United Nations Charter. They came together in recognition that no single nation could solve the world's problems alone. Today, with 193 Member States, the importance of that reality demands that we not only further identify, minimize and eliminate the risks and threats strewn on our common path but also grasp and exploit the many opportunities that innovation, technology and cooperation can offer to solve many of those problems. The spirit of democracy that underpinned humankind's desire to codify and secure a milieu based on international law needs to be revisited and entrenched. Looking back, it is commendable how the Charter facilitated, through the establishment of the various organs, the delivery of that promise in a holistic way. The Charter had the foresight to link and address in a structured manner the social, political and economic problems threatening international peace and security and asserted equal rights for all. The United Nations Charter's intrinsic value in defining the peace and security architecture of the world was to assert the concept of collective security, whereby all of humankind, on equal, democratic footing, would govern the commons. Seventy-five years ago, only a handful of us were free. Today, close to 200 are politically free. It is inevitable, then, that the organs that manage this architecture must also expand their representative structure and democratize their decision-making to reflect the geographic and demographic spread that is our United Nations today. Although regional representation is not specifically addressed in the United Nations Charter, we join all other Africans in asserting that the time has come to make that happen. We have to ensure equitable geographic representation in the Security Council in both the permanent and non-permanent categories. Africa remains the only region not represented in the Council in the permanent category. That must change. The Charter bequeathed us a tool to facilitate the prevention of war. It recommends that solutions to any dispute be made, first and foremost, through negotiation, enquiry, mediation, conciliation, arbitration and judicial settlement, among others. Inspired by that ethos, Kenya has distilled and seeks to capture the letter and spirit of the Charter and the aspirations of the United Nations in a 10-point agenda for its Security Council campaign. The agenda underscores the critical nexus between peace, security and development and its first plank is building bridges. Kenya is dedicated and committed to building bridges and to working closely together with the entire United Nations membership to advance our aspirations in an inclusive, responsive and consultative manner so that the Council can work for all. We seek to enhance the peacekeeping and support operations plank in our agenda. In our close to six-decade existence, Kenya has contributed more than 40,000 troops in over 40 countries. We will continue to work with the United Nations and other Member States to enhance the capacity of the Nairobi-based International Peace Support Training Centre, a humanitarian peace support school. Eminent innovations to deal with asymmetric and emerging threats, such as the Counter Improvised Explosive Devices Centre of Excellence, are acceptable ways of building capacity and ensuring excellence. Our challenge is to find an efficient workable balance between the pacific settlement of disputes and provisions relating to actions in support of peace, breaches of the peace and acts of aggression, and the involvement of regional arrangements and agencies. That balance will ensure that peacekeeping mandates also involve and provide fora transition to peacebuilding, including efforts to ensure the sustainability of peace and development, thus addressing threats to regional and international peace and security. The Peacebuilding Commission is an important intergovernmental instrument that can support that objective. As delineated in the Charter of the United Nations, the Council carries the primary responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and security. We have witnessed the implications and effects of dissonance within the Council on important international peace and security questions and actions. We have also witnessed the evolution of new weapons of war and threats to peace, including violent extremism and terrorism. We listened with great anguish today as the Niger spoke about challenges in the Sahel and the problems that Nigeria and other African countries confront in the face of this terrible phenomenon called terrorism. We will continue to work with others to leverage our wealth of experience in preventive diplomacy, conflict resolution, building appropriate linkages for collaboration and harmonized action within the Council. The Charter calls on the General Assembly to work in complementarity with the Security Council. Kenya therefore welcomes a strengthened Security Council- General Assembly partnership and the cooperation between the United Nations system and regional organizations, including the African Union (AU), to achieve peaceful settlements of disputes and maintain international peace and security. The Secretary- General's specific mention of a scaled-up relationship with the AU needs to be fast-tracked, and we anticipate that the three African members of the Security Council, Niger, Tunisia and South Africa, will provide additional traction for the achievement of that important objective. The Trusteeship Council was set up in a specific historical context to promote and protect the well- being and just treatment of colonized people. There are still some non-self-governing territories. It will take political will, trust, courage, the embrace of differences and a change of mindset to ensure that we all respect the principles of international law, equal rights and self-determination of peoples, as well as the principles of sovereignty, territorial integrity and the political independence of all States Members, as laid out in the United Nations Charter. Kenya upholds and cherishes an ethos based on the rule of law in managing our domestic affairs. We leverage that ethos in our engagement in regional and international relations. We remain true to processes agreed in advance and uphold the integrity of our subregional, regional and international organizations. As Africa's candidate for a Security Council seat for the period 2021-2022, we congratulate the current and immediate past African members of the Council. The Organization and its membership can count on Kenya's integrity, dependability and cooperation to deliver the best for humankind. More work still needs to be done. The United Nations can count on Africa, and the United Nations shall succeed.
