Mr. Fall (spoke in French): The discussion that
we have been participating in since yesterday has been
extremely informative. Generally speaking, four types
of statement can be identified. In the first category
were general statements on the situation in Africa -
those pertaining to the continent as a whole or to
particular regions, such as East Africa or the area
covered by the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development or the Mano River Union area. Along
with that group of statements was a second set relating
essentially to national policies with regard to Africa. A
third category pertained to the action of the Security
Council in Africa. Finally, there was a fourth series of
statements containing proposals for initiatives for
future Security Council action.

At this late hour, I am sure that the Council will
understand that it is not possible for me to attempt to
summarize all of these categories. For that reason, I

will confine myself - in line with the guidelines
provided beforehand by your delegation, Mr.
President- to the conclusions containing specific

proposals for the improvement of the Security
Council's action in Africa.

One could look at those conclusions from three
different perspectives: the political, the institutional
and the operational. With regard to the political
dimension, the first conclusion that can be drawn is the
unanimous agreement that has emerged calling for the
speedy implementation of the conclusions and
recommendations contained in the Millennium
Declaration relating to Africa. Secondly, it has been
proposed that the Security Council play a much more
proactive role with regard to matters of peace and
security in Africa - in particular, that it make a more
resolute and timely commitment, without selectivity
and based upon mandates that provide for forces and
resources in keeping with reality, along the lines of the
action that the Council undertakes elsewhere. Thirdly,
it has been suggested that the present culture and
policy of reaction be replaced by a policy of conflict
prevention. Fourthly, it has been proposed that the
Security Council adopt and put into practice a
comprehensive, integrated approach to the problems of
peace, security and development in Africa.

Fifthly, it has been proposed - again, at the
political level - that the Security Council strengthen
the multidisciplinary character of its peacekeeping
operations in Africa. Sixthly, it has been requested that
measures be taken to end the proliferation of small
arms and light weapons and that active support be
given to the application of the Bamako Declaration and
the Moratorium on the Import, Export and Manufacture
of Small Arms and Light Weapons, adopted by the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS).

Finally, at the political as well as the economic
level, a clear majority has emerged requesting support
for the implementation of the New Partnership for
Africa's Development (NEPAD) - the most recent
initiative, launched by Africans themselves, and one
that the Group of Seven has already expressed
willingness to support. At the political level, those are
the main conclusions.

Turning now to institutional aspects, the first
recommendation that I would like to note relates to the
request that has been made that the framework for
cooperation between the Security Council and the
Economic and Social Council should be strengthened
at the institutional level. Secondly, there has been a call
for the creation of a framework for consultative
cooperation between the Security Council and the
Central Organ of the Organization of African Unity
(OAU) Mechanism for Conflict Prevention,
Management and Resolution and between the Security
Council and such organs as exist within the subregional
organizations. Thirdly, it has been proposed that a focal
point be established for coordination of the
multisectoral activities of the United Nations system in
Africa. Fourthly, it has been proposed that relations of
cooperation be strengthened between the United
Nations and the Bretton Woods institutions with regard
to the problems of peace, security and development in
Africa. Finally, at the institutional level, it has been
recommended that the OAU and subregional
organizations, particularly the Mechanism for Conflict
Prevention, Management and Resolution be
strengthened and provided institutional, financial and
material support.

Following the political and institutional
recommendations, there are, lastly, recommendations
of an operational nature. Here I would echo those who
have said that the time for action has come. The first
recommendation is the prompt implementation of the
declarations and resolutions already adopted by the
Security Council at earlier meetings concerning
operational cooperation between the United Nations
and the OAU, particularly at its meeting of December
1999 and its Summit in September 2000.

The second operational recommendation is the
establishment by the Security Council of a working
group on Africa with a clear, action-oriented mandate.

The third recommendation is that there be more
Security Council visits on the ground in connection
with peacekeeping operations in Africa.

The fourth recommendation is the establishment
of a standing mechanism for following up the
application of sanctions adopted by the Security
Council.

In fifth place, as an adjunct to the previous
recommendation, the desire has been expressed that the
sanctions decided on be targeted and effective but
respectful of the physical and social well-being of
civilian populations. In that regard, the desire has been
expressed that the Security Council finalize the review
that it has undertaken of sanctions and their collateral
effects.

The sixth recommendation, at the operational
level, was for the implementation of a structural
cooperation mechanism between the Counter-Terrorism
Committee of the Security Council and the OAU,
pursuant to the Algiers Declaration on the prevention
of and fight against terrorism.

Seventh, there was a wish for better coordination
of peace efforts and initiatives in Africa, both within
the United Nations system and with the OAU, regional
organizations, subregional organizations and individual
countries.

In the eighth place, at the operational level, it was
noted that there was insufficient financing of
disarmament, demobilization and rehabilitation
operations, particularly in respect of reintegration,
reinsertion and reconstruction, and it was proposed that
much more stable and viable resources be given to
those operations to avoid the syndrome of Liberia and
Guinea-Bissau.

In the ninth place, at the operational level, it was
proposed that the United Nations Office in West Africa
be made into an operational instrument to apply an
integrated regional approach of the peace, security and
development triad.

Finally, at the operational level, it was decided to
welcome the creation by the Economic and Social
Council of an advisory group on countries emerging
from conflict.

That is an entirely free-form and unofficial
attempt to summarize the principal political,
institutional and operational conclusions.

