Mrs. DiCarlo (United States of America): I thank
you, Sir, and the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations (DPKO) for arranging this meeting for the
Council today. I, too, would like to express
appreciation to Under-Secretary-General Le Roy for
his excellent leadership of the DPKO during a very
difficult and challenging period. We wish him all the
best in his future endeavours.

I would like to thank the Force Commanders for
their statements today. We very much appreciate the
role that they play every day in peacekeeping
operations. I want to take this opportunity to express to

Major General Asarta Cuevas and my French
colleagues the United States sympathy for the injuries
suffered yesterday by French peacekeeping troops in
the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon
(UNIFIL), and our hope that they will recover fully
and quickly. This is, of course, an all-too-clear example
of the risks that brave peacekeepers face daily as they
fulfil their roles.

To the Force Commanders, I just want to say that
we very much welcome this opportunity to hear from
them first-hand about the challenges and risks that they
face in implementing United Nations mission
mandates. The Council seeks to match mission
mandates with the needed leadership and capacity to
implement them successfully.

We are very much interested in understanding the
operational, logistical and leadership issues that Force
Commanders face. The core of every peacekeeping
mission is its people and their ability to support efforts
to build a more stable peace. We are interested in the
operational steps being taken to develop mission-wide
strategies to protect civilians, including from sexual
violence, and the role for uniformed peacekeepers as
part of the mission. We very much welcome discussion
of the innovative measures, such as firewood patrols,
community liaison assistance, issuance of cell phones
to community leaders, and response and investigative
teams that include a mix of civilian, police and military
expertise.

Just as important are the gaps that Commanders
face - the factors that either expand or constrain
logistical or leadership effectiveness in achieving their
mandates. These might be the tools to support
missions, such as doctrine, pre-deployment or
in-mission training; tools to help missions operate
efficiently, such as early-warning capacity, intelligence
and timely analysis; or tools to facilitate mobility, such
as aviation capacity and budgetary and administrative
issues.
I have a few questions for the Generals.

I would like to hear General Asarta Cuevas speak
about the military arsenal of Hizbullah. The report of
the Secretary-General of 1 July (S/2011/406) notes that
Hizbullah still maintains its own substantial, growing
and destabilizing military arsenal. I am wondering
what steps UNIFIL is taking to assist the Lebanese
armed forces in removing those illegal weapons and
armed personnel south of the Litani River.

I very much appreciate General Nyamvumba's
focus on the robust presence of the African Union-
United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID) in his remarks. We express the hope that
the lessons that UNAMID has learned in establishing
such a robust presence could be shared with other
missions. I would like to hear him comment on that.

We remain very concerned about the severe
capacity gap in aviation assets faced by the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, and I would like to
hear General Prakash address the question of
whether or rather how - that gap is affecting the
Mission's ability to implement its mandate as outlined
in resolution 1991 (2011). What are the trade-offs with
the Mission's tasks, and what is the Mission no longer
able to do?

 

Finally, I would like to hear from General Khalid
about inter-mission cooperation. There has been good
inter-mission cooperation between the United Nations
Operation in Cote d'Ivoire and the United Nations
Mission in Liberia, and I wonder what lessons have
been learned from that cooperation and whether he sees
a possibility to put inter-mission cooperation to use
elsewhere.

