Ms. Palacio Vallelersundi (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): Terrorism is today an urgent threat to the
peace of our community of nations, which wants to be
governed by the rule of law. We are confronted by a
major challenge of the twenty-first century. Even minor
complacency towards terrorism would be a crime;
inaction would be a mistake of unimaginable
consequences. Those who think that this problem does
not affect them are wrong. Recent events have
provided a painful reminder that something which
seems a distant possibility in our society can instantly
become something both commonplace and appalling.

Millions of people all over the world, thousands
of them living in the Basque country of Spain, must
live every day with the knowledge that they are targets
for terrorist attacks. Terrorism is one of the main
concerns of our democratic societies. Our fellow
citizens are perfectly aware that the death, murder,
devastation and destruction are not aims in themselves
but, rather, constitute means to an end. Ultimately, the
goal of terrorism is to undermine the basic values upon
which our common existence is founded, namely,
democracy, freedom and the rule of law.

We in Spain were aware very early on that
terrorism is no longer just an internal police matter for
States. Today terrorism is a problem for the
international community. If we have learned anything
from terrorist attacks, it is that security is indivisible
and that States and regions are not hermetically sealed
off from one another. The international community has
shown that it too understands this by reacting jointly at
both the regional and the global levels. It has done so
by acting through both the United Nations and the
European Union, as well as through the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), the
North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) and, now,
through the Council of Europe, which has just taken up
the subject of drafting a substantive comprehensive
convention against terrorism.

Because terrorism concerns all of us, because it
threatens all of us, the United Nations must lead and
direct the fight against terrorism. In that context, I
commend the fresh evidence of resolve, consideration
and leadership just given to us by Secretary-General
Kofi Annan.
There are three focal points of the fight against
terrorism. To be effective, we must focus on a common
understanding of terrorism; to be effective, we must cut
the lifeline of terrorism by suppressing its means of
financing and standing firmly against international
crime; to be effective, we must be implacable with
regimes that harbour, encourage or protect terrorists,
particularly if they posses or can develop weapons of
mass destruction.

Freedom and security are not opposing concepts
in this fight. In this fight, freedom and security have a
symbiotic relationship in which both must be
strengthened.

In the global sphere, the various United Nations
conventions on the fight against terrorism are
instruments of prime importance, and we must continue
our efforts to achieve universal ratification of those
texts, without losing sight of the objective of a
comprehensive United Nations convention in that field.

The adoption of Security Council resolution 1373
(2001) and the establishment of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee are vital steps forward. We commend the
Committee for the work it has done. We must continue
to build on the work accomplished, as Ambassador
Greenstock has stated. I congratulate him on his work.

The work of the Committee cannot be limited to a
mere theoretical review of reports. Rather, it must
propose legal and political measures of real-world
effectiveness in the areas of preventing and suppressing
the financing of terrorism; identifying and proposing
instruments for the exchange of information and early
warning systems that can prevent attacks; making
recommendations for effective border control; and the
issuance and control of identification and travel
documents.

We must also insist on the adoption of measures
against the active or passive support of terrorism,
administrative and legal cooperation and granting
refuge to terrorists. Furthermore, we must consider the
adjustment of the Committee's mandate to allow it to
continue to play the active and efficient role it has been
developing, because we know that terrorism is often
linked to other illegal international activities and
because we cannot fight terrorism effectively without
confronting those matters: arms trafficking, money
laundering and other international wrongdoing. We
must pay very special attention to prevent access by
terrorist groups to weapons of mass destruction.

The international community is a reality, and it
shares the hope for a more just world, just as it shares a
painful vulnerability to terrorism and other global
threats. International relations cannot be confined to
constant crisis management. Rather, they must include
a definitive component in the fight for a better world.
Our great common challenge is to articulate those
relations in legal terms in order to achieve international
coexistence that is more just and secure. The fight
against terrorism is a basic priority to achieve that
objective.

Thus, the initiative of the French presidency is
very timely, and Spain firmly supports the draft
resolution that we expect will be adopted at the
conclusion of this debate.

In conclusion, in this common endeavour, the
international community can always count on the
resolute participation of Spain, which, as I have just
stated, will guide the work of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee, whose presidency, as of April, has been
entrusted to us, which I appreciate.

