Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): Rightly or wrongly, humanitarian issues have
recently increasingly become a subject for the Security
Council's attention. We think that it is now high time
to hold a substantive discussion on the Middle East and
North Africa and organize a thematic debate on the topic
of the catastrophic consequences of the destruction of
the statehood of countries of the region as a result of
foreign interference.

The number of victims are in the millions.
However, we have heard nothing relevant from those
who are guilty for those tragedies. Indeed, the war
was launched by the invasion of Iraq spearheaded by
the United States and the United Kingdom, and it has
effectively been continuing for 13 years. The collapse
of a prosperous Libya led to the destabilization of vast
swaths ofNorth Africa. Syria was turned into a conflict
zone of rivalry for regional leadership, with there being
no qualms about using the potential of openly terrorist
organizations. Moreover, the humanitarian tragedy
that we have heard about today is not considered to be
sufficient justification for abandoning that bankrupt
policy. Some have sought to hide their failed geopolitical
adventures through cynical sanctimony, and even lies,
which is something that we often run up against when
discussing the subject of Syria in the Security Council;
today's meeting has been no exception.

The humanitarian situation in Syria cannot be
discussed separately from the other challenges set out
in Security Council decisions and by the International
Syria Support Group, namely, combating terrorism and
seeking political settlement and the establishment of a
regime for the cessation ofhostilities. In that regard, we
see a clear contradiction. It seems that Mr. De Mistura
has forgotten that his primary role is to promote the
political process. He cannot find it in himself to resume
Syrian talks, which were suspended back in May, or to
clearly admit why that happened, that is, the complete
unwillingness of the opposition to hold serious talks.
We hope that in Mr. De Mistura's statement to the
Security Council on 8 December we will finally hear
something concrete.

We need to acknowledge the failure of the concept
of "moderate opposition". It was never convincingly
embodied at the political level, and, militarily speaking,
the few opposition fighters turned out to be soldiers of
the Al-Nusra Front and other extremist groups. It seems
there is an attempt to offset the United Nations inertia at
the political level with one-upmanship on humanitarian
issues: Who can make the grander statement? Who can
propose the more dazzling initiative? However, when
matters come to a head, those initiatives are either
rejected by the opposition, or the United Nations itself
is unable to implement them. That fully applies to the
situation in eastern Aleppo.

We share the grave concerns about the plight of
civilians in eastern Aleppo, but easing their suffering
will not come about by halting the counter-terrorist
operation. Leaving Syria and Iraq as terrorist caliphates
or calling on terrorists to use a humanist approach are
also not alternatives. The current situation could have
been avoided if the promise given to us at the end of
February by the Central Intelligence Agency Director,
Mr. Brennan, had been kept, namely, to separate, in the
space of two or three weeks, the so-called moderate
militants, if any even exist, from the terrorists. That
promise was repeatedly renewed, including at the
highest level, but still nothing has been done. It is clear
that we were being led by the nose the whole time.
Either our United States partners and their allies were
in actual fact unable, or did not have the resources, to
keep their promise, or rather they simply did not want
to. Instead, they continued their dangerous attempts to
use terrorists as a tool for regime change in Syria.

It comes as no surprise that it was France and
the United Kingdom, which have long and blatantly
clamoured for regime change in Syria, including
providing generous support to militants, that initiated
today's meeting - out of their supposed concern for
the situation in eastern Aleppo. In fact, the real reason
is different. The bandits that they, among others, have
so coddled and fuelled are at the point of defeat. Almost
half of that part of the city has been liberated. It could
be the biggest moral victory of the Syrian army since
2012, when jihadist units were sent to the northern
capital and started to gain a foothold, sponsored and
armed from abroad.

Today's meeting is a desperate attempt to use the
Security Council to save terrorists from destruction
in Aleppo. Incidentally, the constant blocking of the
proposal to place on the sanctions list of the Security
Council such terrorist groups as Ahrar Al-Sham, Jaysh
Al-Islam and others has the same aim. It is clear that
any help given to militants in Aleppo is categorically
support for Al-Nusra terrorists, since it is that group
that is on the Security Council sanctions list and
that is directing the military operations of all of the
illegal armed groups in the neighbourhoods that have
been captured.

We vehemently condemn any attempts to protect
terrorists, including any political action under a
humanitarian pretext, which, sadly, United Nations
humanitarian workers have been dragged into. How
else are we to interpret, for example, the fact that the
200,000 residents of besieged Deir ez-Zor, which even
by the United Nations analysis makes up a quarter of
all besieged Syrians, only receive 1 per cent of the
humanitarian assistance? Why has nobody even talked
about the fact that the pseudo-humanitarian White
Helmets, which were recently nominated for a Nobel
Prize, made an incredibly cynical video clip of the
rescue operations that they had supposedly carried out,
which they posted online? Where is the condemnation
of all of those unforgivable fake allegations that we
should expect from the supposedly objective, impartial
Western media? Why was there no condemnation of
that by the United States representative earlier today,
who is a professional journalist herself? The standards
of United States journalism, and even policy, have now
sunk to tabloid level, startling the whole world, and
disinformation has become a typical tactic of United
States diplomacy.

The fact that humanitarian problems do not seem
to genuinely interest Paris, London, Washington or
some others is clear from their indifferent attitudes
to the suffering of the people in Mosul. Nor does the
disastrous humanitarian situation in Yemen seem
to bother them either. There over 80 per cent of the
population is in need of assistance. As for Aleppo,
following the liberation of the northern sector of
eastern Aleppo, thousands of people who were being
held by militants as human shields have finally had a
chance to leave the city to receive food assistance and
basic essentials. According to the information we have
on those neighbourhoods, 6,500 people have already
left, including 2,800 children.

The Russian Federation continues to provide
emergency humanitarian assistance to the residents of
Aleppo. At the instruction of the President of Russia,
the Ministry of Defence is sending a special medical
unit, which includes a multipurpose hospital with 100
beds and a specialized paediatric therapy department,
with a daily capacity for mobile/ambulatory treatment
of 420 people. The Ministry of Emergency Situations
is also delivering a field hospital with 50 places for
stationary treatment, with the possibility of providing
ambulatory assistance to 200 patients per day.

We trust that the necessary humanitarian assistance
will be provided to civilians who are able to escape
their captors by United Nations humanitarian actors,
which have focused their particular attention on eastern
Aleppo. Incidentally, I was surprised how my United
States colleague, who unfortunately left the meeting,
argued that the residents of eastern Aleppo were
unlikely to move to Government-controlled western
Aleppo because the Government was torturing them.
However, it seems that she is wrong. United Nations
humanitarian workers have repeatedly told us that, in
all cases, when Syrian residents come out of a siege,
they always end up going to Government-controlled
areas. It therefore seems it is the terrorists, not the
Government, whom they consider their torturers.

Against that backdrop, we do not understand
the wish of the so-called humanitarian troika of the
Security Council to force through a non-consensual
draft resolution on Aleppo. That will not help anything.
Rather, it will see a repeat of the dangerous situation we
had on 8 October, when the French delegation tried to
put forward a draft text (S/2016/846) that did not have
the support of all Council members (see S/PV.7785).
Without taking into account our concerns, no draft
resolution will be adopted. We have seen such attempts
before. Calls for unity in the Council alternate with
hopeless draft texts being put forward for vote. It is a
pointless tactic.

A key condition for any ceasefire and for providing
humanitarian assistance is separating the non-terrorist
militants from Al-Nusra. There need to be clear,
mandatory, unconditional instructions that terrorists
who are on the Security Council's terrorist list should
be excluded from any ceasefire regime. We propose to
the troika not to be so hasty with votes and, given the
current situation, to think about how they could modify
their draft resolution to reflect the United Nations
humanitarian plan for Aleppo. Overall, Russia supports
all impartial international humanitarian efforts and
is ready to work in the interest of implementing such
efforts. Incidentally, the Castello Road has been
fully freed up now and can be used for the passage
of transportation carrying humanitarian assistance.
Sadly, before, the United States, notwithstanding all its
humanitarian rhetoric, refused to stand with our troops
to guarantee the Castello Road delivery of humanitarian
assistance. But at present we do not need the help of the
United States nor the consent of the opposition, so now
we hope that the Castello Road will be effectively used
by the United Nations.

However, for the plan to succeed, it obviously must
first be properly prepared. We need firm guarantees
from militants for the signatures of their commanders
that they will not obstruct the passage of humanitarian
convoys. Relevant guarantees must also be given by the
United Nations itself. It is important to have an advance
list of victims and casualties for evacuation and lists of
medical personnel for rotation. We need to have an idea
of the specific types of humanitarian assistance and
arrangements for distribution among those in need. All
steps need to be agreed to by the Syrian Government
and all groups operating in eastern Aleppo. Otherwise,
it will just turn into another propaganda ruse that has
no chance of succeeding.

In terms of separating militants, we need to call
on them and the so-called local councils to compile
lists of Al-Nusra Front terrorists that need to be taken
out of the city, and also lists of armed individuals
who themselves wish to leave eastern Aleppo. If our
Western colleagues are truly concerned about the plight
of civilians in eastern Aleppo, and indeed in the whole
of Syria, then they need above all to take genuine and
practical steps - stop supporting terrorists and lift
unilateral sanctions. They need to provide actual help,
which Russia is doing, and not try to use sensitive
humanitarian problems to advance or achieve their own
political goals.

