Mr. Rosselli Frieri (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like to thank the delegation of Italy for bringing
this topic for consideration at this meeting, and I
would like to thank you personally, Mr. President, for
presiding over this meeting. We would also like to thank
Secretary-General Antonio Guterres for his presence
and participation internationaln today's meeting.

The Mediterranean region faces a series of closely
linked challenges that are fuelled by the serious crises
in Libya, Syria and the Sahel region; the global threat
of terrorism and violent extremism, trafficking in
persons, international organized crime, the absence of
State authority and the effects of climate change, among
other factors. These challenges must be addressed with
a holistic perspective that considers needs related to
security, cooperation, development, human rights and
humanitarian law. The causes of extreme poverty,
hunger, unemployment and sectarian and religious
tensions that can threaten regional stability must
be addressed.

Many of these factors have led to massive
displacement in recent years of the inhabitants of
sub-Saharan Africa in search of a better future. In
seeking this future, and before they can cross the
Mediterranean in an attempt that often costs them their
lives, they become victims of international mafias and
criminal groups that exploit their desperate situation
and subject them to absolutely inhuman and degrading
treatment. Allow me to recall that the displacement
of persons does not in itself constitute a threat to
international peace and security. As we prepare to
begin negotiations on the global compact for safe,
orderly and regular migration, Uruguay wishes to stress
the principle of the non-criminalization of irregular
migration and recall that the need to promote and
protect human rights and the fundamental freedoms of
all should be a cornerstone in addressing this topic.

We remain concerned about the desperate situation
of migrants who use Libya as a country of transit to
reach Europe. At the same time, this situation puts a
lot of pressure on host countries, which by making
enormous economic and social efforts to welcome
them, are facing difficulties arising from this new
reality. Hundreds of thousand sub-Saharan migrants
are in Libya right now, waiting for a chance to cross the
Mediterranean and they are being subjected to abuse
and serious violations of their human rights. In the past
few hours, once again, media outlets have reported
the sale of slaves in Libya. This is an aberration and
must be unanimously condemned by all present in this
Chamber. This cannot and should not be tolerated.
Only the political and institutional stabilization of
Libya will make it possible to significantly counter
this phenomenon. With that in mind, we welcome the
new action plan and the United Nations road map for
Libya, which hope will make it possible to revive a
political negotiation process facilitated and lead by the
United Nations.

Just two years ago, the world witnessed the greatest
refugee and migrant crisis since the Second World
War, when hundreds of thousands of Syrians fled the
country to escape the worsening conflict, the escalation
of violence and the expansion of terrorism. We all
remember the images of entire families travelling
through Europe, trying to cross borders to find a new
life away from the horrors of the war in their homeland.
While some have succeeded in their quest, thousands
of others, many of them children, drowned in the
Mediterranean Sea, which has gone from being a cradle
of civilizations to a collective grave for innocent lives.
The challenges in the Mediterranean are an result
of this cluster of problems that we have just mentioned.
Respect and protection for the human individual must
always be at the centre of our work in order to ensure
development in that region and achieve peace and
security in a stable environment.

