Mr. van Oosterom (Netherlands): I thank you,
Mr. President, for granting me this opportunity to
deliver a message from my Minister under these
exceptional circumstances. I would like to thank the
members of the Security Council for their words of
compassion and the condolences expressed by them.

Yesterday almost 300 innocent men, women and
children lost their lives aboard Malaysia Airlines Flight
MH-17, travelling from Amsterdam to Kuala Lumpur
when the plane crashed on Ukrainian soil. This horrible
event has shocked the world and deeply saddened all
countries that have lost compatriots. Our thoughts and
prayers are with all those who mourn the death of loved
ones, wherever their cradle may have stood.

At least 189 victims were Dutch nationals. Today,
many thousands in my country, the Kingdom of the
Netherlands, grieve for the loss of parents, children,
loved ones, friends and co-workers. This is a dark
hour in our national history. We are a nation in shock
and in tears. But we are also a nation united in our
determination to seek the truth about what happened.

We call on all parties that have any influence on
the matter to grant unfettered access to the crash site to
emergency responders and investigators alike. We call
on the Security Council, the world's highest authority,
to mandate a full, thorough and impartial international
investigation into the exact circumstances surrounding
the crash of Flight MH-17. All the relevant materials
recovered from the site, including the airplane's black
boxes, should be made available to the international
investigation immediately and without interference.

Should an investigation show that the tragedy is
the result of the use of weapons, the Netherlands will
condemn that despicable act in the strongest terms and
will demand that all those responsible, both directly
and indirectly, be held accountable and brought to
justice. That is our moral obligation to the memory of
the victims, and our duty in the light of international
law and justice. My country will not rest until justice
is served.

We want to bring the victims' remains home to
their loved ones as soon as possible. We ask the United
Nations to help us achieve that. Those who mourn,
wherever they may reside, deserve to know what caused
the deaths of their loved ones. Our nations deserve to
know what happened. The world has a right to know.

