The President: As this is the first meeting of the
Security Council for the month of April, I should like to
take this opportunity to pay tribute, on behalf of the
Council, to Mr. Abdoulie Momodou Sallah, Permanent
Representative of the Gambia to the United Nations, for his
service as President of the Security Council for the month
of March 1998. I am sure I speak for all members of the
Security Council in expressing deep appreciation to
Ambassador Sallah for the great diplomatic skill with which
he conducted the Council's business last month.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Afghanistan
Report of the Secretary-General (8/1998/222)

The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received a letter from the representative of
Afghanistan, in which he requests to be invited to
participate in the discussion of the item on the Council's
agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, I propose,
with the consent of the Council, to invite that representative
to participate in the discussion, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and
rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Farhcidi
(Afghanistan) took a seat at the Council table.


The President: The Security Council will now begin
its consideration of the item on the agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the understanding
reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the report
of the Secretary-General contained in document S/ 1998/222.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council.

"The Security Council has considered the report
of the Secretary-General concerning the situation in
Afghanistan of 17 March 1998 (A/52/826- S/l998/222).
"The Security Council expresses its grave
concern at the continued Afghan war, which is a
serious threat to regional and international security,
and causes extensive human suffering, further
destruction, refugee flows and other forcible
displacement of large numbers of people.

"The Security Council is concerned by the
increasingly ethnic nature of the conflict, by reports
of ethnic-based persecution, and by the threat this
poses to the unity of the Afghan State.

"The Security Council urges all Afghan parties
to stop the fighting, to agree immediately on a
ceasefire, and to engage without preconditions in a
political dialogue aimed at achieving national
reconciliation, a lasting political settlement of the
conflict, which has no military solution, and the
formation of a broad-based fully representative
government.

"The Security Council reaffirms its strong
commitment to the sovereignty, independence,
territorial integrity and national unity of Afghanistan,
and respect for its cultural and historical heritage.

"The Security Council deplores the fact that
foreign interference in Afghanistan continues
unabated in the form of the supply of war-making
materials to the factions. It also deplores the active
political and military support from outside
Afghanistan to the factions, thereby reinforcing the
reluctance of faction leaders to engage in serious
political dialogue with one another. The Council
reiterates its call to all States to stop such
interference immediately.

"The Security Council notes with concern that
all the Afghan parties have been actively engaged in
arms replenishment throughout the last months,
warns the conflicting parties that the resumption of
large-scale fighting will seriously undermine the
attempts of the international community to assist
them in finding a political solution to the conflict
and urges them to live up to their declared desire for
such a solution.

"The Security Council reiterates its position
that the United Nations, as a universally recognized
intermediary, must continue to play its central and
 

impartial role in international efforts towards a
peaceful resolution of the Afghan conflict and extends
its full support for the activities of the United Nations
Special Mission to Afghanistan and those of the
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
Afghanistan, particularly in his current mission in the
region.

"The Security Council commends the
consolidation of the process, initiated by the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for Afghanistan with
the convening of the 'six plus two' group, and calls
upon all countries involved in it to continue to
participate in its work in good faith, including in the
discussion to devise effective and impartial ways to
curb the flow of arms and other war-making materials
into Afghanistan. The Security Council welcomes the
support of other Member States for this process.

"The Security Council is deeply concerned by the
deteriorating security conditions for United Nations
and humanitarian personnel and calls upon all Afghan
factions, in particular the Taliban, to take necessary
steps to assure their safety.

"The Security Council remains deeply concerned
at the continuing discrimination against girls and
women and other violations of human rights as well as
violations of international humanitarian law in
Afghanistan.

"The Security Council supports the steps of the
Secretary-General to launch investigations into alleged
mass killings of prisoners of war and civilians in
Afghanistan, the outcome of which will be submitted
to the General Assembly and the Security Council as

soon as it becomes available.

"The Security Council is also concerned with
the sharp deterioration of the humanitarian situation
in several areas in Central and Northern
Afghanistan, which is caused by the Taliban-
imposed blockade of the Bamyan region remaining
in place despite appeals by the United Nations and
several of its Member States to lift it, as well as by
the lack of supplies coming in from the northern
route owing to insecurity and looting. The Council
strongly urges the Taliban to let the humanitarian
agencies attend to the needs of the population.

"The Security Council reiterates that the
continuation of the conflict in Afghanistan provides
a fertile ground for terrorism and illegal drug
production and trafficking which destabilize the
region and beyond, and calls upon the leaders of the
Afghan parties to halt such activities.

"The Security Council will remain seized of the
matter and requests the Secretary-General to
continue to keep it regularly informed of the
situation in Afghanistan."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/ 1998/9.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on the agenda.

The meeting rose at 1 pm.

