Mr. Orrenius Skau (Sweden): I would like to
thank all today's briefers for their valuable input and
perspectives, and for their efforts to build peace in
the Central African Republic. I would especially like
to thank our colleague Ambassador Adom for his
leadership on the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 2127 (2013) concerning the Central
African Republic.

We are encouraged by President Touadera's
commitment to advancing the peace process, including
at the recent high-level meeting during the general
debate of the General Assembly. The country's national
ownership and leadership are of course critical to
progress. United, well-coordinated and transparent
international support is now needed. We therefore fully
support the African Union-led African Initiative for
Peace and Reconciliation in the Central African Republic
as a framework for all international engagement. We
also welcome the proposal to appoint a special envoy to
lead the Initiative who would mobilize and coordinate
regional and international engagement. The United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA)
should also have a strong role in supporting the process.

The African Initiative must become more inclusive
in its approach, however. For instance, in its current
composition there is no space for representatives of
civil society. Women have key roles as mediators in
local initiatives, and we believe there is potential for
their increased participation in the African Initiative's
panel of facilitators, as well as for women as parties to
the dialogue. We encourage the Special Representative
ofthe Secretary-General, as a new member of the panel,
together with Special Representative Nebie and others,
to work to improve the inclusion of civil society, as well
as the participation of women.

Progress in advancing the peace process is
also important for stable and credible elections in
2020 and 2021. We support the Secretary-General's
recommendation to include limited logistical support
to the electoral process in the MINUSCA mandate. It
is needed to strengthen capacity and ensure that the
constitutional timeline can be met.

The security situation remains volatile. We are
concerned about the continued widespread violence by
armed groups, as well as targeted attacks on civilians
and aid workers. Sexual and gender-based violence
is increasingly used as a weapon of war, and women
have become an expendable currency in the political
economy of that war. The Council sent a strong signal
earlier this year by making sexual and gender-based
crimes a stand-alone designation criterion for the
sanctions regime. That must now be effectively and
actively implemented.

Like others, we commend and pay tribute to
MINUSCA for its impressive efforts in a very
challenging and often dangerous environment. Given
the dire security situation, MINUSCA must be able
to effectively exercise its core mandate to protect
civilians and to do it increasingly in partnership with
the national defence and internal security forces. There
are good examples of that. The robust operations in the
north-western province of Ouham-Pende have led to a
drop in attacks on civilians and the return of internally
displaced persons. They have been based on a proactive
approach by MINUSCA and coordinated with the
activities of the Central African armed forces.

We therefore support the recommendation that
MINUSCA should provide limited logistical support
to national defence and security forces, enabling
it to increase its footprint outside Bangui. Central
African security forces must be fully and sustainably
operationalized. A formal monitoring process should
be put in place to ensure that MINUSCA's support is in
full compliance with the United Nations Due Diligence
Policy on Human Rights. The European Union (EU)
and its Training Mission has already made important
contributions in that regard. Trilateral efforts among
the United Nations, the EU and the African Union can
play a significant role in restoring peace and security
in the country.

We welcome the efforts to address sexual
exploitation and abuse, in line with relevant Security
Council resolutions and the Secretary-General's new
policy. However, we note with concern that nine new
allegations of sexual exploitation and abuse were
recorded against MINUSCA forces during the reporting
period. We expect that those cases will now be swiftly
followed up, in accordance with agreed procedures.

With regard to the upcoming mandate review, we
welcome the initiative by the Central African Republic
country-specific configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission to provide observations to the Security
Council, which include the importance of strengthened
international support to the Government in its
implementation of reforms and the advancement of
the political peace process, and should now be duly
considered in our review process. Transitional justice
will play a critical role in the peacebuilding efforts. The
people of the Central African Republic have repeatedly
demanded that past grievances be addressed. We
therefore welcome the progress made in establishing
the Special Criminal Court and encourage further steps
to secure financial support and political commitment
for its functioning.

The humanitarian challenge in the Central African
Republic is immense. As we have heard, half of the
population is in need of assistance and only about a third
of the humanitarian appeal has been funded. Additional
funding is therefore urgently needed. We also need
initiatives to combine development, humanitarian and
peacebuilding efforts for long-term sustainable peace.

In conclusion, we must remain mobilized and united
in our efforts to support the Central African Republic.
The situation remains fragile, and only by working
together can we help the country achieve lasting peace.

