Mr. Diallo (Guinea) (spoke in French): On the
eve of the expiry of your country's mandate to preside
over the Security Council, I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for having organized this meeting, and
to tell you once again how much we appreciate the
work done by your delegation. I would also like to
thank Assistant Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations Hedi Annabi for the valuable information
he has just given us. We would like to welcome the
presence among us of Mr. Nebojsa Covie, Deputy
Prime Minister of Serbia and President of the
Coordination Centre of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia and the Republic of Serbia for Kosovo and
Metohija. We also thank him for his statement.

The last two public meetings of the Council on
the issue of Kosovo have enabled us to express our
concerns about such pending questions as the political
deadlock over the selection of a president and prime
minister and the formation of a government, as well as
problems linked to security and development. Today
my delegation expresses its gratification at the Kosovo
Assembly's appointment on 4 March of Mr. Ibrahim
Rugova and Mr. Bajram Rexhepi as, respectively,
President and Prime Minister of the province. That
decision is an important step forward in the
implementation of the relevant resolutions of the
Council. We await with interest the participation of the
Kosovo Serb Return Coalition (Povratak) in the
Government. We also support Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Michael Steiner's efforts to
organize municipal elections in September 2002.
With regard to security, we welcome the entry
into force of the new weapons and ammunition hand-
over programme to retrieve illegally held weapons by
Kosovars through a promise of amnesty. We appeal to
all those concerned to cooperate in ensuring the
success ofthe programme.

The success of any stabilization effort in Kosovo
depends on a programme of reinforcement of
institutions and reconciliation, based on tolerance and
mutual respect, taking into account the interests of all
Kosovars. The strengthening of cooperation among the
elected representatives of Kosovo, the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
and the Belgrade authorities will be a measure of
confidence in future committed action.

In the humanitarian area, my delegation
appreciates the establishment of an inter-ethnic
consortium that will take over from the World Food
Programme on 31 March 2002. The six local non-
governmental organizations that make up the
consortium should enjoy the joint support of the
international community and the elected
representatives and the people of Kosovo.

The question of delineating the border between
Kosovo and the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia deserves our attention. We welcome
Mr. Michael Steiner's announcement on 18 March of
the forthcoming creation of a joint Kosovo-former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia commission charged
with settling the practical questions that affect the
inhabitants on both sides ofthe border. We appeal to all
the parties to rely on dialogue in order to arrive at a
negotiated solution that will benefit all concerned.

Finally, my delegation welcomes the settlement
of the question of Albanian Kosovars held in the
Republic of Serbia and encourages the parties to pursue
various activities with a view to the full
implementation ofthe Common Document.

