Mr. Adom (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation commends Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process, on his
detailed briefing on peace and security issues in the
region, in particular on the Israeli-Palestinian dispute.
We also thank Ms. Tania Hary, Executive Director of
Gisha, Legal Centre for Freedom of Movement, for
her briefing.

Cote d'Ivoire notes with deep concern the
resumption of violence on 12 November between
Israelis and Palestinians in the Gaza Strip and south-
eastern Israel, after a relative calm. We unreservedly
condemn that violence, which has indiscriminately
targeted both Palestinian and Israeli civilians.

Given the current situation, my country would like
to remind the Israeli and Palestinian parties that just
and lasting peace will require a negotiated solution,
with bold compromises that can lead to a solution of
two States coexisting peacefully. Cote d'Ivoire believes
that the deep aspiration of the Palestinian people - a
viable State based on pre-1967 borders, with Jerusalem
as its capital - is an inalienable right. We are also
committed to the security of the State of Israel.

Cote d'Ivoire also urges the parties to the conflict to
respect the ceasefire reached on 14 November, mediated
by the United Nations and Egypt, and to refrain from
any unilateral actions that could further undermine
efforts to find a peaceful solution to the crisis.

Persistent tension and recurrent clashes between
the warring parties must spur the international
community and, especially the Security Council, to
create, without further delay, a framework conducive
for the resumption of Israeli-Palestinian dialogue,
which, regretfully has not made any significant
progress since the Oslo Accords. And the recent actions
and statements of certain stakeholders' also do not bode
well for imminent peace.

The Council must therefore unite once again
in order to send a strong message of peace to all the
parties and to encourage them to resume peace talks
under the auspices of the United Nations. In that
connection, we welcome the key role of international
and regional actors, including Egypt for its mediation,
which has once again proven decisive in reachiing the
current ceasefire.

The consequences of the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict are also disastrous for the people living in the
Gaza Strip, with a worsening humanitarian crisis due
to the cumulative effects of a constant lack of water
and electricity, crumbling social infrastructure and
a foundering economy. We must therefore urgently
remedy the situation, which fuels resentment and
radicalization, through Israeli-Palestinian negotiations
with a View to lifting the blockade on Gaza. Cote
d'Ivoire also encourages the Palestinian parties to
pursue dialogue, based on strengthened cooperation,
for the effective return of the Palestinian Authority
to Gaza, which would enable better handling of
humanitarian issues.

My country is also concerned about the continuing
budget deficit facing the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East. We therefore urgently call for a lasting solution
to the situation, which undermines the effectiveness
of the Agency, which provides assistance to more than
3 million Palestinian refugees.

The much sought-after peace requires, first and
foremost, the willingness of Israelis and Palestinians
to engage in constructive dialogue, which will
undoubtedly have a stabilizing effect on the entire
region. C6te d'Ivoire remains firmly convinced that it
is only through such a dialogue that a peaceful solution
can be found to the Israeli-Palestinian crisis.

In conclusion, Cote d'Ivoire renews its support for
Mr. Mladenov and all the stakeholders who are working
day after day to establish a productive dialogue between
Israelis and Palestinians, in order to achieve lasting
peace between Israelis and Palestinians and stability in
the Middle East.

