We thank Germany for convening this open debate. We also thank all the briefers for sharing their experiences and insights today. Once again, they have reminded us of the poignant human tragedy that lies at the heart of this agenda and of the solemn duty of the international community to end impunity and assist the survivors and their communities to heal from trauma, in order to ensure peace. Sexual violence in armed conflicts, perpetrated by State and non-State actors, poses grave security challenges. It divides communities and weakens governance. It imperils the opportunities for post-conflict reconciliation and stability. The Security Council's actions in response to sexual violence in conflicts and post- conflict situations must therefore be fully informed of the dynamic complexities of the conflicts and the facts on the ground. We wish to highlight the following points on the theme of today's discussion. First, we wish to mention that the issue of violence against women, including sexual violence, has been discussed by other United Nations bodies, including the Human Rights Council. Deliberations at the Security Council should therefore remain focused on those atrocities perpetrated in situations of armed conflicts that threaten intentional peace and security. Secondly, in order to take action to address the implementation gaps, the Council needs to be better informed of the drivers and motivations of a range of State and non-State actors. Justice systems and rule-of-law mechanisms at all levels must be strengthened in order to hold accountable the perpetrators of sexual violence and those who order or condone such violence. Otherwise, we will be treating the symptoms without ever curing the ailment. Thirdly, the Council's sanctions and targeted measures need to be strengthened in order to maximally advance women's protection from sexual violence in situations of armed conflict. Their effective implementation by all actors must be ensured and there should be credible and effective deterrence for those who violate their obligations under sanctions regimes. Fourthly, evidence and insights on the patterns and prevalence of sexual violence in conflict areas must inform the development of specific programmes and policies to prevent such violence and assist the survivors. Expanded programmes in strengthening rule-of-law mechanisms and security sectors in affected countries, more women in security forces and capacity-building for the protection of civilians are important. Equally important is promoting access to justice for the survivors. National ownership and meaningful community participation are key to successful prevention and response efforts. Fifthly, it is critical to challenge the underlying social norms that prescribe behaviours leading to the normalization of sexual violence and perpetuate the stigmatization of victims. Normative, institutional and operational frameworks outside the Security Council have an important role to play in addressing such structural issues. The Council's actions need not duplicate those efforts, but must be situated within those broader frameworks. Sixthly, the meaningful participation of women in conflict resolution, post-conflict reconciliation processes and relevant rule-of-law mechanisms needs to be promoted. India is committed to the effective implementation of the Uniformed Gender Parity Strategy as a road map to increase the number of women peacekeepers. We believe that all women units need to be incentivized to ensure greater participation of women in United Nations peacekeeping. We also remain committed to fostering cooperation with regard to providing adequate training to United Nations peacekeepers on gender issues in order to enable them to fulfil their mandates. India's sensitivities on the issue of sexual violence in armed conflict is guided by the appalling atrocities perpetrated against women with impunity by the armed forces of Pakistan against its own people in India's immediate neighbourhood in 1971. It is ironic that those who perpetrated those crimes, including sexual violence, are now masquerading as champions of justice and levelling false allegations against India. The double standards in Pakistan's actions are self-evident. It is common knowledge that Pakistan is breeding a cesspool of terrorists and other non-State actors, including traffickers and drug and arms peddlers, to destabilize countries in its neighbourhood and beyond. Pakistan is using abduction, forced marriages and forced religious conversions of vulnerable women and girls as weapons of persecution against religious and ethnic minority communities in their own country. The international community can no longer afford to merely sit and watch those atrocities without taking action to stop Pakistan on that reckless path. If the Council resolutions under the agenda of sexual violence in conflict are to be translated into results, we must do much more to hold to account not just those who commit such acts but also those who command, bankroll and condone them. We need greater political will and public awareness among the affected communities and, above all, greater ownership from a range of actors to counter and prevent sexual violence from exacerbating armed conflict and hindering peace. United Nations entities have made significant progress in monitoring, reporting and listing the persistent offenders. We need to close the compliance gaps through a range of context-specific and inclusive actions to strengthen protection and prevention. India is committed to working with all members of the Council during its forthcoming non-permanent membership to address normative and implementation challenges on this agenda.
