Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): I would like to thank you,
Madam, for organizing this debate today. We shall
attempt to respond to what I refer to as key questions in
the concept paper (S/2017/305, annex). There are three,
and I shall try to address them.

We are also grateful to Mr. Mladenov for his
comprehensive briefing on the latest developments in
the Middle East.We appreciate the humane sentiments
that underpinned his presentation.

The peace and the security situation in that region
remains a matter of serious concern because of its
obvious grave implications for international peace
and security. In the meantime, what we see is, as
Mr. Mladenov stressed, the continued worsening of the
humanitarian situation and the danger of chemical and
biological weapons falling into the hands of terrorist
groups. The fact that the overall trajectory is worrying
cannot be gainsaid. It seems to us very easy in this
regard to respond very quickly to the first question in
the concept paper on who benefits from this state of
affairs. It is those who believe that they benefit little
from peace or the balance ofnormal life based onjustice
and fair play, and the the terrorists who are determined
to undermine trust among peoples and religions.

There are no easy solutions to the multiple and
complex challenges facing the Middle East region.
However, the need for a comprehensive and holistic
approach to addressing the multiple and complex
challenges and threats facing the region has never been
more urgent than at this particular point in time. In fact,
developments taking place daily make it rather plain
that one would be delusional if one thought it were
possible to see light at the end of the tunnel.

We often talk about how UnitedNations peacekeeping
would fail without a political framework and a political
strategy to guide it and to identify the end game. This
problem is even more pronounced and more and more
evident at the global level, including with respect to
the situation in the Middle East, most particularly in
this regard in connection with the Palestinian issue.
It is impossible to question the claim that in all parts
of the world, including the Middle East, it is not the
primacy of politics but rather the military approach
that has pride of place as the chosen means of resolving
disputes, misunderstandings and conflicts.
This takes us very close to addressing the second
key question in the concept paper, which asks what
steps can be taken to identify and address threats to
international peace and security. Obviously, as we have
already the implied in the foregoing, the steps that have
to be taken have to be political and diplomatic, based on
justice and aimed at addressing the legitimate demands
and concerns of all concerned. Very rare indeed are the
instances, without denying exceptional circumstances,
when the military approach has resulted in laying the
foundation for durable and sustainable peace among
States. This is all the more pertinent today when the
devastating effects of war are making resort to it a
threat of existential proportions.

Therefore, the answer to the second question it
seems to ask is provided by the report of the High-
level Independent Panel on Peace Operations (see S/2015/446). This would mean that we should invest
more in diplomacy and thus ensure the primacy of
politics, which in fact is and should be the major vocation
of the United Nations and the Security Council, which
is supposed to be the tip of the spear for the world body
in ensuring international peace and security.

This applies to all the difficult conflict situations
in the Middle East. We do not believe that, given
the presence of political will and an unambiguous
commitment to a win-win outcome based on justice
and security for all, it would be impossible to make
progress with respect to any of the conflict situations in
the Middle East and, for that matter, in our own region,
the Horn of Africa. But honest dialogue has to be given
priority. In that respect, it is critical that the Secretariat
play its proper role by way of providing analyses of
conflict situations as objectively as possible, without
fear or favour. Differences in the interpretation of fact
are unavoidable and more or less acceptable, but we
cannot be allowed to have our own facts. That is one
major impediment to the success of diplomatic efforts.

The answer to the last question speaks to the need
for unity within the Security Council, most of all in
isolating, marginalizing and defeating the enemies of
peace, which requires an unambiguous commitment
to the fight against terrorism. Perhaps Syria is the
best example for doing more to create some clarity in
connection with the end game, including with respect
to the fight against terrorism. It seems to us that there
is a need for major efforts in that area.

I would like to conclude by reiterating what
we have always stressed - one cannot ignore the
Palestinian issue. In that regard, no diplomatic effort
will succeed in providing a sustainable solution unless
the Palestinian conflict is addressed on the basis of the
two-State solution. That is also critical for regional and
international peace and security.

