Mr. Sangqu (South Africa): We join others in
expressing our appreciation to you, Mr. President, for
convening this important meeting. We also welcome
the opportunity to participate and share our views on
the issue before the Security Council today. We thank
Mr. Lynn Pascoe, Under-Secretary-General for
Political Affairs, for his briefing this morning. South
Africa aligns itself with the statement delivered by the
representative of Cuba on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement.

The current multifaceted crisis in the Middle East
should be understood in the context of the ongoing
Israeli military occupation of Palestinian and other
Arab territories, which dates back to 1967, and the
associated denial of the right to self-determination of
the Palestinian people. Indeed, Israel's long track
record of disregarding international law and the failure
of the Security Council to take any meaningful action
in response is the key contributing factor to the lack of
progress in the peace process.

It is essential to the maintenance of international
peace and security that all parties fully respect and
meet their obligations under international law,
including international humanitarian and human rights
law, and that the Security Council discharge its
mandate under the United Nations Charter without
selectivity or double standards.

A few months have passed since Israel's most
deadly attack on Gaza since the 1967 Arab-Israeli war.
South Africa wishes to stress the importance of an
independent investigation of the events in Gaza and of
full accountability for any violations of international
law by whomsoever they were committed. In this
regard, we welcome the decision of the Secretary-
General to establish and dispatch a Board of Inquiry to
Gaza. We expect that the Board's report will be
presented to the General Assembly and the Security
Council so that the necessary follow-up actions can be
taken.

While the latest military incursion has come to an
end, we should not forget the consequences of the
disproportionate and indiscriminate attacks on one of
the most heavily populated areas in the world, where
the civilian population was denied any means of
escaping the onslaught by land, air or sea. It is reported
by the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs that 1,455 Palestinians were killed and around
5,000 were injured and that most of the victims were
innocent civilians, including women and 431 children.
An entire civilian population is traumatized and
impoverished. Most of the Gaza infrastructure has been
destroyed, including a large number of schools, clinics
and hospitals. Israel bears full responsibility for
compensating the Palestinian people for its actions.
However, the international community must also take
the lead in efforts to rebuild Gaza.

For its part, the South African Government has
decided to contribute 1 million rand to the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) emergency flash
appeal fund. This contribution is designed to
supplement the annual contribution to UNRWA and
other ongoing South African assistance programmes to
Palestine, including its contribution to the Palestinian
capacity-building initiative under the aegis of the New
Asian-African Strategic Partnership. Also, South
African civil society is actively assisting the
Palestinian people through, inter alia, the provision of
medical assistance.

South Africa condemns the continuing Israeli
blockade of Gaza and the ongoing construction and
expansion of illegal settlements in the West Bank and
East Jerusalem. The continuing construction of the
separation wall and the intensified home demolition
programmes that we are currently witnessing in East
Jerusalem constitute serious violations of international
law, as definitively clarified in the 9 July 2004
advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice.
Those activities also undermine all efforts to achieve
peace between the Palestinian and Israeli peoples.

We also call on the Palestinians to stop firing
Qassam rockets into Israel. The only lesson that we
have been able to learn from those retaliatory actions
over the past decades is that they merely provide cover
for more violence to be perpetuated against the
innocent Palestinian people. We also call upon the
Palestinian parties not to be diverted from their
objective of forming a new unity Government. In that
regard, we support Egypt in its efforts aimed at
assisting the Palestinian parties to achieve national
reconciliation.

South Africa calls upon the parties to the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict to fully respect international law,
and on the Security Council to discharge its Charter-
mandated responsibilities. South Africa continues to
support a negotiated and peaceful solution to the
conflict on the basis of the principle of land for peace,
as expressed in international resolutions and initiatives
such as resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973) and 1515
(2003) and the Arab Peace Initiative.

In conclusion, we look forward to a day when the
bloodshed ends and two States, Palestine and Israel,

are able to coexist in peace and security, within
internationally recognized borders. This vision of a
two-State solution, as endorsed by the Security Council
in resolution 1397 (2002), must underpin any
permanent settlement of this conflict.

