Mr. Hussein (Ethiopia): I would like to take this
opportunity first to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of October. We also welcome the fact
that this open debate is taking place under your
presidency. I also wish to thank last month's President,
Ambassador Levitte of France, for the able way in
which he led the Council's work. It goes without
saying that both Ireland and France are friends not only
of Ethiopia, but also of Africa. I just want to note that
for the record.

Like other delegations before me, I welcome the
Prime Minister of Somalia, Mr. Ali Khalif Galaydh. I
am encouraged by the content of his statement.

A lot has been said here, and a lot has not been
said. I would like to dwell more on the few things that
have not been said.

If we look at the whole process that led to the
Arta Peace Conference on Somalia, we see that there
were, as some have indicated, previous processes, but,
as has also been indicated, these processes were also
very genuine. They took place in Djibouti. In fact, the
first one on Somalia took place in 1991. It was held in
Djibouti. Others were held in Ethiopia, Egypt, Kenya,
Libya and Yemen. In Ethiopia's View, all these were
genuine attempts to resolve the Somali question in the
interest of the people of Somalia. We believed that they
paved the way for what happened at Arta.

I want that also to be on the record, because some
seem not to have that in their record, to judge from
what they have stated. At least that was the implication -
not by many, but by one or two speakers.

Ethiopia fully supported the Arta process from the
beginning. I want it to be on the Council's record that
even where the meeting took place was symbolic - the
air-conditioned tent was provided by Ethiopia. It cost

us more than $250,000. To many this may not seem
like a lot of money, but for a poor country like Ethiopia
it was. We continue to support the Arta process. We
believe that that process was a step forward for peace
and reconciliation in Somalia.

We worked very hard so that this process would
not unravel. In fact, if we look at the IGAD member
States, we see that Ethiopia played a very important,
and at crucial times, leading role to ensure that all were
on board.

IGAD's last position on this matter was adopted
in Khartoum last November, when a head of State from
Somalia took part in one of its meetings for the first
time after 10 years' absence. So that there is no
confusion, I would like to cite the gist of IGAD's
position, contained in a resolution stating that the heads
of State and Government:

"1. Afiirm that the Arta Peace Conference
that resulted in the establishment of the
Transitional Government for Somalia constituted
a major achievement in the Somali peace process;

"2. Urge the Transitional Government and
all parties and administrations of Somalia to
create the environment that would bring into the
process those that did not participate at the Arta
Conference with the objective of widening and
deepening the process of national reconciliation;

"3. Insist that the peace process in
Somalia must continue and be completed through
dialogue and not by resorting to the use of force;

"4. Encourage Somalia's neighbours and
the current Chairman of IGAD to establish a
mechanism that would enable them to continue to
assist the Somalis to achieve full peace, national
reconciliation, and unity".

This is a point also taken in the Secretary-General's
report.

The resolution continues:

"5. Affirm the need for all necessary
measures to be taken to ensure that the territory of
Somalia is not used as a springboard by groups
inimical to the peace and security of the subregion;

"6. Reafiirm IGAD's commitment to the
unity and territorial integrity of Somalia;

"7. Welcome the participation of the
Transitional Government of Somalia in the
deliberations and activities of IGAD, bearing in
mind that regular and continuing evaluation of
progress towards peace and national
reconciliation in the country will be carried out;

"8. Urgently call upon the international
community to support the rehabilitation in
Somalia through direct assistance to the
Transitional Government and the regions which
had established peace and stability through self-
administration, as long as they are committed to
the peace process." (5/2001/120, annex 11)
Well, the implication of this summit position,
which is the position of the region, including Somalia,
is that if the Transitional Government has to be in
place, then others who did not take part have to be on
board. In fact an IGAD delegation was sent to
Mogadishu to discuss this issue with the TNG and to
continue this reconciliation process. At that time, for
reasons known only to itself, the TNG rejected this. It
referred to these groups as rebels, as warlords, and
would not talk to them.

What happened as a result? Others did the same.
They expressed rejection of the TNG; they said there
was no such thing as a TNG, and therefore it was just
another faction. So the TNG could go beyond this.

We have always been transparent. We have
always been frank. I will not change that position
today. I want the Council to know that for us in the
region - in Ethiopia, in particular, and I can only
speak for Ethiopia - we see that the Transitional
Government itself is not of one mind. We believe that
there are basically three groups. There are the
extremists of Al-Ittihad, Al-Islah and the Muslim
Brotherhood. There are also those who are ready for
reconciliation. The first group, by the way, used to
have what were called the Islamic courts and their
militia, and they had longstanding, strong financial
institutions through a number of activities. There is no
need to go into the details; I think most members of the
Council are familiar with them. There is a second
group that is ready for reconciliation, but it lacks the
financial and military muscle. There is a third group
that shuttles between those two, and is used by either.
Hence, when we talk with the TNG, there is no single
group with which one can continuously take up the
issues, as we have done.

We are ready to help in this situation. Norway
suggested that Ethiopia should try to facilitate and use
its influence. We will accept this suggestion. We are
ready to do it. But when we speak of these realities,
some in the TNG - I will not say "all" - do not like
it; they are not comfortable with it. I would even say
that there are others who one could say are more
Catholic than the Pope; they even go beyond the TNG.
We will not accept this.

We are not partial to anyone, whether the TNG, the
Somalia Reconciliation and Restoration Council,
"Somaliland", "Puntland" or any other group. Ethiopia is
not for the TNG; Ethiopia is not for the SRRC; Ethiopia is
not for "Somaliland"; it is not for "Puntland". It is for
Somalia and the people of Somalia.
At the moment we do not see, as the United
States representative once said, any group or entity that
has the political legitimacy and the support of
everybody throughout Somalia. The Arta peace process
is the best of the processes so far. But it is a still
incomplete process that IGAD speaks of. By the way,
the Transitional National Assembly and the Charter
also speak about what came out of Arta. Even those
who claim that we should not speak to this one or that
one are not right. That is not what the Arta process
said. We have the Charter; we have the positions.

Some have tried to pretend that the Somalia
Reconciliation and Restoration Council is supported by
one country, that one country established it, that one
country is behind it. That reference - let us take away
all the pretences - is to Ethiopia. This is because that
group met in a place called Awasa in southern Ethiopia.
It was the first time Ethiopia had facilitated meetings
for Somalis. They have met many times; we simply
facilitated this.

The Foreign Minister of Somalia, Mr. Ismail
Mohamoud Hurre, said of the SRRC last June:

"Ethiopia is open to everyone. Many
Somalis come to Addis Ababa and discuss
matters with the Ethiopians. The SRRC are part
of that. We are not averse to Ethiopia carrying on
discussions with them, as it is all part of the
reconciliation and peace process".

That was what the Foreign Minister of the TNG said.
Today the Prime Minister, Mr. Ali Khalif
Galaydh, said that the Somali Government would
welcome every positive effort by the neighbouring
countries and the world community that can facilitate
this process. He went on to say that they were prepared
to engage those outside the Arta process through
sustained dialogue and negotiations. We welcome this
statement, but I do not welcome indications by
delegations that any support for the SRRC or any
connection to it is like revitalizing warlordism. We do
not find this at all helpful for the reconciliation
process. Nobody, least of all Ethiopia, which has the
longest border with Somalia, wants to revive that.

The biggest problems of the last ten years have
fallen on Ethiopia, a poor country. This includes
terrorism, as well as taking up the burdens of our
people, our brothers and sisters, who came from across
the border. Next to Somalia, the largest concentration
of Somalis in the Horn of Africa or anywhere in the
world is in Ethiopia, where there are over 5 million
Somalis, occupying more than one quarter of Ethiopian
territory. One of the federated states includes more than
one quarter of Ethiopia. That is where I myself come
from. I am an ethnic Somali. There are more than 5
million of us. So, next to the Somalis of Somalia, the
Ethiopians are the ones who are most affected and want
the stability of Somalia.

However, our allegiance and support is for the
people of Somalia. The TNG must encompass all
Somalis, including those who, in the words of the
IGAD summit, have not been part of the process. The
Secretary-General's report and the Council on previous
occasions have said that those who are not already on
board have to be brought into the process.

Should we wait until all of them accept the peace
process? No. We should engage those who are ready
for reconciliation and peace, whether it is the Somalia
Reconciliation and Restoration Council (SRRC) or any
other group or faction outside the TNG. We should
disregard and isolate those who are not for peace.
Somalia's reconciliation process will not be complete if
we do not engage all these groups that I have
mentioned.

There are one or two more points I would like to
touch on before I conclude. We would like to call on
the Security Council to enforce the arms embargo
against Somalia. This has been stated by some. We
have in the past brought attention to the fact that arms
have been shipped into Somalia by air and by sea. This
has made the situation in Somalia much worse and as a
result we have been Victims of terrorism carried out on
our soil, deep inside Ethiopia, committed by groups
coming from Somalia - Al-Itihad was one of them.
They did not hide their identity and claimed
responsibility for what they had done: explosions in
several public buildings and mining and attacking rail
and road transport. These groups did not cease to exist
because it suddenly dawned on them that what they
were doing was not good. They were stopped - at
least until now - by actions taken by Ethiopia to
defend itself after it was attacked. We took action in
1997 by destroying the terrorist bases inside Somalia.
One of them was at Luuq. At least 26 multinationals
were from outside the region. I can recall a number of
them, most of whom are part of the same groups that
make up Al-Qaida. Some may try to sell the idea that
Al-Qaida and international terrorist groups are not in
Somalia; we disagree. We have ample evidence. As we
speak, my Government is taking action to provide
security for more than one foreign embassy in Addis
Ababa, as a result of threats made by these groups. We
are not going to be like those who take ostrich-like
actions. Some of you can afford to do that, as you are
not neighbours of Somalia but live thousands of
kilometres away. In that tranquillity, you can make
statements that appear fine but, in reality, do not help
the situation.

I would now like to touch upon one very serious
issue, one of immediate concern to ordinary Somalis -
a matter of life and death. Dire humanitarian needs can
be due to several factors, but arise mainly as a result of
the failure of the gu rains. These are the main rains that
usually come in summer. Hundreds of thousands in
Bakool, Bay, Gedo, Hiiraan and many parts of the
northeast of Somalia need immediate assistance. We
call upon the international community to assist if a
tragedy is to be avoided there.

In Ethiopia, we already have, in our province in
Warder, in the Degehabur, in Gode, and the
surrounding areas, the thousands who have crossed into
the Ethiopian part of the Somali region. These areas of
Ethiopia themselves have also suffered. To the best of
our ability, we are trying to assist in this particular
case.

In conclusion, I would say, let us be positive.
Look at some delegations, such as Norway, who have
also accepted what I would call the legitimate concerns
of neighbouring countries. There is nobody to take
action when such things as have happened several
times take place over a border that is nearly 2,000
kilometres long. Another suffering country is Kenya.
They will speak for themselves. Djibouti also has a
border of about 70 kilometres with a very stable part of
Somalia. Nonetheless, they have also been affected in
one way or another.

So, when you look at this, I would appeal to the
Council that the interest of the Somali people in toto
should be seen. That is why we welcome all the
positive steps that will be taken by the TNG within its
capacity. I think we should not have any delusions that
they are in a position, for example, to take actions
against terrorism, even if they wished to, because, as I
have said, there are some within the Government that
are part of that problem.

