Mr. Gatilov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian):
The Russian delegation took an active part in preparing the
draft resolution before the Security Council. The draft's
main objective, we believe, is to move forward the process
of settling the conflict in Abkhazia, Georgia.

Our particular concern in having a draft resolution of
precisely this nature stems from our heartfelt desire to help
the peoples of Georgia - with whom we are linked by
centuries-old ties of friendship and mutual respect - to
resolve this crisis situation. This will enable them fully to
focus on the urgent tasks of achieving sustainable economic
growth and creating a political system that will guarantee
the triumph of democracy and the observance of
fundamental human rights and freedoms, including the
rights of national minorities. Russia fully intends to
facilitate the speedy settlement of this conflict, which would
have a positive impact on the situation throughout the
whole region of the Caucasus.

Russia, in close cooperation with the United Nations,
is continuing vigorously to search for the optimal formula
for a settlement that would provide for the unconditional
preservation of the territorial integrity of Georgia as well as
a form of self-government for Abkhazia that would be
acceptable to the parties and that would ensure that the
interests of its multi-ethnic population are safeguarded.

We deem counterproductive calls for the use of force
to resolve the Georgian-Abkhaz conflict, as this would to
an extreme degree complicate the process of settlement and
could lead to the explosion of the whole situation in the
Caucasus, which is already fairly volatile. We are pleased
to note that this approach is shared by members of the
Council.

We are deeply concerned at the lack of progress on
key aspects of the settlement, and we are prepared to
continue to assist the parties in reaching mutually
acceptable agreements.

At this stage, the most acute problem remains the
return of refugees to the Gali region. As a result of the
active mediation efforts of Russia, in close cooperation
with the United Nations, the sides are in substantially
greater agreement on the draft protocol on the return of
refugees to the Gali region and on measures for economic
recovery. It is important that the parties demonstrate the
necessary resolve and sign the document that they have
virtually agreed upon, which would open the way to
resolving other settlement-related problems.

In our view, the political process as a whole has
been significantly assisted by the fairly effective
mechanism that was established with the assistance of the
United Nations and personally by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Georgia,
