Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): At the
outset, Mr. President, allow me to thank the delegation
of the United Kingdom for having organized this
briefing on the protection of humanitarian workers in
armed conflict. I would also like to thank the speakers
for their briefings. The situation they describe should
command our attention.

While the needs do not cease to grow, the
deployment of humanitarian actors is increasingly
hindered by the threats to their security. The figures
speak for themselves. The year 2013 represented a new
peak, with 251 attacks and 155 humanitarian workers
killed. That is the highest number of Victims in the past
10 years. Unfortunately, initial information for 2014
does not indicate any improvement. While it is still
several months until the end of the year, the number
of humanitarian workers killed already exceeds, as the
Deputy Secretary-General just stated, the number of
violent deaths recorded in 2012.

The primary responsibility for the protection of
humanitarian workers falls on the host country. Yet
very often in conflict situations, the authorities have
neither the means nor the willingness to fulfil that role.
To that we have to add the proliferation of non-State
armed groups.

The partners of humanitarian actors must be
aware of that situation and provide them the resources
and flexibility required to adapt their planning to the
constraints imposed by the security conditions. It is also
important that those who have information on threats to
security share it as much as possible with the actors on
the ground, including non-governmental actors, since
they are often in the front lines facing those threats.
The United Nations initiative Saving Lives Together is
an example of good practice in that regard. In our view,
such initiatives should be continued and strengthened.

In 2003, following the attack on the United Nations
headquarters in Baghdad, the Security Council adopted
the seminal resolution 1502 (2003). Since then, in
many other Council decisions concerning country
situations or thematic issues, the imperative to protect
humanitarian workers has rightly been taken into
account. That mainstreaming effort must continue.

Given the evolution of the operational environment,
given the growth of insecurity, we believe it is time
to review resolution 1502 (2003), to try to reflect
developments since its adoption - their causes and
consequences - and to define the role of the Security
Council in that context. We believe such a discussion
should take into account the growing recognition that
international peacekeeping efforts must go hand in hand
with an improvement in the humanitarian situation of
civilian populations in zones of armed conflict and that
unmet humanitarian needs could contribute to further
destabilizing already fragile situations. However,
the need to break the vicious circle of violence and
deprivation should not have the perverse effect of
diverting humanitarian assistance from its main goal
and manipulating it for political purposes.

Humanitarian action can never replace political
action. The situation in Syria makes that only too clear.
At the same time, people under siege cannot wait for a
political solution to be found. They need humanitarian
assistance, to which they are entitled by virtue of
the most basic humanitarian principles codified in
international humanitarian law.

Adopted in the context of the Baghdad attack,
resolution 1502 (2003) clearly recalls, in its fifth
preambular paragraph, that

"there are existing prohibitions under international
law against attacks knowingly and intentionally
directed against personnel involved in a
humanitarian assistance or peacekeeping mission
undertaken in accordance with the Charter of
the United Nations which in situations of armed
conflicts constitute war crimes",

and recalls "the need for States to end impunity for
such criminal acts".

Mention of the protection of humanitarian aid
workers leads inevitably to the matter of respect for
international humanitarian law, and the tools at our
disposal to combat impunity in that connection for
those found guilty of violating that law. We stand
with those who believe that the Security Council must
take full responsibility in that regard, by virtue of the
powers vested in it on that issue, whether that requires
commissions of inquiry, sanctions regimes or referral
to the International Criminal Court.

Today, on World Humanitarian Day, we honour the
memory of all those who have paid with their lives for
their commitment to the most vulnerable among us, We
pay homage to the thousands of humanitarian workers
who, day after day, prove their remarkable devotion and
courage by bringing aid and assistance to populations in
need. We owe all possible assistance and protection to
those humanitarian heroes. Any initiative in that regard
can count on Luxembourg's unconditional support.

