The President (spoke in Arabic): I shall now
make a few remarks in my national capacity.

At the outset, I would like to express my
gratitude to all speakers for their kind words to me and
my country, and to His Excellency the Secretary-
General for joining us at this important meeting. I also
wish to thank Mr. Romano Prodi for presenting the
report (S/2008/813) of his panel; Mr. Ramtane
Lamamra, Commissioner for Peace and Security of the
African Union, for his valuable contribution; and
Ms. Dlamini Zuma, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
South Africa, for her presence here today and for her
significant contribution to our debate.

Today, we are meeting to discuss the report of the
African Union-United Nations panel on modalities for
support to African Union peacekeeping operations.
This discussion is particularly significant in the light of
the specific recommendations of the panel chaired by
Mr. Prodi, and because peacekeeping operations in
general, and those of the African Union in particular,
face serious challenges that must be addressed quickly.
All of us here today agree that the greatest challenge
peacekeeping operations face is the growing demand
for those operations amid a significant shortage of
personnel and financing.

The first aspect - the shortage of personnel - is
in fact linked to the second, the shortage of financing.
We know that many African States are ready to
contribute troops to peacekeeping operations if they are
provided with the necessary financing, equipment and
weapons in compliance with United Nations standards.
Then there is the African Standby Force, which is
expected to be operational by the middle of next year.
This is a significant step for peacekeeping, and we
should begin now to provide it with steady support,
especially given the possible need for its rapid
deployment to address urgent events.

Africa suffers from conflict, poverty and disease.
It sorely needs the support of the international
community in achieving security and stability,
promoting development and combating poverty and
disease. The money spent on war throughout the world
is many hundreds of times the amount needed to enable
Africa to maintain and build peace and achieve
development.

We are disappointed that to date the African
Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) has been unable
to gain sufficient support from the international
community to ensure its full deployment. The forces
currently deployed have not received weapons and
equipment in accordance with United Nations
standards, despite the fact that promises have been
made. We regret that one AMISOM. troop-contributing
country is seriously considering withdrawing its troops
because they are unable to protect themselves.

It is therefore our hope that the Security Council
will soon agree to transform the African Union Mission
in Somalia into a United Nations mission. The security
and humanitarian situation requires this, and, morally

09-2716]
speaking, the United Nations cannot fail to engage in
peacekeeping in Somalia at a time when millions of
Somalis are suffering from homelessness, poverty and
disease.

The report before us today contains practical
recommendations for supporting peace in Africa. These
merit a Security Council consensus on the right
mechanisms to implement them. To our mind, it is
important that Mr. Prodi remain involved in the process
of implementing the panel's recommendations, with a
view to strengthening the capacity of the African
Union to deploy peacekeeping forces, with reliable,
sustainable and predictable resources at its disposal.
We believe that the best way to achieve that is to
implement the recommendations set out in paragraph
90 of the report.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I give the floor to the representative of Cuba.

