Mr. Orrenius Skau (Sweden): Let me begin by
thanking the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for her update today and for the charts reflecting
the mandate implementation dashboard, which really
help to illustrate the progress on the mandate of the
United Nations Mission for Justice Support in Haiti
(MINUJUSTH) and on her work in Haiti. Let me also
take this opportunity to thank MINUJUSTH as a whole
for its committed work for Haiti and for its people.
Sweden commends Haiti for the progress made in
consolidating democracy and stability over the past
two years. We are hopeful that it will continue to make
progress throughout the elections in 2019 and beyond.
The past few months have shown that there is a need
for renewed, broad-based political support for reforms.
Accountability must be a key component in delivering
on the priorities that the President and his Government
have set out. The rule of law and respect for human
rights, and improvements in economic development,
infrastructure, resilience and security are also important
factors in Haiti's ability to further advance on its path
to long-term stability. The benchmarks presented in the
Secretary-General's report (S/2018/1059) will help focus
efforts to support those goals. It is crucial to ensure
an integrated rule-of-law approach that encompasses
the whole justice chain, from police and corrections to
prosecution and courts, and with adequate capacity. The
Haitian National Police have made good progress. We
also welcome the appointment of a delegate minister
for human rights. Other Haitian authorities, with the
support of MINUJUSTH, now need to make similar
progress in the areas of the judiciary and corrections.

MINUJUSTH plays an important role and should
continue to fully integrate gender throughout its
mandate as a cross-cutting issue. That includes, not
least, establishing measures to increase security for
women, and assisting the Government in ensuring
women's participation in political processes at every
level. We expect the upcoming strategic assessment
of the Mission to include gender expertise. We would
also like to underline the importance of efforts to
strengthen the prevention of sexual exploitation and
abuse in the Mission. We need to continue ensuring
that alleged cases of sexual exploitation and abuse are
reported and investigated, and that all necessary steps
are taken to apply disciplinary measures and undertake
criminal prosecutions to hold perpetrators accountable.
The Secretary-General's new approach to eradicating
cholera and building resilience in Haiti should also be
supported. We were happy to be a sponsor of General
Assembly resolution 7l/l6lB in that regard. Sweden
has supported the United Nations-Haiti Cholera
Response Multi-Partner Trust Fund and encourages
others to contribute.

Next year's elections in Haiti will be crucial. We
encourage the Haitian authorities to swiftly adopt
the new electoral law and take all other necessary
steps. Needless to say, we welcome the Government's
commitment to ensuring that the elections are held,
as scheduled. Credible, transparent and inclusive
elections will be a decisive factor for the country's
long-term stability.

MINUJUSTH is one of the first missions making
a transition from traditional peacekeeping in the era
of sustaining peace. The Peacebuilding Commission
could provide a useful platform that can be explored in
that regard. A successful transition would be important
for Haitians first and foremost, but would also serve
as an example for the United Nations system. The
international community must remain committed to
supporting Haiti as it moves forward on its path towards
peace and prosperity for its people.

