Mr. Tafrov (Bulgaria) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank Terje Roed-Larsen for his very thorough
analysis and very useful suggestions.

As a country associated with the European Union,
Bulgaria fully supports the statement that will be made
shortly by the representative of Italy on behalf of the
European Union.

Bulgaria deeply regrets the resumption of
violence in the Middle East. The ceasefire has ended
and violence has begun again. We unreservedly
condemn the continuing practice of suicide bombings
perpetrated by extremist Palestinian organizations. We
call on the Palestinian Authority to take firmer and
more concrete measures to disarm those terrorist
organizations and to dismantle their structures. Equally,
we call on Israel to end the practice of extrajudicial
executions.

Bulgaria believes that a possible expulsion of
Yasser Arafat from Palestinian territories would cause
a political crisis of incalculable consequences and an
increase in violence. We regret the resignation of Prime
Minister Mahmoud Abbas. It was a hard blow to the
peace process. We welcome the appointment of the
President of the Legislative Council, Mr. Ahmed Qurei,
to the post of Prime Minister. We wish him good luck.
We hope that the new Prime Minister will enjoy the
confidence and support of the Palestinian people, the
members of the Quartet and the entire international
community. To that end, he must possess the sufficient
authority for undertaking the necessary measures
against terrorist organizations.

Bulgaria is convinced that the road map is not
dead. The two parties must do everything possible to
overcome their differences, resume their contacts and
continue their joint efforts relative to the commitments
they made for the road map's implementation. That
implementation should over time bring an end to the
spiral of violence and terror, including by ending all
forms of collective punishment and, of course, by
improving the daily living conditions of the Palestinian
people. The Quartet and the parties involved in the
peace process must redouble their efforts to press the
two parties to live up to the promises they have made.

