Mr. Roscoe (United Kingdom): I want to join others in thanking Special Envoy Huang Xia for his briefing. We share the concerns set out in the Secretary- General's report (S/2020/951) about both the immediate and the secondary impacts of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic in the Great Lakes region. We commend the efforts to strengthen regional coordination in responding to the pandemic and we echo the Secretary-General's call for regional leaders to capitalize and build on this by enhancing cooperation towards peace and development. While we recognize the impact that COVID-19 restrictions have had on the implementation of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region, we call for the resumption of these efforts as soon as possible, including through virtual engagement. I wish to add our voice to those that have welcomed the recent steps taken by the region towards improved relations. As Mr. Xia reported, last week's mini-summit between the Heads of State of Uganda, Rwanda, Angola and the Democratic Republic of the Congo, as well as the Southern African Development Community initiative to resolve the border dispute between the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Zambia, are two encouraging examples of this. We also welcome the more positive tenor of dialogue between Rwanda and Burundi on the normalization of relations. This momentum from regional talks and dispute resolution efforts must be maintained; continued cooperation among regional Powers 1s crucial to bringing peace and stability to the region. I will now turn to some of the individual countries of the region. We welcome the peaceful transfer of power in Burundi, as well as the resumption of voluntary refugee returns from Tanzania and Rwanda. It is crucial that all refugee returns be and remain of a genuinely voluntary nature. With Tanzania and Uganda's elections on the horizon, we call on all national leaders and the international community to ensure that both sets of elections are peaceful, free and fair. Reports of shrinking democratic space in this respect are concerning. As ever, we remain concerned about the humanitarian situation in the region. This is particularly the case in the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo, where conflict, human rights abuses by armed groups and natural disasters are driving displacement and food insecurity. We are also increasingly concerned about the illegal smuggling of natural resources. We underline the need for increased regional cooperation to tackle this illegal smuggling and to restrict financial flows to armed groups operating in the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo. We continue to be troubled by the human rights situation in the broader region. We are especially concerned by the increase in sexual and gender- based violence in connection to lockdowns and other COVID-19 response measures. We echo the Secretary- General's call for leaders of the region to continue to prioritize the protection of human rights and the fight against impunity. Finally, I want to add that we welcome Special Envoy Xia's consultations with national, regional and international stakeholders on his regional strategy. We were very glad to hear that his report has been submitted to the Secretary-General and we hope to see greater detail and the finalization of this strategy as soon as possible. I would also underline the importance of Special Envoy Xia's work across the region to promote more joined-up efforts across the United Nations family in order to ensure that the United Nations is delivering as one. It is crucial that the regional strategy for the Great Lakes be well coordinated with both the transition strategy of the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and with Assistant Secretary-General Keita's review of United Nations engagement with Burundi.
