Mr. Jomaa (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): Allow
me at the outset to congratulate you, Madam, on
Lebanon assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council and to convey to you and your delegation our
sincere wishes for success. We appreciate the approach
that you have taken in guiding the work of the Council,
particularly with regard to encouraging interactions
with non-members. My delegation values this
opportunity to participate in the Council's discussions,
and we are grateful to Lebanon for having organized
this open debate.
(spoke in English)

I would like to extend my thanks to Ambassador
Apakan of Turkey, Ambassador Heller of Mexico and
Ambassador Mayr-Harting of Austria for their
informative briefings on the activities of the Counter-
Terrorism Committee and the Committees established
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1540 (2004)
during the past six months. We appreciate their efforts
as Chairs of those important subsidiary bodies of the
Council to engage more with Member States through
frequent and regular briefings. We welcome such
practices and encourage greater interaction with
Member States on the work of the Council on this issue
as well as better coordination between the work done
by the Security Council and its specialized Committees
and by the General Assembly in the fight against
terrorism.

My country has been fully engaged in the
implementation of all Security Council resolutions
related to the fight against terrorism. In fact, Tunisia
has presented the Council with a total of seven reports
pursuant to its resolutions 1373 (2001), 1455 (2003),
1540 (2004) and 1624 (2005). Moreover, Tunisia
submitted its reply to its first Preliminary
Implementation Assessment more than a year ago. My
country is party to 12 sectoral conventions on terrorism
adopted under the auspices of the United Nations. Last
month our Council of Ministers considered a draft law
approving Tunisia's adherence to the International
Convention for the Suppression of Acts of Nuclear
Terrorism.

We have noted with particular interest the active
role played by Turkey, as Chair of the Counter-
Terrorism Committee (CTC), and by the Counter-
Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate (CTED) in
seeking to improve transparency in the work of the
1373 Committee, as evidenced by the recent changes
made in the CTC's working methods, aimed at
improving the value of its thematic discussions by
following them up with informal briefings to Member
States. So far two thematic briefings have been
organized, on legal cooperation and maritime security.
We welcome this evolving practice and look forward to
more events of this type.

The CTC continues to monitor the
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001) through its
continuous stocktaking exercises, as well as by
conducting country visits. In this context, in March the
Executive Directorate visited Tunisia where it had open
and constructive discussions with the relevant Tunisian
authorities, enabling the Committee to be better
informed about Tunisia's comprehensive counter-
terrorism strategy in general, and to keep abreast of the
important steps taken by Tunisia to ensure full
implementation of the various provisions of resolution
1373 (2001).

I take this opportunity to thank the Executive
Director and his team for their much-appreciated
collaboration in the preparation and conduct of that
visit, which from our perspective was an interesting
and useful exercise. We look forward to timely follow-
up on the findings of the visit, particularly in regard to
addressing the technical assistance needs that were
identified in collaboration with Tunisia. Capacity-
building is of paramount importance to national and
global counter-terrorism efforts. It is also one of the
main pillars of the United Nations Global Counter-
Terrorism Strategy adopted by the General Assembly in
2006 (see General Assembly resolution 60/288).

Terrorism is a global threat and requires a
coordinated and concerted global response.
Multilateral action through the United Nations system
is a vital element in any international strategy for
addressing terrorism and violent extremism. In this
regard, we believe that, because of its non-contentious
nature, capacity-building through technical assistance
is a field where international cooperation and solidarity
can bring tangible results in the fight against terrorism.
It is a field where United Nations organs have the
potential to play a more relevant and efficient role and
to bring greater added value to the fight against this
scourge. Yet this field has not yet reached its full
potential. Technical assistance should go beyond the
development of legislation and best practices. It should
include cooperation, information-sharing and transfer
of technology and equipment in such areas as border
control and surveillance.

Over the past period, the 1267 Committee has
been engaged in reviewing the consolidated list of
individuals and entities subject to the sanctions regime
and has been striving to complete that exercise by the
end of June, as was mandated by resolution 1822
(2008). While we recognize the importance of meeting
deadlines, we believe that the completion of such a
delicate task should not lead to any precipitate or hasty
decisions.
I would like to take this opportunity to commend
the Monitoring Team for its efforts to reach out to
Member States and engage in constructive dialogue
with them on the sanctions regime and review exercise.
Tunisia has participated fully and constructively in that
exercise and has responded to all information requests,
providing all available updated data on time. We will
remain fully engaged in the review of the list so as to
keep it as accurate as possible, because we believe that
such an exercise should be a continuing effort and a
permanent commitment. Having said that, we also
believe that the Committee could further enhance its
procedures, in particular with regard to transparency,
so that the monitoring of the list could be a more
inclusive prerogative, whereby States of nationality
that are not members of the Committee would be duly
consulted, and their views taken into account to the
greatest extent possible, before listing or de-listing
decisions concerning their nationals are taken. I am
confident that doing so will greatly reinforce our
collective commitment to ensuring that the 1267
regime remains an effective multilateral tool for
responding to the threat of terrorism.

We also note that the 1267 Committee has been
updating its working guidelines to take into account the
new procedure established under resolution 1904
(2009), designed to improve due process and ensure
that de-listing requests are addressed in a timely
manner, including through the creation of the post of
ombudsperson to serve as a point of contact for
individuals and entities wishing to be de-listed. While
welcoming this improvement, we join others in
encouraging the necessary follow-up, including
through the timely appointment of the ombudsperson
by the Secretary-General.

Resolution 1904 (2009) also brought forth
another important element, namely, the issue of
payment of ransoms to terrorist groups. As the
Monitoring Team rightly pointed out in its tenth report,
there is no difference between ransom payment and any
other form of financing of Al-Qaida, the Taliban and
their associates. Hostage-taking is becoming an
increasingly lucrative activity, and the payment of
ransoms to terrorist groups not only encourages further
hostage-taking, but inevitably results in further terrorist
attacks. While noting the encouraging steps taken by
the Security Council in its resolution 1904 (2009) by
placing funds resulting from ransom payments under
the sanctions regime, we believe that there is still room
for more action to condemn unambiguously the
payment of ransom to terrorist groups. Such
condemnation would be fully consistent with
paragraph 2 of resolution 1373 (2001).

In conclusion, let me underline that Tunisia
remains fully committed to continuing to work with the
Security Council Committees and their expert groups
to strengthen our capacity to fight terrorism in all its
forms and manifestations.

