Mr. Petritsch: When I took up my mandate in
Bosnia and Herzegovina in August 1999, Yugoslavia
and Croatia were ruled by the same leaders who had
brought about the disastrous conflicts of the 1990s.
Their proxies still wielded power in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. Consequently, refugees saw little hope of
returning to their homes. Reform was effectively
blocked by wartime politicians, who did nothing to
overcome the internal economic divisions and the
virtual absence of an adequate legislative framework.
State-level institutions had been established, but they
were underfunded, understaffed and lacked real power.
My predecessors, Carl Bildt and Carlos Westendorp,
worked hard to correct this but were severely hampered
by an uncompromising political climate inside the
country and a lack of cooperation from Zagreb and
Belgrade.

Faced with this situation, my strategy was clear.
Since arriving in Bosnia and Herzegovina, I have
vigorously promoted the creation of an investment-
driven, rather than an aid-dependent, market economy;
the mass return of refugees to their homes, by rolling
back the results of ethnic cleansing; and the
consolidation of institutions - legal, political,
economic, social, educational and civic - that will
sustain a viable democracy long after the international
community has ended its extraordinary assistance and
involvement in the country's affairs.

After ll September, the potentially disastrous
consequences of weak and failed States have been
burned into our consciousness. The experience of
Bosnia and Herzegovina has shown conclusively that
countries cannot recover from war or protracted civil
strife simply through material aid or military
assistance. They need institutions that work and a
culture in which laws are properly debated and
universally applied and respected. Today, with regard
to Afghanistan, even sceptics accept that institution-
building must be at the core of successful intervention.

Consolidating the rule of law has underpinned our
strategy in Bosnia and Herzegovina, since institution-
building, refugee return and economic development
can be promoted only in a secure environment of law
and order. In this respect, the work of the International
Police Task Force (IPTF), mandated under the
Dayton/Paris Peace Accords to provide the citizens of
Bosnia and Herzegovina with an efficient and impartial
police service, has been key to the peace
implementation efforts. I would like to take this
opportunity to commend the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Jacques Paul Klein; the IPTF
Commissioner, Vincent Coeurderoy; and the staff at
IPTF and the United Nations Mission in Bosnia and
Herzegovina (UNMIBH) for the strenuous efforts they
have made in order to carry out this work.

On 18 February, the European Union's General
Affairs Council announced that the European Union is
ready to establish a police mission, which will take
over from IPTF from 1 January 2003, as the Secretary-
General has already indicated. The European Union
Police Mission (EUPM), supported by the European
Union's institution-building programmes, will
contribute to peace implementation and to the
European Union's overall policy in the region, notably
the Stabilization and Association Process. It represents
a unique opportunity for the European Union to
develop its political engagement with Bosnia and
Herzegovina and to support structural reform crucial to
the country's Europeanization process.

Allow me to express my appreciation to the
European Union's High Representative for Common
Foreign and Security Policy, Javier Solana, for the
decisive and constructive approach adopted by the
European Union in undertaking the EUPM. The
European Union's initiative was welcomed and
accepted by the Steering Board of the Peace
Implementation Council on 28 February. I have duly
informed the Secretary-General of this.

Policing in Bosnia and Herzegovina will not be
fully effective as long as there is a belief that certain
individuals are beyond the reach of the law. In this
respect, the work of the International Criminal Tribunal
for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY), and the cooperation
given to ICTY by the Bosnia and Herzegovina
authorities at the State level and in both entities, is
crucial to the country's overall recovery.

Just a few days ago, Stabilization Force (SFOR)
troops launched operations in eastern Bosnia to arrest
Radovan Karadzic. Let me take this opportunity to
thank the SFOR Commander, General John Sylvester,
and his soldiers for these courageous undertakings,
necessitated by the absence of credible efforts by the
Republika Srpska authorities to apprehend and transfer
to The Hague indicted war criminals hiding on their
territory.

The entity of the Republika Srpska must be left in
no doubt that as long as it fails to live up to its
obligations, it will not receive the full backing of the
international community. I remain firmly convinced
that unless Radovan Karadzic, Ratko Mladic and other
indictees end up in The Hague, people will not be able
to turn the page and look to the future. The Serb
Democratic Party (SDS), founded by Karadzic, has
announced the expulsion of members indicted for war
crimes. Yet the SDS will have to show practical and
public support for the ICTY before this kind of
statement is greeted with any sort of credence.

If approved by the ICTY under the 1996 Rome
Agreement, commonly known as the rules of the road
procedure, war crimes cases may be tried in Bosnia and
Herzegovina courts. I am acutely aware of the
sensitivity and importance of such trials, which not
only are aimed at bringing perpetrators to justice but
also play a key role in the overall reconciliation
process.

In the light of a plan proposed by the ICTY
Prosecutor last year regarding possible remission of
ICTY cases to Bosnia and Herzegovina, my Office is
currently engaged in discussions with ICTY and the
United Nations Office of Legal Affairs here in New
York with a View to cooperating on a consultancy
project that will identify the resources that are needed
to try more war crimes cases in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. The consultancy will begin shortly. It is
being funded by the Governments of the United
Kingdom and Sweden, and will entail close
cooperation with other United Nations agencies,
international organizations and Bosnia and
Herzegovina authorities.

While international efforts in the broad sphere of
the rule of law have yielded results, progress in some
areas has fallen short of expectations, because there has
not yet been a thorough reform of the judiciary. The
Judicial System Assessment Programme (J SAP), which
had been set up by UNMIBH two years earlier, was
terminated in November 2000. As a consequence of
JSAP's closure, my Office was tasked to set up the
Independent Judicial Commission (IJC). On 14 March
last year, I issued the Decision formalizing the
establishment of IJC and determining its mandate.
However, IJ C reported to me a rather alarming picture:
judges and prosecutors, many of whom gained office
during or immediately after the war on ethnic or
political rather than professional grounds, are often
unfit to carry out their duties. There is a lack of
adequate financing, and courts are often subject to
undue external influence.

Following a request from the Peace
Implementation Council (PIC), last week I presented a
reinvigorated programme of judicial reform measures
for 2002-2003 to the Political Directors of the Steering
Board. This combines a restructuring of the Bosnia and
Herzegovina court system and a depoliticized
appointment procedure with the introduction of a High
Judicial Council. It also encompasses the reform of key
laws, including civil and criminal procedure codes. The
Council of Europe was invited to work on the details of
the strategy in order to develop a system for Bosnia
and Herzegovina that is compatible with modern
European standards.

Indeed, the Europeanization of Bosnia and
Herzegovina - crystallized in the imminent accession
of the country to the Council of Europe and in the EU
Road Map itemizing steps that Bosnia and Herzegovina
must take in order to move closer to eventual European
Union membership - is the overarching context for
promoting the rule of law and advancing the main
agenda of the international community for Bosnia and
Herzegovina's recovery.

Bosnia and Herzegovina has reached a crucial
juncture in its path towards permanent recovery. The
main political parties are discussing how to implement
the Constitutional Court's decision on the constituency
of peoples throughout Bosnia and Herzegovina. Indeed,
this is a test case of whether Bosnia and Herzegovina
will develop into a State committed to human rights
and the rule of law, and to the protection of the
individual as well as that of Bosnia and Herzegovina's
three constituent peoples and the group of the so-called
others.

The implementation of this decision puts an
enormous burden on the still fragile political system in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. Yet this is a moment when
the country must establish internal equilibrium founded
on a constructive interdependence of all groups.

There is still a widely held view that compromise
and consensus are a kind of weakness. We are striving
to change this deeply ingrained attitude, an attitude not
confined to Bosnia and Herzegovina alone. The talks
now under way are part of a process through which the
implementation of the Dayton Peace Agreement is
evolving into something broader and deeper.

This evolution - transcending the limitations of
Dayton - is an incremental process, yet truly
democratic in nature. It has again highlighted the
evolutionary potential of Dayton. The very fact that the
Constitutional Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina, an
institution provided for in the Dayton Constitution, has
triggered this process indicates that the Dayton system
is indeed capable of reforming itself. Even well-
intended statements from abroad risk jeopardizing this
process which I View as "ownership in the making". I
believe that the parties must be given every opportunity
to produce "home-grown" solutions, arrived at by
Bosnia and Herzegovina leaders for the benefit of the
citizens of their country.

However, time is of the essence. The current
constitutional discussions must produce a successful
outcome within days, so that the necessary
amendments can be made to the Entity constitutions
and the Bosnia and Herzegovina Election Law within
the time frame required to hold general elections on
schedule in October of this year. These elections will
be the first post-war polls organized by the domestic
authorities and will introduce a four-year election
cycle, which should further enhance the stability of the
political system.

As the rule of law has begun to take hold, the
number of returning refugees, throughout Bosnia and
Herzegovina, has increased dramatically. Last year,
more than 92,000 so-called minority returns were
recorded, a 36 per cent increase over the corresponding
figure for the year 2000, which had been termed a
"breakthrough" at the time by the United States-based
non-governmental organization Human Rights Watch.
If this rate is maintained - and I believe it can be
maintained - mass return will be completed within
two years. Here I would like to mention the crucial role
of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees (UNHCR) in what I believe is a historic
achievement, which just two years ago seemed
extremely unlikely.

Since the end of 1997, more than 102,000
property claims have resulted in repossession - that
is, 41 per cent of all such claims in all of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. That rate will hit the 50 per cent mark
shortly, thus meeting a key condition of the European
Union road map.

I believe we can be proud that the corner has at
last been turned, but this is not the time to relax our
efforts. Adequate funding must be sustained until the
return process has been completed.

The Srebrenica massacre left a legacy of war
more bitter than any other. I welcome the United
Nations recovery programme for Srebrenica, which
aims to address the extraordinary social and economic
problems there. It will underpin the efforts of the
international community in the context of the
Srebrenica Action Plan to facilitate returns to this area.

In 2000 and 2001 I issued decisions setting aside
land for a cemetery and a memorial at Potocari near
Srebrenica. A marker stone was formally installed at
the site on the sixth anniversary of the massacre on 11
July 2001. The proposal made by the associations of
the victims' families to add the nearby so-called
Battery Factory site as a location for the memorial is
being considered at the moment, and a site assessment
of the property is being undertaken, funded by the
United States Government. However, I continue to urge
these associations to proceed without delay to plan for
the burial of the remains that have been exhumed and
prepared for interment.

Early in my mandate, I introduced the concept of
"ownership", or "odgovornost" as they say in the local
languages, to address the dependency syndrome of
Bosnia and Herzegovina and to encourage the Bosnia
and Herzegovina authorities at all levels to meet their
responsibilities. Today, international peace
implementation officials face a healthy amount of pride
on the part of Bosnia and Herzegovina leaders, civic
activists and citizens alike. I see this as proof that they
have the genuine will to start owning problems and
taking responsibility for their country's future.

With the Alliance for Change, a coalition of
reform-oriented parties that displaced the nationalist
establishment in government at the beginning of 2001,
there are finally politicians leading the country who
support and defend Bosnia and Herzegovina's
statehood. With assistance from the international
community extended in a spirit of evolving partnership,
they have, among other things, passed an election law
and prepared Bosnia and Herzegovina for Council of
Europe membership.

As the circumstances of peace implementation
have considerably changed, the international
community has adapted its engagement so as to meet
new challenges in the most effective way. In the spring
of 2001, I was asked by the Foreign Ministers of the
European Union and the Contact Group to oversee the
streamlining of international civil implementation
structures in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Let me share
with you key elements of the final streamlining plan.

The Steering Board of the Peace Implementation
Council (PIC), of course, remains the overall board of
directors, the body to whom I report. In Bosnia and
Herzegovina, there will be a cabinet-style body of
international agency heads, chaired by the High
Representative and responsible for cross-cutting policy
development, supported by an inter-agency situation
group. At the centre, there will be four task forces
covering the core strategic areas of economic reform,
refugee return, institution-building and the rule of law.

Finally, there will be a restructured field presence
based on new joint areas of responsibility and the so-
called co-location of all key agencies.

We have reached the final stage of peace
implementation where more must be done with fewer
resources, and everything must be prepared for a hand-
over to the local authorities. This streamlined model
will deliver a leaner, less bureaucratic, international
community presence with reduced overall costs. It is
being put into effect immediately.

In conclusion, Mr. President, let me inform you
and the members of this body of my intention to leave
my post at the end of May. This is my last presentation
to you, but I will send a final report to the Secretary-
General at that time.

I am convinced that Bosnia and Herzegovina can
and will be a viable State if we continue to implement
our overall plan with firmness and consistency. It is
essential that we do not lose focus at this crucial stage.
Forces bent on destruction and division are not yet
completely defeated.

Yet, the contours of a stable and self-sustainable
Bosnia and Herzegovina, based on the Dayton/Paris
Accords and firmly on course to Europe, are at last
coming into view. Bosnia and Herzegovina has
normalized its relations with its neighbours and now
speaks as an equal and respected member of the
community of States in South-Eastern Europe. I am
proud that I have played a part in bringing this about.

When I leave my post in May, Mr. President, I am
confident that my distinguished successor and friend,
Paddy Ashdown, with your continued support, will
further build on the solid foundation we have put in
place. He will have the opportunity to finally return
Bosnia and Herzegovina to its rightful place - into the
hands of its citizens.

