Mrs. Odera (Kenya): The situation in Angola has
deteriorated rapidly, threatening not only the delicate
stability of that nation but also regional peace and security.
The Kenyan delegation is greatly perturbed by the lack of
political goodwill, which has heightened the crisis in
Angola.

The military and security situations unfortunately
seem to be leading towards renewed confrontation. We
urgently appeal to both the Government and UNITA to
exercise maximum restraint and move the people of
Angola away from the brink of war.

As the security situation deteriorates, the
humanitarian situation has worsened. More and more
people have become internally displaced to such an extent
that now over 10 per cent of the country's population falls
in this category. Many Angolans have fled to
neighbouring countries, as disease and lack of food and
medical supplies continue to afflict the internally
displaced population. We encourage the international
community not to give up, but to continue its much-
needed efforts to alleviate the plight of the Angolan
people.

These political and military developments have
substantially eroded the confidence of both parties in
upholding all the elements of the Lusaka Protocol, which
is the heart of the peace process. We can only urge them
to move quickly back to the negotiating table.

This crisis has seriously affected the work of the
United Nations Observer Mission in Angola (MONUA),
and in the context of this perception among the parties
that a military solution is feasible, the presence of
MONUA has become even more important. We are
therefore happy to note that the downsizing of MONUA's
military component has been temporarily suspended. We
believe that MON UA's presence will continue to serve as
a stabilizing component within the peace process.

It is against this background that my delegation
supports the draft resolution which extends MONUA's
mandate for one month, until 15 September 1998.
My delegation strongly supports the Secretary-
General's appeal to the Government of Unity and National
Reconciliation and, in particular, UNITA to renew their
efforts towards national reconciliation and immediately
institute confidence-building measures at national and
local levels, including the expeditious reactivation of the
joint mechanisms in the provinces.

Without reconciliation a lasting and enduring peace
will continue to be merely a dream. We appeal to the
leaders of Angola to look within themselves, set aside
their political differences and come together to build a
peaceful, united and prosperous Angola.

 

This is the main concern of the Council. It is also this
concern that motivated the Secretary-General to quickly
dispatch his Special Envoy, Ambassador Lakhdar Brahimi,
to the region. We have to quickly build on the immense
progress made by the late Maitre Alioune Blondin Beye to
ensure that these gains are not lost for ever.

We welcome the timely appointment of Mr. Issa
Diallo as the new Special Representative of the Secretary-
General to Angola. We wish him great success and assure
him of our complete cooperation. We do this not only as a
member of this Council and chair of the sanctions
Committee, but also as an African nation. The cooperation
of the parties with Mr. Diallo will be a fitting tribute to the
memory of the late Maitre Beye.

