Mr. Simonovie (Croatia): Let me thank you, Mr. President, for convening this important debate. I also thank the Secretary-General and Mrs. Robinson for their valuable inputs. Croatia aligns itself with the statement made by the observer of the European Union (see S/PV.8699). I will add several points in my national capacity. The adoption of the Charter of the United Nations and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights were decisive moments in human history. In order to prevent the horrors of the Second World War from reoccurring, Member States decided to establish a powerful global organization to protect peace and to promote development and human rights. However, because of the Cold War, the promises envisaged by the Charter remained unfulfilled. The end of the Cold War finally created a political climate that enabled moreeffective actionin safeguarding peace and preventing mass atrocities. In addition to the better functioning of the institutions provided by the Charter, United Nations peacekeeping and special political missions, as well international accountability mechanisms, were introduced. For years, the number of conflicts and atrocity crimes were steadily decreasing. That is no longer the case. In recent years, the number of conflicts, as well as atrocity crimes, has been once again on the rise. Impunity is running rampant. The lack of decisive multilateral responses undermine the rules-based international order. Effective prevention is too often blocked by divisions in the Council and the use of veto by its permanent members. The Charter gives the Security Council the primary responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and security. Within the Council, special trust is given to its five permanent members, vested with special powers. However, such special powers, including a permanent seat on the Council, as well as the right to veto, are accorded to permanent members in the understanding that they would use them responsibly, benefitting all peoples and all United Nations Member States. Croatia has always been a strong and vocal advocate of multilateralism, while at the same time calling for the necessary reforms that would enhance the effectiveness and relevance of the Organization, especially the Security Council. Who sits on it is not the only issue; we would like to see the Council more engaged in preventing crises and dedicated to its Charter duties rather than any particular interest. In order to maintain the Council's authority and relevance in maintaining global peace and security, we need more cooperation and global responsibility in its work. Therefore, Croatia welcomes and supports the initiative to establish a code of conduct regarding Security Council action against genocide, crimes against humanity and war crimes, as well as the French-Mexican initiative whereby the five permanent members of the Council would commit to refraining from the use of veto in cases in which the commission of mass atrocities has been proven. Both initiatives reflect the spirit of the Charter and its intention to save succeeding generations from the scourge of war. In a practical sense, it is crucial that those initiatives do not require an amendment to the Charter, which is, as we all know, extremely difficult because of procedural requirements, as well as vested interests. Croatia also supports and is a part of the multilateralism initiative. Current challenges, such as weapons of mass destruction, as well as cyber and environmental threats, can be successfully addressed only through joint, well-coordinated efforts. Croatia also upholds the responsibility to protect (R2P), as consensually adopted in the 2005 World Summit Outcome document (General Assembly resolution 60/1). It is not legally binding like the provisions of the Charter, but, in addition to being morally binding, it is also politically binding on all Member States, especially the members of the Security Council, which have special responsibilities under R2P. However, the primary aim of R2P is the prevention of atrocity crimes, not reaction to them. There are many things that could and should be done before the point of no return is reached and atrocities are committed. In preventing mass atrocities, peace and security, development and human rights aspects are closely interlinked. Therefore, the Security Council, the rest of the United Nations, regional organizations, Member States and civil society should be coordinating and acting together. In conclusion, we must uphold the United Nations Charter and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. They are humankind's survival guide, but they should also be complemented by additional multilateral responses to newly emerging threats. The seventy-fifth anniversary of the Charter, the twentieth anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000), on women and peace and security, and the fifteenth anniversary of the adoption of R2P create plenty of opportunities for discussion, hopefully leading to more effective action on the prevention of conflicts and atrocity crimes. We must reverse the negative trends. We the peoples demand it from us here and now.
