Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): We wish to express solidarity
with the United Kingdom and Afghanistan. Of course,
the United Kingdom knows that we stand shoulder to
shoulder with it during these difficult times.

It is indeed a great opportunity for me to be able to
extend a warm welcome to you, Sir, and to thank you
for presiding over today's important meeting, and we
thank the Bolivian delegation for organizing it. We are
also grateful to the Secretary-General for his briefing,
which, as usual, was very insightful.

Mr. President, water is, as you so eloquently
highlighted, a vital natural resource, indispensable
to realizing sustainable peace and development.
Unfortunately, due to population growth, urbanization,
industrialization and climate change, water scarcity is
projected to rise. Therefore, in an era of water stress,
the way States manage their transboundary waters
will be extremely crucial to realizing peace, stability
and development.

We are firmly convinced that transboundary rivers
and lakes could and should be, as you stressed, Sir, a
source of genuine cooperation and partnership between
Governments and peoples. Of course, affirming this in
theory is by far much easier than carrying out the same
in practice. The latter requires overcoming obstacles
to a win-win approach that are political, psychological
and cultural, as well as other types of impediments that
affect the development of realistic partnerships that
accord with the reality on the ground.

It is therefore self-evident that the mismanagement
of transboundary waters in the ways just indicated
could lead to political tension and conflict. This is not
naturally ordained by a higher power, however; it is
not ineluctable. What is in fact natural and in accord
with the interest of all concerned is cooperation,
which is facilitated by the natural bond among peoples
that transboundary rivers help to engender. But the
realization ofthis in itselfrequires wisdom, realism and
commitment to a spirit of cooperation that brooks no
desire to monopolize transboundary water resources.

The colonial history of Africa makes this issue all
the more critical. Our strong conviction of the critical
importance of cooperation as a more important theme
whenever the topic is addressed is borne out of past
experiences. History has shown that water can be
instrumental in transforming a potentially conflictive
situation into one of cooperation and partnership.
Creating and building a win-win partnership is indeed

possible, as long as States accept that transboundary
resources must be used equitably and reasonably.
With the right political will, unwavering commitment
to continued dialogue to solve disagreements and
participatory mechanisms, transboundary rivers create
favourable conditions for peace, economic cooperation
and regional integration which could benefit all
riparian States.

That is why studies demonstrate that, despite
the fiery political rhetoric, no State has gone to war
specifically over water resources, and there are more
examples of cooperation than of conflict, with hundreds
of agreements negotiated and signed by States,
resulting in productive and well-functioning bilateral
and regional mechanisms. It is for these reasons that
we remain committed to and actively pursue a path of
cooperation in bilateral and regional transboundary
water management issues.

Ethiopia strongly believes in the utilization of
transboundary waters, including the Nile River, as a
source of regional cooperation for shared development.
For Ethiopia, the Nile basin is a natural endowment
that belongs to all riparian States, which should lead
to strengthened friendship and greater understanding.
Let me take this opportunity to reaffirm the political
commitment of Ethiopia to continuing the regional
dialogue with a genuine and lasting commitment
to shared prosperity and overcoming poverty. This
is also in conformity with the 2030 Agenda, whose
major clarion call is leaving no one behind. That is
why, in fact, the topic is best addressed by the General
Assembly and the Economic and Social Council.

All the same, the Nile Basin initiative is an example
of cooperation and partnership that we have in our part
of the world whose ultimate objective is achieving
harmonious utilization of the river. The riparian States
negotiated the Nile River Basin Cooperative Framework
Agreement for almost 13 years and now the Agreement
is signed by six riparian States and ratified by three
States. It is our sincere hope that once the remaining
three riparian States ratify the Agreement, a permanent
River Basin Commission will be established.

The cooperation between Ethiopia, Egypt and the
Sudan and the signing of the Declaration of Principles
by the leaders of the three easterly countries is also
another manifestation of regional cooperation which
needs to be enhanced further. No doubt, there are
differences between upstream and downstream States
of the Nile, but the most important thing is that we have
a mechanism for dialogue anchored in the principle of
mutual understanding and respect. We believe such
bilateral and regional governance mechanisms should
be allowed to develop and consolidate within their
own regional contexts. Internationalizing these issues
will not help; it would instead complicate matters
undermining efforts at the bilateral and regional levels.

The 2030 Agenda provides us another historical
opportunity to ensure access to clean water for all.
The timely and full implementation of the Sustainable
Development Goals (SDGs) is the best tool to prevent
conflict and ensure inclusive development for all.
In this context, enhanced international cooperation
would be indispensable to fully implement SDG 6 and
other water and water-related Development Goals and
Targets in developing countries, particularly in least
developed countries.

Ethiopia has been actively and constructively
engaged in water dialogues that Member States have
undertaken this year in accordance with General
Assembly resolution 71/222 on the International Decade
for Action, "Water for Sustainable Development",
2018-2028, which it co-sponsored. It is such kind
of development-oriented dialogues, together with
adequate and sustained financial, technological and
capacity-building support for the most vulnerable
countries, that could bring concrete solutions for the
water-stressed world. This is how we all could prevent
conflicts and promote durable peace and security.

