Mr. Aliyev (Azerbaijan): Let me commence by
expressing our gratitude to the Moroccan presidency of
the Security Council for having convened this important
meeting to discuss the threats to international peace
and security posed by the multifaceted and interlinked
challenges that the countries of the Sahel region are
facing. I would also like to thank Secretary-General
Mr. Ban Ki-Moon, Special Envoy Mr. Romano Prodi,
and the High Commissioner for Refugees, Mr. Antonio
Guterres, for their informative briefings. I also thank
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Cote D'Ivoire Mr. Charles
Koffi Diby for his insightful intervention on behalf of
Economic Community of West African States. The
high level ofrepresentation at today's meeting attests to
the unwavering commitment of the United Nations, the
regional and subregional organizations and the States
concerned to finding durable solutions to the problems
in the Sahel region.

For years, the Sahel region has been plagued
by complex political, security, socioeconomic and
humanitarian challenges. The recent wave of violence in
the region and its vicinity, accompanied by infiltration
by armed groups, terrorists and criminal networks into
the region, an influx of weaponry and an upsurge in
radical separatist activities, have further undermined
the security and stability of the Sahel States and have
exacerbated the trials of the already harsh lives of
their peoples. In addressing the situation in the region,
the international community must remain strongly
committed to respecting the sovereignty, territorial
integrity, unity and political independence of the
countries of the Sahel.

The crisis in Mali, including its negative
implications for the region and beyond, is a matter of
grave concern. We concur with the Secretary-General
that Mali's complex crisis requires a multifaceted and
integrated response, in which the political, security,
humanitarian and human rights dimensions are well
coordinated and mutually reinforcing. Azerbaijan
supports the ongoing national, subregional, regional and
international efforts to promote national reconciliation
and fully restore the constitutional order in Mali. At
the same time, the situation in the north of Mali calls
for urgent action and measures, including in particular
those under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United
Nations, to restore the territorial integrity, sovereignty
and unity of the country and to dismantle the terrorist
and criminal networks there.

The persistent situation of insecurity and
underdevelopment in the Sahel naturally has an
aggravating impact on the humanitarian situation. It is
obvious that there is aneed for a swift, comprehensive and
consistent international approach in tackling massive
displacement, health, food insecurity and malnutrition
problems. A prompt response and continued assistance
to the affected countries are required to address the
most pressing needs of the population and to prevent a
large-scale crisis in the region. In the broader context,
it is crucial to effectively link humanitarian and
development initiatives to ensure sustainable solutions.
Support for national Governments in the region is
required, with a View to enabling them to design and
implement resilience-based approaches to sustainable
development.

I commend the joint high-level partnership mission
of the United Nations Office of the Coordinator for
Humanitarian Affairs and the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation to the Sahel region that took place from
14 to 21 October. The mission primarily focused on
gathering information on the impact of the humanitarian
crises in some countries and exploring ways to respond
collaboratively. Azerbaijan participated in that joint
partnership mission and will continue contributing
to national, regional and international humanitarian
efforts and development assistance programmes in the
Sahel.

One meeting will not suffice to fully reflect on
and search for solutions to all problems faced by the
Sahel countries. Those problems are perennial, chronic
and deeply rooted. A comprehensive, integrated
and radical response and consistent engagement
from regional and international actors are critical.
Resolution 2056 (2012) authorized the development and
implementation of a United Nations integrated strategy
for the Sahel region. The expedient finalization of the
strategy will imminently pave the way for a structural,
coordinated and efficient international approach to
tackle security, governance, humanitarian, human
rights and development issues in the Sahel. The efforts
of Mr. Prodi, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
for the Sahel, are instrumental, indeed indispensable,
in achieving the earliest realization of the strategy
and coordinating responses at all levels to the regional
problems.

In conclusion, we reiterate our support of and
welcome the presidential statement made earlier today
(S/PRST/2012/26), which once again demonstrated the
Security Council's strong determination to advance
peace, security, stability and development in the Sahel
region.

