The President (spoke in Spanish): I will now
make a statement in my capacity of Vice-President and
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of
Panama.

At the outset, I would like to thank the Special
Representative for Children in Armed Conflict,
Ms. Radhika Coomaraswamy, the Executive Director
of UNICEF, Ms. Ann Veneman, and Ms. Jo Becker of
the Watchlist on Children and Armed Conflict,
representative of non-governmental organizations, for
their briefings. We are also pleased to welcome here
the French Minister for Foreign Affairs, Bernard
Kouchner, the Minister for Development Cooperation
of Belgium, Mr. Charles Michel, and the Under-
Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs of Italy,
Mr. Vittorio Craxi.

We all recognize the negative impact of armed
conflicts on children. Innocent beings are deprived of
an education, displaced and uprooted from their homes
and haunted by the violence they witness or even
commit. Lost generations are created, deprived of
opportunities, which could unleash a permanent cycle
of violence in their lives. The international community
thus has an obligation to undertake efforts to prevent
this scourge from continuing to affect children in
armed conflict.

The establishment of the Security Council's
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict is
evidence that neither the world nor the United Nations
will continue to address these issues in a fragmented
manner. That concept is clearly reflected in the 2005
World Summit Outcome, which reads:

"We acknowledge that peace and security,
development and human rights are the pillars of
the United Nations system and the foundations
for collective security and well-being. We
recognize that development, peace and security
and human rights are interlinked and mutually
reinforcing." (resolution 60/1, para. 9)

On the basis of that concept, the establishment of
the Working Group is worthwhile and appropriate.

Nonetheless, protecting children in situations of
armed conflict is a task that the Security Council
cannot and must not undertake on its own. The General
Assembly must increase its efforts in that matter and
guarantee that those efforts are carried out in close
coordination with the Security Council, to avoid the
duplication of efforts and ensure a more effective
organizational approach.

In that context, we must add that the Working
Group's practice of meeting with parties affected by
their decisions should serve as an example for other
subsidiary bodies of the Security Council, a practice
that Panama has repeatedly endorsed.

With respect to the report of the Secretary-
General, we welcome the important advances in the
implementation of the relevant norms, standards and
international legislation in the criminal field, including
the conviction of members of the Armed Forces
Revolutionary Council by the Special Court for Sierra
Leone for recruiting and using children in armed
conflict in that country. Along the same lines, the arrest
warrants and charges issued by the International
Criminal Court against individuals who have forcefully
recruited children represent concrete steps taken by the
international community to put an end to the culture of
impunity that exists among those who systematically
violate the rights of children in situations of armed
conflict.

Despite those advances, we must express our
concern regarding the increasing use of camps for

08-2361]
refugees and internally displaced persons as places
from which to recruit child soldiers, a practice which
aggravates the daily difficulties already faced by those
children. Refugee and internally displaced children are
more vulnerable to homelessness, malnutrition, lack of
education and discrimination. Such difficult conditions
have a psychological impact on children, predisposing
them to violent behaviours and facilitating their
recruitment by the warring parties in a conflict.

We express our concern regarding the
proliferation of intentional and systematic attacks
against schools, teachers and school buildings, where
children do not only go for their education, but where
they traditionally find refuge. That space must be
respected. In particular, we stress our concern for the
trends in the use of sexual violence as a weapon of war
and the excessive use of force against children.

We join all those who reaffirmed their support for
the work of the International Criminal Court. We
encourage that international tribunal to continue
safeguarding the rights of children when investigating
war crimes and crimes against humanity.

Finally, we underscore the importance of
including child protection advisers in the mandates of
future peacekeeping missions and relevant political
missions. Likewise, we stress the need for greater
concentration on the reintegration of children into
society through programmatic responses at the
community level, particularly in the form of education
and psychosocial support, in order to increase their
opportunities for participation in society.

I cannot conclude without congratulating the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict and the Executive Director
of UNICEF, and the very many non-governmental
organizations, all of them, on the work that they have
done to put an end to this threat to international peace
and security. Similarly, let me also acknowledge the
leadership that France has shown in this extremely
important area. I thank them all.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council and give the floor to the representative of
Slovenia.
