Mr. Al-Allaf (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): Allow
me at the outset to express our gratitude to the Under-
Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs, Mr. John
Holmes, for the important briefing that he has
presented this morning. We would also like to note that
we share his concerns about the safety and security of
civilians in several conflict zones.

My country's delegation would also like to
express its thanks and gratitude to you, Mr. President,
for holding this important meeting to address the issue
of the protection of civilians in armed conflicts. This
meeting is aimed at entrenching the basic tenets of
international humanitarian law, the Fourth Geneva
Convention and the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights. It is also aimed at reaffirming the political,
legal and moral responsibilities of parties to conflicts
towards civilians, civilian institutions and the
protection of civilians in conflict situations. Moreover,
the role of the international community lies not just in
guaranteeing complete adherence to these laws, but
also in guaranteeing that there will be no impunity in
cases of violations.

This meeting comes at a difficult time, as the
world watches, live and in astonishment, the situation
in Gaza. The situation has been ongoing for three
weeks now. All international rules and standards
regulating armed conflict have been violated. The
Israeli aggression has targeted unarmed and innocent
civilians and destroyed infrastructure in Gaza. Here,
Jordan joins the international call issued by the
Secretary-General for an end to the suffering of
civilians in Gaza and for their protection.

We are faced with an unprecedented example of
inhumane aggression against the security, safety, rights
and basic freedoms of human beings, the most
important of which is the right to life and freedom
from fear and terror, and against the right to the basic
requirements of normal life. We are witnessing a
flagrant violation - an attack against the identity of
the Palestinian people and their character, future and
basic rights. We are also witnessing an unjustified
siege that has cut the lifeline of the 1.5 million
Palestinians living in Gaza. These are civilians who are
being subjected to a disproportionate use of force and
to collective punishment. They deserve immediate
protection by this Council.

I will not list all the figures, which are known to
us all, but I would like to point out that 280 children
have been killed, 1,200 have been wounded, and many
more are living in fear and terror. This terror will haunt
them for generations and decades to come. UNICEF
has clearly expressed its deep concern over the
destructive impact that the Israeli aggression has had
on children in Gaza.

Israel must protect civilians, especially children,
who constitute 56 per cent of Gaza's residents. Israel
must abide by the provisions of international
humanitarian law, especially the principles of
distinction between targets and proportionality. These
figures are not simply collateral damage; rather, they
represent primary damage caused by targeted military
operations in a disproportionate and exaggerated use of
force. This arbitrary use of force does not distinguish
between a military target and the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East school, in which a group of women, children and
elderly people had sought refuge from Israel's military
operations.

The evacuation of the injured and the provision
of safe passage for ambulances and medical personnel
are among the most important tenets of international
humanitarian law. On that basis, Israel must guarantee
and facilitate access by medical staff and ambulances,
which are now unable to do their duty in the light of
the dangerous circumstances prevailing in Gaza. Israel
must abide by the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights, the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection
of Civilian Persons in Time of War and the Protocols
Additional I and II to the Geneva Conventions of
12 August 1949, which pertain to the protection of the
victims of international and non-international armed
conflict. It must also abide by all relevant international
instruments, the Declaration on the Protection of
Women and Children in Emergency and Armed
Conflict and all relevant General Assembly resolutions.
Jordan calls on the international community to
uphold its responsibilities and obligations in protecting
civilians in armed conflict, including by calling upon
Israel to immediately implement resolution 1860
(2009), which calls for an immediate ceasefire that
would lead to a full withdrawal of Israeli forces from
Gaza and guarantee the full protection of the
international community for the people of Gaza against
the Israeli military aggression.

