The President (spoke in Chinese): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of China.

The continued military strikes against the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia by the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization, with the United States at the lead, has already
resulted in severe casualties and damage, and the situation
in the Balkan region has seriously deteriorated. The Chinese
Government strongly opposes such an act, which constitutes
a blatant violation of the principles of the Charter of the
United Nations and of international law, as well as a
challenge to the authority of the Security Council. We
would like to reiterate our strong call for an immediate
cessation of this military action, so as to facilitate the
restoration of peace in the Balkan region at an early date.

China has always stood for the peaceful settlement of
disputes through negotiations. We oppose the use or the
threat of use of force in international affairs. We oppose
the power politics of the strong bullying the weak. We
oppose interference in the internal affairs of other States,
under whatever pretext, in whatever form. The Chinese
delegation would like to reiterate that the question of
Kosovo, being an internal matter of the Federal Republic
of Yugoslavia, should be resolved by the parties
concerned in the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia among
themselves.

The Kosovo issue should be settled on the basis of
respect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and of a guarantee of the
legitimate rights and interests of all the ethnic groups in
the Kosovo area.

It was based on the above principles that the Chinese
delegation voted in favour of the draft resolution before
us. We deeply regret that the Council has failed to adopt
this draft, which is in conformity with the basic principles
of the Charter of the United Nations and international
law.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

The Security Council has thus concluded its voting
procedure.

The next speaker is the representative of Ukraine. I
invite him to take a seat at the Council table and to make
his statement.

