Mr. Tillander: The visit of the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC) to Liberia and Sierra Leone last
month, with participation from Australia, Bangladesh,
Canada, Egypt, Japan, Kuwait, Norway, Sweden and
the United Kingdom, demonstrated the commitment
to peacebuilding in Liberia and the region. I am very
grateful for the warm welcome and support from the
Government, the United Nations Mission in Liberia
(UNMIL) and the entire United Nations system.

The visit allowed us to consult with the Government
on how to accelerate progress on security sector
reform, the rule of law and national reconciliation, in
accordance with resolution 2066 (2012). I appreciate
this opportunity to report to the Council on those
aspects. During the visit, the first regional justice and
security hub was inaugurated in Gbarnga. This is one of
the many steps needed to advance Liberia's progress in
extending services, justice and security to communities
around the country. This is an essential component of
institution-building in Liberia and for consolidating
mutual trust and respect between the State and its
people. As President Johnson-Sirleaf stated at the
launch ceremony,

"The opening of this first hub, in the nation's
heartland, is confirmation that we mean what we
say about decentralizing services to all parts of
this country. The presence of this hub, and of the
others to follow, will ensure access to justice and to
quality security service for all Liberians."

Efforts should continue to ensure that the provision
of quality justice and security services is a reality.
We count on the Government of Liberia to make the
appropriate provisions, including planning and budget
allocations for recurring costs and delivery of services.
At the same time, we must now focus on the services
and activities that should be provided through the
second and third hubs, located in Zwedru and Harper.
We have agreed with the Government that a year from
now, the PBC will visit and assess the range of services
in place and offered to the people in the surrounding
communities.

This focus on implementing and providing
services quickly is very challenging. The Government
must establish a budget for recurring costs, training
and deployment; the United Nations Development
Programme must start to implement the hubs' service
components; gender advisers, judges, outreach and
public services should be quickly put in place; the
United Nations Office for Project Services must without
delay provide innovative infrastructure solutions, some
of them temporary; financing committed through
the Peacebuilding Fund should be made available
as indicated, with a focus on facilitating the speedy
delivery of services. Applying lessons learned from the
Gbarnga hub is essential; if we get this right, the hub
concept may serve as a model for other countries.

But the hub concept must be implemented within a
holistic, coordinated and balanced approach to justice
and security, including the entire rule-of-law chain.
The outcome of the review of the Justice and Security
Joint Programme will help strengthen its effectiveness
and its function in setting priorities. The result should
provide a basis for a comprehensive approach, with
agreed indicators and benchmarks in support of
Government actions that should also guide the United
Nations system and bilateral partners. Government
ownership is of fundamental importance. In line with
the statement of mutual commitments, and as a sign of
its commitment, Liberia has increased the allocation
for justice and security in this year's budget. Its timely
disbursement will be the basis for implementing
programmes, ensuring partners' full support and
keeping step with UNMIL's transition.

Work on a police law is under way under the
leadership of the Minister of Justice. It has been given
the highest priority and includes the professionalization
ofthe police and the chain of command as well as proper
oversight and complaint mechanisms. The PBC will be
prepared to continue to assist in identifying creative
approaches to fill specialized UNMIL posts, using
the various tools available and relevant new funding
mechanisms.

National reconciliation is another core peacebuilding
priority. That is also an area where there is a need for
leadership and resolve. As the Commission discussed
with the Minister of Internal Affairs, Mr. Blamoh
Nelson, in a video teleconference last week, various
strands within the National Reconciliation Road
Map should now be implemented in an inclusive and
coordinated manner. The role and mandate of the various
institutions and actors involved in the implementation
still need to be clarified. Government funds allocated
should be made available in a timely manner, and
financing mechanisms based on the Road Map will
offer opportunities for international partners to support
coordinated implementation. Exchanging experiences
with other countries that have been in similar situations
could also promote the reconciliation process. The PBC
can offer a platform for facilitating such exchanges and
for promoting third-party commitments of necessary
resources.

The Minister of Gender and Development,
Ms. Julia Duncan-Cassell, participated in a PBC
configuration breakfast meeting during the session of
the Commission on the Status of Women, and reminded
us of the measures that are needed to prevent gender-
based violence, such as working with men and women
and ensuring women's participation in decision-making.
The Peacebuilding Fund and UN-Women have initiated
discussions to help identify areas needing support, and
such efforts should be encouraged. In order to support
various groups of youth, including women and girls, the
United Nations system, together with the international
financial institutions and bilateral partners, should
work with the Government and civil society to address
gaps in that area.

Regarding land and resources, representatives of
civil society expressed concern during the PBC's last
visit about the lack of community participation, the
limited role of women and the fact that some concessions
do not necessarily lead to improved livelihoods for the
host communities. There should be further support and
encouragement for Government efforts to strengthen
laws, policies and institutions aimed at resolving
existing disputes and preventing the mismanagement of
land and natural resources, including measures to stop
the misuse of private-use permits, for example, and to
bring those responsible to justice.

Finally, I welcome the cooperation between the
Government and the PBC in addressing the mutual
commitments made, starting in November 2010, and
renewed and adopted last week, after the second review.
The Government has demonstrated its commitment
by increasing its efforts, including through budgetary
provisions, to support justice, security and national
reconciliation. The PBC is committed to working
with the Government to implement the statement of
mutual commitments and to align it with Government
priorities and peace- and State-building goals, thus
avoiding duplication, ensuring effective coordination
and channelling resources more efficiently in support
of the Government's peacebuilding objectives. That
approach will help stakeholders focus on critical issues
and provide an environment conducive to the transition
and eventual drawdown of UNMIL. I look forward to
the intensification of our efforts and the full support of
the Security Council, and I stand ready to report back
to the Council on progress made.

