Mr. Flies (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I thank
the Secretary-General for his presentation. Allow me
also to take this opportunity to warmly thank the High
Commissioner for Human Rights, Ms. Navi Pillay,
for what is doubtless her last appearance before the
Security Council.

My delegation aligns itself with the statement to be
made later by the observer of the European Union.

Over the past few months we have witnessed one
conflict after another, some more deadly than the others.
Faced with the annihilation of so many human lives
and such misery and suffering, there is reason to ask
ourselves whether the solemn promise that accompanied
the founding of the United Nations has been kept. Yes,
successive generations have been spared the scourge of
worldwide war, but not the numerous conflicts that in
many areas of the world continue to destroy the lives of
hundreds of thousands, if not millions, of men, women
and children.

With that in mind, it becomes all the more pressing
to ask whether everything has really been put in place
to prevent such conflicts. Today's open debate and
resolution 2171 (2014), which we have just adopted, are
therefore timely, and I would like to congratulate the
United Kingdom for having taken this initiative.

Even if we are sometimes caught off guard by the
emergence of a crisis situation, no conflict arrives
without warning signs. Training ourselves to recognize
them, analyse them and understand them in order to take
the most appropriate and effective measures to prevent
a situation from degenerating into open conflict - that,
in a few words, is the essence of conflict prevention. In
reality, such an undertaking is complex and requires
the coordinated implementation of many tools and
multiple actors.
Chapter VI of the Charter of the United Nations
enumerates the tools that States and the Security
Council can use to bring about the peaceful resolution of
disputes. Those tools are well known and include, inter
alia, negotiation, investigation, mediation, conciliation
and arbitration. Those instruments have not always
been fully utilized in the context of conflict prevention.
We welcome the fact that, with today's resolution, the
Council has committed itself to making better use of
them.

But we must also look beyond current conflicts,
beyond those already on the Security Council's agenda,
to recognize the signs that alert us to emerging ones,
keeping in mind that prevention is easier than cure. We
know that most conflicts are preceded by a significant
degradation of the human rights situation. The
Secretary-General's Rights Up Front initiative belongs
in that context, and we welcome it. We welcome it not
only because it places the question of human rights at
the heart of the activities of the United Nations system,
but also because its goal is to better inform Member
States about populations that are suffering serious
human rights violations or violations of international
humanitarian law, or are at risk for that, and thus to
contribute actively to the conflict-prevention effort.

The Secretary-General's Special Adviser on the
Prevention of Genocide and the Special Adviser on the
Responsibility to Protect also have a crucial role to play
in that context. The very notion of the responsibility to
protect, as defined in the 2005 World Summit Outcome
(General Assembly resolution 60/1), is inseparable
from the setting up of an early-warning mechanism.
The Special Advisers on the Prevention of Genocide
and on the Responsibility to Protect fulfil that role
for the Secretary-General, but also for the Security
Council and the international community as a whole.
The Council would benefit from inviting them more
often to report on their work.

By Virtue of the provisions of the Charter,
the Secretary-General likewise can contribute to
conflict prevention, in particular by drawing the
Council's attention to any matter that could jeopardize
international peace and security. That prerogative,
which is granted him by Article 99 of the Charter,
allows him particularly to broaden the horizon of the
Council. We strongly encourage the Secretary-General
to continue to employ that important tool.
Conflict prevention that is worthy of that
name cannot ignore the cyclical nature of conflicts
related to the root causes that trigger and maintain
tensions - poverty, discrimination, a lack ofthe rule of
law, and impunity, to name but a few. The Peacebuilding
Commission, established nearly 10 years ago under
the auspices of the Security Council and the General
Assembly, has an important role to play in preventing
a relapse into a situation of conflict and in supporting
countries emerging from conflict towards sustainable
peace. It is another significant tool in the prevention
architecture.

In this year of commemoration of the centenary of
the Great War, it is natural that we consider the causes
of past conflicts. However, that should also prompt
us to look ahead and convince us of the need to make
every effort not to repeat past mistakes. Today we have
available means that were inconceivable a century ago.
It is up to the Council to use those tools by focusing on
action, not only on reaction. Maintaining international
peace and security also involves the more important
aspect of conflict prevention.

