Mr. Lancry (Israel) (spoke in French): When this
discussion began, I was given ample opportunity to put
forward Israel's point of view. I would like in this
regard to express my full gratitude. Nevertheless, this
second statement seemed to me to be a necessary
clarification at the end of this discussion, which has
been clearly unequal in its content.

First of all, we take note of the urgent and
relevant appeal for a return to reason and dialogue
between Palestinians and Israelis based on a total
cessation of violence and confrontation and on the
implementation of the Mitchell plan.

A guiding principle of the peace process, the
mutual recognition contracted between Israelis and
Palestinians following the Oslo Accords remains a
major basis for the ability of the two peoples to affirm
the principle of their coexistence. The bedrock of the
Oslo Accords linked to the intrinsically philosophical
dimension of the Israeli-Palestinian relationship - that
is to say moving from exclusion and reciprocal denial
to mutual recognition - is still valid despite the tragic
setback inherent in the current crisis.

It is this common basis, on which the future of
both peoples, depends that we must make more visible
and credible, through a political process free of any
confrontation or terrorist constraint.

In the service of that objective, the Mitchell plan
is a necessary and effective tool for a return to the logic
of peace. It is this strong and necessary message that
most Members of the Security Council have given
pride of place.

The Mitchell report, agreed to by the two parties,
could be immediately implemented if only the entry
point, that is the end of violence and terrorism, were
opened up.

This is precisely what is stipulated by the
Mitchell report in its broad outlines. Israel has already
shown its willingness for a return to the situation that
prevailed before 28 September 2000. It is ready for an
end to this confrontation on all fronts imposed for
almost a year by Palestinians under the cover of an
intifada, as soon Palestinian terrorism gives way to
dialogue.

Consequently, rather than exacerbating an already
sufficiently complex situation by introducing totally
new international machinery, it is up to the Palestinian
leadership to assume its responsibility by taking the
necessary decision: that of doing away with all strains
of terrorism, which are harmful to peace and hinder its
painstaking realization.

Good-faith negotiation cannot endure even the
smallest dose of terrorism - much less the Palestinian
suicide attacks that throughout this conflict have been
used as a method of killing the maximal number of
people.

It is once again imperative to eliminate terrorism
and replace it with policy, a fundamental principle to
which Chairman Arafat committed himself when he
signed the Oslo Accords. That is an inviolable rule to
which Chairman Arafat must bind his dialogue of
peace.

Yesterday, permanent and non-permanent
members of the Security Council indicated their firm
and unequivocal condemnation of Palestinian
terrorism. They spoke of their revulsion at the
atrocious nature of certain Palestinian terrorist
practices. Chairman Arafat must heed that powerful
message. The condemnation of terrorism that underlay
those Council members' appeal for a resumption of
dialogue was highly significant. It essentially indicated
the need to end the process by which terrorism and
policy are becoming interchangeable. This mixture of
the two is no longer acceptable; it could even
undermine the remarkable political achievements made
during the early days of the Oslo process.

Declared by the Mitchell report to be
"reprehensible and unacceptable", Palestinian terrorism
has now been rejected by nearly the entire Security
Council.

Yet we are somewhat perplexed by statements
made by certain participants in the debate, which were
as inconsistent as they were self-contradictory. An
example is the twofold position taken by the Permanent
Representative of Pakistan. Our Pakistani colleague
both affirmed that he "support[ed] the full
implementation of the Mitchell report" (supra, resumption I) and bridled at what he called a denial of
"legitimacy and glory", referring to Palestinian
terrorism. I say this with all the deference I feel
towards my Pakistani colleague, whose statements on a
variety of issues I invariably appreciate, but how can
we seriously believe in the "legitimacy and glory" of
suicidal terrorism and its gruesome effects?

In another vein, worthy of weightier discourse, I
would like to respond to one of the comments of my
Pakistani colleague. He said that "peace cannot be
established through subjugation". I willingly agree
with that, and recall in that context that peace was not
obtained at Camp David precisely because of the flaw
of subjugation: as a response to the comprehensive
Israeli peace offer encompassing the main final-status
issues, Israel found itself facing the threat of scheduled
extinction by demographic drowning linked with the
right of return of Palestinian refugees. We could not
submit to subjugation of that kind.

This type of Security Council debate inevitably
generates its share of tangential and outrageous
rhetoric fueled by ranting. And the Permanent
Representative of Iraq felt neither embarrassment nor
restraint in engaging in unmatchable hyperbole: he
accused Israel of nothing less than using nuclear and
chemical weapons against the Palestinian people.

Soon after his Iraqi colleague, the Permanent
Representative of Libya, in what appears to be a
recurring rhetorical spasm, drew on his repertory of
hatred and contempt for the Jewish people and for
Israel.

Those two permanent representatives, of Iraq and
of Libya, also represent the serene permanence of two
eccentric dictatorships that, with noteworthy
composure, advocate the eradication of the State of
Israel. The most recent reminder of this anti-Israel
penchant may be seen on page A-8 of today's The New
York Times, which quotes the regime's number-two
man, the Iraqi Vice-President, Izzat Ibrahim, as calling
on the Arab and Islamic nation to combat Israel and "to
expel the sons of monkeys and pigs, strangers on the
land".

We Israelis have no particular reason to welcome
such lessons of contempt and hatred, as taught in
countries such as Iraq and Libya, but I wonder whether
such rhetoric is the best way of serving the Palestinian
cause.

As we have said, we consider the draft resolution
being circulated at Palestinian behest to be utterly
impracticable, despite its sophisticated crafting. The
text is unilateral; it absolves the Palestinian side of any
responsibility for its terrorist practices; and it strips the
Mitchell plan of its bilateral dimension and uselessly
burdens it with a totally superfluous international
machinery.

We stress that our approach, which calls for direct
bilateral negotiations on the implementation of the
Mitchell report, enjoys significant support among key
members of the Security Council. It is from that
perspective - which encompasses the same means
used during the most fruitful stages of the Israeli-
Palestinian peace process - that we invite our
Palestinian partners to resume the dialogue.

Recent months, during which similar debates
have taken place in the Security Council, have duly
shown the futility of an exercise that would impose an
unjustified and ineffective international presence. Only
a return to the beginnings and the life-source of the
historic turning taken by Palestinians and Israelis since
Oslo will enable us to overcome our frustrations and
attain the peace and coexistence that both our peoples
deserve.

The announced meeting between Shimon Peres,
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Israel, and
Chairman Yasser Arafat could indicate - at least, this
is our conviction and our hope - such a new
beginning.

