Mr. Salim: Let me begin by expressing my deep
appreciation to you, Mr. President, and to your
colleagues in the Council for having once again
extended an invitation to me to come here to brief you
on the status of the inter-Sudanese peace talks on the
conflict in Darfur, the Sudan, which are currently
taking place in Abuja, Nigeria. The fact that the
Council has once again invited me to New York to
address it clearly symbolizes the collective concern of
the international community at the plight of the people
of Darfur and the Council's determination to remain
seized of the ongoing processes, especially the speedy
and successful conclusion of the peace talks.
Since I last briefed the Council three months ago,
there have been significant developments in the efforts
to achieve a comprehensive peace agreement for
Darfur. That agreement is clearly within our reach,
despite the fact that a great deal of hard work still
remains to be done.

We shall very shortly submit a set of compromise
proposals representing fair and balanced options for
bringing the conflict in Darfur to an end and putting in
place the necessary mechanisms for ensuring that,
ultimately, a just and lasting peace can prevail in that
troubled land.

On 6 April last, I had the opportunity to brief the
African Union Peace and Security Council meeting in
Addis Ababa and to participate in a constructive
discussion on how best to sustain the momentum of the
process. My personal assessment after the meeting is
that Africa is waiting impatiently for a political and
negotiated resolution of the conflict in Darfur. The
subsequent visit to Abuja of Mr. Denis Sassou-
Nguesso, President of the Republic of Congo and
current Chairman of the African Union (AU), on 8 and
9 April last was a tangible manifestation of that
preoccupation and reflected the determination of Africa
to assist our mediation efforts. Meanwhile, our host in
Nigeria, President Olusegun Obasanjo, continues to
support us fully.

Taken together, these facts demonstrate clearly
the genuine desire of the leaders - and, indeed, of
Africa as a whole - to do their utmost to address the
problems in Darfur. In this, there is a happy
convergence between the Council and Africa.

When I last briefed the Council in January, I
expressed my frustration at the agonizingly slow pace
of the negotiations and the apparent lack of confidence
among the parties. This time around, I should like to
state that the situation is evolving, though not as fast as
we would have wished. We continue to be hampered by
the unwillingness or inability of the parties to offer
significant concessions and by the deep distrust and
mutual suspicion that pervades the relations among
them. As we enter the home stretch of this marathon
negotiating session, the anxieties of the parties are,
understandably, intensifying. We can therefore expect
further frustrating hesitation as they contemplate
compromise and agreement, and, in more general
terms, what the future holds for them and their
respective constituencies.

By the time I left Abuja last Saturday, we had
gradually and systematically exhausted all the
arguments on the key issues of power-sharing and
wealth-sharing baskets. Most notably, I had the
impression that we might be able to make some
progress in the negotiations on security arrangements,
such that the final - and, arguably, the most
important - piece of the jigsaw puzzle, the final status
issues, could be presented in the near future.

During the past few days, the Vice-President of
the Sudan, Mr. Ali Osman Taha, was with us in Abuja
at the head of a high-powered delegation of the
Government of National Unity of the Sudan. As a
matter of fact, I had to - most reluctantly - leave
Mr. Taha in Abuja because of my prior and twice-
postponed commitment to brief the Council. The Vice-
President's visit has been extremely helpful in moving
the process forward. All the leaders of the Darfur
movements were also present, together with their
senior advisers, when I left. For the first time, there are
intensive bilateral and direct discussions between the
parties, as well as meetings facilitated by the
mediation, which followed the momentum provided by
the initiative of President Sassou-Nguesso and
President Obasanjo. The conflict in Darfur, which has
caused so much suffering and bloodshed, seems at last
to be ripe for resolution, and we in the African Union
mediation are prepared to take the parties into that
difficult and sensitive final stretch in the coming
weeks.

On a related issue, I wish to commend the First
Vice- President of the Sudan, Mr. Salva Kiir, and the
leadership of the Sudan People's Liberation Movement
(SPLM) for the engagement of their representatives in
and the facilitation of the process alongside Vice
President Ali Osman Taha in Abuja. Their deep
insights, broad experience and forward-looking ideas
have proved very helpful in providing confidence to
the movements and a much-needed momentum for the
talks.

I am personally convinced that we are now in a
position to present a far-reaching set of proposals to
the parties before the end of April, as urged by the AU
Peace and Security Council and the Security Council
only a few days ago. Such proposals will cover the
issues of power- sharing, wealth-sharing, security
arrangements and the Darfur-Darfur dialogue and
consultations, as well as implementation mechanisms
and modalities.

At the centre of our proposals is a formula for
power- sharing. Here we have listened to the parties
exhaustively on a set of issues concerning Darfur's
representation in the presidency, the National
Executive and National Assembly, the status of Darfur
within the Sudan, and the makeup of Darfur's three
state governments. That also applies to the issue of fair
representation for Darfurians in the Sudan's national
institutions and the commissions envisaged under the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement.

The Government of the Sudan is beginning to
show some flexibility on those issues, and we are
hopeful that the differences can be narrowed. We need
the movements to head in the same direction as we
strive to address their concerns. The mediation
proposals will be informed by the flexibility indicated
by the Government and by our understanding of both
the movements' legitimate fears and the aspirations of
Darfurians in general, as well as the imperative of
finding a just and lasting formula to resolve the
problems that are at the heart of this terrible conflict in
the Sudan.

In submitting the proposals, we remain guided,
first and foremost, by the principle of fairness. We are
committed to ensuring that we do not submit any
proposal for power-sharing that does not enable the
people of Darfur to enjoy fair and effective
representation in the Sudan's national institutions with
a view to ending their marginalization.

On wealth-sharing, there are four outstanding
issues: the assistance to be provided to internally
displaced persons and refugees to enable them to
restart their livelihoods, the formula for transfers from
the national Government to the states, the seed money
for the Darfur reconstruction and development fund,
and the compensation for communities and individuals
who have been victims of the conflict. The
compensation and the money for the Darfur fund are
two of the most controversial. Nevertheless, we remain
convinced that, with political will and commitment by
the parties, all of those issues can be resolved without
further delay.

Security lies at the heart of Darfur's crisis. It is
probably not an exaggeration to say that security
arrangements will make or break the negotiations in
Abuja. Let us be clear: the war in Darfur is not a
conventional war between contending armies, or even a
war between conventional State armed forces and a
guerrilla movement. Darfur is home to a myriad of
armed and dangerous militias, including the Janjaweed,
armed movements that are fragmenting, bandits of
sorts, foreign combatants and tribal forces. Security
arrangements, both for an immediate ceasefire and for
long-term final status arrangements, are a complex
undertaking.

Our mediation team has made proposals on issues
such as the disengagement of forces, redeployment,
disarmament of the Janjaweed, control and
neutralization of militias, policing and enhancing the
security of the camps for internally displaced persons,
security of nomadic migration corridors and the
demilitarization of humanitarian supply routes. Each of
those issues requires decisions by the parties if there is
to be forward movement so that, at the end of the day,
we can achieve a workable ceasefire. There is no quick
fix or easy process.

However, I am pleased to report that we have
started making progress - albeit slow - in some
aspects of the security arrangement negotiations. Some
of the proposals under consideration are innovative and
should make a real difference to enhancing stability
and security for people on the ground. The challenge is
to take with us the parties - particularly the
movements - that harbour a deep and unyielding
distrust of the real intentions of the Government and of
its sincerity to implement what will be agreed.

Our efforts and those of the international
community to provide assurances and guarantees to the
movements have yet to yield the desired results in the
form of a speedy movement towards an agreement.

The proposed enhanced ceasefire agreement
stipulates that the control and the neutralization of the
Janjaweed and undisciplined militias is a prerequisite if
there is to be a ceasefire and a peace agreement for
Darfur. Those steps must be in sequence with various
stages of the implementation of the enhanced ceasefire
agreement. One of the assurances that we have factored
into the agreement is that each of those steps will have
to be monitored and verified by the African Union
Mission in the Sudan (AMIS). It is only after each step
is satisfactorily completed that the movements would
be obliged to take the reciprocal steps of withdrawing
and redeploying their forces and accepting limited
arms control.

In the discussions on the comprehensive security
arrangements, which are about to start in Abuja - they
will begin as soon as we conclude the ceasefire
negotiations - we are also linking the final
disarmament of the J anjaweed and militia forces to the
assembling of the movements' forces. Similarly, the
parallel processes of disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration should go together with the process of the
integration of former combatants of the movements
into Sudan's armed forces and other security services
on the basis of criteria to be agreed to by the parties as
part of a comprehensive package.

As the security arrangement negotiations
progress, we are drawing attention to the challenges of
implementing a future agreement, with all of the
responsibilities that that will impose on the African
Union and the United Nations. The Force Commander
of the African Union Mission in the Sudan is currently
designing a detailed implementation plan for how he
should redeploy his forces to undertake the
considerable additional tasks that will arise in the
context of the agreement. Clearly, there will be many
complex tasks that will have to be performed by AMIS
during the early stages of the implementation of the
envisaged ceasefire, including verifying force positions
on the ground, monitoring the disengagement and
redeployment and patrolling demilitarized zones and
humanitarian supply routes. In particular, I would like
to draw the attention of the Council to the important
role that will have to be played by the AMIS civilian
police in monitoring and policing additional locations
in Darfur and in building up a community police
capacity where it is non-existent.

The African heads of State are ready to assist us
with their personal engagement and to contribute
troops to Darfur to keep the peace. I am here to plead
with the Council to extend maximum support to AMIS
to ensure that the ceasefire agreement, once signed, is
followed up by the upgrading, capacitation and
empowerment of AMIS so as to enable it to cope with
the additional responsibilities. I need hardly recall the
point - which is repeatedly made - that AMIS, as
presently constituted, is not optimally equipped to
fulfil its mandate. That problem will become even
more acute with the added responsibility that will come
with a comprehensive ceasefire agreement.

There is no point in calling for the speedy
conclusion of an agreement if nothing is done to

appropriately prepare AMIS for its expanded mandate.
My plea to the Council is not to wait for the transition
from AMIS to the United Nations force to take place
before strengthening the implementation mechanisms
of any agreement to be reached in Abuja. Institutional
and bureaucratic arguments must be avoided and real
planning done on how to help AMIS in concrete terms.
There is too much at stake in Darfur to adopt a
business-as-usual approach.

The enhanced ceasefire agreement for Darfur
currently before the parties is, to all intents and
purposes, a ceasefire. It is a road map that covers three
quarters of the journey to a comprehensive security
arrangements agreement. All of the parties are
understandably reluctant to sign on to that ceasefire
and embark upon that road until they are sure of the
end state. Thus, even as we continue our negotiations
on the modalities of the ceasefire, we are seriously
engaged in exploring the central issues of the final
status of forces, as well as issues of disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration. We have no illusions,
however, that a comprehensive Darfur peace
agreement, signed in Abuja, will be the end of the road.
There are many years of painstaking work ahead of the
people of Darfur - and of their friends in Africa and
in the world at large - if they are to restore the social
fabric of their damaged communities.

The conflict in Darfur requires that we lay the
foundation for reconciliation to take place at the
community level. To that end, I am happy to inform the
Council that we have initiated a process of preparation
for the Darfur-Darfur dialogue and consultations. The
Council will recall that last year the parties agreed that,
after a formal peace agreement has been signed, the
people of Darfur should have the opportunity to come
together to share and own such an agreement, in order
to deepen and strengthen peacebuilding confidence, as
well as to work towards communal reconciliation. We
shall shortly be putting our final proposals for that
process on the table for consideration and possible
adoption by the parties.

Even though the African Union will continue to
play a leading role in the political aspects of the peace
process and the implementation of the envisaged
agreement, the role of our partners will also be
important in providing all-round support and
encouragement, especially the huge financial, logistics
and human resources burdens and expertise, not only
for the dialogue itself, but also for assisting in the
implementation of the agreements reached. We believe
that the healing process in Darfur must begin
immediately after a peace agreement is signed, but let
us not expect it to be a quick process. The challenge of
peacebuilding and reconciliation in Darfur will require
our consistent collective engagement well beyond the
conclusion of the Abuja talks.

On 10 March 2006, the African Union Peace and
Security Council adopted a resolution indicating that it
wished to see a comprehensive Darfur peace agreement
before the end of this month. We are working full
steam ahead to meet that deadline. Certainly, we shall
put our proposals on the table in the coming days. The
presence of Vice-President Ali Osman Taha and the
SPLM. delegation has certainly provided additional
momentum to the process. The presence of the leaders
of the movements in Abuja is also an encouraging sign
and a sine qua non for a successful resolution of the
conflict. I sincerely hope that they will remain in
Abuja, in dialogue, without a break, and in spite of the
distractions and diversions that have reappeared in the
past week.

Our progress has been facilitated by the support
of the partners, who continue to be well represented.
We consult them at every turn. Our friend Mr. Jan
Pronk, the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for the Sudan, is a frequent visitor to Abuja
and his team is intimately involved in all aspects of our
work. I pay tribute to his energy and dedication. These
partnerships have been instrumental to the progress we
have made thus far. They will be even more
instrumental as we move towards implementing the
agreement subsequently reached.

I would like to personally express, as an African,
my appreciation for and satisfaction with the continued
attention and support that we have been receiving from
Secretary-General Kofi Annan and the United Nations
family. For me, since I was privileged to have
participated in the process of United Nations reform,
that kind of continued engagement by the United
Nations with a regional organization- is gratifying. I
am happy to be part of a concrete manifestation of it
with respect to our common efforts to resolve the
conflict in Darfur. The challenges for this Council
include not only to continue being seized of the crisis
of today and our peace process, which is still
incomplete, but also to seek ways of engaging with the
post-conflict challenges that lie ahead.

I hope that this Council will also continue to help
the Republic of Chad and the Sudan to find a solution
to the problems that have been developing for quite
some time now. While we unequivocally support the
Tripoli Agreement, it remains our hope that everything
will be done to contain the problems identified, as most
of them have some direct bearing on the efforts we are
making in Abuja, as the negotiations for a ceasefire
agreement have revealed.

In conclusion, I leave the Council with the
message once again that we are in the final stretch of
concluding the Darfur peace agreement. The mediation
is ready and, we believe, the time is right for the
parties to move beyond arguments to decisions. I am
confident that, once we table our proposals, we shall
receive the unequivocal support of the United Nations
and the encouragement of this Council to the parties to
sign on to the package without delay.

