Mr. Takasu (Japan): Japan supports a peaceful
resolution of the issues of Abkhazia and South Ossetia
based on the principle of the territorial integrity of
Georgia. It is essential for all parties concerned to
ensure peace and security in Georgia and its region.
There is also an urgent need to improve the
humanitarian conditions of internally displaced persons
and refugees. To accomplish these tasks, we need to
maintain a United Nations presence in the Abkhazia
region and enhance the mandate of the United Nations
Mission.

Japan views positively the recommendation made
by the Secretary-General on the new mandate of the
United Nations Mission. We support his
recommendation as a good basis for a new mandate. It
is therefore disappointing that no agreement has been
reached within the Group of Friends of the Secretary-
General, despite intensive negotiations. What is most
important for the international community is the
maintenance of peace and security in Georgia and its
region.

Our belief was that this goal could be achieved
most effectively through a continuous United Nations
presence. It is for this reason that Japan supported the
draft resolution, which extended the mandate of the
current Mission to allow further negotiations on the
substantive draft resolution to be completed during the
period of two weeks.

Japan also supports the reference to resolution
1808 (2008) and the commitment to the principles of
the sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity
of Georgia within its internationally recognized border.
After the event of August 2008, two resolutions were
unanimously adopted by the Security Council in
October 2008 and February 2009 with a reference to
resolution 1808 (2008). There is no reason why we
should drop it at this time.

Regrettably, the extension of the Mission was not
adopted by the Council. I would like to encourage the
international community, particularly those members of
the Council concerned, to make further efforts to
ensure peace and security in Georgia and its region and
to reach an agreement as soon as possible. I also take
this opportunity to express our thanks to the men and
women who have been serving in the United Nations
Observer Mission in Georgia for their dedication and
good work.

