Mr. Lucas (Angola): The Security Council has just
adopted resolution 2304 (2016) renewing the mandate of
the United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS).
Angola voted in favour of the draft resolution, and we
would like to outline our point of view on the issue.

As a member of the African Union and Chair
of the International Conference on the Great Lakes
Region, Angola remains committed to the quest for
peace and stability in the Republic of South Sudan
and to supporting the current peace process, for which
international community support is critical. We express
our agreement in general with the mandate ofUNMISS,
inter alia the high priority given to the protection of
civilians, the creation of conditions conducive to the
delivery of humanitarian assistance and support for the
implementation of the peace process.

The stand by the Intergovernmental Authority on

Development (IGAD) and the African Union represents
a step forward in the direction we have been requesting
for quite some time now, that is, a greater commitment
by the region in addressing critical situations affecting
the African continent. The decisions taken by IGAD
are courageous, even challenging, and we are intent
on working with the Government of South Sudan,
regional players and the United Nations in order that
they produce the desired results.

We welcome the important decision adopted by the
IGAD Plus Heads of State and Government on 16 July,
and endorsed by the African Union. It is a decision that
translates a renewed regional commitment to finding
solutions to the conflict in South Sudan. It is our
expectation that the deployment of a regional protection
force, as decided by IGAD and now by the Security
Council, while no easy matter or a magic potion for
the immense problems facing South Sudan, will make a
tangible contribution to the stabilization of the country
and to the attainment of peace.

During the negotiation of resolution 2304 (2016),
Angola conveyed a number of concerns and presented
constructive proposals addressing apprehensions
expressed by the Transitional Government of National
United of South Sudan, while trying to accommodate
the demands of IGAD and the African Union. Most of
those proposals and concerns did not receive appropriate
consideration, which we deeply regret.

Despite the fact that the United Nations Mission in
South Sudan is under a Chapter VII mandate, the basic
principles of peacekeeping call for the consent of the
parties and, as referred to in a communication from the
Secretariat to the members of the Security Council,

"the lack or support or consent from the parties
might have a negative impact on the way the
parties, particularly the national authorities and
local population, perceive the mission".

Now that the resolution has been adopted, we urge
all efforts to be deployed in order to closely associate
the Government of South Sudan with the deployment of
the regional protection force and to guarantee its formal
consent and cooperation more than merely in principle.
We look forward to the discussions to take place
between the East African Chiefs of Staff and their South
Sudanese counterparts, as requested by IGAD Plus, on
the deployment of the regional protection force, which
must guarantee peace and stability in South Sudan,
in strict respect for its independence, sovereignty and
territorial integrity. In that regard, we would like to
assure the Transitional Government of South Sudan
that Angola will adopt an active stance in order to
ensure that the provisions of the resolution are correctly
implemented and that the Government is an integral

part at all stages of the resolution's implementation.

Finally, the resolution contains an annex imposing
a new sanctions regime. Our view is that the imposition
of sanctions by the Security Council on a Member State
should be preceded by serious consultations on the
issue, which in fact did not happen. In due course, when
appropriate, we shall revisit the issue.

