The President (spoke in French): The Security
Council will now continue its consideration of the item
on its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance
with the understanding reached in its prior
consultations.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council welcomes the
briefing by the Chairman of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001) of
28 September 2001 (the Counter-Terrorism Committee) on the work of the Committee in the
year since its establishment, and other reflections
by members of the Committee.

"The Security Council recalls the statement
of its President of 15 April 2002
(S/PRST/2002/ 10) which recorded its intention to
review the structure and activities of the
Committee no later than 4 October 2002. The
Council confirms the continuation of the current
arrangements for the Bureau of the Committee for
a further six months. It invites the Counter-
Terrorism Committee to pursue its agenda as set
out in the work programme for the Committee's
fifth 90-day period (S/2002/1075), focusing on
ensuring that all States have legislation in place
covering all aspects of resolution 1373 (2001), a
process in hand for ratifying as soon as possible
the 12 international conventions and protocols
relating to terrorism, and effective executive
machinery for preventing and suppressing
terrorism financing; exploring ways in which
States can be assisted to implement resolution
1373 (2001), in particular in the areas of primary
focus; and building a dialogue with international,
regional and subregional organizations active in
the areas covered by the resolution. The Security
Council invites these organizations to continue to
find ways of improving their collective action
against terrorism and, where appropriate, to work
with donor States to establish suitable
the

programmes.

"The Security Council notes with
satisfaction that 174 Member States and 5 others
have submitted a report to the Counter-Terrorism
Committee pursuant to paragraph 6 of resolution
1373 (2001). It calls on the 17 Member States
which have not yet submitted a report to do so
urgently.

"The Security Council invites the Counter-
Terrorism Committee to report on its activities at
regular intervals and expresses its intention to
review the structure and activities of the
Committee no later than 4 April 2003."

This statement will be issued as a document of
Security Council under the symbol

S/PRST/2002/26.

The Security Council has thus concluded the

present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 12.15p.m.
