Mr. Musayev (Azerbaijan): At the outset, I
would like to thank you, Mr. President, for organizing
this timely and important open debate on the protection
of civilians in armed conflict.

It is symbolic that today's meeting has been
convened immediately following the celebration of the
sixty-sixth anniversary of the end of the Second World
War and the commemoration of its victims. That war
was a great tragedy that demonstrated the destructive
consequences of tyranny and disregard and contempt
for human dignity, rights and freedoms.

A response to the overwhelming horrors of
crimes perpetrated during the wartime occupation of
large parts of many nations served as the basis for the
founding of the United Nations, the establishment of
multinational judicial institutions and the proclaiming
of fundamental values, such as peace and respect for
human rights. The significant development of
international norms and standards for the protection of
civilians and the engagement of the Security Council,
including the adoption of a number of important
resolutions and practical steps towards their
implementation, have turned increased attention to
protection issues.

ll-33lll
However, efforts to ensure a peaceful, just and
prosperous world have not always been consistent and
successful. As a consequence, civilians continue to
suffer from inadequate protection and discriminatory
treatment in situations of armed conflict.

Azerbaijan's interest in the issue under
consideration is obvious and stems from its efforts to
contribute to the achievement of sustainable peace and
development and its practical experience of addressing
the impact of armed conflict on civilians.

As is known, in its resolutions adopted in 1993 in
response to the occupation of Azerbaijani territories,
the Security Council referred specifically to violations
of international humanitarian law, including the
displacement of a large number of civilians in
Azerbaijan, attacks on civilians and bombings of
inhabited areas. The European Court of Human Rights
later arrived at an important conclusion qualifying the
behaviour of those carrying out the incursion into the
territory of Azerbaijan as acts of particular gravity that
could amount to war crimes or crimes against
humanity.

In recent years, important steps have been taken
for the protection and vindication of rights and the
prevention and punishment of crimes having an
international dimension and scope. We believe that
ending impunity is essential, not only for the purposes
of identifying individual criminal responsibility for the
most serious crimes of international concern but also
for ensuring sustainable peace, truth, reconciliation, the
rights and interests of victims and the well-being of
society at large.

It is essential that peace efforts and peace
agreements never encourage the acceptance of the
situations achieved by the unlawful use of force or
other egregious violations of international law and
never promise amnesty for genocide, war crimes,
crimes against humanity and gross violations of human
rights.

Particular consideration must be given to the
implications for the protection of civilians in armed
conflicts aggravated by population displacements and
foreign occupation. The impact of conflict on housing,
land and property, as well as discrimination on ethnic
grounds and forced demographic changes in such
situations, require a more consistent approach in order
to put an end to illegal practices and policies and
ensure the safe and dignified return of displaced
populations to their homes.

It is important that the recognition of the right to
return, along with increased attention to its practical
implementation and concrete measures aimed at
overcoming obstacles preventing return, be applied by
the international community with more systematic
regularity. Ensuring the right to return constitutes a
categorical rejection of the gains of ethnic cleansing
and offers important measures of justice to those
displaced from their homes and land, thereby removing
a source of possible future tension and conflict.

The lack of agreement on political issues cannot
be used as a pretext for not addressing problems caused
by continued and deliberate disrespect for international
humanitarian human rights law in situations of armed
conflict and military occupation.

Therefore, we proceed from the importance of
reaffirming, with respect to such situations, the
continuing applicability of all relevant international
legal norms, achieving the invalidation of activities
aimed at the consolidation of military occupations,
initiating urgent measures towards removing the
adverse effects of such activities and discouraging any
further practices of the same or similar nature.

