Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): First of all, we thank Mr. Mohamed Ibn Chambas for his briefing. The Dominican Republic commends the peaceful electoral processes in some countries of West Africa and the Sahel. At the same time, we acknowledge the considerable efforts made by countries of the region and regional and international actors to address the ongoing deterioration of the political and security situation in the Sahel, in particular in Burkina Faso, Mali and the Niger. These countries face recurrent attacks, which cause mass displacement of people, instability and poverty. We condemn intercommunal violence and terrorist attacks against humanitarian actors and civilians, in particular women, and the numerous casualties suffered by the security and defence forces of Burkina Faso, Mali and the Niger. We hope that those responsible will be brought to justice and that the Multinational Joint Task Force and the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel) will receive the necessary resources and training for enhanced joint cross-border operations. It is important that the memorandum of understanding between the Economic Community of West African States and the G-5 Sahel be implemented in order to deepen their cooperation on security and development issues and strengthen the implementation of the G-5 Sahel and INTERPOL security coordination platform. The high number of deaths and clashes between farmers and cattle breeders keep a region that is already affected by mass displacements of innocent people on edge. There are reports of serious human rights abuses, food insecurity and an adverse impact on education and health services. Communities are also deeply affected by the effects of climate change and must be assisted in building a strong resilience to the many adverse factors. With regard to women, we agree with the fact that their role in politics should not be limited to mobilization and support functions. We therefore expect more inclusive and meaningful participation of both women and young people in peace and decision-making processes. We hope that the holistic approaches and measures put in place by countries to alleviate political and security tensions will be supported by all actors in society and lead to changes in political, governance, development and human rights trends. Such changes are necessary to ensure that pending electoral processes and other challenges are conducted and overcome smoothly and that progress is made in creating better opportunities for West African societies. The lack of opportunities exposes populations to recruitment by armed groups. It provides the ideal scenario for such groups to expand their operations and increase the number of attacks against civilians and the military in order to exercise control. There is an increasing need for greater cooperation in advancing the battle against the threat of terrorist and criminal groups. At the same time, the United Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel (UNOWAS) must be strengthened with the necessary resources and clear and realistic mandates for working with regional partners on cross-cutting threats to peace and security in the region. We commend the good offices and continued efforts of UNOWAS in the quest for peaceful solutions to the various challenges faced by West African countries. In conclusion, only by developing coordinated actions aimed at resolving the root causes of fragility, inequality and poverty in the region and by providing the military with sufficient resources and training will it be possible for State authorities to obtain a greater presence in the affected areas and create opportunities to achieve the human development index needed for the sustainable development of their peoples.
