The President (spoke in Arabic): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of

Egypt.

At the outset, I would like to thank His Excellency
Mr. Zahir Tanin, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, for his thorough briefing to the
Council. We fully support his efforts. I would also
like to welcome Mr. Ivica Dacie, First Deputy Prime
Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia,
and Ambassador Vlora Citaku, and to thank them for
their statements.

Egypt has been following the recent political
developments in Kosovo and hopes that its recent
presidential election augurs a new beginning and an
opportunity to engage in transparent and constructive
internal dialogue aimed at reducing recent tensions.
We would also like to warn against the escalation of
those tensions by opposition forces in Kosovo and to
reject any resort to Violence as a means for expressing
political opposition. It will be important to build on the
recent statements by Kosovo officials regarding their
full commitment to carrying out the agreements signed
with Serbia. We would like to emphasize the importance
of making every effort to arrive at a comprehensive
settlement of all the issues outstanding between
Belgrade and Pristina through sincere negotiations and
dialogue based on good intentions and mutual respect
between the two sides, and within the framework of the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations and the relevant Security Council resolutions,
particularly resolution 1244 (1999).

That can be achieved only by creating a constructive
regional climate conducive to a resumption of the
political dialogue held under the European Union's
auspices. In that regard, we should emphasize the
importance of implementing every provision of all
four pillars of the agreement of August 2015, without
exceptions. We should avoid turning the agreement
into a point of contention and seize the opportunity
it presents to reach final settlements aimed at paving
the way for economic development and achieving
prosperity for all the peoples of the region.

We should also build on some of the positive
developments mentioned in the Secretary-General's
report (S/2016/4007) on the normalization of relations
between Belgrade and Pristina regarding certification
of academic documents and other steps. We believe in
the importance of continuing dialogue at the technical
level as a step towards normalizing relations between
the two sides. We commend the ratification of the
international agreement concerning the hosting by
the Netherlands of the specialist chambers for trying
war crimes perpetrated during the conflict. We hope
it will help to buttress the principles of the rule of law,
accountability and justice with a view to achieving
comprehensive reconciliation. We call for the provision
of the support needed to ensure the specialist court's
work and to its establishment as soon as possible.

At the same time, we look forward to seeing
enhanced efforts by the Kosovo authorities with
regard to the voluntary return of internationally
displaced persons, protecting artefacts of cultural
and religious heritage, speeding up settlements and
comprehensive reconciliation, ending discrimination
among all communities, protecting minority rights and
consolidating the rule oflaw, in addition to the need for
support to the authorities in confronting the challenges
presented by refugees and the threat of terrorism. In
that connection, we support the five-year strategy that
Kosovo has outlined for fighting terrorism with a view
to tackling that serious challenge.

In conclusion, we would like to reiterate our
support for the United Nations Interim Administration

Mission in Kosovo and the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General. We emphasize the need to
foster coordination among the efforts of the Mission,
the European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo
and the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe, with a view to carrying out all the provisions
of resolution 1244 (1999).

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

The representative of Serbia has asked for the floor
to make a further statement. I now give him the floor.

