We wish first to thank Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, United Nations Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process, and to reaffirm our support for his efforts to calm the situation and restore stability, in particular given the outbreak of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. Like everyone, we have been watching the unfolding repercussions of this invisible and dangerous epidemic as it spreads through all corners of the world. We all see that the brunt of it is being borne by the most vulnerable countries, regions and cities, perhaps chief among them Palestine, where the health sector has crumbled under decades of occupation, the serious impact of which has led to acute shortages of equipment and supplies. That is especially so in the Gaza Strip. After nearly 13 years of an illegal blockade, its vulnerable inhabitants are particularly exposed to this deadly epidemic. To make matters worse, the Palestinian authorities are undertaking efforts to contain the spread of the epidemic, in spite of their limited resources and in the face of the restrictions imposed by Israel, the occupying Power. However, by continuing their assaults, the occupying authorities have undermined those efforts and exploited the state of emergency on the ground. For instance, they recently demolished a hospital structure that was under construction, arrested a number of sterilization staff members and seized their equipment, and prevented volunteers in Hebron from carrying out sterilization procedures. They have ignored pleas by the Palestinian Authority to release Palestinian prisoners who are vulnerable to infection. Moreover, Israeli soldiers have deliberately spread the epidemic in Palestinian buildings and properties. In line with its firm and principled position in support of our brothers in the State of Palestine, and on instructions from the Amir of the State of Kuwait, His Highness Sheikh Sabah Al-Ahmad Al-Jaber Al-Sabah, Kuwait recently donated $60 million to the World Health Organization, of which $10 million was earmarked to support the measures implemented by the Palestinian Government to combat COVID-19. There has been no let-up in the disgraceful attempts by Israel, the occupying Power, to exploit the current situation to entrench the occupation. It is pursuing its illegal settlement activities and policies, expanding and building thousands of settlement units and annexing land in flagrant violation of resolution 2334 (2016). Israeli breaches of the rights of the Palestinian people in the Jordan Valley are gaining in frequency in preparation for its annexation at a later date, in violation of internationally recognized resolutions, including resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973). Regrettably, the attacks by Israel do not stop there. Rather, in these trying times, they have been redoubled with impunity in the occupied Palestinian territory, including the West Bank and East Jerusalem. They include the demolition and seizure of Palestinian buildings, the displacement of Palestinian families, growing waves of arbitrary arrests and an increase in settler crimes carried out against defenceless Palestinians, their property and their places of worship, with the connivance of the occupation authorities. We hold the latter wholly responsible for those crimes, which constitute a flagrant violation of international humanitarian law and human rights law and the Fourth Geneva Convention of 1949. The Israeli occupation authorities are undermining the work of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East, continue to target Islamic and Christian holy places, including the Al-Aqsa Mosque, where they are forcing through a change in 67/99 68/99 the compound's legal status quo and its temporal and spatial division, and insist on taking unilateral illegal decisions, such as freezing Palestinian tax revenues. They are also taking measures to change the historic character and status of the city of Jerusalem and its demographic structure. I put it to the Security Council at the last open debate on the situation in the Middle East (see S/PV.8706), which was held last January, that perhaps it was time for the Security Council to take a firm stand to stop those crimes and attacks. The Council needs to assume its responsibilities as a matter of urgency and effectively, before it is too late. Occupation and the trampling of the Palestinian people's rights will do nothing to foster peace or provide security, especially at a time when a deadly and merciless epidemic is spreading. One dare hope that such a desirable international movement might begin now, so that the Palestinian people might enjoy the coming of the holy month of Ramadan in security and peace. Lastly, although the Israeli occupation authorities continue to ignore the will of the international community, we remain committed to the Arab, Islamic and international position that peace is a strategic choice and that a lasting, comprehensive and just solution must be based on the two-State solution, in accordance with the agreed terms of reference, namely, the relevant Security Council resolutions, the principle of land for peace, the road map and the Arab Peace Initiative. In that way, the Palestinian people will exercise all its legitimate political rights and establish, on its territory, an independent State with East Jerusalem as its capital.
