Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): I congratulate your friendly country, Togo,
and you yourself, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month. We
wish you all success in that sensitive stewardship. I
would also like to congratulate my colleague
Ambassador Sangqu of South Africa on presiding over
the Council for the past month.

I think that drawing inspiration from history in
this Chamber is an extremely important exercise.
Invoking examples from the cultures and literatures of
peoples and nations is a critical experience. As I say
this, I recall the literary masterpiece by the German
author Johann Wolfgang von Goethe entitled Faust. It
is a work that speaks in symbolic terms of the risks
inherent in a person's - even a very wise one -
selling his soul to Satan. That symbolic story
summarizes the idea with which I would like to begin
my statement, which is that a human being should not
sell his or her soul to Satan in exchange for illusory
gains that could destroy that person's hopes for
freedom further down the road.

My delegation has examined the text of the draft
resolution put before the Council. Given our firm belief
in the pan-Arab principle, we had hoped that the
examination of the question of Syria would have
remained, first, exclusively within the Syrian
household, and then in the larger supporting Arab
household structure.

However, the rush by some parties to invite
international intervention - and we know in advance
what their objectives are in dealing with Arab issues,
which are first and foremost the question of Palestine
and the Israeli occupation of Arab territories - is a
cause for concern. It is indeed a cause for sadness,
deep sadness for the regrettable state of affairs in
which we now find ourselves.

At this point, I would like to quote in English a
sentence spoken some 22 years ago by former United
States Attorney General Ramsey Clark:

(spoke in English)

"The United Nations, which was created to prevent the
scourge of war, has become an instrument of war."

(spoke in Arabic)

My delegation has followed with great
appreciation the efforts by the advocates in the Council
for human rights and the purposes and principles of the
United Nations Charter, especially the inadmissibility
of intervention in the internal affairs of countries, of
waging wars against countries to gain exclusive control
of their geographic location and their lucrative natural
resources, and of resolving the economic problems of
the Western Powers at the expense of the peoples of
developing nations. To those States that safeguard
international peace and security, we express our deep
gratitude and appreciation, and the annals of history
will record the noble positions they take.

Is it not strange that over a period of 45 years -
from its creation in 1945 to 1988 - the Security
Council adopted only 690 resolutions, whereas in the
following 20 years it adopted three times that number?
That indicates that the current world is less secure, less
just and less fair and that the provisions of the United
Nations Charter are seriously threatened.

In this context, I would like to stress that the
Syrian Arab Republic, a founding member of this
world Organization, has been targeted by some Powers
for punishment because of its commitment to
international legal norms, especially on the issue of
defending the human rights of peoples. Today, Syria is
being sacrificed in a crisis manufactured by parties that
do not want the best for Syria and its people. That is
evident from their support - in funding, arms and
favourable media coverage - for armed terrorist
groups that kill, abduct and intimidate Syrian citizens
and destroy and sabotage infrastructure, including
power generation equipment, oil and gas pipelines,
Ministry of Justice buildings and railroads.

Is there a sensible person who would believe that
any government would commit massacres in any city
on a day when the Security Council is scheduled to
hold a meeting to examine the situation in that
country? Would any entity put itself in such a position?

The most convincing proof of the criminal nature
of those armed groups lies in the acts committed this
very morning, which killed innocent people and
destroyed homes as well as the buildings housing
Syrian embassies in many capitals, all of that without
any condemnation by the Secretary-General or the
Council. The goal is to send a misleading message
aimed at influencing the Council by swaying its
decision-makers with respect to the draft resolution.

The best proof of our good intentions in our
dealings with the League of Arab States is reflected in
the contents of the report of the observers of the
League ofArab States (see S/2012/7l, annex, enclosure 4). What is very strange is that Council members did
not examine that report in due time, for reasons known
to all of them. The report confirms that Syria has
fulfilled its obligations under the protocol.

Here, and for the fourth time at least, let me
stress that if the killing had ceased, if those who pay
lip service to democracy had ceased to implement their
designs against Syria, if those States that provide
generous funds - billions of dollars - and the most
modern weapons and means of communication to the
armed groups, hosting them in their capitals in order to
facilitate their criminal acts against the Syrian people
and their property, if they had ceased to do so, Syria
would have fulfilled the League of Arab States plan of
action and the relevant protocol under that plan.

Certain Arab Gulf States have dragged the
League of Arab States to the Security Council, with a
view to leveraging the Council's power against Syria
and to internationalizing a purely Arab issue, contrary
to the provisions of the Charter of the League of Arab
States. That is in spite of the fact that since the
beginning of the crisis, all of the Arab politicians in the
League of Arab States have been competing among
themselves to stress that they are not seeking the
internationalization of the crisis in Syria.

The report of the observer mission that I
mentioned earlier stresses that Syria has fulfilled its
obligations despite the acts of violence. Let me quote
here from the report:

"The mission noted that the Government
strived to help it succeed in its task and remove
any barriers that might stand in its way. The
Government also facilitated meetings with all
parties. No restrictions were placed on the
movement of the mission and its ability to
interview Syrian citizens, both those who
opposed the Government and those loyal to it."
(5/2012/7], annex, enclosure 4, para. 73)

About two and a half months ago, the Qatari
Al-Jazeera satellite channel broadcast from Doha a
political programme hosted by a well-known journalist.
The two guests on that programme were the current
President of Tunisia - who was not the President at
that time - and a Syrian political activist. During that
programme, its host said, addressing the current
Tunisian President, "Do not ask me about my sources,
but I have received information from the highest levels
in Doha to the effect that the Syrian regime will change
on 22 January" - that is, the very day on which the
League of Arab States met in Cairo and took the
decision to come before the Security Council.

It is indeed strange that the calls for reform,
respect for human rights and the right to peaceful
demonstration apply to Syria only, not to any other
State in the region, especially those that sponsored the
draft resolution submitted against Syria. Some of the
Arab States that sponsored the draft are the very same
ones that prevented the Arab League from endorsing
the integrated initiative submitted by Syria to the
League of Arab States on bolstering the process of
democracy, reform and human rights in all Arab States.
That initiative included a demand for the issuing of a
decision by the Council of the Arab League that would
put forward a comprehensive Arab vision aimed at
promoting democracy and reform in all Arab countries
and fulfilling the aspirations of the masses in the areas
of freedom; human rights; a multiparty system;
freedom of information; fair and transparent elections;
freedom of expression; the right of assembly and
peaceful demonstration; and respect for the rights of
minorities, alien residents and expatriate workers on
their territory.

Is it rational that among the sponsors of the draft
are States that prevent women from attending a soccer
match? And those States are calling on Syria to be
democratic?

Peaceful demonstration is a basic right
guaranteed under Syrian law. The right to demand
reform is the right of every Syrian citizen, and no one
can deny that. But what no law can prevent and no
State can accept is terrorism, chaos and the sabotaging
of public and private property - the destabilization of
a country. Every peaceful demonstrator, every person
who calls for genuine reform aimed at safeguarding the
Syrian homeland from major schemes and all those
who seek dialogue as a way to resolve the crisis are not
only welcome partners but key components of any
effort to end the crisis in Syria as well as an integral
part of reform and development in Syria.

The draft resolution which the Council failed to
adopt today emphasizes the importance of the dialogue
that has been mentioned here. We are in favour of such
a dialogue and wish to see it continue and succeed. But
those who wish to be parties to such a dialogue have
refused to engage in dialogue openly, and the Security
Council and the League of Arab States are fully aware
of that. Also aware of that fact are those countries that
have sought, and continue to seek, to host such a
dialogue. This comes at a time when my country has
agreed, in the Council, to undertake immediately a
national, comprehensive dialogue that is inclusive of
all parties, but under the auspices of the homeland.
However, the other side, which has stonewalled the
undertaking of such a dialogue as a result of
encouragement by some who wish to adopt dominating
positions, has rejected dialogue and continues, even as
we speak, to reject it.

It is our hope that the parties still supporting the

opposition and armed groups - and those parties
spoke about themselves, as some of my colleagues
indicated in their statements - will sincerely advise

their friends to foster a national dialogue, abandon all
intentions to destroy Syria and to abandon all attempts
to authorize outside military intervention. Indeed, they
must join the ranks that will build Syria as it
endeavours to renew itself.

Syria will enjoy security and stability as it always
has. Syria will continue to be the homeland of
tolerance and openness. Syria will remain the
homeland of all Syrians, irrespective of their
affiliations and political positions. There will be no
majority and no minority. All of that will be developed
on the ground in an initiative involving national
ownership by the Syrian themselves and without
external intervention. Syrians do not need to wait for
lessons on democracy and human rights from Powers
that deal with those lofty humanitarian concepts as if
they were commodities to be traded speculatively on a
stock exchange.

My colleague, the representative of the United
States of America, said that she was disgusted at the
use of the right of veto by two permanent members of
the Security Council. I am not evaluating what she
said. I respect her point of View. Nonetheless, I would
like to ask her if her disgust also applies to the 60
vetoes that have been cast in this Chamber to prevent
the establishment of a just, comprehensive and lasting
peace in the region, the fair resolution of the Arab-
Israeli conflict and the settlement of the question of
Palestine.

The statements made by some colleagues betray
the true and genuinely hostile intentions of their
countries towards the country, people and Government
of Syria. All along, the tone of their statements has
been undiplomatic, and their description of the Syrian
Government as a regime is inconsistent with the
principles of international law. They used inappropriate
language to refer to the President of the State of Syria.
It is only natural for us to say that the use of those
words in this Chamber by some colleagues betrays
their direct involvement in attempts to fan the flames
of Violence, escalation and bloodshed in Syria and
among Syrians. We do not accept any of that.

I do not wish to speak at length, but I would like
to conclude my remarks by raising an important matter.
Today, a journalist working for Al-Jazeera's English
channel in London said on record that the Ministry of
Foreign Affairs of Qatar had instructed the channel to
increase and intensify its coverage just hours before the
convening of this meeting. I leave it to Council
members to draw their own conclusions from the
political instructions given to that self-proclaimed
news channel to falsely step up the pressure on the
Security Council by claiming that massacres are being
carried out in Syria.

