Ms. Jacome (Panama) (spoke in Spanish): Allow
me to express my gratitude for the reports presented
this morning by Ambassadors Jurica, Urbina and
Grauls on the important work carried out by the
Committees they chair.

We would like to express our gratitude for the
efforts to achieve the full implementation of resolution
1822 (2008) by the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999)
concerning Al-Qaida and the Taliban and associated
individuals and entities. Resolution 1822 (2008)
introduces positive elements to the sanctions regime,
including a requirement to add a narrative summary
alongside the listing request; States' obligation to
notify individuals who are listed; an annual review of
the list of persons who are deceased; a review of the
names of persons that have not been updated for more
than three years; and the active revision of the
Committee's guidelines.

The Security Council must also acknowledge that
the 1267 Committee finds itself at a very complex
crossroads and is under public scrutiny with respect to
its practices and the implementation of terrorism-
related resolutions. The Council must make greater
efforts to implement procedures that are clearer,
transparent and fair and that provide for the necessary
fundamental guarantees and the standards of due
process. In that respect, we agree with Court of Justice
of the European Communities in its decision of
3 September 2008 recognizing that although any
person or entity may currently directly submit to the
Committee their request to be de-listed from the
consolidated list, the procedure is essentially of a
diplomatic and intra-State nature. Thus, individuals and
entities affected cannot truly defend their rights.

We should also point out the efforts made by the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1373
(2001) concerning counter-terrorism with a view to
making its work more transparent. My delegation is
convinced that such measures will help to achieve
closer cooperation between Member States and the
Committee, which will in turn help ensure a more
effective implementation of the provisions of
resolutions 1373 (2001) and 1624 (2005). In terms of
established practices, we should point out that those
Member States visited by the Committee will receive
an invitation to discuss with the Committee the details
of the report that are related to that visit. That will
allow that Member State to participate more actively in
the follow-up to the visit and to convey to the
Committee its comments on the visit and its priorities
for technical assistance.

However, we must make greater efforts to build
up relations between Member States and the

Committee in order to more effectively address the
challenges in combating terrorism. In that regard, we
urge the Committee to work with Member States in
reviewing their preliminary implementation
assessments.

We also believe that it is crucial to promote
cooperation between the Counter-Terrorism Committee
and international and regional organizations. We
appreciate the joint work done by the Committee and
such organizations in the context of the five special
meetings of the Committee, including the follow-up of
the main outcomes of those meetings.

We would like to underscore the importance of
the meetings that took place on 20 October between the
members of the 1267 and 1373 Committees and
Mr. Martin Scheinin, Special Rapporteur on the
promotion and protection of human rights and
fundamental freedoms While countering terrorism. We
are certain of the great importance of those exchanges
and agree with the conclusions contained in
Mr. Scheinin's latest report to the General Assembly
(see A/63/223) with regard to ways to establish best
practices in order to ensure the right to a fair trial in
terrorist cases. We would like to take this opportunity
to urge that those initiatives continue to be coordinated
in order to improve the work of the Committees.

With the new mandate provided by resolution
1810 (2008), the work of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) will have to focus
on improving dialogue between the Committee, States
and other organizations and entities, especially those
with a wide and representative membership. By
strengthening that interaction we will better achieve
the universalization of the measures provided for in
resolution 1540 (2004) and thereby prevent, to the
extent possible, the enormous dangers posed by the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction on the
part of non-State actors.

My delegation would like to take this opportunity
to acknowledge the important work done by the current
members of the Expert Group of the 1540 Committee
throughout its mandate. In that connection, resolution
1810 (2008) also calls for the appointment of a new
Expert Group, which will have the important obligation
of helping the 1540 Committee to carry out its
objectives in the next three years. It will be necessary
to put in place a group of professionals that bring
together the appropriate experience and qualifications
while bearing in mind equitable geographic
representation as much as possible.

