Mr. IliicheV (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We listened very carefully to the briefing
by the Permanent Representative of Kazakhstan,
Mr. Kairat Umarov, on the activities carried out by the
Committee pursuant to resolutions 751 (1992) and 1907
(2009) concerning Somalia and Eritrea. We thank him
for his very skilful leadership of this subsidiary body of
the Security Council.

We share the view that the situation in the area of
security on Somalia remains difficult. In this regard,
we note the decision made by the President of Somalia,
Mohamed Abdullahi Mohamed, to call, on 6 April,
a state of emergency and a 60-day amnesty for the
Al-Shabaab fighters who agree to lay down their
weapons. The reason for taking these initiatives was a
number of terrorist acts in the capital and in the region,
as well as the renewal of pirate attacks on foreign
merchant ships off the shores of the country. We are
also concerned by the fact that peaceful civilians are
increasingly becoming the victims of terrorist attacks.
In this regard, we note with satisfaction that, in the
context of the yearly rotation of military personnel in
Somalia, on 8 April, a new contingent, consisting of
5,700 troops, arrived from Uganda to ensure security
in the country.

We are in favour of ensuring that the international
community continues to take measures to increase the
fighting capacity of the Somali National Army and the
African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), because
they bear the main burden of fighting Al-Shabaab. We
need to react to and follow very closely the humanitarian
situation in Somalia, which has become very difficult.
We know that a few regions are now facing the threat
of famine. At the same time, we must also note that
the successful election in Somalia is a very important
milestone on the path towards national reconciliation,
rebuilding Government institutions and creating
democratic institutions. We expect that the Federal
Government will work actively to settle the domestic
political situation and develop the country socially
and economically.

We are in favour of strengthening the sanctions
regime in Somalia, strictly adhering in particular
to the arms and charcoal embargoes, including the
monitoring of areas off the shores of Somalia and
extending assistance to the authorities by AMISOM. in
this sphere, as provided for in resolution 2317 (2016).
We believe that such an embargo is a key instrument
for ensuring that the extremist forces in the country
do not receive additional assistance. We have had good
experience with the practice of partially lifting the
embargo on providing weapons to the Somali armed
forces at the request of the Federal Government.

With regard to the international restrictions on
Eritrea, we think that what we should be discussing
is not lifting but rather optimizing the sanctions that
would be helped bythe development of a relevant
road map, especially since the criteria for introducing
sanctions cannot be confirmed by the Monitoring
Group. We note that the Group is discussing Asmara's
alleged interference in the internal affairs of
Djibouti and Ethiopia. This information needs to be
carefully checked.

In conclusion, we would like to point out that
any sanctions regime is not a dogma but something
that needs to be adapted to changing realities and
periodically reconsidered to see whether it is still in
line with the reasons that created it initially.

