Mr. Oratmangun (Indonesia): On behalf of my
delegation, I would like, first of all, to extend our most
heartfelt congratulations, Mr. President, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of July. We are particularly grateful for
the presence of Mr. Paul Robertson, Foreign Minister
of Jamaica, in our midst despite his numerous other
duties and responsibilities. We have full confidence
that under his wise guidance and skilful stewardship,
progress will be made in dealing with the issue on our
agenda. Let me also take this opportunity to commend
the role played by the past Security Council President,
Ambassador Jean-David Levitte of France, in
facilitating our deliberations last June.

My delegation is gratified to note the Security
Council's decision to hold a public session to renew its
consideration of conflict prevention at this juncture,
when conflicts are being waged in various parts of the
world. These retrograde developments which have
defied peace-making efforts warrant greater attention
being placed on conflict prevention before they
escalate into violence and bloodshed. We share the
widely held view that preventive strategies are
preferable to reactive strategies; they are also highly
cost-effective. The sums preventive strategies require
pale in significance when compared to the huge cost
involved in the unconscionable loss of life and material
devastation resulting from conflict. Hence, the Security
Council should go further not only in dealing with
conflicts but also in deterring the emergence of new
tragedies.
As a fundamental axiom, it is pertinent to note
that, as each situation is unique, initiatives must be
premised on a case-by-case basis. Under each
circumstance they should be undertaken with the
consent of the States concerned, should take into
account the legitimate interests of those States and
should be consistent with the principles enshrined in
the Charter. Our failure to recognize these immutable
principles may well prove to be counter-productive.

In its task to prevent disputes between States
from arising, the Security Council, in our view, should
first of all address the underlying causes through
confidence-building measures encompassing both
military and non-military aspects, such as political and
socio-economic matters. It should reconcile the
divergent security interests of the States concerned,
pave the way for openness and transparency in military
matters, seek restraint in acquiring armaments in
accordance with national security needs and encourage
regional organizations to play an active role in
initiating and implementing conflict-prevention
measures appropriate to a region.

While the Security Council's record in containing
conflicts is noteworthy, we should nonetheless enhance
its capabilities through more effective global and
regional mechanisms for conflict prevention that could
defuse crisis situations and prepare the ground for
peacemaking. It is clear that the machinery for pre-
empting conflicts and disasters is not as effective as it
should be. This calls for a reassessment of the existing
approaches, as well as the exploration of new
modalities warranting our serious consideration.

Among such new modalities is, first, the General
Assembly. As a universal forum, it has an important
role to play in the maintenance of international peace
and security. Hence, its capacity to recommend
appropriate conflict-prevention measures must be
recognized.

Secondly, the importance of periodic review by
the Security Council of situations that are prone to
conflict cannot be over-emphasized. This would alert
the Council to the dangers inherent in a situation and
have it undertake preventive measures as foreseen in
the Charter.

Thirdly, socio-economic development is a crucial
component in preventing conflicts and in healing
wounds after conflicts have occurred. Member States'
support of the efforts of the United Nations system
with regard to preventive activities and provision of
necessary assistance for developmental purposes would
be imperative.

Fourthly, in this context, projections by the
Economic and Social Council of socio-economic
problems that could lead to a breakdown of the
political system and the attendant crisis, and the
formulation of strategies to deal with such explosive
situations, would make a significant contribution. This
could be augmented by closer collaboration between
members of the Economic and Social Council and of
the Security Council in order to deal comprehensively
with potential crises. There could also be collaboration
among various relevant agencies.

Fifthly, the Secretary-General has a role to play in
consultation on a regular basis with the States
concerned, to monitor and bring potentially dangerous
situations to the attention of the General Assembly and
the Security Council, as well as to convey his own
views and recommendations. The Member States, for
their part, should support the Secretary-General's
efforts by providing adequate and timely information
and appropriate assistance in implementing relevant
recommendations.

In South-East Asia, members of the Association
of South-East Asian Nations (ASEAN) realize that the
persistence of conflicts would inevitably lead to the
weakening of the region as a whole, and therefore they
have demonstrated a strong desire for peaceful
relations. Cooperative and equal security for all States,
now prevailing in our region, is widely acknowledged
to be preventive in nature, while its infrastructure is
being further strengthened. Consequently, there is a
general expectation of peaceful settlement of disputes.
It is in this spirit that the ASEAN Regional Forum
(ARF) reflects the determination of the Asia Pacific
countries to ensure a peaceful and stable political and
security environment for their people. The ARF is thus
an exercise in conflict prevention as it deals with inter-
and intra-regional relations in such a way that new
relationships based on recognition of the mutuality of
interests could evolve gradually and peacefully. The
ARF may well turn out to be an effective mechanism
for deterring conflicts in that part of the world.

My delegation also wishes to draw attention to
the Workshop technique adopted by Indonesia in
dealing with a potentially explosive situation in the
South China Sea, which involves overlapping claims of
sovereignty and the resultant dispute over exploration
and exploitation of resources. The latest of these
Workshops, held in Jakarta in December 1998, agreed,
among other things, to undertake a study on guidelines
and a code of conduct for the South China Sea. The
Workshop cited confidence-building measures as
essential for minimizing tension, for preventing
conflicts, promoting cooperation and creating an
atmosphere conducive to the peaceful settlement of
disputes. As a result of the Workshop process, we now
have a sizeable and still-growing body of concrete and
constructive proposals for cooperation in the South
China Sea in fields that offer much common ground
and promise large benefits for all peoples of the area.

In conclusion, we should place conflict
prevention efforts that affect regional peace and
international security at the top of our agenda, while
improving and strengthening the capacity of the United
Nations in this field. They constitute the cornerstone of
the Organization's endeavours for peace.

