Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola): I would
like to start by expressing our thanks to Deputy
Secretary-General Eliasson for his briefing on the
situation in the Middle East, and in particular on
the Palestinian issue. Based on his briefing, we
have to acknowledge the frustration resulting from
the prevailing situation and the inability of the
international community - in particular the Security
Council - to provide a real, meaningful contribution
towards a solution for this painful conflict in the Middle
East and in Israel.

The current dangerous escalation of violence
between Israelis and Palestinians and the tragic loss
of life are indeed unacceptable. The recent events in
Jerusalem, with escalating tensions around the holy sites
in the city, are very dangerous developments with the
potential for far-reaching consequences, which should
by avoided by all means. We strongly urge the Israeli
authorities and security forces to uphold the status quo
in the Al-Aqsa Mosque compound to avoid aggravating
tensions and religious sensitivities and causing more
resentment. It is always very difficult to put an end to
religious wars. They are very costly in human lives.

Indeed, the participants in the debate have provided
constructive contributions, which, if taken into account,
could change the way we address this issue, in particular
the right of the Palestinians to self-determination and
statehood. In this regard, the Oslo Accords offered
a unique opportunity and were a beacon of hope
for putting an end to the Israeli occupation of the
Palestinian territories. Failure in moving this forward
was catastrophic, and the restrictions under which the
Palestinians live today are greater than those of 1987,
when the first Intifada broke out.

We wonder whether the periodic waves of
confrontation are not a deliberate long-term strategy by
extremist circles in Israel to undermine the possibility
of a two-State solution. On one hand, Palestinians face
desperate living conditions and increased restrictions
on freedom of movement in the occupied West Bank
and East Jerusalem. On the other hand, there is ongoing
settlement expansion in the West Bank, in violation of
international law but endorsed by Israel's authorities,
under the protection of Israel's security forces. This
reality cannot persist forever. As we have witnessed in
the past forty years, it is usually followed by periodic
waves of violence, as is currently observed in Jerusalem.

Unfortunately, these outbreaks of Violence, beyond

the horrendous consequences ofloss oflife and physical
destruction, have always resulted in the additional
loss of Palestinian land, increased restrictions and
brutal repression against the Palestinians. The most
worrisome development in the last few weeks is that
both Israelis and Palestinians have abandoned the hope
of negotiations for ending the crisis and bringing about
a lasting solution to this conflict. The failure of the
peace process - which, we have to acknowledge, is a
collective failure of the international community - will
weaken the mechanisms in place for managing tensions.
Indeed, mechanisms like the agreement between Israeli
Defense Forces and the security forces of the Palestinian
authorities are less and less viable, since negotiations
with Israel no longer offer any realistic prospects for
ending the occupation itself. It is therefore the Security
Council's duty to overcome our differences, forge a
consensus and do our utmost to revive the peace process
by setting parameters for negotiations and for a final
status agreement. This has been reiterated by several
participants in the debate this morning.

It is imperative that the peace process be
reinvigorated in order to end the occupation and achieve
a just and lasting solution on the basis of two States,
living side by side and in security. In this connection,
Angola welcomes the Visit of the Secretary-General to
Palestine and to Israel. We also welcome the proposed
plan for a meeting of the Quartet in Vienna tomorrow.
In order to achieve some results, we urge all sides to
put an end to the Violence, as it undermines legitimate
Palestinian aspirations for statehood and Israel's
longing for security.

To prevent further territorial expansion and
guarantee safety for both the Palestinian and Israeli
people, Angola strongly supports the request for
United Nations or other international protection for
the occupied Palestinian territory, in the interest of
preventing further escalation of hostilities. This would
be a clear and tangible manifestation of our support for
the two-State solution, which we have reiterated several
times in this Council.

The atmosphere in the Middle East is reaching a
boiling point, and we may be engulfed in a conflict that
will have global repercussions. To avoid this, we must
resolve the Palestinian question as soon as possible by
facilitating the creation of a Viable Palestinian State,
living side by side with Israel. We need to go beyond
the historic raising of the Palestinian flag, which we all
witnessed here at United Nations in recent days. This
was a significant political statement by the Palestinian
Authority, but it is, unfortunately, too little too late, as
the events we are now witnessing demonstrate.

