The Secretary-General: It is very good to see
you here in New York, Mr. Minister, as we discuss this
important topic. Let me thank you for convening this
thematic debate. The topic you have chosen is
particularly timely, since in these days we are marking
the tenth anniversary of a dark moment in the history
of the United Nations.

On 11 July 1995, Srebrenica, a place that the
Security Council had proclaimed a safe area and that
was manned by United Nations peacekeeping forces,
fell to the attacking Serb forces. On 13 July, the
systematic killing of Muslim men and boys began. As
we reflect on those shameful events, we are reminded
that, whenever the Security Council takes
responsibility for protecting civilians, it must craft an
unambiguous mandate and provide adequate resources
to do the job properly, and that everyone involved -
from the Council itself, the broader membership of the
Organization and the Secretariat here in New York to
our personnel on the ground - must fully understand
the expectations they have aroused among people
desperate for protection in the face of grave danger.

But the truth is that this theme could be taken as
encompassing almost the whole of the Council's
current agenda, since almost every crisis that the
Council has to deal with includes a humanitarian
dimension. Indeed, it is often the sheer scale of human
suffering, more than anything else, that impels the
international community to intervene. Our task should
be to prevent such suffering. All too often we fail to do
so because we do not recognize the gravity of the
threat until too late. That is why I believe that Member
States should recognize that whenever a particular
State is unable or unwilling to protect its citizens
against extreme violence, there is a collective
responsibility for all States to do so, a responsibility
that must be assumed by the Council.

Debate tends to focus on the extreme cases where
only forceful intervention can halt the bloodshed. Yet
the earlier we tackle a crisis by other means, the better
our chances of preventing it from reaching that point. I
therefore join the President in stressing the importance
of helping to prevent future conflicts by addressing
their root causes.

The Council has already adopted important
resolutions on this subject, and I have devoted several
reports to it. In a few days' time, a major civil-society
conference on prevention will be held here at United
Nations Headquarters. In the light of that conference's
deliberations, I hope the Council will return to it in the
near future, focusing especially on practical modalities.

Meanwhile, the Council has a heavy caseload of
countries already affected by conflict or tentatively
emerging from it. The most frustrating cases are
countries that relapse into conflict only a few years
after the international community has helped them
emerge from it. We have learned from bitter experience
that peacebuilding, in order to be successful, needs to
be sustained over a period of years and to include a
broad range of tasks. Those include reintegrating and
rehabilitating demobilized combatants, helping
societies and markets to recover their vitality and, most
crucially of all, strengthening the capacity of State and
social institutions to provide security and justice based
on the rule of law.

In a moment, the Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Guehenno, will speak in
more detail about the problems of providing genuine
security in post-conflict situations. For my part, I wish
briefly to stress the importance of the rule of law. That
is something that cannot be imposed from outside.
Local actors must genuinely understand that only
confidence in the rule of law will ensure lasting
security, by enabling people of different factions or
communities to rely on the forces of the State, rather
than on factional militias, for protection. For that to
happen, courts and other institutions must be based not
on an imported model, but on the culture and traditions
of the local society.

The role of the international community is to
galvanize and provide technical assistance to that
process while making sure that all national actors are
included in it. It must do so in a coordinated manner.
Different parts of the United Nations system, including
the international financial institutions, need to
cooperate closely with each other and with bilateral
donors and troop contributors. Ensuring that
coordination is one of the roles I hope to see filled by
the new PeacebuiIding Commission, which I hope
Member States will agree to create at the world summit
to be held in September. That Commission should help
to sustain the international focus on peacebuilding
tasks in countries that, thanks to the cessation of active
hostilities, are no longer intensively covered in the
news media. By bringing together the different
international and regional actors involved in such
countries, the Commission would, and should,
harmonize peacebuilding activities across the
multilateral system.

As an advisory body, the Commission would
neither encroach upon the authority nor dilute the
responsibility of the Council. No matter how effective
the Commission may be, the members of the Council
will continue to bear the responsibility for devising and
adopting the mandates under which the United Nations
operates in war-torn countries. The Council will
therefore still have the responsibility of ensuring that
those mandates are both broad and long enough to give
affected countries a real chance of developing the
institutions and attitudes needed to sustain the rule of
law. Only when that is achieved can a country hope to
break decisively with the cycle of violence.

