Mr. Zahid (Morocco) (spoke in French): As this is
the first time I have had the opportunity to address the
Council since you, Sir, assumed the presidency, I do not
want to miss this opportunity to convey to you the warmest
congratulations of Morocco and of the Moroccan
delegation. We are convinced that thanks to your diplomatic
skills and experience, and your thorough knowledge of the
United Nations, you will successfully conduct our work and
the work of the Council throughout this month.

Allow me also to convey the Moroccan delegation's
congratulations to Ambassador Fowler on the report that
he, in his capacity as Chairman of the Security Council
sanctions Committee on Angola, introduced to the
Council.

We also thank the Council for having acceded to our
request to have an opportunity to clarify the situation
concerning a reference - a minor one, certainly, but it is
a reference nonetheless - to the Government of the
Kingdom of Morocco and to Morocco.

In paragraph 123 of the report, the Panel indicates
that it learned that in 1995 Mr. Savimbi had placed
$250,000 with UNITA's representative in Morocco, and
that additional payments were made later. The same
paragraph indicates that at least some Moroccan officials
knew of the initial deposit, which, according to the report
itself, occurred prior to the imposition of sanctions on
UNITA. And paragraph 125 concludes that the Panel

"noted the apparent absence of any action by
Morocco to track down or freeze UNITA assets that
had been transferred to that country with the
knowledge of Moroccan officials".

Here there is an error in the French text, which instead of
saying "des fonctionnaires", should say "de
fonctionnaires". We are not talking about all the officials,
just some of them, as the report previously states.

In order to dispel any ambiguity and to clarify the
situation, I would like to inform the Council that the
funds referred to in the report were completely exhausted
before the imposition of sanctions. As regards the UNITA
representative who is mentioned, we have already
formally reported to the sanctions Committee and its
Chairman that this person left Morocco a long time ago,
and I would like to confirm this today.

In conclusion, I would like to reaffirm Morocco's
support for all the efforts of the international
community - beginning first and foremost with our
Council - to restore peace, stability and prosperity to the
fraternal country of Angola, which has suffered
excessively from the torments of war.

 

