Mr. Konuzin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are grateful to you, Sir, for expressing
solidarity with Russia on behalf of the Security
Council in connection with the terrorist attack on my
country. I shall convey your words of sympathy to the
Russian Federation and all the victims of the tragedy.

Our Organization was established immediately
after a most cruel and devastating war that brought
mankind untold grief. Millions upon millions died and
my own country suffered enormous loss of life.
Yesterday was 9 May, a day sacred to the citizens of
Russia and all peoples of the Soviet Union. On the very
anniversary of victory in the great war for the
fatherland, when countries in the anti-Hitler coalition
and all people of good will commemorated the end of
the Second World War, a monstrous terrorist act was
committed in the Chechen Republic of the Russian
Federation. In Grozny, during the celebrations
commemorating the crushing of fascism, a terrorist
explosion killed the legally elected President of
Chechnya, Akhmad Kadyrov. Others died and many,
including children, were wounded.

This crime was committed at a time when the
Chechen Republic was gradually intensifying its efforts
to restore a peaceful way of life. Refugees were
returning home, the economy was recovering and
political activity was increasing. It was precisely
that - the normalization of the situation in the
Republic - that drew the fury of terrorists who are
blinded by hatred for all mankind and who are doomed
to oblivion. Today, in every mosque in Chechnya, they
are praying for the victims of this act of terrorism and
cursing the murderers.

The bloody trail of terrorism can be seen
throughout the world: Russia, the United States,
Indonesia, Spain, Saudi Arabia and the Middle East.
International terrorism, the black plague of the twenty-
first century, can be countered only if we work together
and form the united front of an international anti-
terrorist coalition. Russia will participate in that
struggle. Victory will be ours.

My delegation has prepared a draft presidential
statement in connection with the terrorist attack in
Grozny, May I ask you, Sir, to convene consultations
following this meeting in order to consider it?

I now turn to the item on the Security Council's
agenda today. We are grateful for the Secretary-
General's report on Timor-Leste, containing detailed
information on developments in that country. We
believe that it accurately reflects both the achievements
of and the main problems facing Timor-Leste. We
agree with the report's conclusion concerning the need
to extend the United Nations Mission of Support in
East Timor (UNMISET) beyond 20 May for an
additional 12-month consolidation phase, in a reduced
size and with a modified mandate. We support the
Secretary-General's suggestions for the parameters of
an extended UNMISET, including the new
recommendation for the establishment of an
international response unit of 125 gendarmerie.

We are grateful to Brazil for having prepared a
draft resolution on the basis of the Secretary-General's
recommendations and we are prepared to participate
constructively towards its adoption.

We welcome the further stabilization in Timor-
Leste and commend the Timor authorities on their
success in developing the basic State institutions. We
note the progress achieved in legislation with a view to
the adoption of several important laws and regulations
governing the activities of individual public bodies,
determining procedures for local elections and
regulating various aspects of social and political life in
the country. We expect that Timor-Leste will soon
adopt key laws on the national police and defence,
which are essential to establishing a truly independent
force to provide internal and external security for the
country.

We welcome the establishment of the National
Electoral Commission, the first test of which will be
the preparation of local elections in the last quarter of
this year. We share the view that external assistance
will be necessary to the successful holding of the
elections and we urge the donor community to provide
Timor-Leste with the support it needs for the
preparation and convening of those elections.

We welcome the ongoing development of
Timorese-Indonesian relations. The two countries have
expressed their desire to establish genuine good-
neighbourly and mutually beneficial relations, which
provides grounds for hope that there will soon be a
settlement of pending matters, including the important
issue of demarcating and monitoring the common
border. Timor-Leste's economic development will also
benefit from positive movement in bilateral talks with
Australia on developing and allocating underwater
petroleum resources.

In conclusion, we thank Mr. Kamalesh Sharma,
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
East Timor, and the entire UNMISET staff for their
real contribution to a settlement on the island.

