Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I
would like to thank the Prosecutor for his report and
briefing this morning. I would also like to take this
opportunity once again to commend him and his staff
for their tireless efforts to bring justice to the victims
of international crimes. The serious risks they take in
the cause of international justice were brought home
recently by the death of Alain Lubamba Kongolo, a
member of the Office of the Prosecutor who died in a
plane crash while pursuing investigations in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. Our condolences
go to his family and colleagues.

We have heard this morning about Libya and the
actions of the Al-Qadhafi regime in attacking civilians.
When the Security Council adopted resolution 1970
(2011) (see S/PV.6491), it stressed the need to hold to
account those responsible for attacks on civilians. We
are grateful to the Prosecutor for the swift action he
has taken to implement resolution 1970 (2011). The
report he has presented describes a situation that
demands such decisive action. To quote from his
report: "the shooting at protesters was systematic";
"War crimes [were] committed as a matter of
policy"; many hundreds, or thousands, of protesters
have died; and "massive crimes are reportedly
committed upon instruction of a few persons who
control the organizations that execute the orders".

Despite repeated promises of a ceasefire from the
regime, we continue to see appalling attacks and
excessive use of force. Last week, as the Libyan
Deputy Foreign Minister announced a withdrawal from
Misrata, we saw intensified rocket attacks, with
hundreds of rockets landing in civilian areas over the
following three days. Together with disruptions to the
water and electricity supplies, this is conduct that
demonstrates an ongoing campaign to target civilians
in Misrata. Similar attacks have occurred in other
cities.
Others, including the High Commissioner for
Human Rights, have highlighted the deliberate
targeting of medical facilities and civilians, the use of
children as combatants, the denial of humanitarian
access and the use of sexual violence as a weapon.

Given those indications of dreadful criminal acts,
we as the international community must continue to
support the Prosecutor in thoroughly investigating
these allegations and holding those responsible to
account.

The United Kingdom will continue to assist the
Prosecutor's investigations wherever possible. All
United Nations Member States, whether parties to the
Rome Statute or not, should do the same.

Those holding power in Libya must fulfil their
obligations under resolution 1970 (2011) to cooperate
with the International Criminal Court and to swiftly
hand over any individual who may be indicted.

We welcome the cooperation that the Interim
Transitional National Council has given to the
investigation so far, and encourage it to continue.

As a State party to the International Criminal
Court, and therefore subject to its jurisdiction, the
United Kingdom strongly supports the Court's mandate
to fight impunity, in Libya and elsewhere.

The deteriorating situation in Syria is of
increasing concern in that regard. The violent
repression there must stop immediately. The Syrian
Government has a responsibility to protect peaceful
protesters, not to attack them. Those responsible for
this violence should be held to account. There can be
no impunity. We strongly support the Secretary-
General's call for an independent, transparent and
effective investigation into the killings. We must be
prepared to consider the appropriate avenues, including
the International Criminal Court, to bring justice to the
victims of these crimes. But it is not too late for the
Syrian Government to decide against more violent
oppression and bring about the radical reforms
necessary for peace and stability.

