Mr. Annabi: I am pleased to be back in the
Security Council and to join this discussion of the work
of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH). The wide participation in today's
debate underscores the high level of international
commitment to the stabilization process in Haiti. It
builds upon the Security Council's Visit to Haiti from
ll to 14 March and on the visit by the Secretary-
General and former President Clinton that took place
09-29184
on 9 and 10 March. We hope that the international
community will make a further effort two weeks from
now, at the 14 April conference on Haiti to be hosted
by the Inter-American Development Bank in
Washington, DC.

Sustained international engagement is critical to
enable Haiti to take advantage of a unique moment of
opportunity. The country now has its best chance in
decades to break from the destructive cycles of the past
and to move towards a brighter future. But it can do so
only with the continued strong support of external
partners. The Secretary-General has suggested that in
order to consolidate Haiti's stability, progress must be
made in addressing five interlinked challenges: first,
political dialogue, including elections; secondly,
extension of State authority; thirdly, strengthening
security; fourthly, the rule of law and human rights;
and fifthly, socio-economic development.

The report of the Secretary-General now before
the members of the Security Council (S/2009/129)
summarizes advances that have taken place in each of
those areas over the past six months. In order to
provide a context for today's discussion, I would like
to update and supplement that analysis, focusing on
recent developments, key tasks that remain and where
the further assistance of the international community
will be indispensable.

First, with reference to political dialogue and
elections, the resolution of political differences through
dialogue remains the cornerstone of advancement in all
other areas. There have been some positive
developments in this necessarily Haitian-led process.
In the aftermath of last year's hurricanes, we witnessed
a new potential for cooperation among representatives
from across Haiti's political spectrum and between the
various institutions of governance, the private sector
and civil society. Last December, the Government and
Parliament adopted for the first time a joint legislative
agenda. The establishment by President Preval at the
beginning of this year of a series of broad-based
commissions on key national issues represents a further
effort to promote dialogue and collaboration. Council
members will recall that they met with the leaders of
some of those commissions during their visit.

This progress, however, remains fragile. There is
a risk of renewed conflict among political institutions
and between the executive and legislative branches of
Government. These tensions are often related to
09-29184
personal ambitions and fed by the scourge of
corruption, which the Government is seeking to curb.

At this critical time, Haiti cannot afford the kind
of discord that paralysed the country for almost five
months last year. It is essential that the Haitian
leadership in the executive and legislative branches, in
civil society and the private sector rise to the challenge
and work together constructively. The international
community can and should contribute by
demonstrating that it stands with those who seek
collaboration and that it will hold accountable those
who promote conflict and instability.

The ongoing electoral process for renewal of one
third of the Senate, which can reinforce political
cooperation in the longer term, has nonetheless brought
some additional strains in the short term. Over the past
months, we saw considerable tensions related to
participation in the polls. Today, however, the process
is moving ahead. We hope that the Haitian people will
take full advantage of this opportunity to make their
voice heard and to select leaders with the necessary
ethical and professional qualities.

These elections are indispensable to permit the
proper functioning of the Parliament. It is therefore
essential that they take place in a climate that is free
from disruption or violence. At the same time, as
mandated by the Security Council, MINUSTAH is
providing the necessary logistical and security support
for the electoral process, in close collaboration with the
Haitian authorities. I am pleased to say that, at this
time, the first round appears to be broadly on track to
take place on 19 April, as envisaged, although the
timeline remains tight.

Secondly, as regards the extension of State
authority, MINUSTAH continues to assist the
Government in developing administrative capacity in
areas that are related to the mandate at both the
national and local levels, drawing in particular on our
civil affairs officers. This is a long-term process, but
some progress is being made. An integrated border
management strategy is beginning to take shape,
including the revision of the customs code, whose
adoption features on Haiti's joint legislative agenda.
That effort has been complemented by the provision of
bilateral funds to create necessary infrastructure along
the border. We are also providing support to local
administrations in the conduct of a number of basic
tasks, including budget preparation.
3
But it is clear that MINUSTAH'S efforts can
barely begin to make a difference in enabling the State
administration to respond to the needs of the
population. We therefore welcome the bilateral and
multilateral programmes that have been launched to
help build capacity in a number of ministries, and we
hope that further efforts will be made along those lines.
Those efforts could be facilitated through the adoption
by the Government of a clear plan for strengthening

public administration, drawing on existing blueprints.

The strengthening of Haiti's security structures
represents a third area where there have been
significant advances, but where further efforts are
required. Over the past four years, based on steadily
increasing collaboration between MINUSTAH and the
Haitian authorities, Haiti has seen a remarkable
improvement in its security situation. The dispersal of
armed groups in rural areas in 2004 and 2005 and the
dismantling of gangs in urban strongholds in 2006 and
2007 were followed, over the second half of last year,
by increased effectiveness in curbing kidnapping,
which was having a disproportionately demoralizing
impact on the population.

We are building on that progress with further
initiatives to promote security in border areas and have
complemented the deployment of troops along the land
border with the Dominican Republic and along the
coast with maritime and airborne patrolling. We hope
that those latest efforts will be of assistance in
promoting security throughout the Haitian territory and
in deterring illicit trafficking activities. At the same
time, we recognize that they cannot alone represent an
effective response to the problem of trafficking, which
constitutes a key threat to Haiti's stability. They must
be reinforced through engagement by other countries
within the region that can assist by sharing information
and with complementary patrolling and, as appropriate,
coordinated operations.

Meanwhile, we are advancing with our
programmes to strengthen Haiti's own security
capability. A class of 702 Haitian police cadets
graduated in February, making a total of more than
9,200 active police officers. The training of an
additional 450 cadets was launched last December, and
recruitment for the next promotion is ongoing. It is
essential that this pace be maintained in order to reach
the target envisaged in the Haitian police reform plan
of 14,000 police officers by the end of 2011. We also
continue to push forward with the vetting process,
together with the Haitian police, in order to ensure that
those who are serving have the necessary professional
standards and qualifications. Bilateral assistance has
been made available to help meet a number of key
needs in terms of infrastructure and equipment, but a
lot more is needed.

That progress is encouraging. At the same time,
as was clear during the riots last spring and the
hurricanes last summer, MINUSTAH's troops and
police remain indispensable when a real crisis erupts.
The country continues to face a number of threats,
including a significant risk of civil unrest, reflecting
Haiti's difficult living conditions and the continued
presence on the ground of a number of potentially
violent elements, including former gang members and
discontented army veterans. Those threats could be
activated for political or criminal motivations or to
inhibit reform programmes that target corruption,
smuggling and trafficking. In that context,
MINUSTAH's security components are needed to
promote a sense of security among the Haitian people,
to deter spoilers and to spare a still vulnerable Haitian
police force from unmanageable challenges or setbacks
that could deal a fatal blow to its morale and
credibility.

Fourth is the rule of law and human rights. In the
area of justice reforms, there has been progress towards
the establishment of the key supervisory body the
Superior Council of the Judiciary. The Minister of
Justice announced recently that the Superior Council
would soon be installed, subject to the outcome of the
vetting process, which is almost complete. In the
interim, a judicial inspectorate has been created within
the Ministry of Justice in order to provide the
necessary oversight ofjudges.

The 12 March opening of the School of
Magistrates represented a further major development. I
would like to thank the members of the Security
Council for their participation in that ceremony, which
offered a clear indication of the importance that they
attach to the justice reform process.

As regards corrections reform, there has been
some progress in training corrections staff and in the
rehabilitation of prisons, but the situation in Haiti's
corrections facilities remains unacceptable from the
perspective of human rights and security. It is critical
that that process be given continued priority by Haiti's
leadership and strong bilateral support.

In the area of human rights, we are seeing
historically remarkable levels of public debate and of
respect for freedom of the press, as well as for civil
liberties in general. We have also been encouraged by
the broad interest of the Government and of civil
society in a human rights approach that integrates
economic and social concerns. However, limited
progress has been made in the strengthening of the
Office de la protection du citoyen - the office of the
ombudsman - which will play a critical role in
ensuring the sustainability of human rights gains.

Fifth and last is social and economic
development. Socio-economic issues are not, of course,
the core work of a peacekeeping operation. However, it
remains clear that in Haiti, the promotion of security
and development are very closely linked. The current
levels of deprivation and poverty in the country are
incompatible with durable stability. If we are to
succeed in our efforts, it is essential that there be an
improvement in people's daily lives, or at least a
realistic hope of such an improvement.

In that context, we have been deeply concerned
over the deterioration of the socio-economic situation
in 2008. The scope of the damage wrought by last
summer's hurricanes is estimated at about $1 billion, or
equivalent to 15 per cent of Haiti's gross domestic
product. That has now been compounded by the global
financial crisis, which in February, compared to the
previous February, brought a 14 per cent reduction in
the remittances that constitute a lifeline for many
Haitian families and represent nearly three times the
figure for international assistance.

In that context, we continue to believe that
assistance must be directed in three broad areas. First,
we believe that continued humanitarian relief is
essential. Without it, many Haitians will have little to
eat, no capacity to send their children to school and no
access to basic services.

Secondly, it is critical to assist with early
recovery, focusing on providing jobs, while tackling
urgently needed rehabilitation and reconstruction tasks
that can also support longer-term development. We
hope that more bilateral assistance can be provided,
including with reference to the various projects that
have been outlined in the post-disaster needs
assessment, conducted jointly by the Government, the
European Union, the World Bank and the United
Nations.

Thirdly, we continue to call for longer-term
development, which depends upon the regeneration of
private-sector activity. The growth and poverty
reduction strategy paper had already helped to identify
certain key priorities of the Haitian Government for the
future. Over the past few months, that has been
helpfully supplemented by the work of Professor
Collier, who has pointed out that Haiti offers real
potential for investors, particularly in the area of
garment manufacturing, taking advantage of existing
advantageous trade agreements. But Professor Collier
also noted that, in order to leverage that potential,
certain conditions must be put in place - in particular,
the enhancement of key roads and ports, the
development of electricity and the adoption of certain
legislative and policy measures to create a truly
investment-friendly environment.

The realization of such a programme requires a
renewed partnership among national authorities, who
must take the necessary decisions; international actors,
whose assistance is essential if the required
improvements in infrastructure are to be undertaken;
and the private sector, which will need to take
advantage of those new opportunities. We earnestly
hope that the 14 April Washington conference will
facilitate agreement on such a forward-looking agenda,
based on mutual commitments and accountability. At
the same time, we hope that participants will be able to
help the Government to bridge a short-term
requirement for budget support, which amounts to
some $125 million for the current fiscal year.

Finally, visitors over the past month have
underlined that Haiti is at a turning point and that this
is the first time in many years that the country truly
appears to be poised to make a break from a past of
suffering, poverty and violence and towards a path of
sustainable social and economic development. We
agree with that analysis. We believe that today, Haiti
has a real chance to consolidate the stability that we
have all worked hard to establish. But that can happen
only with sustained and coordinated support for
progress in all areas of stabilization, drawing on a
strong partnership among Haitians, MINUSTAH, the
United Nations country team and the wider
international community.

This is, of course, a difficult environment in
which to ask for further assistance. However, at a time
when so much has been achieved, there is a compelling
logic for making an additional effort - one that will
be relatively modest in absolute terms but can make a
critical difference in securing the investments made to
date and can prevent the major costs that would be
associated with any renewed decline or disorder.

The international community has made a
remarkable contribution in providing opportunity to
Haiti. Our Haitian counterparts are today showing a
clear determination to seize that chance. I hope that,
with the support of the Security Council, that
partnership may be sustained in order to enable the
efforts made to date to come to fruition and to place
Haiti firmly on the path towards the better future that it
has sought for so long.

