Mr. Hasmy (Malaysia): My delegation associates
itself with the words of condolence expressed by the
Foreign Minister of Namibia in respect to the tragic
Kenyan air crash.
My delegation also joins others in welcoming our
distinguished guests here at this morning's meeting: His
Excellency the President of Zambia, Her Excellency the
Foreign Minister of South Africa and His Excellency the
Foreign Minister of Namibia and President of the General
Assembly.

I wish to make some brief comments, as we agree
with and entirely associate ourselves with many of the
points have been made by others this morning. Allow me
to commend you once again, Mr. President, for focusing
on Africa during your Council presidency for the month
of January. It has been a useful, indeed exhilarating,
month during which not only Council members but also
the larger membership of the Organization and even some
concerned members of civil society have been educated.
We also received a useful education on the complex
workings of American politics during our meeting with
Senator Jesse Helms. We believe that that dialogue was
equally useful.

During this month, we have dealt with many
important African issues, especially that of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. This has been an
extremely useful exercise. However, a number of other
African issues have not been addressed - namely, those
relating to Ethiopia and Eritrea, Somalia and Western
Sahara. My delegation would like to believe, and to
stress, that they were left out not because they were less
important. These other issues remain important, and we
hope the Council will give them as much attention in the
coming months.

 

During this month the Council has focused on Africa
in a way that it has not done before. Lasting one entire
month, this focus on Africa might perhaps have dispelled
the impression that there is a bias on the part of the
Council towards other regions. The United States
presidency of the Council has focused, or refocused, the
Council's attention on Africa, for which my delegation, as
do others, commend the President. But equally important -
indeed, more important, in my view - is the need for
follow-up actions, which you yourself just now
underscored, Mr. President. These follow-ups should be our
next order of business relating to Africa, beginning next
month under the Argentine presidency, and under
subsequent presidencies.

My delegation had very much hoped that at least on
one particular issue, that of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, the Council would have been able to initiate a
resolution authorizing a United Nations peacekeeping force
in that country. We earnestly hope that what we were not
able to do this month on the Democratic Republic of the
Congo we will be able to do, if not next month, certainly
as soon as possible, as time is of the essence if we want to
build on the Lusaka Agreement, an agreement so
painstakingly put together and one that we all believe
remains the only viable basis for a lasting solution of the
conflict in that country. Our ability to do so with the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, as well to carry out the
other follow-up actions ahead of us, will in large measure
reflect the success of the American presidency of the
Council for this opening month of the new millennium. We
are confident that having initiated the process, the United
States will put its mighty weight behind the important
follow-up process.

The challenge before the Council, as I have heard
from statements made this morning - including that of the
Permanent Representative of Algeria next to me, who
represents the chairmanship of the Organization of African
Unity - is that the Council must go beyond words to
actions - concrete actions. I believe the Council will be
able to meet this challenge.

