Mr. Aboul Gheit (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): I am
convinced, Mr. President, that you, all the participants
in this discussion, and all the other members of the
international community, can grasp the dangers
inherent in the situation in the Middle East today. We
all believe that those dangers are a result of the
stalemate in the peace process.

Some basic elements should be addressed; if they
persist, these will lead to further deterioration of the
situation, with consequences that, hopefully, the region
will not have to experience.

First, it would be indeed dangerous if the
international community, represented by the Security
Council, did not deal with Israel's attempts to widen
the circle of current tension between the Palestinians
and Israel, turning it into a broader conflict. Those
attempts include the Israeli aerial attack against Syrian
territory, which was condemned by Egypt.

Secondly, the behaviour of the Israeli
Government in recent months has created greater
distrust about its real intentions. All indications and
acts lead us to believe that Israel aims at thwarting the
peace process, which is based on the principle of two
States, Israel and Palestine, living side by side in peace
and within secure and recognized borders. Israel's acts
and behaviour show that it has opted for a course that
runs counter to the search for a just and lasting
solution. The construction of this wall of separation,
which upon completion will extend between 450 and
600 kilometres, prevents more than 200,000 Palestinian
citizens from forging a future and deprives them of
their land and livelihood. It is also in flagrant violation
of international humanitarian law and the Fourth
Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of
Civilian Persons in Time of War, of 12 August 1949.

We ask the members of the Council to refer, for
example, to the report of the Special Rapporteur of the
Commission on Human Rights on the situation of
human rights in the occupied Palestinian territories. He
clearly and honestly stated in his report a point worth
considering. Some have stated that the wall is being
built to achieve security for Israel and its settlements
and settlers in the occupied Palestinian territory. Our
response is that, if as some, including the Palestinians,
have said, Israelis want to live in security, in isolation,
then the wall of separation should be built along the
1949 ceasefire demarcation line. But, behind this act is
the notion of expansion, of taking over Palestinian land
and destroying the future of the Palestinian people. It
also runs counter to the concept of two States - Israeli
and Palestinian, as the Palestinian representative has
mentioned.

Secondly, how else can Israel's acts be explained,
given the ongoing escalation of violence against the
Palestinians. Their territory is invaded; their houses are
destroyed; their activists are killed; and they are
subjected to collective punishment. All those measures
unfortunately spark counter-violence and lead to
attacks that kill Israeli civilians in Israeli territory. The
Egyptian Government has condemned those acts,
including the latest attack carried out in Haifa.

Today the Security Council must shoulder its
responsibility and show its determination to achieve a
settlement in keeping with Security Council resolution
1397 (2002) on the establishment of two States -
Israel and Palestine - with a view to controlling this
continuously deteriorating situation in the region. What
is demanded of the Security Council today is to express
international consensus on the firm demand that Israel
stop the construction of the wall of separation deep
inside Palestinian territory, set aside its settlement
policy and assume its responsibilities as an occupying
Power, in accordance with the 1949 Fourth Geneva
Convention.

In conclusion, Secretary-General Kofi Annan
spoke honestly and explicitly at the end of the Quartet
meeting on 26 September 2003, when he said that the
situation calls for bold steps with a View to extricating
ourselves from this impasse and to beginning to
implement the road map. Transparent machinery is
required to tackle certain tasks, with close monitoring,
in keeping with a clear timetable and carrying out well
defined measures, so that commitments can be kept and
implemented.

