Ms. Landgren: The report ofthe Secretary-General
on Liberia (S/2014/598) that is before the Council has
been overtaken by the Ebola virus disease (EVD)
epidemic. Liberians are facing their gravest threat since
the war and my remarks will focus on that.

The spread of the EVD in Liberia has been
merciless. The Ministry of Health puts the number of
reported cases above 2,070, with over 1,200 deaths, but
these numbers understate Ebola's true toll. The speed
and scale of the loss of lives and the economic, social,
political and security reverberations of the crisis are
affecting Liberia profoundly.

Unlike an earthquake or a flood, this crisis grows
exponentially, with every fresh infection begetting
others. Caring for the sick and burying the dead are
traditions now freighted with risk. The Liberian health
system was the region's weakest, despite a decade of
partnership efforts; now, at least 160 health workers
have contracted the disease and 80 have died. Most
health workers have gone long stretches without proper
protective equipment, training or pay. Local funeral
rites that involve the touching and washing of the dead
have led to countless new deaths and will need to be
replaced with safer rituals, requiring the commitment
of religious and traditional leaders. Many communities
denied that Ebola existed at all.

There is no real disagreement among health experts
about what needs to be done. Advocacy and community
mobilization, the prompt removal of suspected EVD
cases from communities to case management centres,
the urgent and safe disposal of bodies, and robust
contact tracing and active case search are the main
elements. That does require going community to
community - and even door to door - to inquire,
inform and support. It requires health workers to staff
Ebola case management centres, while employing
meticulous infection control measures.

For now, patients at advanced stages of EVD
continue to be brought to facilities that cannot admit
them. Four new case management centres will be
established in Monrovia, adding some 500 beds in the
capital alone, but even this may not fully respond to
the needs. We will know this epidemic is being outrun
when we find that there is spare bed capacity.

By late July, the EVD outbreak had triggered
widespread alarm and the Government took several
measures. Borders were closed, other than at a few
strictly controlled crossing points; non-essential
Government workers were sent on mandatory leave;
and most Government travel was restricted. Border
markets, schools and other institutions were ordered to
close, and large gatherings were suspended. But Ebola's
spread outpaced the Government's ability to respond.
In several instances, public anger broke out over the
failure to remove the bodies of EVD victims from
streets and houses.

On 6 August, President Ellen Johnson-Sirleaf
declared a 90-day state of emergency, stating that the
scale and scope of the epidemic exceeded the response
capacity of national institutions and existing legal
frameworks. Extraordinary measures were required,
the President said, including the suspension of some
constitutionally guaranteed rights. The legislature
endorsed the decision, as required by the Constitution.

Later in the month, a curfew was instituted from
9 p.m. to 6 a.m., since yesterday pushed back to 11 p.m.
Within the context of the state of emergency, the narrow
domestic role of the Armed Forces of Liberia (AFL)
was broadened and the army deployed, along with the
National Police and the Immigration Service, to isolate
highly Ebola-affected counties and communities and
to protect the less-affected counties. The benefits
of isolating Ebola-affected communities to prevent
disease transmission are not clear. Those operations, to
date, have not always included prior arrangements to
make available food and water, or sufficient supportive
engagement with the communities concerned.

On 20 August, when the Government mounted
an AFL-led operation to isolate the West Point area
of Monrovia, the prices of essential goods within the
cordon skyrocketed within hours. Panicked residents
protested the cordon, and in the confrontation with the
AFL shots were fired and a 15-year old boy was fatally
wounded. Following that incident, President Ellen
Johnson-Sirleaf made the commitment that there would
be no further use of lethal force, and on 30 August the
West Point cordon was lifted.

Movement restrictions throughout the country
continue, including through operations of the Armed
Forces. Criteria for passage at checkpoints have not
been consistently implemented or clearly communicated
to the public, and opportunities for vigilantism
and profiteering have increased. Although some
coordination has been visible among security agencies
in the EVD response, each agency has planned and
executed its own security operation, with coordination
more visible at the county level. A joint command centre
has been established to oversee nationwide operations.

The halting of cross-border trade, domestic
movement restrictions and general economic
uncertainty have prompted panic buying of food and
other goods. Several major concessions have reassured
the Government and their own employees that they
are not planning to close, although many have reduced
operations and repatriated foreign personnel. A number
of forestry concessions have stopped operating and
over 10,000 forestry workers have reportedly been
laid off. With unemployment and underemployment
already high, Ebola has added to Liberia's economic
uncertainty.

The Ministry of Finance and Development Planning
has announced that the Government already faces a
$57-million revenue shortfall, and informed donors of
preliminary indications of a $ll6-million budget gap.
Growth projections have been revised downward to
2.9 per cent from 5.9 per cent. The executive is revising
the budget to reflect revenue shortfalls and to assure
that the Government has the resources to operate
while responding to Ebola. The national budget for the
fiscal year beginning 1 July not having been passed,
the Government has been operating on an advance
equivalent to one-twelfth of last year's budget.

The EVD outbreak has also created uncertainty
around some fundamental democratic processes. Noting
that it would be unable to deliver credible senatorial
elections in October, as scheduled, the National
Elections Commission proposed a postponement until
the second week of December, which would allow the
vote to take place before the 15 incumbent senators
finish their terms on 6 January. The legal framework for
a postponement is being explored by the legislature and
the Law Reform Commission. The National Elections
Commission will need clarity soon. There is growing
recognition that even a December electoral timeline
may be difficult to maintain should the crisis stretch.

The constitutional review process has also suffered.
The national constitutional conference envisaged for
August could not be held, delaying national discussion of
proposed amendments and the legislative consideration
of proposals that was to follow. It pushes the national
referendum on constitutional reforms into at least 2016.
The Government is, by its own admission, extremely
stretched. Several officials have reportedly left the
country or remained abroad, despite the President's
Office announcing on 11 August that officials who
failed to return to the country within a week would lose
their jobs. A lack of confidence in the Government's
capacity to address the crisis has contributed to fluid
political dynamics, and it has been widely reported
that some Liberians, including among the diaspora,
have called for an organized transition from the present
Government.

A successful Ebola response will require steady
governance. Since the end of the civil war, Liberia
has made progress in developing basic institutional
capacities while laying the foundations for a transformed
democratic State. However, the Ebola crisis has started
to strip away some of that progress. The enormous task
ofaddressing Ebola has revealed persistent and profound
institutional weaknesses, including in the security
sector. As demands pile up, the police face monumental
challenges in planning and implementing large-scale
operations due to poor logistics and communications,
an overly centralized command structure and an over-
concentration of personnel in Monrovia.

Although the delicate progress achieved in the
security transition may be stalled by Ebola, the
handover of security functions from the United Nations
Mission in Liberia (UNMIL) to national actors has so
far taken place according to Government and UNMIL
agreed timelines. Since the completion of the second
phase of UNMIL's military drawdown in June, the
Mission no longer has a fixed military presence in
seven of Liberia's 15 counties, and four counties have no
presence of UNMIL armed security response capacity.

As increased funding is found to respond to EVD,
it will be important that the Government take full
responsibility for resourcing the Liberia National Police
adequately and holding it accountable for delivery.
Critical to that will be the ability to use the opportunity
to deploy police officers more widely throughout the
country. The Ebola outbreak has halted UNMIL's joint
border operations with the United Nations Operation
in Cote d'Ivoire and Ivorian authorities. Other than
incidents within Cote d'Ivoire near the Liberian border
in February and May, the border areas have been
peaceful during 2014. Although Ivorian refugee returns
remain suspended, the situation in the refugee camps
remains calm.

Early on in the crisis, the Government established
a national task force on Ebola, chaired by the President
herself, operating as overall leadership for the response
in Liberia. The structure, which has undergone
adjustments, has been criticized for failing to bring
the epidemic under control. There have been calls in
Liberia for a stronger international role in coordination
structures.

As in Guinea and Sierra Leone, discussions are
under way to design an overarching coordination
platform for response efforts in Liberia through a
national and international partnership. Beyond an
initial $20 million of Government funding approved
by the legislature, of which $5 million have been
made available, the related trust fund has not received
significant financial support. Transparent and credible
financial management will be essential, and the World
Bank is working on a modality through its development
trust fund.

Since late July, UNMIL has turned its full focus
on EVD and engaged in supporting the nationally led
response. Given the reduced activity of the Government
and other national actors, some of UNMIL's work,
as originally conceived, has slowed in the areas of
constitutional reform, national reconciliation, land
reform, the capacity-building of security agencies, and
natural resource management. UNMIL has not ceased
its mandated activities, however, and other work has
intensified with respect to the security sector and the
rule of law, political good offices, the protection of
civilians and human rights monitoring and support.

In the fight against the EVD, the Mission is working
through four pillars of engagement and support:
security and the rule of law, logistics, communications
and outreach, and coordination at both the central and
the county levels. Our military and police continue
to provide operational advice and support to national
counterparts, including embedding liaison officers
within the joint command centre with Liberian military,
police and immigration personnel. UNMIL has worked
closely with the Ministry of Justice and the judiciary to
address the extremely high rates of pre-trial detention,
helping to alleviate some overcrowding in Liberia's
major prisons, which is an added concern within the
Ebola context.

The Mission is not directly enforcing the
quarantining of communities or counties, but is
monitoring all security operations under the state of
emergency. UNMIL's own security posture is kept
under constant review to best place the Mission in
its protection-of-civilians mandate. We have played a
large role in the logistics of the EVD response, both in
the planning and the delivery of operations. UNMIL
leads an interagency crisis logistics team comprising
the World Health Organization (WHO), the World Food
Programme, UNICEF and the International Committee
of the Red Cross, which conducts logistics planning,
inventory management, stock control, distribution
and coordination at the Ministry of Health and Social
Welfare. That team links closely with UNMIL logistics
to deliver supplies throughout the country.

In support of Government outreach efforts,
UNMIL has engaged in nationwide communications
on EVD education and prevention measures. That is
done through traditional communicators, UNMIL
radio programming in 17 Liberian languages, and
the printing of over 150,000 flyers, among other
things. UNMIL retains a civilian presence in each of
Liberia's 15 counties, where we have always worked
closely with local authorities. Since March, when Lofa
county became the epicentre of the outbreak in Liberia,
UNMIL has provided coordination support to county
superintendents, county health teams and county EVD
task forces.

In discussion with several superintendents and
county health teams, I have found insightful thinking,
planning and initiatives around the basic measures of
preventing the spread of Ebola. So far, however, many
superintendents have received only $2,300 from the
central Government. We understand that more funding
may be on the way. Meanwhile, UNMIL has turned its
ever-useful quick impact projects programme towards
rapid Ebola support.

UNMIL and the United Nations country team
partners continue to benefit from a close and consultative
relationship. Five weeks ago, I began bringing together
a few leaders of the international health partner
agencies on the front lines, including Doctors Without
Borders and the United States Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention, with a small number of United
Nations colleagues, including the WHO leadership,
to brainstorm around Ebola responses on a scale not
foreseen by any existing protocols. Responding in that
context is beyond any of us acting alone, and we will
do everything we can to maintain those close links on
the ground.

In that connection, let me mention that in addition
to reorienting our activities, UNMIL and the United
Nations more broadly have advocated at the highest
levels to prevent the international isolation of Liberia
and its neighbours affected by the Ebola epidemic.
The Mission is also seeking support arrangements for
front-line international responders and the diplomatic
community to enable them to stay and operate in
Liberia. That includes access to UNMIL's shuttle
flights between Monrovia and Accra, which were
reactivated on 7 September, and access to UNMIL's
medical facilities for routine medical care.
United Nations Headquarters continues to engage
with Member States to secure an EVD-specific
treatment centre and medical evacuation arrangements
for United Nations personnel, the diplomatic community
and front-line international EVD responders. From our
own organization, we are seeking a decision to provide
danger pay to our personnel in recognition of the severe
stress and uncertainty of the unprecedented situation,
which is, understandably, not captured within the
existing United Nations regulations.

This epidemic of unprecedented scale would
challenge any Government and any society. Even as
Liberia and its partners respond, the disaster continues
to grow - a tragedy for a country that has seen so
much hardship. UNMIL has pledged to provide its full
support and continues to review the range of capabilities
we can bring to ending this latter-day plague, which
must be stopped in its tracks and stopped soon.

