Mr. Musayev (Azerbaijan): At the outset, I would
like to commend your delegation, Mr. President, for
holding this important open debate and for submitting
a concept note (S/2018/66, annex) on the topic. I also
thank Mr. Ian Martin for his insightful briefing.

We congratulate the State of Kuwait on assuming
the presidency of the Security Council for the month of
February and the chairmanship of the Informal Working
Group on Documentation and Other Procedural
Questions. I would also like to praise the contributions
made by the former Chairs of the Working Group.
We acknowledge the role that the Group is playing by
advancing ways to further enhance the transparency,
accountability and overall efficiency of the Council's
work. As an elected member of the Security Council,
Azerbaijan actively participated in discussions within
the Working Group and, during its presidency of the
Council, held an open debate on the Council's working
methods in October 2013 (see S/PV.7052).

The Security Council's working methods continue

to raise great interest among the broader membership.
Such an interest arises from the threats and challenges
facing the world nowadays and the functions of the
Security Council, which acts on behalf of Member
States and on which Member States conferred
the primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security, as provided for by the
Charter of the United Nations. Today's open debate is
yet another illustration of the high level of attention
given to the topic.

We welcome the adoption by the Security Council,
on 30 August 2017, of presidential note S/2017/507,
which incorporates and further develops the Council's
previous documents concerning its working methods.
However, there is a need for more efforts in that
direction, including through the Informal Working
Group and annual open debates on working methods. I
would like to focus briefly on three points.

First, it is clear that unity among the permanent
members is an absolute necessity for reaching
agreements. At the same time, it is important to always
remember that both permanent and elected members
of the Security Council bear a collective responsibility
for international peace and security. We note the
progress achieved so far in making the Council a more
collaborative and inclusive organ and would welcome
further deliberations and contributions to that end.

Secondly, the broader United Nations membership
should be given more opportunities to be heard. We
take positive note of some developments in that respect
and look forward to additional efforts to enhance the
transparency of the Security Council and its interaction
with the wider membership.

Thirdly, needless to say, the effectiveness and
accountable functioning of the Security Council
require, first and foremost, the implementation of
its decisions. The fact that the unlawful use of force
against sovereign States and the resulting military
occupation of their territories continue notwithstanding
Security Council resolutions, including those referring
to regional arrangements, does not mean that such a
state of affairs can constitute an accepted practice of
the Council's working methods.

The objective of maintaining international peace
and security is hardly achievable if the universally
recognized fundamental values, norms and principles
are overtly disregarded, misinterpreted or conditioned
by aggressors to whitewash their illegal actions.
At a time of increased brutality of armed conflicts,
challenges to the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of States, the highest level of forced displacement
and growing terrorist and separatist threats, more
concerted actions and synergy are required at all levels
to safeguard international peace and security.

We look forward to the full implementation of
presidential note 507 and a continued improvement
in the working methods and regular practices of the
Security Council.

