Miss Durrant (Jamaica): Jamaica joins in
welcoming the successful outcome of elections in East
Timor. We are pleased that the process was a smooth
one, marked by a high turnout of voters and conducted
in an atmosphere of calm and order. In this regard, I
wish to thank Under-Secretary-General Guehenno for
his comprehensive report on the proceedings.

We are heartened to note that the elections
received a clean bill of health from the numerous
international observers. This was due in no small
measure to the people of East Timor and to their
demonstrated dedication to creating a viable
democracy; to the leadership of the Secretary-
General - and in this regard we are pleased that he has
joined us; to the work of the United Nations
Transitional Administration in East Timor (UNTAET)
under the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Sergio Vieira de Mello; and to the support
received from the international community, including
United Nations volunteers and representatives of non-
governmental organizations.

It is clear that the wishes of the people of East
Timor are reflected in the election results and that the
different parties in the Constituent Assembly reflect the
views of all sectors of society. The work of the newly
elected Constituent Assembly begins at a crucial point
in the democratic life of East Timor and we encourage
continued cooperation between the newly elected
leaders and UNTAET. The work on the constitution is
extremely important to the future of East Timor, as it
will provide a foundation, terms of reference and
information on rights and responsibilities that will hold
society together and guide the actions of the people of
East Timor. We wish to stress the importance of finding
common ground with regard to the drafting of the
constitution and the need for those intimately involved
to work in a spirit of cooperation and compromise.

The successful holding of elections in East Timor
must encourage the international community to stay the
course and to continue to support the East Timorese. It
also gives us great hope for the future of East Timor.
Work must continue on reconciliation, on the refugee
situation in West Timor and on the security situation
there, as well as on capacity-building and economic
viability. It is clear that the people of East Timor will
require the assistance of the international community
after independence, and we look forward to the report
of the Secretary-General that is due in October and the
guidelines that it will provide for the future mandate of
the United Nations in East Timor.

Jamaica wishes the people of East Timor well as
they prepare for independence.

