The President (spoke in Russian): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of the Russian Federation.

Like the other members of the Council, we are
pleased to see Deputy Prime Minister Covie here in
this Chamber once again. We welcome the specific
measures set out in his statement which are being
undertaken by Belgrade to promote the comprehensive
implementation of resolution 1244 (1999). We also
welcome the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Mr. Michael Steiner, and we thank him for his
very informative and useful briefing.

Our comprehensive discussion today of the
situation in Kosovo is extremely timely. It provides us
with an opportunity not only to summarize some of the
results of the international efforts that have been
deployed in the nearly three years that have elapsed
since the adoption of resolution 1244 (1999), but also
more clearly to pinpoint the key problems - those that
require an immediate solution.

Frankly, the results of the process of
implementation of resolution 1244 (1999) are rather
contradictory. On the one hand, of course, progress has
been achieved in a number of specific areas with
respect to Kosovo. Indeed, progress has been made
with respect to social and economic aspects and with
respect to the question of the establishment of a Police
Service. Elections have been held in accordance with
the Constitutional Framework. Provisional institutions
of self-government have been formed. Yet, at the same
time, it must be frankly acknowledged that the
improvements taking place in Kosovo are affecting
only the Albanian population.

At the same time, an entire subset of substantive
problems remain virtually untouched after three years.
There is no real security in the region. The process of
the return of non-Albanian refugees and internally
displaced persons has hardly moved ahead. Organized
crime, smuggling and corruption are flourishing.
Efforts are being carried out from the territory of
Kosovo to destabilize the situation in the south of
Serbia and in neighbouring Macedonia.

The situation poses a real threat not only to
regional but also to European security. Many have
spoken today of the fact that the future of Kosovo is in
Europe, so let us reflect on those threats that exist
today in Kosovo that are also threats to Europe. Who
bears responsibility for all of this? Unquestionably,
there are forces in Kosovo that are not interested in a
normalization of the situation.
But that responsibility lies first and foremost with
the international community - that is, speaking
frankly, all of us. We adopted that resolution, and today
Kosovo is a de facto international protectorate. I think
that we all bear responsibility for seeing that, under our
control, a new abcess does not fester on the body of
Europe. I hope that we all share that sense of
responsibility, and that is how I perceive the fact that
Bernard Kouchner came to the opening of today's
meeting. He also bears responsibility for what is going
on in Kosovo, and he is not indifferent to the situation.
I welcome his interest in the resolution of many of the
problems that continue to plague the area. It is
important for all of us to try to resolve those problems
as quickly as possible. First and foremost, we must
focus on specific issues that would promote the
establishment of a normal living conditions in Kosovo
for all of its inhabitants and for all of those who wish
to return there.

In one form or another, those objectives have
already been noted today in the statements of many of
our colleagues, and we are in solidarity with those who
have as a priority the war on crime - above all on
organized crime; the formation of genuinely
democratic and multi-ethnic interim political,
administrative and judicial structures that are free from
the sway of extremists and criminal elements; the
security and equality of all inhabitants of the region,
regardless of their ethnic or religious affiliation; the
restraining of political extremism; the return of Serbian
and other non-Albanian refugees and internally
displaced persons; assistance to inter-community
dialogue; the completion of demilitarization and the
disarmament of former Kosovo Liberation Army
(KLA) fighters; the prevention of the militarization of
the Kosovo Protection Corps; the stepping up, through
international efforts, of interaction with Belgrade; the
establishment of dialogue between Belgrade and the
leaders of the Kosovo Albanians; and strengthened
control by the Security Council over the activities of
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) and KF OR and the enhancement of
their effectiveness.

These problems did not arise today, and progress
has been made in resolving some of them. In particular,
I should like - aside from those words that have been
heard here today regarding the efforts of Michael
Steiner - to make positive mention of the actions of
KFOR and in particular of its most recent report. We
have focused our attention also on the initial efforts
that are being undertaken by KF OR to establish border
control; the work that is being done with respect to the
Kosovo Protection Corps, including the reduction of its
staff and the shifting of its activities towards solely
civilian objectives; and KFOR's efforts to take illegal
weapons away from the population and to put an end to
the activities of armed factions and criminal groups.
We welcome the stepping up of KFOR's efforts in
these areas, and we hope that it will be able to maintain
them.

Particular attention should be devoted to the
situation in Kosovo-Mitrovica, which is extremely
serious. It would probably be possible to resolve this
problem in various ways, but we want firmly to state
that ultimatums and the use of force in resolving this
issue are unacceptable; we have long said this. The
problem of Mitrovica also is longstanding, and we have
consistently warned that attempts to resolve it through
coercion were extremely risky. We are convinced that
this approach is correct. Only political means can help
to find a way out of this situation.

Incidentally, it is also difficult to count on the
full-fledged participation of the Kosovo Serbs in the
municipal elections that are set for September. We do
not wish to prejudge the results of the efforts that are
now being undertaken to find ways to defuse the
situation in Mitrovica, but we would like clearly to
state that we see as optimal a situation in which there
would be two communities established in the city, each
with their own municipal bodies, with the relevant
competences. Those communities in turn would then
delegate representatives to a common municipal
institution of self-government.

Recently there has been a great deal of
speculation regarding the final status of Kosovo.
Studies by the International Crisis Group have been
cited today. Of course, that Group has its own point of
view, and furthermore it has no responsibility for the
situation in Kosovo. But we, however, do bear such
responsibility, and that is why I wish to say with all
due seriousness that any attempt at this stage to shift
this question onto a practical plane is extremely
dangerous. This can be done only when the situation in
the region has stabilized and when we have seen clear
progress in the resolution of those high-priority
problems that were touched on today by virtually all
members of the Security Council. The necessary
conditions for the beginning of the political process are
not currently in place, and thus any kind of hasty action
can only destabilize the situation in Kosovo and in the
region.

A great deal was said today about the benchmarks
set out by UNMIK. I welcomed Mr. Steiner's
explanation that those benchmarks are by no means
designed to indicate a trajectory on the road to Kosovo
independence, but rather to ensure conditions that
would ensure a normal life for all in the region. I
reiterate Mr. Steiner's statement that it is important that
this policy be implemented clearly and that no
speculation be permitted with regard to such
benchmarks in order to advance slogans of
independence. Unfortunately, even today, here in this
Chamber, such an attempt was made when Kosovo's
prospects were referred to in the context of the
development of events in East Timor. I believe that
such an analogy is wrong and very dangerous.

It is important that what Mr. Steiner has begun -
namely, the leadership of the United Nations mission,
on a constructive note - continue successfully. Key to
that, in our View, is the establishment of effective
cooperation between UNMIK's administration and the
authorities of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. The
basis for such cooperation already exists: the Common
Document of 5 November 2001 and the coordinated
work begun to implement it. We also know that the
Special Representative is energetic, persistent and
skilled in achieving results, and we are counting on the
fact that all of those qualities will be demonstrated in
Kosovo in the full and comprehensive implementation
of resolution 1244 (1999).

In conclusion, I should like to ask a few questions
of Mr. Steiner.

We know that the Kosovo Assembly, at its first
meeting on 16 April, through the votes of the Albanian
majority attempted virtually to revise some of the
provisions of the constitutional framework. At the
same meeting, despite the position expressed by the
Security Council, doubt was cast on the agreement
between the Government of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia and Macedonia on the demarcation of the
border. I should like to know if UNMIK responded to
those actions by the Assembly majority.

Many here have welcomed the steps Belgrade has
taken to hand over the Albanian prisoners to UNMIK. I
should like to ask precisely where those Albanian
prisoners are right now.

What is the Special Representative's assessment
of the course of and prospects for the investigation by
the International Criminal Tribunal for Yugoslavia of
war crimes perpetrated in Kosovo by Kosovo
Liberation Army fighters?
Another question concerns the issue of debts of
the enterprises being privatized in Kosovo. We have
heard that the international financial organizations
estimate that those debts are between $1.2 and $1.4
billion. We also know that some of the loans were
guaranteed by the Government of Serbia. The fate of
property in Kosovo belonging to the Federal Republic
of Yugoslavia and to Serbia is another issue relating to
privatization. I should like to ask how UNMIK is
resolving that issue with Belgrade.

I resume my function as President of the Security
Council.

I now give the floor to the representative of
Spain. I invite him to take a seat at the Council table
and to make his statement.

