Mr. Ouane (Mali) (spoke in French): I wish to
associate myself with the words of welcome extended
to Mr. Jacques Paul Klein, the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and Coordinator of United
Nations Operations in Bosnia and Herzegovina. I wish
to thank him for his enlightening and detailed
statement.

I also thank the Secretary-General for his report
of 2 June 2000 on the United Nations Mission in
Bosnia and Herzegovina (UNMIBH).

I wish to make three brief comments on the
question under consideration. First of all, my
delegation is gratified by the progress that has been
made by UNMIBH within the framework of its overall
mandate, which, we should recall, is to oversee and
restructure the institutions of law and order in the
Republic. On this basis, the establishment of the State
Border Service and the multi-ethnic Brcko district
police force are significant, as is the integration of the
specialized police forces of the Federation. The
Secretary-General's report also mentions the progress
achieved in establishing the Law Enforcement
Personnel Registry and the initiatives to accelerate the
recruitment, voluntary redeployment and return of
minority police. Along these lines, we note the positive
response of Croat leaders to the statement made by the
President of the Security Council on 23 April calling
on them to become constructive partners in the peace
process. We should also mention the remarkable work
done in the judicial system assessment programme.

Secondly, my delegation hopes that the progress
made will be consolidated. To that end, and as
emphasized by Mr. Klein in his statement, the ongoing
and enduring commitment of the international
community seems to be urgently needed. We welcome
the efforts of the Member States that have contributed
to the Trust Fund administered by UNMBIH, which we
hope will receive further contributions for the Police
Assistance Programme in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Similarly, we hope that the Security Council and
Member States that have an influence on the parties
will give UNMIBH the support it needs. The
cooperation of the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina
remains essential to the success of UNMIBH's
continued mission.

My third comment is on the return of refugees
and displaced persons. This return is a major priority
and must be accelerated. That is why we urge the
authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina fully to
implement measures to encourage the populations to
return, in particular through property legislation and
the lifting of restrictions on legal evictions.

In conclusion, I stress Mali's support for the
extension of UNMIBH's mandate for a further 12-
month period to 21 June 2001. We thank Mr. Klein and
all the staff of UNMIBH for their devotion to the cause
of peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

