Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): I wish to make a simple clarification and to
comment about what the Special Envoy has just said.

At the Vienna II conference, held to prepare for
Geneva, Jordan was charged with determining who
was a terrorist and who was not, and Saudi Arabia was
charged with determining who was in the opposition
and who was not, so that we could take those two
definitions to Geneva with us. Neither Jordan nor Saudi
Arabia established such definitions, and the problem
was again referred to the Geneva conference. We then
found out that terrorists had been invited to the Geneva
conference. Afterwards, they were excluded because
everyone found out that they were terrorists.

On the other hand, the Syrian Government has been
repeatedly to Geneva and will return there to engage
in an intra-Syrian dialogue - not a Syrian terrorist
dialogue - without outside interference and without
any impositions. Therefore, we need the Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General for Syria to gather all the
opposition groups in one delegation, which would
come to negotiate with the delegation of the Syrian
Arab Republic. We are not prepared to negotiate with
terrorists, or with hundreds of genetically modified
armed terrorist groups. We are a Government that is
prepared to negotiate with one united delegation of the
national opposition that truly desires an intra-Syrian
settlement without outside interference.

We do not consider all members of the opposition
terrorists, as was suggested by the statement of the
Special Envoy. However, we would like to negotiate with
those who believe in Syria and in the future of Syria
and the dialogue among Syrians without their being
used in the service of external agendas. I reiterate that
the Syrian Government is prepared to return to Geneva
and to resume the dialogue, but not with the deaf or the
mute or the blind. We want to resume the dialogue with
Syrian nationals like us who believe in our country and
do not serve an external agenda and spend their days in
five-star hotels and get paid by Governments who use
them in cheap tricks.

The meeting rose at 1.40 pm.
