Mr. Quinlan (Australia): I thank Under-Secretary-
General Feltman for his briefing.

It is obviously true that the Middle East is
experiencing dramatic turmoil, but a potentially
historic opportunity has opened up in the Middle
East peace process that we simply must not neglect.
The emphasis placed by world leaders on final-status
negotiations and the goal ofa lasting two-State solution
during leaders week at the General Assembly reflected
the recognition that we must all engage closely with the
peace process. It is widely recognized that the status
quo cannot continue.

Australia commends the activism and commitment
that the United States continues to show in its leadership
of final-status negotiations. We welome Secretary
Kerry's speech at the meeting of the Ad Hoc Liaison
Committee for the Coordination of International
Assistance to Palestinians on 25 September, in which
he stressed how urgently a two-State solution is needed.
Prime Minister Netanyahu and President Abbass also
continue to display great courage and statesmanship in
persisting with negotiations despite domestic pressures.
We recognize that sustained efforts are necessary
to negotiate the significant challenges and difficult
decisions that lie ahead and in order to conclude
negotiations within the nine-month time frame.

We are concerned about recent attacks that have
resulted in the deaths of Israelis in the West Bank.
The condemnation of such acts by Palestinian leaders
is welcome and important. Earlier clashes in the West
Bank, which have led to the deaths of Palestinians, are
also of concern. It is vital that leaders on both sides do
not let such events derail the peace efforts.

The past month has also seen an historic
breakthrough in the Council's consideration of the
conflict in Syria with the unanimous adoption of
resolution 2118 (2013) on the destruction of Syria's
chemical weapons and the presidential statement on
humanitarian assistance (S/PRST/2013/15). These
actions demonstrate that the international community
can work together towards peace and security in Syria
and the region, and we simply must continue to build
on this.

Resolution 2118 (2013) demonstrates our agreed
conviction that the use of chemical weapons is a grave
and serious threat to international peace and security.
We are giving our own full support to the Secretary-
General and the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons (OPCW) in their Joint Mission to
inspect and oversee the destruction of Syria's chemical
weapons.

The onus now lies with the Syrian regime. It must
comply in full with its obligations under resolution
2118 (2013) and cooperate without reservation with
the United Nations-OPCW Joint Mission. The Council
itself must rigorously monitor progress in Syrian
compliance. Our continued engagement will be vital if
the Mission is to succeed.

While progress on chemical weapons is welcome,
only a political solution can resolve the crisis. We
support efforts to convene a second Geneva conference
in November. We urge both the Syrian regime and the
opposition to participate constructively in these talks.
We call on those with influence on the parties in Syria
to facilitate the process.

The Syrian people need a political solution for their
future, but today they also need food, medical care,
shelter and protection. As the presidential statement
on humanitarian access adopted on 2 October made
clear, the magnitude of the humanitarian crisis requires
immediate, safe and unhindered humanitarian access
throughout the country. Sieges must stop; all parties,
and particularly the Syrian authorities, must ensure
that access is provided by the most effective means. We
support calls for ceasefires to allow assistance.

The Council must monitor closely and systematically
the adherence of all parties to the provisions of the
presidential statement of 2 October (S/PRST/2013/15),
and we support an early briefing to the Council by
Emergency Relief Coordinator Valerie Amos. Already
the conflict is taking a dramatic toll on the security
and stability of the region, and without a resolution
the threat to international peace can only grow.
Neighbouring countries have seen growing sectarian
violence and cross-border violations by parties aligned
to the Syrian conflict. They play host to huge numbers
of displaced Syrians. All neighbouring countries,
particularly Lebanon and Jordan, need the support of
the international community as they struggle to contain
the effects of the Syrian conflict.

We agree with the concerns expressed by others
today about Lebanon. The Council must reaffirm its
support to the sovereignty and stability of that country.
My own country stands ready to work through the
Council to do whatever we can to alleviate this terrible
cr1s1s.

