Mr. Corr (Ireland): On behalf of my delegation, I
should first like to join others in welcoming Special
Representative Steiner to the Council today. We have
been looking forward to this first meeting with Mr.
Steiner. We also, of course, welcome Deputy Prime
Minister Covie. We are very grateful to Mr. Steiner for
his very comprehensive briefing this morning, as well
as to the Secretary-General for his most recent report
on the United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo (UNMIK). I would also like to thank Deputy
Prime Minister Covic' for his important statement this
morning and to say how glad my delegation was to see
Mr. Kouchner with us at the beginning of our meeting.

Ireland fully agrees with the statement that will
be delivered by the representative of Spain on behalf of
the European Union, so I shall make only a few
comments of particular importance to my delegation.

Ireland warmly congratulates Special
Representative Steiner on the strong and positive start
he has made in only a number of weeks, laying out an
ambitious programme of priorities and building on the
very considerable achievements of his predecessors. He
has outlined a map, as he put it this morning, on how to
finish the job and we welcome this.

We also welcome the further progress in ensuring
participation by all communities in the provisional
institutions of self-government, following the elections
by the Kosovo Assembly of Mr. Rugova as President
and Mr. Rexhepi as Prime Minister of Kosovo, as well
as the formation of a Government. We welcome the
agreement on the participation of the Kosovo Serb
Return Coalition - Povratak - in the institutions,
giving voice to the electorate that they represent in the
new Government. It is essential that Kosovo have a
truly multi-ethnic Government, representative of all of
its people, and we are encouraged by signs that a
similar approach is gradually being adopted in the
composition of the Civil Service, as outlined in the
Secretary-General's report. We urge the fullest possible
participation by the minority communities in the public
service.

Mr. Steiner has outlined a comprehensive vision
for Kosovo's future development, based on economic
progress, the rule of law and a fair and just society for
all the people of Kosovo. Ireland especially welcomes
the emphasis on economic reform and reconstruction,
including, as we heard this morning, privatization,
which are essential to ensuring real stability in Kosovo
and without which progress in combating crime and
violence will inevitably be limited. Kosovo's people, in
particular its young people, must be given a sense of
hope and real possibilities for the future. Jobs will
clearly be a key element of this. We heard this morning
about progress in both of these areas, as well as in the
social services - schools, hospitals and so forth -
and in the area of crime reduction. That is very
welcome.

Ireland also welcomes the Secretary-General's
request to Special Representative Steiner that he
elaborate a series of benchmarks in order to measure
progress in the institutional development of Kosovo, as
well as with regard to the rule of law, the economy and
other areas. This is a very positive and constructive
development. We have looked carefully at the summary
that has been provided this morning and we very much
welcome this initiative.

We call on all of Kosovo's elected leaders to
work together, including with UNMIK and KFOR, to
achieve the objectives which have been outlined by the
Special Representative. Cooperation between all
communities aimed at achieving these objectives is
vital in enhancing Kosovo's European perspectives.

Once again, Ireland also encourages all elected
leaders to develop a genuine political dialogue, both
within and between Kosovo's communities. We look
forward to real engagement on this issue in the
approach to the municipal elections in September.

The development of real dialogue between
Pristina and Belgrade is clearly a further essential
element in the achievement of the objectives outlined
by the Special Representative. The Common Document
signed by Belgrade and UNMIK last November
provides the framework for such discussions, and we
welcome the participation, for the first time, of a
representative of the provisional institution of self-
government at a meeting of the High-Ranking Working
Group on 9 April.

Ireland regards the recent transfer to UNMIK by
the authorities in Belgrade of Kosovo Albanian
prisoners as a key element in developing the dialogue
between Belgrade and Pristina. This removes an
unnecessary irritant, but it is also a major step in the
process of reconciliation between the Albanian and
Serbian communities in Kosovo. We look forward, in
the context of an enhanced dialogue, to further
progress with regard to the return of displaced persons
within Kosovo, as well as to determining the fate of
missing persons from all communities. As we have said
before, the slow rate of Kosovo Serb returns - despite
some progress - remains worrying. A framework of
economic and other measures must be put in place in
order to increase the numbers resettling and remaining
in Kosovo. In this respect, as Mr. Steiner said in his
statement, we need a real breakthrough, but this will
require a substantial commitment, including a financial
commitment.

The creation of a society based on the rule of law
is fundamental to the future development of Kosovo
and, in particular, to the opening of European
perspectives for the province. Democracy cannot take
hold in an environment where crime and violence
flourish, and we are deeply disturbed by indications in
the Secretary-General's report of continuing ethnically
motivated violence.

Ireland strongly condemns, as others have this
morning, the absolutely unjustifiable attacks against
UNMIK police on 8 April in Mitrovica, which resulted
in a substantial number of casualties. Those promoting
such attacks and ongoing unrest in the area must
recognize the authority of UNMIK throughout Kosovo.
We welcome the statements of those local community
leaders who condemned these attacks. All of Kosovo's
leaders must make clear that there is no future in
support for extremism. Economic success can follow
only in a society based on the rule of law.

The successful development of Kosovo will help
to ensure peace and stability in South-East Europe.
Kosovo's vocation lies in Europe. Its progress along
the path towards European integration can be
determined only by Kosovo itself and by the work of
its leaders in building a truly democratic and multi-
ethnic society. Ireland, together with its partners in the
European Union, will continue to support greater
integration and regional cooperation through the
Stability Pact and the stabilization and association
process. The South-East European Cooperation Process
summit in Tirana on 28 March marked a further
important step in enhancing regional cooperation that
will open further European perspectives for Kosovo.

