Mr. Rodrigo (Sri Lanka): At the outset, allow me to
thank you, Mr. President, and the other members of the
Security Council for the opportunity to present Sri
Lanka's Views on the Supplement to the Secretary-
General's "An Agenda for Peace".

Sri Lanka would also like to extend its deepest
condolences to the people and Government of Japan on
the tragic loss of life and devastation caused by the
earthquake in the region of Kobe.

During your stewardship of the Council,
Mr. President, we have experienced welcome advances in
the process towards greater openness in the Council's
work. My delegation greatly appreciates your approach.

 

We are also grateful to the Permanent Representative
of Rwanda for the efficient conduct of the Council's work
during December.

The Secretary-General in his introduction to the
Supplement recalls the political climate surrounding the first
Security Council meeting held at Heads of State level in
January 1992. He describes it in paragraph 1 as

"a time of hope and change".

The 1990s represent, as Charles Dickens described an
earlier period of change, not only "the spring of hope" but
also "the winter of despair". The cold war may certainly be
over, but that late and not much-lamented phenomenon was
not the sole cause for the constraints placed upon the
United Nations, or, as the representative of New Zealand
would have it, for making the United Nations crawl. There
are other maladies, particularly economic ones, which lie
outside cold war complications.

Since "An Agenda for Peace" was first issued in June
1992, three annual reports of the Secretary-General on the
work of the Organization have reviewed its basic premise.
As a welcome corrective to what was primarily a political
emphasis in the original Agenda for Peace, we have also
seen the Secretary-General's "An Agenda for
Development", exploring the nexus between political
concerns and underlying economic factors.

The Agenda for Development seeks to identify the
multiple dimensions of development. Peace, the economy,
the environment, society and democracy were all seen as
essential dimensions of development. While peace was thus
seen as providing the most secure context for lasting
development, there has also been recognition of the reality
that political conflicts have, at root, economic and social
causes. "An Agenda for Development" thus extended the
horizons of "An Agenda for Peace". It has served, as the
Secretary-General's Supplement puts it, to advance
international consensus on the crucial importance of
economic and social development as the most secure basis
for lasting peace. We now hope for a practical
manifestation of this consensus through the effecting of a
balance between peace-keeping activities and pressing
socio-economic imperatives.

Two years ago "An Agenda for Peace" offered a new
vision to guide post-cold-war approaches to preventive
diplomacy, peacemaking, peace-keeping and peace-building.
The Organization has come to be increasingly involved in
a wide range of often controversial United Nations
experimental activities relating to peace and security.
Since June 1992 many of these activities have been
guided by approaches outlined in the Agenda for Peace.
In some situations the approaches adopted have been less
successful than in others. The experiences gained, whether
negative or positive, have been the subject of constant
assessment by the Council and by the General Assembly,
as well as by individual Member States.

The Secretary-General has not been insensitive to all
this, as the Supplement - a frank and thought-provoking
paper - clearly shows. It is the latest, but hopefully not
the last, document in what we see as an incremental
exercise to improve and hone the capacity of the United
Nations to more effectively and efficiently respond to
threats to international peace and security. We would
welcome the continuation of this process, for two reasons.

First, the global tectonic rumbles which began in the
late 1980s have not yet settled. Further changes will take
place, not necessarily for the better. We are by no means
yet on a yellow brick road leading to the end of history.
Secondly, the responses of the United Nations to these
developments are likely to continue counting not only
successes but failures. The Organization must therefore
develop essentially consensual courses of action - not to
mention garnering essential resources - to respond to
new eventualities.

As the representative of Indonesia, speaking on
behalf of the non-aligned countries, suggested, the current
debate on the Supplement could thus be advanced further
with the participation of all Members through some
suitable mechanism. The comments made by the
representative of Slovenia are relevant in this connection.

The representative of Indonesia, in his statement,
which we support, dealt also with many other issues of
concern to my delegation. I therefore need to make only
some brief supplementary comments. My delegation has
in other forums stressed the importance of what we have
called the "before" of peace-keeping.

 

It is essential that the United Nations have a clear and
accurate understanding of the complexities of any situation
in which it contemplates involvement or intervention. Every
encouragement should be given to national domestic efforts
being pursued to promote the peaceful settlement of
disputes before the United Nations intervenes. The United
Nations should scrupulously respect the principles of the
sovereignty, territorial integrity and political independence
of States and should not intrude into areas which lie within
their domestic jurisdiction.

The Department of Political Affairs, which has been
organized in the Secretariat to follow international
developments, should maintain close touch with Member
States so as to be alive to complexities involved in each
unique situation and to ensure the accuracy and fairness of
political assessments that are being made. Reluctance to
seek recourse to the United Nations - which the
Secretary-General notes and regrets - will be reduced only
to the extent to which States develop confidence and faith
in the Organization.

When eventually decided in respect of a conflict
situation, the peace-keeping operation should be conducive
to its eventual settlement, and not confuse or confound it.
When the United Nations intervenes, the objectives it seeks
to fulfil must be clearly understood and embodied in
coherent peace-keeping mandates which enjoy the support
of the general membership of the United Nations.
Resources needed to pursue and attain these objectives
within realistic time frames must be anticipated, and their
availability ensured, so as to permit a credible and
sustainable level of effective engagement. Efficient,
cost-effective management and rational utilization of these
resources are vital in order to retain States' confidence in
the United Nations. The consent of States, impartiality and
the non-use of force, except in self-defence, are cardinal
principles of peace-keeping.

Finally, my delegation would like to comment on
section E of chapter III of the Supplement, which relates to
sanctions. We endorse the View that the purpose of
sanctions is to modify and influence the behaviour of those
who threaten international peace and security, and not to
punish or otherwise exact retribution. All Member States
are bound to comply with decisions relating to sanctions,
and the imposition of sanctions therefore involves all
Member States.
The impact of sanctions, given the extent of global
interdependence, affects more States today than ever
before - some economically vulnerable States even more
adversely than others. A balanced analysis is therefore
necessary before the imposition of sanctions, not only to
assess whether the threat to international peace and
security would indeed be removed by sanctions, but also
to avert the suffering of the innocent in the target State,
as well as in other States.

By the same token, a strong case exists for much
closer and more regular scrutiny of the situation in respect
of States currently under sanctions, particularly where
vulnerable civilian populations are being adversely
affected. The Secretariat deserves to be strengthened with
additional staff and resources required to more effectively
and expeditiously fulfil its functions in respect of Article
50 of the Charter. We would therefore welcome close
study of the timely suggestions made by the
Secretary-General in paragraph 75 of his position paper.

We are grateful that the Agenda for Peace has
remained open for improvement and that the
Secretary-General has been responsive to the many
suggestions that have been made in the two years since
his original document was issued. We urge the process
forward, not only in the Security Council but also in the
General Assembly and in other forums, so that the
decisions eventually reached, however hard, will be
effectively carried out with the support and acceptance of
the general membership of the Organization, on whose
behalf the Council acts.

