Mr. Empole (Democratic Republic of the Congo) (spoke in French): Allow me, first of all, to warmly
congratulate you, Mr. President, on the accession of your
country, Azerbaijan, to the presidency of the Security
Council, and to express the Democratic Republic of the
Congo's satisfaction at seeing you, Sir, presiding over
the Council during the month of October. Allow me
also to pay tribute to the work of your predecessor, the
Permanent Representative of Australia, and to express
our gratitude for the outstanding way in which he led
the work of the Security Council in the past month.

I would also like to take this opportunity to thank
His Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-Moon, Secretary-General
of the United Nations, firstly, for the efforts that he
continues to make towards resolving the Congolese
crisis in particular and, beyond that, the problems
affecting the Great Lakes region in general. I also thank
him for his personal involvement in the negotiations
on, and the conclusion and implementation of, the
Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region, an
agreement reached in Addis Ababa on 24 February.
Finally, I thank him for the publication of two
important reports (S/2013/569 and S/2013/581) dealing
with the situation in my country, which the Council is
considering today.

At the outset, I would like to extend to the Council
the apologies of His Excellency Mr. Gata Mavita wa
Lufuta, Ambassador and Permanent Representative of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo to the United
Nations, who wished to personally participate in
this morning's meeting but who, unfortunately, had
to remain in our country as a result of developments
there since his most recent trip there accompanying the
Security Council's delegation.

The Security Council has just heard two briefings
on the reports of the Secretary-General. Allow me to
fully acknowledge the thoroughness of those reports
and to express to him my full appreciation.

I would also like to welcome the presence of the
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Great
Lakes Region, Her Excellency Ms. Mary Robinson,
and Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Martin Kobler, as well as to express my delegation's
gratitude to them for both their valuable statements and
their tireless efforts to restore peace to the eastern part
of my country.

The publication of the two reports by the Secretary-
General on the situation in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (S/2013/569 and S/2013/581) and our meeting
today demonstrate our shared desire to reaffirm our
humanity and j ointly evaluate, without complacency, the
progress achieved in implementing the commitments
undertaken under the important Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and the Region of 24 February 2013. Those
commitments were undertaken with a View to ending
the tragic situation of the people living in the eastern
part of my country and identifying the challenges that
remain for lasting peace to be established and for the
region to be able to devote its energy and intelligence
to the key issues of fighting poverty and improving the
population's living conditions.

To that end, the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo calls on the States in the region
to implement in good faith the commitments they freely
entered into. Among other things, we call on them for a
change in policy, behaviour and attitude. According to
the Framework, they are committed to not interfering
in the internal affairs of other neighbouring States,
not condoning or providing assistance or support to
any armed groups and respecting the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of neighbouring States.

I would like to reiterate, on behalf of the Congolese
people, our thanks to the Secretary-General and the
entire international community. I would also like to
assure you, Sir, of the unshakeable determination of
the President of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
His Excellency Mr. Joseph Kabila Kabange, to work
for lasting peace in the Great Lakes region, together
with you, the Secretary-General, his peers from the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region
(ICGLR) and the Southern African Development
Community (SADC) and all our other bilateral and
multilateral partners. Indeed, without peace, no progress
will be possible. Without minimal safety for persons
and property, any development remains hypothetical.

We cannot today evaluate the impact that
repeated armed conflict in the eastern provinces of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo has had on my
country's development. I would remind the Council
that, as a result of those conflicts, my country has lost
more than 6 million lives over two decades of war, with
thousands of women raped and abused; millions of
children unable to go to school because they have had
to constantly move to escape the war; approximately
3 million people displaced and forced to abandon
their fields, livestock and small-scale economic and
subsistence activities; thousands of men, women and
children infected through no fault of their own with
HIV/AIDS and other sexually transmitted infections
or suffering from malaria; and many deaths due to
childbirth in inappropriate circumstances. That list is
not exhaustive.

We welcome the progress noted at the regional
level in the implementation of commitments taken
under the Framework, including the adoption of
regional monitoring criteria and progress indicators by
the Heads of State gathered under the auspices of the
"11+4" mechanism, on 23 September, on the margins of
the general debate of the General Assembly at its sixty-
eighth session. However, the security and humanitarian
situation in the region remains fragile and is cause for
concern.

As we meet today, the populations of Goma and
Rutshuru still live in fear and uncertainty due to the
sporadic attacks that the Mouvement du 23 mars
(M-23), with the help of its well-known external allies,
has been launching against the defensive positions
of the Forces armees de la Republique de'mocratique
du Congo (FARDC) since the adoption of resolution
2098 (2013) and despite its provisions. Moreover, the
volatile security situation extends into many areas
of the eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo due to the activities of several other negative
forces, both domestic and foreign, including the Forces
democratiques de liberation du Rwanda (FDLR), the
Lord's Resistance Army (LRA), the Ugandan Allied
Democratic Forces/National Army for the Liberation
of Uganda, Mayi-Mayi Raia Mutomboki and others,
the Nduma Defence for Congo and others, as so well
described in the two reports of the Secretary-General.

That is why no country in the Great Lakes region
has campaigned more vigorously than the Democratic
Republic of the Congo for the establishment of an
intervention brigade tasked with neutralizing all
negative forces, including the FDLR, and endowed with
an offensive mandate. It is for the same reason that the
Democratic Republic of Congo, whose population, more
than any other, suffers under the presence of foreign
armed groups on its territory, would never collaborate
in any way with such forces, whose hallmark is killing,
rape, abuse of all kinds and the looting of public and
private property and natural resources.

The deployment on the ground of the Intervention
Brigade established by resolution 2098 (2013) is an
undeniable step forward, and we fully appreciate it. We
would like for all States concerned to trust the Brigade
to carry out the responsibilities entrusted to it by the
Security Council, namely, monitoring and securing
the border between the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and its neighbours to the east on the one hand;
and, on the other hand, neutralizing all negative forces
without exception. The strengthening of the Brigade's
operational capacities, including through the provision
of additional attack helicopters and unarmed drone
systems, is a step that should be taken in all urgency and
that would allow the Brigade both to fulfil its mission
to protect civilians and fight all armed groups as well
as to defend itself against the recurring provocations by
the M-23.

That said, we recognize that military force alone
cannot solve the complex equation needed to achieve
peace in the Great Lakes region of Africa, where the
causes of conflicts and disputes overlap and are both
internal and external in nature. Given the extremism
espoused by all ofthe negative forces, force is necessary
but not sufficient. To be sustainable, the solution must
also come about through a sincere dialogue among
all the internal and external parties and a good faith
implementation of the conclusions reached among
them.

Therefore, for its part, the Congolese Government
remains committed to the Kampala talks, thus putting
to the test the good faith of the M-23 leaders and all
stakeholders involved. Unfortunately - and we have
all witnessed this i it has not been possible to date
to achieve a just and balanced agreement. In the same
vein, the Government of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo encourages other States in the region to
follow its lead in this respect.

The Democratic Republic of Congo is shouldering
its share of responsibility so that peace and harmony
can be rapidly restored to the region. My country has
taken on that task, with significant progress having
been made noted in the conflict area in terms of
reducing the threats to the security of the population
and improving the Government's management of that
security. As evidence of that, following the signing of
the Framework, the Congolese Government undertook
to fulfil its obligations, which, incidentally, correspond
to tasks that it identified 11 years ago and which it treats
as important and priority tasks.

In that context, we have both accelerated and better
systematized our reform of the security sector. The
housecleaning of the structures and staff in the army,
security services and police; the recruitment within the
defence forces ofyoung Congolese from every province
of the country; the reopening of military training
academics; and the training of special forces and
support units with assistance from bilateral partners
and with the primary objective of operationalizing the
Rapid Reaction Force are all concrete actions recently
undertaken to make the defence of our territory more
effective to better ensure State authority.

In order to strengthen that authority, in particular in
the east of my country, starting with Goma, the national
police, public authorities and courts have been provided
on a priority basis with capacity-building programmes,
allowing them to progressively regain control of the
situation.

The decentralization provided for in the Constitution
has come a step closer to becoming reality, in particular
through the adoption of the necessary implementation
laws and the organization of a number of meetings
devoted to managing decentralized territories.

The reforms to the management of public
finances - which have been under way for several
years and whose positive results are evident in a stable
macroeconomic framework - continue to be pursued
and have just been successfully complemented by the
launching of measures to improve the business climate
and a national certification mechanism for mineral
resources, which will strengthen economic growth.

Furthermore, the Government recently completed
an in-depth review of the poverty reduction strategy
paper with the aim of ensuring more inclusive growth,
partially overcoming the delay in achieving the
Millennium Development Goals and strengthening
the credibility and effectiveness of the fight against
poverty.

The Grand Inga project is based on the same
rationale. It should be noted that the project should
eventually lead to the production of sufficient electricity
to satisfy the needs of nearly half of Africa - clean
and renewable energy, in line with the requirements of
sustainable development.

At the political level, reconciliation and
strengthened national unity are more urgent than ever
before. The coordination of the Framework's Expanded
Joint Verification Mechanism has been entrusted to
a competent and experienced team from the political
opposition.

The Independent National Electoral Commission
has been completely reformed. A new team that is
more focused and inclusive has assumed the leadership
of that important institution in support of democracy.
The priority of the new Commission is to prepare
the upcoming electoral process to ensure optimal
conditions for local, municipal, provincial, senatorial
and provincial gubernatorial elections.

Moreover, national consultations initiated by
the President took place from September to October
to seek ways and means of strengthening national
cohesion among all the Congolese people, with a
view to strengthened efforts in dealing with all of the
challenges facing the Congolese nation. That forum,
which was intended to be inclusive, brought together,
in addition to the national and provincial political
institutions, political parties of all stripes and all facets
of civil society, including significant representation by
women and youth. Its preparation and leadership were
entrusted to a presidium made up of the President of
the Senate, a well-known leader of the opposition who
was elected to that post as such, and the President ofthe
National Assembly, who is a member ofthe presidential
majority.

I cannot conclude without thanking all of those who
have committed themselves to working side by side
with us for lasting peace in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. I am thinking particularly of SADC,
ICGLR, the African Union and the European Union for
their essential roles in maintaining peace in our region.
I am thinking of all of the United Nations Blue Helmets
who have lost their lives to ensure that peace returns to
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We pay tribute
to their memory.

I also thank the United Nations and, in particular,
the members of the Council, who have recently been
willing to travel to my country to improve their
understanding of the profound realities of the war in
my country. We are most grateful to them, as they
are participating in the work towards the post-2015
development agenda, which would respond to the calls
for a better world for all.

The Secretary-General's reports before the Council
today propose a gamut of measures to be undertaken at
national and regional levels. They indicate conclusions
and recommendations that my country endorses.

In conclusion, when the members of the Council
soon retire to the consultations room to discuss the
issues, they should bear in mind the suffering of the
Congolese people, the children separated from their
families, the women who daily suffer from rape. It must
not be forgotten that in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, more than in any other conflict zone in the
world, thousands of individuals continue to fall victim
to war every day.

With more than 6 million killed in two decades
of successive wars, the massacres of civilians in my
country represent one of the grimmest pictures facing
humankind since the end of the Second World War. It is
high time to find the ways and means to enable millions
of individuals not only to stay alive, but to live with
dignity in a world where peace, security and justice
represent reality for one and for all.

