Mr. Skoknic Tapia (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): We
are grateful for the convening of this second Security
Council meeting (see S/PV.8452) to address an issue
of the utmost gravity that is severely affecting the
region, for which the Council is called upon to play
a fundamental role in the search for ways to find a
solution to this pressing humanitarian and political
crisis. We appreciate the briefing by Ms. Rosemary
DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-General for Political and
Peacebuilding Affairs. She not only provided a summary
of events over the past several days but also, with that
information, a dramatic overview of the humanitarian
situation in Venezuela.

In our previous statement on this subject in the
Council we indicated that Chile promotes democracy
as the central element of its foreign policy and as
the political system that constitutes the appropriate
framework for full respect for human rights. The values
of tolerance, dialogue, equal opportunities and the full
exercise of fundamental freedoms are best guaranteed
within a context within which the rule of law prevails,
there is respect and balance among the powers of the
State and where public institutions operate responsibly.

Unfortunately, in recent days we have witnessed
once again the profound crisis that Venezuela is
undergoing, which is affecting its institutions and
has led to an unacceptable deterioration in the living
conditions and inalienable rights of the country's
citizens. All of this is happening under an authoritarian
and repressive Government.

With regard to the events oftwo days ago, under the
leadership of the President of my country, Mr. Sebastian
Pifiera, Chile participated in the international and
solidary effort to assemble the humanitarian aid that
Venezuela desperately needs, as confirmed by the
briefing by Under Secretary-General DiCarlo. However,
the distribution of aid through that collaborative effort
was not possible owing to the negative and violent
reaction by the Maduro regime.

Accordingly, the Government of Chile reiterates in
the strongest terms its categorical condemnation of the
violent acts committed by the police and para-police
forces of the illegitimate regime of Nicolas Maduro
in areas bordering Colombia and Brazil, set off by the
attempt to peacefully deliver humanitarian aid, during
which many people tragically lost their lives and many
others were injured.

We join in the condemnation made by the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights, as those acts of indiscriminate violence affected
unarmed civilians who were only seeking access to the
humanitarian aid that was supposed to be delivered.
There is no justification or explanation whatsoever for
this most recent flagrant and unacceptable violation
of the human rights of all Venezuelans, who are today
overwhelmed by the profound social, humanitarian,
political and economic crisis affecting their country.
For that reason, it warrants the determined repudiation
of the international community.

The Government of Chile renews its full support for
the interim President of Venezuela, Juan Guaido, and
also conveys to him its most sincere condolences for
those fallen Venezuelan citizens, as well as its solidarity
and wishes for the speedy recovery of those wounded.

We also support the commencement of the democratic
transition process in Venezuela so as to hold new
elections as soon as possible, with the participation of
all political actors and the international guarantees and
standards needed for a process of this scale. We call
for the guarantee of the rule of law, the fundamental
rights of persons and social peace so as to facilitate the
Government's transition.

Chile is a member of the Lima Group, and
accordingly emphatically reiterates its support for a
political, diplomatic and peaceful solution to the crisis
that Venezuela is going through. In that regard, I wish
to stress that Chile does not, and will not, support
alternatives that run contrary to international law and
the principles enshrined in the Charter of the United
Nations. That is why, together with other States of the
region, we will continue to work through diplomatic
channels in constant dialogue with the international
community to reach a solution to this prolonged crisis
in our region.

