Mr. Abdel Aziz (Egypt) (interpretation from Arabic): The Security Council is meeting today to discuss
international and regional efforts to resolve the crisis in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and to look at
What the Security Council, the Organization of African
Unity (OAU) and other regional and international bodies
can do to put an end to the suffering of these African
people, who are our brothers.

 

As the Council considers the situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, at the request of that
country itself, we should note that this debate is not
intended to offer a platform for invective or for placing
blame on any particular party. On the contrary, what we are
trying to do is to highlight possible concrete solutions so as
to encourage the parties to contribute to stability and
security for all. In this context, I should like to thank you,
Sir, for convening this Security Council debate, thus
showing the great importance that China attaches to the
problems facing Africa.

Egypt is following very closely and with great concern
the evolving situation in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. This situation has a negative impact on peace and
stability in the entire Great Lakes region.

The Security Council, the OAU and the parties
concerned must increase their efforts to achieve a
settlement as soon as possible, with a view to strengthening
the sovereignty, unity, territorial integrity and governmental
structures of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and
leading to the withdrawal of foreign troops. There must be
a national dialogue in which all parties are involved.
President Kabila himself recently proposed this with a View
to achieving national reconciliation and to restoring the
stability and security of his country.

Egypt has followed the situation with great interest
and has done its utmost to promote a ceasefire, so that there
can be a peaceful settlement. We have also participated in
all the peace initiatives at the regional and other levels
within the context of the OAU and the Central Organ of its
Mechanism for Conflict Prevention, Management and
Resolution; we also were involved in the initiative of
President Chiluba of Zambia and in the initiatives of the
Southern African Development Community - all with a
view to arriving at a peaceful settlement. We also support
the efforts of the eight States that met in Windhoek in
January.

Egypt is also very interested in a pan-African summit
meeting aimed at strengthening security in the Great Lakes
region. To create the necessary climate for success, this
meeting would be held under the auspices of the United
Nations and the OAU. Egyptian leaders will do all they can
to follow the talks and their outcome.

In December 1998 there were talks on this matter in
Cairo between Presidents Mubarak and Kabila. In late 1998
and early 1999 the Egyptian Minister for Foreign Affairs
Amre Moussa and his Congolese counterpart also met with
a view to strengthening regional and international efforts
to avert a crisis.

The Egyptian delegation has read the letter from the
Permanent Representative of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo addressed to the Security Council concerning
violations of human rights in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. The Egyptian delegation condemns the acts of
violence committed against innocent civilians during the
crisis, and we reaffirm the need to ensure respect for
human rights and to bring to justice those responsible for
these crimes. The Egyptian delegation also reaffirms the
importance of the political commitment necessary to
strengthen the protection of civilians.

Weapons, including small arms and light weapons,
must not be allowed to circulate. The weakest and most
vulnerable sectors of the population must be protected.
This point was reaffirmed by the President of the Security
Council in a statement to the press on 17 February 1999.
The President said that it was necessary to put an end to
all military activities and military training activities
prejudicial to the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and
he called for a halt to all such activities.

I return now to one basic issue essential to a
settlement of this crisis: the role of the Security Council
in conflict resolution in Africa. We appreciate the
Security Council's initiative calling on the Secretary-
General to submit a report on the causes of conflict in
Africa and on how to resolve them. We also welcome the
decisions the Security Council took when it considered
that report. However, the report and the resolutions do not
reduce the part that the Security Council must play in
resolving individual crises in Africa.

The Council has a role to play in resolving crises
and protecting international peace and security. The
Council must take the decisions needed in order to study
the situation in Africa as a whole, as well as in particular
subregions.

We are sorry to see the emergence of a trend in the
Security Council not to take steps to halt crises in Africa.
Decisions are taken simply to study them within the
overall context of the situation in Africa or to look at
them in the context of, for example, the Great Lakes
region. It is sometimes decided that the Security Council
does not need to play its part when regional efforts are
under way to defuse a crisis. But regional efforts should
merely complement the role of the Security Council,
which is to maintain international peace and security. The

 

Council cannot reverse the situation and decide that
regional efforts are paramount - in this particular case, the
efforts of the Organization of African Unity. It cannot be
said that those regional mechanisms have priority. The role
of the Security Council must not be reduced to one of
simply endorsing resolutions adopted by regional bodies.

Crises in Africa are becoming increasingly complex:
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Somalia, Angola,
the conflict between Eritrea and Ethiopia, as well as in
other regions. These conflicts have shown that steps taken
by the Security Council have proved to be inadequate. It is
now up to the Council to review the effectiveness of the
measures it has taken. It must look at each crisis
individually and seek to resolve the African problems
overall so that peace and security can be restored
throughout the African continent.

