Ms. Paik Ji-ah (Republic of Korea): I thank
Ms. Fatou Bensouda, Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court, for her briefing on the recent
developments in the Darfur situation.

Darfur was the first case the Security Council
referred to the International Criminal Court (ICC).
As such, the situation has given us an opportunity to
realize the vision of putting an end to impunity, through
close interplay between the Council and the ICC, for
those who committed serious crimes against the human
conscience. At the same time, the situation has imposed
upon us various challenges that we have to confront
in order to make the interplay more constructive and
relevant to the maintenance of international peace
and security. So far, the Council and the ICC have not
lived up to that expectation. The situation has been
tarnished by the lack of cooperation, not only on the
part of the Sudanese Government but also on the part
of other States, which have international obligations to
cooperate with the ICC.

Although the ICC has reported to the
Security Council that there have been instances of
non-cooperation, efforts within the Council to respond
to the reports were defeated because the Council failed
to forge unity on what would be the most proper way
to do so. It was the Security Council that referred the
situation to the ICC; therefore, follow-up action on the
part ofthe Council to the referral is not only fair but also
necessary. Despite the difficulties we face, the Council
and the ICC need to redouble their efforts to that end.
In addition, more rigorous consultations between the
United Nations and the ICC should be encouraged to
close any potential communications gap. Making their
respective work compatible and mutually reinforcing is
essential to bring justice and peace to the region.

The international community created the ICC out
of the conviction that holding perpetrators of serious
crimes against humanity accountable could prevent
the emergence of such criminals in future. The current
situation in Darfur seems to confirm that conviction
in the reverse. As the culture of impunity continues
to prevail, security in Darfur is deteriorating because
perpetrators do not need to be concerned about the
consequences of their crimes. The outcome is an ever
worsening security situation and unabated human
suffering, driving many innocent people from their
homes. That vicious cycle must be stopped. Delivering
justice to those who have committed heinous crimes
is the first step to that end. A robust monitoring and
review of alleged crimes involving international human
rights and humanitarian laws, such as various forms of
attacks against civilians, should be stressed. Proactive
campaigns to pursue those who have committed sexual
and gender-based crimes against the most vulnerable
must be given top priority. International cooperation in
that regard needs to be further solicited.
The situation in Darfur and the role of the ICC
in it is a litmus test of our ability to bring peace and
stability through the pursuit of international criminal
justice. The Council needs to consider what support
it can render to the ICC to accomplish that goal. We
continue to work with other Council members and the
ICC in that vein.

