Mrs. Nufiez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I would
like to thank the Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court, Ms. Fatou Bensouda, for her comprehensive
briefing on the twenty-fifth report on the activities
of her Office on the situation in Darfur in the Sudan.
We believe that these transparent and frank briefings
provide added value to the analysis of issues that fall
within the competency of the Security Council.

At the outset, Uruguay takes this opportunity to
reiterate its full support for the role of the International
Criminal Court as an institution that was created to
strengthen the rule of law at the international level by
judging those who are responsible for the most serious
human rights violations, which affect humankind as a
whole. In this regard, we renew our appeal to States
Members of the United Nations that are not yet parties
to the Rome Statute to join it, which would contribute
to the universalization of this instrument designed to
fight against impunity and defend the victims of crimes
so atrocious that they constitute a serious threat to the
peace and security of all humankind.

We regret that the situation with regard to this subject
has remained practically unchanged since December,
the last time we addressed it (see S/PV.7850). Having
listened to Ms. Bensouda's briefing this afternoon, we
wish to express our dismay at the lack of cooperation
of the States parties to the International Criminal Court
and the lack of observance and implementation of the
Rome Statute. Uruguay, as a State party to the Statute,
is concerned about all cases of non-cooperation with
the International Criminal Court. In this particular
case, it is worth recalling resolution 1593 (2005), which
states in paragraph 2 that

"the Government of Sudan and all other parties to
the conflict in Darfur shall cooperate fully with
the Court and the Prosecutor [and] urges all States
and concerned regional and other international
organizations to cooperate fully".

Uruguay supports and is prepared to work to ensure
that the Council plays a more active role in considerin
instances of non-cooperation with the Court and to
make sure that arrest warrants are executed, a necessary
condition for the Court to be able to sufficiently comply
with its mandate.

Ms. Bensouda stressed that the Prosecutor's Office
had welcomed the action proposed by New Zealand
last year. Uruguay agrees that such proposals could
empower the Security Council to take concrete action
in cases of non-cooperation with the Court. In this
regard, the Council should adopt a more structured
approach to considering cases of non-cooperation.
It is also imperative to resolve the current impasse
between the Council and the Government of the Sudan
in this regard, taking advantage of the improvement
in their relationship with respect to the political
process in Darfur and the performance of the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur.

In conclusion, I would like to send a message
of encouragement and congratulate the Prosecutor
for her work to investigate the crimes committed in
Darfur, which undoubtedly promotes the strengthening
of the rule of law and the formation of a society in
which perpetrators of crimes are held accountable
and the rights and guarantees of all inhabitants are
fully respected.

