Mr. Reuben (Israel): Thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this important debate. I also wish to
extend my appreciation to the Chairpersons of the
counter-terrorism Committees for their professional
work and for their informative briefings this morning.

We welcome the opportunity to engage in such
exchanges and in the periodic informal briefings for
Member States. We hope that they will continue to be
held on a regular basis. The comprehensive briefing
held by the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task
Force last week is another encouraging initiative that
further demonstrates the significance of close
cooperation and coordination among all United Nations
counter-terrorism bodies, particularly the Security
Council counter-terrorism Committees.

Monitoring and ensuring that States fully
implement Security Council resolution 1373 (2001)
remain at the core of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee's activities. The upcoming tenth
anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1373 (2001),
later this year, serves as a reminder of the vital and
ongoing role of the Committee. Earlier this year, Israel
submitted its preliminary implementation assessment,
reflecting its commitment to a continued, informed and
constructive dialogue with this important body.

Technical assistance, facilitated by the Counter-
Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate (CTED), is
an essential tool for countering terrorism that offers an
important means for developing expertise and sharing
best practices. In this regard, Israel continues to
expand its technical assistance and cooperation on
several levels and in a number of regions.

To the same end, Israel's counter-terrorism
agencies cooperate with a large number of regional
organizations. We recently signed an agreement with
34
the counter-terrorism branch of the Inter-American
Committee against Terrorism for a joint cooperation
project in Latin America, particularly in the fields of
improving aviation security, preventing the financing
of terrorism and countering radicalization.

The recent removal of Osama bin Laden from the
terrorist landscape represents a significant step forward
in the fight against terrorism. However, despite recent
advances in the fight against terrorism - and indeed,
perhaps because of them - we must be ever more
vigilant. Preventing acts of terrorism is only one part
of the challenge. Addressing incitement to terrorism
represents another long-term and equally difficult part
of the equation. Resolution 1624 (2005) unanimously
condemned the incitement to, justification of or
glorification of acts of terrorism. In this regard, the
Internet poses both a challenge and an opportunity.

We therefore support the efforts of CTED
pursuant to resolution 1963 (2010) to produce a global
implementation survey of resolution 1624 (2005) by
December. We also support its decision to update its
global implementation survey on resolution 1373
(2001) by June, in order to assess the evolution of risks
and threats.

The anguish of countless victims of terrorism
provides a powerful reminder that no cause or
grievance can ever justify terrorism. Every day, at least
one Member State suffers from some form of a terrorist
attack. Roadside bombs, rockets, mortars, suicide
bombers and kidnappings continue to wreak havoc and
bring grief and agony to nearly every corner of the
world.

Given Israel's first-hand experience with the
devastation caused by terrorism, we attribute particular
importance to United Nations initiatives to voice and
commemorate the untold stories of the victims of
terrorism. Every day, more Israelis fall within the range
of terrorist rockets as a result of illegal arms smuggling
into Gaza. Hamas's and Hizbullah's ever-growing
arsenal of missiles and rockets is made possible by the
continuous transfer and smuggling of weapons and
ammunition by two prime sponsors of terrorism in our
region, namely, Iran and Syria. Only two months ago,
we witnessed another example of this illegal activity
when the cargo vessel Victoria, which set sail from
Syria, was found to be carrying some 40 tonnes of
concealed weaponry of Iranian origin among a cargo of
lentils and cotton.
11-33901
We continued to witness the devastating
consequences of this smuggling activity when, last
month, members of the Hamas terrorist organization
used an anti-tank missile that they had smuggled into
the Gaza Strip to strike and completely destroy a
school bus travelling in southern Israel, injuring the
bus driver and killing a 16-year-old child.

The Al-Qaida and Taliban Sanctions Committee
remains an important part of the efforts to isolate
terrorists and their means to inflict harm. Israel
welcomes the considerable progress made towards
promoting clear and fair procedures concerning the
inclusion of individuals and entities on the
consolidated list. In this regard, the work of Judge
Kimberly Prost as Ombudsperson represents an
important step in addressing concerns over due
process. Her informative reports provide a concise
outline of her Office's activities.

We believe that it is critical to continue to
develop international standards against the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and dual-
use items. The international community must continue
to seek and implement measures that keep the world's
most dangerous weapons out of the hands of the
world's most dangerous individuals, especially in our
region. In this regard, I wish to reiterate Israel's full
support for resolution 1540 (2004) and the renewal of
its mandate in resolution 1977 (2011).

The struggle against global terrorism calls for our
political resolve and tireless action. We must not forget
the victims of terror, and we must not overlook the
culpability of those who seek to incite, sponsor or
justify terrorism or of those who provide sanctuary to
terrorists. We appreciate this opportunity for dialogue
and will continue to actively engage in and support the
important work of the Council's counter-terrorism
committees.

