The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo in which he requests to be invited to participate
in the consideration of the item on the Council's
agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, I
propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite that
representative to participate in the consideration of the
item without the right to vote, in accordance with the
relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Ileka
(Democratic Republic of the Congo) took a seat
at the Council table.

The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.
Members of the Council have before them
document 8/2008/801, which contains the text of a
draft resolution submitted by Belgium and France.

I wish to draw the attention of the members of the
Council to documents S/2008/772 and S/2008/773,
which contain the texts of letters dated 19 August 2008
and 10 December 2008 from the Chairman of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1533 (2004) concerning the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, transmitting respectively the
interim and final reports of the Group of Experts on the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

It is my understanding that the Council is ready
to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it.
Unless I hear any objection, I shall put the draft
resolution to the vote now.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
A vote was taken by a show of hands.

In favour:
Belgium, Burkina Faso, China, Costa Rica,
Croatia, France, Indonesia, Italy, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya, Panama, Russian Federation, South
Africa, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America, Viet
Nam


The President: There were 15 votes in favour.
The resolution has been adopted unanimously as
resolution 1857 (2008).

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda. The Security Council will remain seized of the
matter.

The meeting rose at 11.50 am.
08-66435

