Ms. Wronecka (Poland): At the outset, allow me
to welcome the presence among us of His Excellency
Mr. Leonard She Okitundu, Vice-Prime Minister and
Minister for Foreign Affairs and Regional Integration
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. I am also
very pleased to welcome Ms. Leila Zerrougui and to
congratulate her for her appointmenet. She has our
full support. I am sure that her mission will be very
successful. Allow me to share our thoughts about the
situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

We are worried about the divisions among political
and civil society actors in the country. The lack of
commitment and goodwill on the part of all the political
actors might undermine the holding of free, fair and
credible elections. We call upon all the political actors
to engage in the ongoing political process.

We note that President Kabila committed in January
to ensuring that elections would be held as planned and
that the Constitution would be respected. However, it
is critical that the Government take concrete steps to
speed up the implementation of confidence-building
measures, to release political prisoners, to allow the
return of political exiles to the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, to lift the ban on public demonstrations
and to bring to justice alleged perpetrators of human
rights violations. Only by doing so will the Congolese
Government show genuine will to normalize the
situation in the country. We are concerned about the
restrictions on the political space. The Congolese
authorities should protect the fundamental freedoms
enshrined in the Constitution and stop the harassment
of political and civil society actors. We also expect
that the security forces will bear accountability for
abuses and the use of excessive force against peaceful
demonstrations.

The full implementation of the 31 December 2016
Political Agreement remains the only way out of the
current political situation. All political actors must
realize that there is no alternative to the election. A
lack of commitment to the process by the opposition
would be a great loss for Congolese society during
the transition period. Close cooperation with civil
society, particularly with women representatives,
including their involvement in the electoral process, is
also crucial, as it constitutes a foundation for widely
accepted elections.

We welcome the announcement of the Independent
National Electoral Commission on the conclusion of the
voter registration process. It is now necessary to ensure
the further timely implementation of the electoral
calendar, the establishment of the legal framework and
the provision of required funding. Those actions could
help reassure foreign donors of the credibility of the
process and encourage them in providing financial,
logistical and technical support for the election.

We are concerned about the dramatic deterioration
in the humanitarian and security situation and the
significant increase in violence, especially in the
Tanganyika and Ituri provinces, which has generated
significant population displacements. The political
situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
has strategic importance for the stability of Central
and sub-Saharan Africa. A peaceful and growing
Democratic Republic of the Congo could give a huge
boost to the whole continent. We also think that a
Security Council visit to the region could bring about
positive results. The coming months will be critical
in preserving all of the efforts made by international,
regional and national actors in order to stabilize the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

In conclusion, Poland commends the hard work,
courage and sacrifice of the members of the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic ofthe Congo. We once again offer
it our full support.

