Mr. Svilanovic (Serbia and Montenegro):
Mr. President. I greatly appreciate the opportunity you
are giving me to speak. I would like to brief the
Council on several issues.

First, unfortunately the violence is continuing
today. Attacks by Albanians have been continuing, and
that is why we hope that our joint efforts today will
bring us to concrete action that will stop those attacks.

I would also like to clarify one thing. There is no
violent conflict between Albanians and Serbs at this
moment. But it is a permanent violence of the
Albanians against the Serbs, who are living there in
small numbers. Five per cent of the people living in
Kosovo now are Serbs. They live in enclaves, in
villages or in several houses grouped within larger
cities. They have been attacked in an attempt to
ethnically cleanse Kosovo before we go to the
implementation of standards, following the policy of
"standards before status". And that must be stopped. In
a couple of days it may be too late.

Also, attacks against international staff, as far as
KFOR or United Nations troops or officers are
concerned, are exclusively committed by Albanians.
The international officers are only doing their jobs.
They are trying to guard the people in villages or
houses, and they have been attacked by Albanians.
Furthermore, I would like to say that we stay
committed to continue the dialogue that was launched
in October in Vienna between Belgrade and Pristina. It
might be more difficult today, but we are determined to
fulfil our international commitments and obligations.

What we would like the Security Council to do is
to try to find a mechanism that would also include our
side in the joint efforts being made to implement the
standards. We want to be part of the process of
implementation, and we believe that the Council might
be able to find a mechanism that would also include
our side. We are not asking for veto power; we want to
be part of a process.

Secondly, there will be an evaluation process that
will see how far and how much the standards have been
fulfilled and achieved. We want to be part of that
evaluation process also. At certain points we will
discuss that status and would appreciate if at that time
all options would remain open and not be pre-defined.

I do not want to finish my statement without
saying that we are very sorry for what happened in
several cities in Serbia yesterday, particularly in
Belgrade and Nis. I would also like to say that full
control is in the hands of the Government, which has
taken the upper hand in further protest demonstrations
in order to be sure that there will be no violence.

I would also like to mention that in spite of the
fact that those mosques have been burned - we are
sorry for that and say that it might be that police action
was not as accurate and decisive as it should be -
there was not a single attack against Bosniacs or
Albanians or people of other ethnic background among
the incidents yesterday and the day before in Belgrade
or other cities. That was not happening against
minorities.

Finally, I would like to say that we remain
supportive of every non-violent action, because we
believe in the attitude of non-violence of the Security
Council and all of us.

The immediate task is to bring more troops in
order to prevent any further violence and then to
continue the political process that has already been
defined.

