Mr. Ould Cheikh Ahmed (spoke in Arabic): I
thank you, Madam President, for this opportunity to
brief the Security Council on the latest developments
in Yemen.

I have just returned from the first face-to-face
talks in the Yemen peace process, which I facilitated
in Switzerland. While the meetings did not bring
about an end to the fighting, as we had all hoped, they
did result in constructive talks between the Yemeni
Government and its political and military opponents.
The dialogue provided a firm foundation for resuming
talks in the near future and the basis for a renewed and
strengthened cessation of hostilities. I am very grateful
to the Government of Switzerland for having hosted the
talks and for its excellent support.

The talks were conducted during a very bleak
period for Yemen and during a worsening security
situation. Since my previous briefing to the Council
(see S/PV.7542), violence has pervaded in many parts
of the country, resulting in hundreds of civilian deaths
and many others injured. The catastrophic situation
with regard to Yemen's health-care system was made
even worse with the destruction of two Medecins
Sans Frontieres medical facilities in Taiz and Saada.
Cross-border attacks in the north involving the use
of heavy weaponry had a serious impact on security
and stability in the border area. The residents of Taiz
continue to suffer the consequences of heavy fighting
and severe lack of assistance. Artillery fire and air
strikes have continued to affect the residential areas of
the city. Those attacks, which constitute grave breaches
of international humanitarian law and obstruct the
delivery of humanitarian assistance, have had a
devastating impact on the lives and livelihoods of the
city's residents.

As I have noted in earlier briefings, the conflict
and the security vacuum it has caused have led to the
dangerous expansion of extremist groups in the country,
particularly in the areas of Abyan, Albeda'a and Shabwa.
Al-Qaida in the Arabian Peninsula has consolidated
its presence in the Governorate of Hadhramaut and its
control of the port of Al Mukalla. The Islamic State
in Iraq and the Sham has continued its campaign of
attacks and assassinations of political leaders and
security officials. The Governor of Aden, Major
General Mohammed Jaafar Saad, was assassinated on
6 December, along with six ofhis guards, one day after
my visit to Aden. At the time, I strongly condemned
that act of terrorism.

The talks in Switzerland followed many weeks of
consultation with Yemeni leaders and the Governments
in the region. I consulted with the Foreign Ministers of
the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, the Sultanate of Oman,
the United Arab Emirates, the State of Qatar, the Islamic
Republic of Iran and the Secretary-General of the Gulf
Cooperation Council (GCC), all ofwhom expressed their
strong support for the peace process. Despite the grave
security challenges, I visited President Hadi Mansour in
Aden on 5 December for a final consultation in advance
of the talks. I also met repeatedly with Vice-President
Khaled Bahah and Yemeni Government representatives
in Riyadh, and with representatives of the Houthis, the
General People's Congress and other stakeholders in
the Sultanate of Oman. Despite profound differences,
we were able to agree on the format and agenda of the
talks in the days before the consultative meeting.

On 15 December, delegations finally met around a
single table in the town of Magglingen, Switzerland.
The talks were aimed at putting an end to violence
in Yemen and developing a clear framework based
on resolution 2216 (2015), which will bring the
country back to a peaceful and orderly transition, in
accordance with the GCC Initiative and the outcomes
of the National Dialogue. Participants in the talks
demonstrated the courage and determination needed
for successful negotiations. In the weeks of preparation
for the talks, the Government of Yemen, the Houthis,
the General People's Congress and other key Yemeni
stakeholders expressed their willingness to have a full
and comprehensive cessation of hostilities during the
talks. President Hadi communicated his support for
the ceasefire to the Secretary-General in a letter dated
7 December. States of the region and the coalition also
expressed support for the cessation of hostilities, which
I believe was essential to ensure the confidence of the
Yemeni people in the peace process.

I announced the cessation of hostilities on the
morning of 15 December. The Government of Yemen,
the Houthis and the General People's Congress publicly
welcomed my announcement and pledged to respect
the cessation of hostilities. In order to minimize the
violations, a coordination and de-escalation committee
was established, comprised of military advisors from
the two delegations and United Nations experts. The
committee liaised with the military leadership in
Yemen in order to help avert clashes and any escalation
of Violence, with some success in the early days.

Tragically, we were unable to preserve the
cessation of hostilities throughout the duration of the
talks, although we did see a significant reduction of
violence in the first few days. Numerous violations
were reported by the committee on the third day. The
lack of compliance with the ceasefire demonstrated
the need for stronger agreements and more robust
mechanisms to ensure adherence. The participants in
the talks subsequently agreed that the committee's work
would continue over the coming months immediately
after the end of that round of talks. We agreed with the
delegations that the committee should be based in the
region, with United Nations support. To that end, I hope
that we can rely on the generous support of Member
States. This is a concrete and practical outcome of the
talks in Switzerland, and I hope it will allow for a more
effective ceasefire agreement in the near future.

The agenda for the talks included the discussion
of humanitarian issues, confidence-building measures
and a general framework that could serve as the
foundation for a comprehensive settlement. The first
days of the talks also saw constructive engagement
on humanitarian issues. In order to ensure that the
discussions on humanitarian issues were grounded
in the practical challenges of delivering assistance in
Yemen, I invited several senior officials from United
Nations humanitarian agencies to join the talks. With
their assistance, the participants in Switzerland agreed
to restore humanitarian access to Taiz, which had been
largely cut off from aid for many months. I am very
grateful to my colleagues from the United Nations
humanitarian agencies who were able to operationalize
that agreement immediately. A large United Nations
convoy with fuel and food supplies entered Taiz on
17 December, the first large shipment of aid to arrive in
almost three months. As noted in the final communique
of the talks, the sides are committed to working with
me and the United Nations humanitarian team to build
on the agreement with a view to ensuring expanded aid
in the coming weeks.

Most importantly, the discussions in Switzerland
led to a common understanding of a negotiating
framework for the conclusion of a comprehensive
agreement to end the conflict and resume inclusive
political dialogue. That framework is firmly based
on resolution 2216 (2015) and other relevant Security
Council resolutions, and provides a mechanism for a
return to a peaceful and orderly transition based on
the GCC Initiative and National Dialogue outcomes.
The two sides have agreed that the framework will
serve as the foundation for the next round of talks. The
framework provides a mechanism for negotiating the
sequencing and interdependence of the key elements
of resolution 2216 (2015), including the creation of
interim security committees, the withdrawal of militias
and armed groups, the restoration of State institutions
and State functioning, and the resumption of inclusive
political dialogue, which will be needed to come to an
agreement on the remaining steps of Yemen's political
transition. The framework provides the foundation for a
new political consensus with special security measures,
which will help Yemen to achieve stability and enable it
to confront the expansion of terrorist groups.

The talks reveal deep divisions between the two
sides on the path to peace and the formulation of a
future agreement. Trust between the parties remains
weak. I must admit that there were several days when
I feared that the two sides would not find a way to
make progress on any of the central issues. Ultimately,
however, the commitment of the delegations, especially
the Chairs, proved stronger than those divisions. By
the end of the talks, the delegations had agreed to
meet again next month using a common framework,
which will help them map out a clear and effective path
towards peace and a negotiated and inclusive political
transition.

The parties to the talks should be commended
for the progress that has been made and the courage
they demonstrated at the talks in Switzerland. We all
know that the path to peace in Yemen will be a long
and difficult one, but we also know that failure is not
an option. The lives of the Yemeni people have been
devastated by the most horrific violence and conflict
that the country has ever seen. It is time to begin creating
a safe and stable future for the generations to come.
The challenge now will be to find a way to strengthen
and build upon the progress we have made thus far. The
peace process is in its very early days. In order for it to
flourish and prosper, it will take nurturing, care and a
great deal of support.

I would like to sincerely thank President Abdrabuh
Mansour Hadi Mansour for his strong commitment to
bringing lasting peace to Yemen. I am also very grateful
to the Government's delegation, led by the Deputy Prime
Minister Abdul Malik Al-Mukhlafi, for its constructive
and open spirit during the consultations. I am equally
grateful to Mr. Aref Al-Zouka and Mr. Mohammed
Abdulsalam and their respective teams for their
conciliatory and courageous attitude during the talks.

I must also thank Member States for their tireless
and steadfast support of our efforts, which has been
invaluable. I hope we can count on their continued help
in the coming months. I need the Council's support in
order to ensure a durable and comprehensive ceasefire
in advance of the upcoming round of talks. I will
also need the Council's backing for the negotiating
framework that we have proposed to the parties and
which, I believe, will help Yemen to find an end to the
war and the beginning of a more prosperous and stable
future.

