Mr. Braun (Germany): To start, let me thank the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA), Mr. Yamamoto, for his comprehensive
briefing and both him and his staff for their
tireless efforts.

Germany aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered on behalf of the European Union.

Afghanistan finds itself in a tense political
situation. The despicable attack in the vicinity of the
German Embassy in Kabul on 31 May was one of the
deadliest suicide attacks in Afghan history, leaving
over 80 dead and more than 400 injured. The Permanent
Representative of Afghanistan provided some details in
his statement earlier today. We condemn in the strongest
terms the senseless killing of so many innocent victims.
As in numerous similar attacks in the past, once again
civilians were the targets most affected. We call on
the Afghan authorities to conduct a thorough criminal
investigation and to hold those responsible accountable
for their crimes.

Those perverse attacks, carried out in the holy month
of Ramadan, resulted in far too many casualties and
caused significant damage to our Embassy. Numerous
other diplomatic missions and non-governmental
organizations were also affected. But that heinous
act only strengthens our resolve. Germany remains
strongly committed to working side by side with our
Afghan partners to tackle the challenges before us.

We commend the National Unity Government for
keeping its doors open to peace negotiations with the
Taliban. A comprehensive peace and reconciliation
process remains the only way to long-term stability in
Afghanistan and the region. Only an Afghan-led and
Afghan-owned process will result in a sustainable
solution. Germany continues to stand ready to assist
Afghanistan in the process. The Kabul process is the
Afghan-led solution on the way towards peace.

The fragile security situation remains the main
challenge in Afghanistan. As Secretary-General
Guterres points out in his report (S/2017/508), the
number of casualties among women and children
increased by 24 per cent and 17 per cent, respectively.
More needs to be done to protect the most vulnerable
in Afghan society. The adoption of a national civilian
casualty prevention and mitigation strategy by the
Government is an important step in the right direction.
It now needs to be implemented with vigour. In addition,
the imminent ratification of Protocol V to the 1980
Convention on Certain Conventional Weapons will also
help reduce the number of civilian fatalities.

Furthermore, we encourage the National Unity
Government to proceed with electoral reforms. For
some months now, Afghanistan has had the necessary
institutions in place for the holding of parliamentary
and district council elections. A clear and realistic
timetable is crucial for pushing through the remaining
electoral reforms and for holding credible, fair, equal
and free elections.

Let me conclude by reiterating Germany's full
support for the crucial role played by UNAMA and
United Nations agencies working in Afghanistan.
As co-Chair of the International Contact Group
on Afghanistan, Germany especially commends
UNAMA's efforts to strengthen cohesion among
international and regional stakeholders in Afghanistan.
We look forward to receiving the results of the strategic
review of the Mission requested by the Security
Council. The review should be conducted with the aim
of optimizing ongoing activities and strengthening the
Mission even further. Germany remains committed to
supporting Afghanistan, in close cooperation with the
Afghan Government and our international partners.

