I thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Haiti, Helen Meagher La Lime, for her detailed briefing, which clearly reflects the various crises Haiti is going through. We would like to begin by acknowledging the efforts made by the Haitian Government to counter the effects of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic in the country, under the leadership of its multisectoral commission for the management of the COVID-19 pandemic. The Dominican Republic is extremely concerned about the profound social, economic, health and political crisis in its sister Republic of Haiti, marked by the stagnation in the organization of the legislative elections and the lack of consensus on a shared political agenda to break the deadlock and set forth a new electoral cycle that will put the nation on a path of lasting stability. For this reason, in the first Dominican statement on the Haitian issue made in the Security Council last year, we warned of the danger of a premature departure of the United Nations Mission for Justice Support in Haiti without first having achieved conditions conducive thereto (see S/PV.8502). We hope that this situation will serve as an example when the extension of the mandates of other missions is analysed, in order not to make the same mistake. This complex political and economic crisis has degenerated into an impossibility of good governance and is therefore of deep concern to the Dominican Republic. The economic situation and insecurity in the country - and the food crisis that, according to the World Food Programme, today affects approximately 5 million Haitians - significantly affect not only the operations of United Nations personnel, but all activities aimed at improving the situation in the country. The problem is multidimensional and requires interdisciplinary action. Although intentional homicides reported to the police decreased by 12 per cent between | June and 31 August, violence and impunity continue to wreak havoc and affect the normal course of daily life. Kidnappings have rebounded and ongoing clashes between gangs have recently led to the displacement of hundreds of families. In recent days, we have heard with astonishment how violence has cut short the productive lives of high-profile citizens, such as the professor, lawyer and President of the Haitian Bar Association, Monferrier Dorval, as well as the father of the Director of Haitian National Police, who was found dead inside a water tank. These actions have been interpreted as threats and expressions of rejection from minority sectors that prefer chaos and are betting against the constitutional reform process in the country. Hopefully, sooner rather than later, the perpetrators of these atrocious crimes will be brought to justice; both inaction and impunity are unacceptable. In this context, we call upon the United Nations to provide the United Nations Integrated Office in Haiti (BINUH) with the necessary personnel to enable the mission to be effective and to fulfil its mandate. Mindful of the global economic downturn, it must be stressed that BINUH needs to be fully staffed in order to be effective, and, similarly, we call on BINUH, the international community and the Haitian Government to redouble their efforts in support of the Haitian National Police strategic development plan 2017-2021 and also to provide the judicial system with the resources and tools necessary to protect the rights of citizens, particularly the most vulnerable. It is paradoxical that one of the aspects in which the United Nations has achieved some success in Haiti since 2004, namely, generating a critical awareness of human rights among the population, does not find the institutional support to enforce human rights in the courts. There is a gap today between the expectations and demands of society and the capacity of rights holders to ensure that they are respected. The humanitarian situation in Haiti remains worrisome. Fifty-three per cent of Haitian households experienced hunger between May and June, and the number of children suffering from malnutrition is expected to increase by 25 per cent by the end of the year. A revised humanitarian response plan for 2020 was launched in June, aimed at reaching 2.3 million of the 5.1 million Haitians considered to be the most vulnerable. Including the response to COVID-19, the plan requires $472 million. However, disconcertingly, as of 10 September, only 16 per cent of the that amount had been funded. This situation could be exacerbated by the still-active hurricane season. To minimize these aggravating factors, it is necessary for the Haitian Government and its institutions to intensify their efforts in order to establish mechanisms for risk assessment and the designing of plans and strategies to strengthen the most affected sectors. Similarly, information and collaboration channels must be established with local communities to expand early-warning mechanisms that help in joint planning for the impact of climate shocks. The combination of the institutional crisis, COVID-19 and adverse climate phenomena could be devastating for a country that should not be left to fend for itself. The shared border between the Republic of Haiti and the Dominican Republic means that the political, social, health and economic processes of each country significantly impact the other. The success of health, security, defence and climate- change adaptation policies requires binational coordination. Given the situation in Haiti, to achieve this coordination, the support and assistance of the international community and multilateral organizations is essential - I repeat, essential. Instability in Haiti threatens the stability of the Dominican Republic and potentially that of the region. Inertia or avoidance can never be viable policies for the situation in Haiti. In that context, we once again echo the words of the Secretary-General, who said: "Absent additional financial support, the country will fall further behind in addressing its development challenges." (S/2020/537, para. 32) That should not be countenanced by the international community. Good-neighbourliness between the two countries can never undermine the principle of strict compliance with Dominican and international law. In the almost two years aS a non-permanent member of the Council, the Dominican Republic has made consistent proposals with regard to the political process in Haiti and has abstained on resolutions that, while well-intentioned, did not taken due account of the reality in Haiti. We have worked bilaterally and multilaterally to advance the peace and security agenda in Haiti, offering our good offices. As this is our last engagement on this issue in the Security Council, just as BINUH celebrates its first year of deployment in Haiti and at a time when that country is facing more difficult political, socioeconomic and security conditions than last year, we wish to emphasize our ongoing concern that, despite the progress of the One United Nations plan, and even with the United Nations country team's support to the Haitian authorities, the Council cannot afford to transfer the responsibilities of the mission to the Haitian Government while the current deep political instability and humanitarian crisis in that country continues. However, we must clearly state our firm belief that the well-being and future of the people are in the hands of the citizens. While providing additional and vital support, the international community cannot bring about the necessary changes in Haiti on its own. The meaningful participation of civil society and the Haitian political leadership is essential, including the active involvement of the diaspora, with common approaches and a joint agenda. That can be achieved only if the pending electoral process in Haiti is successful. We therefore urge the international community to take a more active role in organizing that process and to extend the BINUH mandate, providing it with the necessary resources for its proper functioning. BINUH must facilitate a comprehensive political agreement in Haiti, ensuring that legislative elections are held, which is the most urgent task. Finally, the Dominican Government calls on the international community to provide the Haitian people with much-needed humanitarian assistance and the resources necessary to invest in infrastructure and job creation. The Dominican Republic will continue a policy of openness to ongoing cooperation with the people of Haiti - cooperation that characterizes the deep sense of solidarity of our people - but also equally affirms that there is not, and cannot be, a Dominican solution to the situation in Haiti.
