Mr. Mauro Vieira (Brazil) (spoke in French): I
thank France for convening today's meeting.

I will deliver an abridged version of my statement.
The full text of the statement will be available
for circulation.

We welcome new developments towards the political
reunification of the State of Palestine, in particular the
agreement signed in Cairo on 12 October and steps taken
to extend the authority of the Government of National
Consensus to the Gaza Strip. We encourage Palestinian
political groups to continue their dialogue. However,
we remain concerned about the continued expansion
of illegal settlements in the occupied territories and
about discussions on the amendment of the Basic Law:
Jerusalem, Capital of Israel, adopted by Israel in 1980
and negated by resolution 478 (1980). It is imperative
to avoid other unilateral actions that could impede the
peace process.
Brazil reiterates its full commitment to the two-
State solution, with Israel and Palestine living side
by side in peace and security, within internationally
recognized and mutually agreed boundaries and on
the basis of the pre-1967 lines, with East Jerusalem
as the capital of the State of Palestine. We recall the
fundamental responsibility of the Council to support the
resumption of direct negotiations between the parties.

Brazil welcomes the Security Council's decision to
extend the mandate of the United Nations Interim Force
in Lebanon (UNIFIL). We acknowledge the constructive
engagement of France and Italy in negotiations to
ensure the continuity of the essential elements of the
Force's mandate. The international community must
fully appreciate UNIFIL's contribution to the stability
of Lebanon. The Force's Maritime Task Force has
played a valuable role in preventing arms trafficking
to non-State actors in Lebanon and in training the
Lebanese Naval Forces. It must continue to have the
means necessary to carry out its tasks. We hope that
the Council will continue to give its full support to
UNIFIL and take into consideration the views of the
Government of Lebanon and the troop-contributing
countries in its next mandate renewal.

Brazil is also concerned about the plight of
Syrian and Palestinian refugees in Lebanon. While
acknowledging the hospitality, generosity and spirit
of tolerance that permeates Lebanese democracy,
we underscore the need to strengthen international
cooperation in order to assist those people. It is vital
to provide funding for contingency plans drawn up by
multilateral agencies for use in the field; improve the
social and economic conditions of host communities;
promote refugee resettlement initiatives; and ensure
their right to return.

Our country has done its part by hosting thousands
of refugees affected by the conflict in Syria. Our new
migration law will establish a humanitarian visa for
travel to Brazil, which will be granted to stateless
persons and nationals ofcountries plagued by instability,
armed conflict, disasters or serious violations of
human rights law or international humanitarian law.
We encourage other countries to take steps to host
refugees from conflicts in the Middle East and reduce
current pressure on nearby developing countries, such
as Lebanon, Jordan and Turkey.

Turning now to the conflict in Syria, we welcome
the finalization of parameters for the implementation of
four de-escalation zones that emerged from the Astana
process. We must now ensure that efforts under way
to address the security dimension of the crisis lead to
tangible progress towards a political solution based
on resolution 2254 (2015). We welcome the ongoing
liberation of areas previously occupied by Da'esh in
eastern Syria, but underscore the imperative to respect
international humanitarian law in such offensives.

In addition,withregardto the fightagainstterrorism,
we note an increase in the number of letters submitted
to the Security Council to justify the use of military
action for counter-terrorism purposes under Article 51
of the Charter of the United Nations. It is essential that
those letters provide sufficient information concerning
attacks in which legitimate self-defence is invoked,
which will allow for proportionality and need for the
use of force to be assessed. To enhance transparency,
Brazil suggests that all such communications be listed
on the Security Council's website. We note with interest
the ongoing discussions on measures to promote
reconstruction and economic recovery in Syria. It
is important to create conditions that allow for the
dignified voluntary return of refugees and internally
displaced persons.

Finally, I would like to say a word about Iran. Brazil
joins with many other countries that support the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action on the Iranian nuclear
programme. It is a solid multilateral framework, which
was legally adopted by resolution 2231 (2015) and
plays a key role in stabilizing the Middle East and in
implementing the non-proliferation regime.

Brazil has long believed that the establishment
of a zone free of weapons of mass destruction in the
Middle East would contribute to peace in the region.
We are adding to that traditional position a new legal
instrument for promoting a nuclear-free world - the
Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons, which
Brazil was the first country to sign. We encourage
all countries to accede to the Treaty, and we warmly
congratulate the International Campaign to Abolish
Nuclear Weapons, our partner in the process, on its
having been awarded the 2017 Nobel Peace Prize.

