Mr. Spatafora (Italy): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union. The acceding
countries, Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Estonia,
Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Malta, Poland, Slovakia
and Slovenia, the candidate countries, Bulgaria,
Romania and Turkey, and the European Free Trade
Association (EFTA) country Iceland, member of the
European Economic Area, declare that they align
themselves with this statement.

First of all, allow me to express our deep
appreciation for your presence here, Sir. The fact that
you preside over this meeting confirms and emphasizes
the substantial importance that the Security Council
and the European family attaches to the issue under
discussion today. I also wish to join my other
colleagues in thanking Under-Secretary-General
Guehenno for his comprehensive briefing, which has
provided us with an overall picture on the current
situation in Kosovo and still more importantly, has
indicated the way ahead.

The European Union underlines, once again, the
continued validity of the "standards before status"
policy of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) as upheld by the United
Nations Security Council in accordance with resolution
1244 (1999). It therefore supports the initiative of the
United Nations Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Harri Holkeri, to set out more
concrete guidelines for progress and to operationalize
that strategy. It welcomes the Presidential Statement,
issued on 12 December, on the "Standards for

Kosovo", a document that is a first concrete step in the
process.

The European Union believes it is necessary to
build on the current momentum by working out, as
soon as possible, the relevant implementation plan and
by establishing a body to continually review the
progress achieved. That process should be led by the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
through regular consultations with the Provisional
Institutions of Self-Government and other relevant
parties as appropriate.

There is considerable work to be done to achieve
the agreed standards: democratic governance must take
hold in a multi-ethnic Kosovo in order to make
progress in anticipation of the comprehensive review
envisaged for mid-2005, or earlier, if sufficient
progress is made. The European Union stands ready to
assist in that process and considers the Stabilization
and Association Process Tracking Mechanism (STM)
as an important complementary instrument to that end.

The European Union believes that the direct
dialogue initiated on 14 October 2003 in Vienna
remains an indispensable element of the "standards
before status" strategy based on Security Council
resolution 1244 (1999). It therefore encourages all
parties concerned to continue the direct dialogue by
convening meetings of the expert working groups
without further delay.

Finally, the European Union underlines the
importance of structural reforms in Kosovo, of which
privatization is a key element. It calls upon the
Provisional Institutions of Self-Government to exercise
their responsibilities constructively so to allow the
privatization process to resume as soon as possible.

