Mr. Oh Joon (Republic ofKorea): Let me first of all
congratulate you, Sir, and the entire Chadian delegation
on the great success of this month's presidency.
Although we have had a very tight schedule, you have
led our work efficiently with your able leadership.

On the Middle East dossier, much work has been
carried out by the Council in December and, indeed,
throughout the year. However, as all who are present
around the table realize, much more work remains to
be done in the year ahead. In Syria, we are particularly
concerned by the continuously increasing humanitarian
challenges and their regional and global repercussions.
In this month's briefing (see S/PV.7342), Under-
Secretary-General Amos reported to the Council
that the number of Syrians requiring humanitarian
assistance has now reached some 12 million people.
In that regard, we welcome the adoption of resolution
2191 (2014), enabling the continuation of critical
cross-border humanitarian access. Of course, without
a negotiated political solution to the present conflict,
no amount of humanitarian support will suffice. We
sincerely hope that the efforts of Special Envoy De
Mistura will establish a basis for a sustainable political
process in the near future.

Turning to African issues, while we continue to
tackle conflicts on a country-specific basis, it is also
important that the Council take a strategic look from
a regional perspective and think of ways to strengthen
collaboration with regional organizations. In that
regard, the open debate on the relationship between
the United Nations and the African Union (AU) (see S/PV.7343) served as a valuable opportunity to identify
challenges facing peace efforts in Africa and to outline
ajoint approach to addressing them. Those discussions
reminded us that the strategic partnership between the
two bodies, especially in the areas of capacity-building
and financing, is instrumental in finding appropriate
solutions to African crises. As stated in the African
Union's fiftieth anniversary declaration, we hope that
the Security Council and the AU will continue to work
towards achieving the goal of a conflict-free Africa by
the year 2020.

In the same vein, the high-level open debate on
terrorism and cross-border crime also highlighted the
interconnected nature of terrorism and transnational
crime in the Sahel region, Libya, Syria and Iraq. It
also demonstrated the great need for such issues to
be addressed holistically. The adoption of resolution
2195 (2014) played an important role in bringing the
Council's attention to the issue of an increasingly
dangerous and troubling nexus between terrorism and
transnational organized crime.

Before concluding, although we have a few
important meetings ahead, I would like to take the
opportunity to thank all members of the Council as the
Republic of Korea's term in the Security Council draws
to an end this month. Serving on the Security Council
these past two years has been a great privilege and a
rewarding experience. During the past two years the
Council has collectively made considerable progress
towards building peace and stability in many parts of
the world. But we have also been bogged down by some
of the most pressing crises of our time. My delegation is
honoured and also humbled to have been a part of that
unified effort to bring more peace to the world.

I would also like to express sincere appreciation to
all of the Council members for their close collaboration
and friendship during the past two years. I am also
grateful to the Secretariat staff for their kind assistance
and support. My special thanks go to the support staff,
including the translators, interpreters and security
personnel. Although we will no longer be on the
Council, the Republic of Korea will continue to work
closely with the members of the Council to safeguard
peace and security across the globe. We are confident
that the Council's ongoing efforts will bring our world
closer to peace. I wish all members the best in their
future endeavours.

