Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America): I
wish at the outset to thank Ambassadors Puri, Wittig
and Sangqu for their briefings.

In September, the Secretary-General hosted an
extremely productive high-level symposium on
counter-terrorism, marking the tenth anniversary of the
events of 11 September 2001. That event allowed
Member States to speak about the different
contributions that the United Nations has made over
the past decade to counter and prevent terrorism in all
its forms and build a global community to speak out
against it. The symposium also demonstrated broad
support for United Nations efforts to counter violent
extremism.

Much of the focus was on the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, the only
universally approved approach to combating and
preventing terrorism, and on the Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force (CTITF), which, since its
creation in 2005, has played a key role in strengthening
cooperation and coordination among the now 31 parts
of the United Nations system with a role in supporting
implementation of the Strategy. The adoption of the
Strategy and the institutionalization of CTITF, as well
as the recent establishment of the United Nations
Centre on Counter-Terrorism within the CTITF office,
represent milestones in the evolution of the United
Nations counter-terrorism programme and deserve our
strong support.

Also in September, the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1373
(2001) concerning counter-terrorism (CTC) hosted an
event marking the tenth anniversary of the adoption of
that resolution and the establishment of the CTC. Over
the past decade, the Council has shown a remarkable
commitment to promoting the implementation of a
resolution that helped galvanize the global movement
to strengthen national and regional legal policy and
institutional counter-terrorism frameworks.

Since the Council established the Counter-
Terrorism Committee, in the fall of 2001, the CTC has
developed tailored interactive counter-terrorism
dialogues with States. That has led to the gathering of
unprecedented amounts of information on national
efforts to implement resolution 1373 (2001), in what
has essentially been a worldwide audit of counter-
terrorism capacities. Partly as a result, many States
have revised existing counter-terrorism laws, or
adopted new ones, and ratified and implemented the
universal instruments related to terrorism. In addition,
the CTC has succeeded in identifying capacity gaps
and in engaging with a range of assistance providers to
help countries receive the training that they need.

The evolution of the United Nations institutional
counter-terrorism framework, culminating with the
establishment of the United Nations Centre on
Counter-Terrorism, has been encouraging. We hope
that it will continue to evolve with the appointment of
a United Nations counter-terrorism coordinator to serve
as both the chair of the CTITF and the Secretary-
General's special adviser on counter-terrorism issues.

With that enhanced political and institutional
support within the United Nations system, we hope that
there will be even more flexibility for the CTC and the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
(CTED) to address some of the critical counter-
terrorism challenges. For example, more work remains
to strengthen national sanctions regimes to take action
against a broad range of terrorism threats and in
countering the increase in kidnapping for ransom as a
means of financing terrorism and other criminal
activity.

The United Nations also faces challenges in
securing unmanned borders, which allow terrorists to
travel with impunity, and in strengthening the capacity
of civilian courts to prosecute terrorists. The United
States is pleased to support CTED-led projects that
bring together practitioners to address common
counter-terrorism challenges.

The United States would particularly like to thank
CTC Chair Ambassador Hardeep Singh Puri, as well as
Executive Director Mike Smith, for their strong
leadership. The United States looks forward to
intensifying our efforts with CTED and other relevant
stakeholders, including civil society organizations, to
ensure that the United Nations responds flexibly to the
ever-changing terrorist threat.

With regard to Al-Qaida sanctions, the United
States welcomes the significant enhancements to the
listing and delisting processes of the regimes of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) concerning
Al-Qaida and associated individuals and entities,
outlined most recently in resolution 1989 (2011). The
establishment of an independent Ombudsperson
empowered to make recommendations to the
Committee on de-listing petitions has begun to ensure
that such procedures are fair and transparent.

Similarly, we applaud the Committee's ongoing
efforts to undertake regular reviews of its list to make
certain that the sanctions remain relevant and up to
date. We believe that it is imperative that the
Committee not lose sight of the need to ensure that
such sanctions are fully implemented and appropriately
calibrated to address current threats from Al-Qaida and
its affiliates. Ensuring a fair process is important, but
no less important are advancing our efforts to promote
full implementation and ensuring that cases of
non-compliance are adequately addressed. We look
forward to working with the Committee and its
Monitoring Team to examine the effectiveness of
existing measures and to identify practical ways to
enhance implementation efforts.

Let me thank Ambassador Wittig and his team, as
well as the Secretariat and the Ombudsperson, for their
tremendous efforts. They have worked tirelessly to
implement the reforms, and we are grateful for their
efforts. I also thank the Monitoring Team of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1267
(1999) for its important work in proposing
recommendations for improving the Committee's work
and in strengthening Member States' implementation of
the regime.

Regarding the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) on
non-proliferation, we want to express our continuing
support for Chairman Sangqu. We look forward to
2012 as the Committee takes a more robust role in
providing a strong and consistent voice for the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004). That will
require strategies to ensure that all States requesting
assistance receive it, and active collaboration with key
stakeholders to conduct implementation workshops and
training sessions. To ensure greater implementation,
the United States has made a voluntary contribution of
$3 million to the United Nations Office for
Disarmament Affairs (UNODA). We continue to
encourage Member States and regional organizations to
contribute to the UNODA Trust Fund and to the
implementation activities of the 1540 Committee. Such
implementation has matured beyond an initiative that is
primarily report-focused. We now need to concentrate
on implementation. In September, the United States
hosted a visit by the 1540 Committee and its Group of
Experts to observe our domestic efforts to implement
the resolution. We hope that other States will invite the
Committee to conduct such visits.

Finally, we warmly thank the European Union
(EU) and its Polish presidency for their cooperation on
the joint United States-EU declaration on the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) and a fruitful
First Committee side event focused on the resolution.
The United States strongly encourages additional
efforts to improve the overall effectiveness of the 1540
Committee's operations, particularly improved
matching of implementation assistance requests with
offers of assistance.

The General Assembly presidency and the
support of its global partnership will help to make
strong partnerships across that spectrum. In addition,
we emphasize that the work of the Chair, the
Committee, the Group of Experts and UNODA must be
better integrated and coordinated within intergovernmental
and regional organizations to maximize implementation.

We are pleased by the progress made by the
Committees under the capable leadership of the Chairs.
The Council's counter-terrorism efforts will guide and
reinforce actions of Member States to deter terrorism,
including the threats posed by Al-Qaida and its
affiliated groups and the proliferation efforts of
non-State actors.

