Ms. Bellamy: I, too, am quite pleased to join the
Council today. I regret that I will not be able to remain
for the entire discussion, as the United Nations
Children's Fund (UNICEF) Governing Board is
presently also in session and I must return to its
deliberations, but I appreciate the opportunity to be
here. Let me also echo the words of my colleague
Olara Otunnu in expressing our appreciation, Madame,
for your personal as well as professional commitment
on these issues.

I should like to begin by saying that UNICEF is
deeply heartened by the Council's ongoing concern
with the violations of the rights of children in armed
conflict. I would also take this opportunity to commend
Olara Otunnu, in particular, for his work in helping to
draw global attention to these outrages.
As the past year has demonstrated, however, our
efforts so far have fallen short of what is required. One
example of our failure to protect children from the
ravages of war is the reality we encounter in areas
where humanitarian access has been denied. During the
siege of Monrovia, the inability of the humanitarian
community to gain access led to the unnecessary
suffering of children and women. South-Eastern
Afghanistan and the Darfur region of Sudan also
illustrate the life-threatening consequences when
access to children and women in need is denied.

In my travels, I have often witnessed the horrific
impact of war on children. We can only begin to
imagine - and I think the film captured some of it -
how it must feel for a child to experience the fear and
the uncertainty that come with the threat of war, the
horror of war and the long aftermath, when schools are
closed, routines of daily life are destroyed and children
must try to cope with the loss of family, homes and
community.

The report of the Secretary-General attempts to
bring home the reality of what is happening. The
numbers speak for themselves. We know, for example,
that in Liberia there are an estimated 15,000 child
soldiers, some of whom have been in the fighting
forces for many years. A recent survey in Sierra Leone
indicated that 17 per cent of displaced households
reported sexual assaults, including rape, torture and
sexual slavery. In mid-2003, there were 82 countries
affected to some degree by landmines and/or
unexploded ordnance, of which only 45 are States
parties to the Convention on the Prohibition of the Use,
Stockpiling, Production and Transfer of Anti-personnel
Mines and on Their Destruction.

Another devastating consequence of today's wars
is that they create and exacerbate conditions that lead
to HIV/AIDS. Women and girls are often left so
destitute that trading sex for survival becomes the only
option for many. Other conditions, such as the
disintegration of communities, displacement, the
separation of children from their families, rape and
sexual violence, and the destruction of schools and
health services also fuel the spread of HIV/AIDS.

I am pleased to report that UNICEF is operational
on the front lines every day. We are there before,
during and - where there is success - after conflict,
assisting with our colleagues in protecting and helping
children. We do this with our many United Nations and
non-governmental organization partners.

Child soldiers tend to be the face of children and
armed conflict, but there are many other ways in which
the rights of children are violated during armed
conflict. For example, I recently returned from travel to
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, where I saw
first hand - particularly in the eastern part of the
country - the devastating impact of sexual violence.
Girls, and sometimes boys, are targeted in campaigns
of gender-based violence, including rape, prostitution,
trafficking, forced pregnancy and sexual slavery. This
past year, we have seen and been reminded once again
that rape has been used systematically as a weapon of
war and as a means to terrorize populations and destroy
communities. Adolescent girls are often singled out for
this abuse. In a hospital I visited in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, girls as young as four years old
lay side by side with grandmothers in their 70s. And,
indeed, I would report that those who seek medical
help represent only a fraction - just a small portion -
of the survivors.

We are working in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo with a variety of partners, in addition to our
United Nations partners. I would mention the
International Rescue Committee and the Italian non-
governmental organization COOPI. We are working to
try to provide care and support for survivors of sexual
violence. One project supports a network of community
women who reach out to survivors of rape. We are also
providing support to several hospitals.

In situations of conflict, when people are
extremely vulnerable, there is always the possibility
that power may be abused. We, as humanitarian actors
and as United Nations staff, must ensure that in our
own behaviour we respect the highest standards of
personal conduct. Supported by the Secretary-General's
bulletin on special measures for protection from sexual
exploitation and abuse, which was issued a few months
ago in October 2003, we are actively promoting these
principles to maintain the highest possible standards
and greatest vigilance in all situations within which we
and our partners are working.

We have experience, I must say - given how
many wars there are now - in demobilizing child
soldiers. Throughout the past several years, our country
offices have engaged in dialogue with groups and
Governments using children as soldiers in order to try
to bring an end to that terrible practice. The Secretary-
General's list of parties to conflict who recruit and use
children as soldiers has been a valuable advocacy tool
in that regard. The list has also created opportunities
for the Office of my colleague, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict, and our agency to pursue
collaborative actions in our advocacy efforts on behalf
of children in armed conflict.

I am also pleased to draw the Council's attention
to an important new tool, a guide to the Optional
Protocol on the involvement of children in armed
conflict, jointly prepared by the Coalition to Stop the
Use of Child Soldiers and UNICEF. It is being released
today. We hope it will enable child protection
advocates, Government officials, ordinary citizens and
children themselves to take and bring into usage the
commitment of the Optional Protocol so that specific
actions can be put into effect.

In Afghanistan, working with non-governmental
organizations such as the Bangladesh Rural
Advancement Committee (BRAC), we are supporting a
community-based demobilization and reintegration
programme for child soldiers. We expect the
programme to reach about 8,000 child soldiers over a
three-year period, with formal education, accelerated
learning, apprenticeships, vocational start-up kits and
psychosocial and other support.

In Cote d'Ivoire, extremely difficult security
conditions and political instability prevail. One of the
lessons learned from past experience with
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR)
programmes that we have applied in Cote d'Ivoire is
that child demobilization should not be contingent on
formal peace processes or more comprehensive DDR
exercises. Resources need to be made available for this
as early as possible. We urge Council members to
ensure that children's rights are taken into account
when the Council considers the revised mandate of the
United Nations Mission in cote d'Ivoire.

We have found that an essential part of re-
establishing normalcy for demobilized child soldiers,
as well as generally for children affected by conflict, is
getting kids - boys and girls - back into school. In
Liberia, we used some unconventional methods to
distribute school materials. These included teachers
using wheelbarrows to collect their school supplies,
and a fleet of outboard canoes to reach river villages.
We helped to train some 20,000 teachers and we helped
in the rehabilitation of more than 3,000 schools,
including working in conjunction with the schools to
provide clean water and hygiene facilities. We
undertook similar activities in Afghanistan, although
we did not use wheelbarrows; I think we used four-
legged beasts there.

When entire communities are in a state of flux,
schools can provide a haven. It is therefore vital that
their sanctity be protected. The misuse of schools, their
occupation and attacks on them are among the worst
violations of children's rights. They are also a violation
of one of the most basic principles of the laws of war:
that civilian sites must be protected.

Effective monitoring and reporting - again, as
my colleague said earlier - on children's rights
violations are essential conditions for ending impunity
for crimes committed against children. The Secretary-
General's report and the draft resolution on children
and armed conflict contain many ideas on improving
monitoring and reporting in order to hold accountable
those who deliberately target, abuse or exploit children
during war.

When the lives and the rights of children are at
stake, there must be no silent witnesses. The challenge
before us is to improve monitoring and reporting on
children's rights violations by modifying and
strengthening the existing human rights system so that
it can better perform its intended function. There are a
variety of supports out there, and I have listed them in
my prepared testimony. With our partners, over the
next few months, we will attempt to identify even
clearer indicators and to strengthen our capacity in this
area.

Monitoring and reporting serve a key function.
They allow the development of a record of violations
and, in so doing, provide an essential foundation for
pursuing justice, accountability and, ultimately,
reconciliation. It is essential that mechanisms
established for such purposes be sensitive to the special
situation of children and provide appropriate
procedures for their participation.

While boys and girls continue to be targeted,
abused and exploited - whether as soldiers, as sex
slaves or both - it is important to bear in mind that
there are significant ways that young people
themselves are demonstrating their resilience and their
ability to overcome the violence around them. I would
call attention to this having been demonstrated in
Timor-Leste, Kosovo, Sierra Leone and Colombia.

One particularly innovative example is in the
occupied Palestinian territory, where a Child-Friendly
Cities framework is being piloted. Children's municipal
councils - containing about 50 per cent boys and 50
per cent girls - have been set up in each of the cities
to give young people an opportunity to plan and
implement activities that will help improve and rebuild
community life.
We appreciate the continued commitment by the
Council to deal with the situation of children in armed
conflict. The Secretary-General's list on the use of
child soldiers, in particular, is a vital step forward. It is
important to maintain the Secretary-General's list on an
annual basis, and to ensure that its scope be extended
to situations not strictly on the Council's agenda. Such
an annual list will allow the Council to track progress
made or commitments not kept. It can also request
more detailed information on actions taken by the
parties on the list and decide upon measures it may
take to encourage greater progress in this regard. We
stand ready to provide any information that the Council
may wish to receive.

We encourage the Council to request, as a matter
of routine, that information on child protection issues
be included in all peacekeeping mandates, as well as in
country-specific and thematic reports. Some of the
specific issues that should be highlighted are the
demobilization of child soldiers; justice, accountability
and reconciliation; refugees and internally displaced
persons; and gender-based violence. The Council's
upcoming debates on the possible creation of several
new missions and on the renewal of existing ones
provide important opportunities to do exactly that.

We must ensure that children are protected from
violence, abuse and exploitation. We must be able to
tell children everywhere that they and their families
will be protected, that they will be able to go to school
every day, that their health centres will be open and
functioning and that those who abused them during the
war will be brought to justice. The Security Council
has a vital role to play.

