Mr. Zannier: The report before the members of
the Council details the activities of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
from 16 July to 18 October 2010. Today, I wish to
highlight the major challenges and successes of the
reporting period, as well as the principal challenges
that lie ahead and how we believe they can best be met.

There has been one major development since the
publication of the report. On 2 November, the
Assembly of Kosovo supported a no-confidence
motion against the Government, and the Acting
President issued a decree for early general elections, to
be held on 12 December. Those developments follow
the resignation of President Sejdiu and the collapse of
the Government coalition on 18 October.

Since the issuance of the advisory opinion of the
International Court of Justice, in July, there has been
growing unease on the part of the Kosovo authorities in
cooperating with UNMIK in two areas of our mandate
implementation, namely, the facilitation of regional
cooperation and the administration of northern
Mitrovica. Although concerned that UNMIK's
facilitation of their presence at regional forums
undermines their declared sovereign status, Kosovo's
institutions have so far continued to take part in most
regional mechanisms in which their participation
currently requires such facilitation.

Regrettably, however, during this reporting period
they stopped participating in the Regional Cooperation
Council. The Council deals with issues of importance
for the development and long-term stability of the
region - including those of economic and social
development, energy and infrastructure and justice and
home affairs - as well as cooperation in the security
sector. By choosing not to participate during the
reporting period, the Kosovo institutions lost valuable
opportunities to benefit from regional cooperation on
issues ranging from education to digital media. More
opportunities will be lost should they decide not to
re-engage with the Council.
10-63455
While the choice to participate in such initiatives
is one for the Kosovo authorities, we have steadfastly
discouraged them from choosing the path of isolation.
Kosovo's long-term stability and prosperity is
inextricably linked with that of its neighbours.
Participation in structures fostering regional cooperation
is key to the development needed to ensure long-
lasting peace in the region, and to the hope of a better
future for its people. That is a common goal of both
Pristina and Belgrade. The challenge has been, and
remains, finding practical solutions to political
obstacles.

With the requisite goodwill, Pristina and Belgrade
can find such solutions. UNMIK will continue to
provide its assistance and to propose practical ways to
overcome political obstacles. But we believe that such
solutions can be sought most effectively through a
dialogue between the parties. In that regard, the Central
European Free Trade Agreement (CEFTA) presents an
impending opportunity for Belgrade and Pristina to put
politics aside in pursuit of a fundamental stepping
stone towards the European perspective of the region.
The Kosovo institutions have recently resumed
attendance at CEFTA meetings, in spite of the
continuing refusal of some CEFTA members to accept
the new Kosovo customs stamps endorsed by UNMIK.
That is a step in the right direction, and one that I hope
signals that Pristina will ultimately choose to continue
on the path of regional cooperation. I also hope that all
CEFTA members will accept Without further delay the
Kosovo customs stamps endorsed by UNMIK.

During this reporting period, we also encountered
a serious challenge to our management of the
Administration of northern Mitrovica. The publication
of an inaccurate report on the UNMIK Administration
in Mitrovica (UAM) by the coordinator of the "Office
for Implementation of the Strategy for the North of
Kosovo", blaming the UAM. for lack of progress in the
implementation of the strategy, was followed by an
intense media campaign against the UAM. and, more
worryingly, against my staff in northern Kosovo in
their individual capacities. For my part, I swiftly and
firmly took issue with the potential endangerment of
my staff by their being singled out in the press,
including immediate steps to ensure their safety.

While the Kosovo authorities have nevertheless
continued to channel municipal funds to the UAM. for
the benefit of the inhabitants of northern Mitrovica,
regrettably representatives of the Kosovo Albanian
villages in northern Mitrovica and the Kosovo Albanian
authorities at the municipal level have been reluctant to
engage with us recently, making it more difficult for us
to facilitate contacts between the communities.

Indeed, inter-ethnic relations in northern Kosovo
appear to be deteriorating. While overall the situation
remained stable during the reporting period, continuing
incidents in northern Kosovo have highlighted the
strong potential for instability there and the urgent
need to address the issues that continue to create
friction between the communities. Since the end date
of the report, low-level interethnic incidents have
persisted, and with them the danger of igniting wider-
spread violence.

Our key challenge in northern Kosovo remains to
mediate between the communities, as well as to serve
as a bridge between northern Kosovo and the Pristina
authorities. To improve our ability to meet this
challenge in northern Mitrovica, we are reviewing the
way the UAM. operates in order to enhance its ability
to serve as a link between the communities. To that
effect, we are engaging with the European Union (EU)
and other international partners in order to develop a
shared understanding of the policies required to
address the challenges in northern Kosovo. In addition,
we are coordinating our actions with the United
Nations Kosovo team, within the context of our
recently completed Integrated Strategic Framework.

Nevertheless, our overall assessment is that the
tensions in northern Kosovo and the attempt to
scapegoat UNMIK for the lack of progress there are
reminders of the pressing need for the dialogue called
for by the General Assembly. We also believe that two
other key issues regarding which progress is falling
short of expectations - those of missing persons and
returns - can also be most effectively addressed
through dialogue between the parties. I am encouraged
that the recent internal political events in Pristina have
not created an obstacle to the preparations for the
dialogue, and that the preparatory phase is under way
in Brussels. For our part, we are working with the EU
to provide the United Nations support and contribution
to this important process.

There has been other encouraging news that I
wish to highlight. On 1 October, in a coordinated
action with the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, Mercy Corps International
and Roma and other residents of the Cesmin Lug camp,
the UAM. finally closed and sealed off the camp so that
it cannot be reinhabited. With the support of the
Mitrovica municipality, its former residents relocated
to homes newly constructed by the United States
Agency for International Development in the Roma
Mahala area, or to Osterode camp to await the
construction of additional homes funded by the EU.
While not forgetting that the closure of Cesmin Lug,
with its unhealthy conditions, was too long delayed, I
am heartened to finally be able to report concrete
progress in the living conditions of some of Kosovo's
Roma, Ashkali and Egyptian residents.

In that context, I must bring to the Council's
attention the prospect of increased forced returns to
Kosovo of Roma and other vulnerable groups,
following the conclusion of readmission agreements
between Kosovo and Western European Governments
that host significantly large numbers of displaced
persons from Kosovo. These returns, if unmanaged,
will further strain Kosovo's already limited absorption
capacity and increase the risk of secondary
displacement and further marginalization. That has real
potential to derail progress, not only in the overall
returns process but in improving inter-ethnic relations
and securing long-term stability in Kosovo. I therefore
urge repatriating countries and the Kosovo authorities
to ensure that those returns are managed prudently and
do not result in a humanitarian crisis.

In conclusion, on behalf of all UNMIK staff, I
wish to thank the Council for its support and to assure
it that we will continue to perform UNMIK's mandated
functions to the best of our ability. UNMIK will
continue to offer its facilitation and good offices. We
hope that both Belgrade and Pristina will take advantage
of that offer. Our goal remains to consolidate the peace
that the people of Kosovo and so many in the
international community have worked so hard for so
long to keep.

