Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I would
like to thank the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2012/462) and Under-Secretary-General Ladsous
and Mr. Fedotov for their briefings this morning. I also
welcome Ambassador Tanin's contribution to today's
debate.

In the past six months, the international community
has made significant progress on the commitments made
at the December 2011 Bonn Conference. Efforts are now
focused on reinforcing our enduring commitment to
Afghanistan. That means not only ensuring the security
of Afghanistan and its people, but also sustaining the
political and economic progress, including through
the support of neighbouring countries. I will focus my
statement today on the progress being made in those
three areas.

First, on the security transition, I welcome the
success of the NATO Chicago Summit in May, which
saw the International Security Assistance Force (ISAF)
contributing countries demonstrate our long-term
commitment to Afghanistan, in particular by agreeing
the NATO strategic plan for Afghanistan, and make
incredible contributions towards sustaining the Afghan
National Security Forces after 2014. That sent a clear
message to the Afghan people that we will not abandon
them, and to the insurgency that it cannot wait us out.

The protection of the Afghan civilian population
remains at the core of ISAF's military strategy. ISAF
forces have worked extremely hard to minimize the level
of civilian casualties and have introduced new rules to
govern the use of force. As the Secretary-General's report
highlights, we have had considerable success in that.
That is in stark contrast, of course, to the insurgency,
which continues to target civilians indiscriminately.

Secondly, on the political and economic progress,
the United Kingdom looks forward to the July Tokyo
Development Conference on Afghanistan, hosted
by the Government of Japan. It is absolutely vital to
Afghanistan's future stability that we send a strong
signal of our enduring commitment through the
transformation decade 2015 to 2025. Therefore, we,
the international community, should look to provide
concrete aid pledges for at least the period 2015 to 2017.
The United Kingdom has already done so. We call on
others in the international community to follow suit.

Alongside such undertakings, the United Kingdom
strongly supports all efforts to ensure that Tokyo offers
an opportunity for the participation of Afghan civil
society, including women. The United Kingdom works
closely with the Government of Afghanistan, local and
international non-governmental organizations, civil
society organizations and international partners to
improve the status of women in Afghanistan so that
they can play a full role in a future peaceful Afghan
State.

Of course, the Government of Afghanistan must
also deliver on the commitments that it has made to
the Afghan people and to the international community,
in particular by continuing with key economic and
governance reforms and by working towards greater
self-reliance. The centrepiece of the Tokyo conference
will be a mutual accountability framework, setting
out Afghan and international commitments for the
post-2014 period. That work will complement the
commitments made on security at the Chicago Summit
and will move us another step closer to a sustainable
future for Afghanistan.

Thirdly, among all the challenges and opportunities
facing Afghanistan today, the relationship between
Afghanistan and its neighbours is vital, as other
speakers have highlighted this morning. At the Heart of
Asia ministerial conference in Kabul earlier this month,
Afghanistan's neighbours expressed their mutual
interest in Afghanistan's long-term stability. The
United Kingdom welcomes the assistance provided by
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) and the supporting role of United Nations
agencies in the Istanbul process. I would also like to
take this opportunity to reiterate the United Kingdom's
readiness to contribute to confidence-building
measures, where requested by the region.

The United Kingdom supports a strong UNAMA
presence as we move through the transition period,
and beyond. UNAMA plays an essential role in
coordinating international efforts and in providing the
Afghan Government with support in order to deliver
on its own commitments. We welcome UNAMA's view
that the inevitable financial constraints are a valuable
opportunity to ensure that its future operations are
closely focused on the core mandate and that the
relationship between UNAMA and the United Nations
country team is regularly reviewed.

In conclusion, the international community has
made real progress against the commitments made at
Bonn in December 2011, but there is still work to be done
to secure the future of Afghanistan and its people. The
United Kingdom remains resolute in our determination
to work with the Government of Afghanistan and all
international partners in that crucial endeavour.

