Mr. Alkalaj (Bosnia and Herzegovina): I would
like to commend you, Minister Patriota, for convening
this meeting to discuss such an important topic. My
appreciation also goes to Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon, Ms. Sarah Cliffe of the World Bank and His
Excellency Mr. Eugene-Richard Gasana, Chairperson
of the Peacebuilding Commission, for their insightful
remarks.

It is our View that the objectives of security and
development go hand in hand, which means that
security is a prerequisite for development. Discussions
about security therefore lead us inevitably to a
discussion of development, indicating an inherent link
between these two issues. Improvements in one area
enhance the chances of progress in the other, while
failure to provide either security or development could
jeopardize success in both fields.

Various dimensions of development and security
are interconnected and mutually reinforcing, which
suggests that the link between them requires a
coordinated approach. It is therefore important to have
a clear understanding of the mechanisms that govern
the security-development nexus. That nexus also calls
for a reassessment of the boundaries between those two
issues. At the core of the matter is the ability to
contribute on the ground to conflict prevention and the
creation of an atmosphere conducive to sustainable
peace.

The peacebuilding process entails overlapping
agendas for peace and development aimed at
preventing and managing conflicts and encouraging
post-conflict reconstruction. The United Nations has a
central role in promoting such agendas. In order to
address the deep-rooted causes of violent conflicts,
new and innovative approaches must be found to
generate resources for conflict prevention and
peacebuilding. In addition, the various actors within
the United Nations system must seek out the best
possible ways to contribute to their common purpose of
development and security.

It is crucial to extend assistance to countries in a
wide range of sectors, including governance, human
rights, justice, reconciliation, demilitarization,
demobilization and reintegration, as well as security
sector reform. Assistance programmes in those areas

should be sensitive to the connection between
development and security agendas. It is also important
that strategies regarding security and development are
integrated and implemented alongside the other
priorities in a coherent peacebuilding framework.

Security sector reform and disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration, as parts of
comprehensive peacebuilding strategies, can be
successfully implemented only in an environment that
offers economic opportunity and favours development.
When early peace dividends are evident and accepted,
the security sector is well-managed and democratic
norms are in place, opportunities for development are
present in the true sense.

Weak national institutions, whether they are in
the political, security or development domains, can
increase the risk of a relapse into conflict. Bosnia and
Herzegovina believes that one way of addressing the
security-development link is to focus on building and
strengthening institutions that are indispensable to
security and development. That issue was the topic of
our thematic debate held in the Security Council last
month (see S/PV.6472).

Governments and societies need proper funding
and assistance in consolidating their efforts to provide
security for their populations and to improve economic
conditions. Much has been achieved through the
United Nations peacebuilding architecture and the
activities of the Peacebuilding Commission and the
Peacebuilding Fund. Yet, more remains to be done.

With regard to the donor community, it is
essential to establish better cooperation between
donors and international financial institutions. United
Nations agencies and international organizations need
more specialized expertise in areas such as natural
resource management and wealth-sharing. They must
also coordinate their efforts towards achieving
meaningful results and adjust their responses to the
specific situation in a given country. A well-
implemented and integrated strategy on the parts of
agencies, funds and international financial institutions
can significantly increase prospects for the success of
efforts to ensure peace and security.

With all of that in mind, Bosnia and Herzegovina
emphasizes the importance of an integrated,
comprehensive and coordinated approach that includes
the establishment of good governance, the rule of law,
the promotion of human rights, institution-building,
security sector reform, economic reconstruction and
development in order to achieve irreversible peace.
Furthermore, we firmly believe that particular
emphasis should be placed on empowering women and
on their greater involvement in peacebuilding efforts,
including in development processes.

Finally, we are fully aware that the Security
Council is not responsible for making decisions
directly related to the issue of development. However,
we believe that the Council can and should contribute
through its work to the transformation of post-conflict
settings into environments that foster long-term
development. Given the correlation between security
and development and the Council's primary role in
maintaining international peace and security, it is safe
to say that this body already invests significant efforts
to that end. Nevertheless, in the course of its
deliberations, the Security Council should also
endeavour to address development issues with the
attention they warrant, in order to ensure a smooth and
effective transition to lasting and sustainable peace.

