Mr. Vale de Almeida: I am honoured to speak on
behalf of the European Union and its 28 member States.
The following countries align themselves with my
statement, of which a longer version will be distributed

in the Chamber: the candidate countries Turkey, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro,
Serbia and Albania; the country of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidate Bosnia and
Herzegovina; the European Free Trade Area country
Liechtenstein, member of the European Economic
Area; as well as Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova
and Georgia.

First, I would like to commend the United States
for holding this debate on peacekeeping and the
implementation of resolution 2378 (2017). Peacekeeping
operations continue to be a vital instrument in advancing
peace and security in the world, as our environment is
becoming more and more complex and challenging. We
also thank the Secretary-General for his first annual
briefing on the implementation of resolution 2378
(2017). We welcome the progress made over the past
year in making United Nations peacekeeping more
efficient and effective. The European Union and its
member States strongly support the Secretary-General's
initiatives to make the United Nations delivery more
effective and efficient on the ground, especially the
Action for Peacekeeping initiative, which highlights the
need for a sharper focus on performance, among other
things. We also welcome the Secretary-General's calls
for the primacy of politics, as peacekeeping operations
can be deployed only in support of political solutions,
not as a substitute.

All efforts at improving performance should
be integrated in the broader context of the United
Nations reform process, at Headquarters and in the
field. The latter constitutes an indispensable enabling
environment for peacekeeping reforms to have a real
impact. We underline the importance of reducing
the overall environmental impact of United Nations
peacekeeping operations. A lighter footprint would
allow for improved safety and security - both for
troops and for the civilians of host countries - cost
efficiencies and, eventually, better performance.

We underline the importance of the reform efforts
undertaken, in terms of management, logistics,
procurement, and human resources provided to peace
operations, which will hopefully provide additional
incentives for a culture of performance to thrive. We
understand, too, that the efforts made at reform need
to be accompanied by commitment and contribution
by all members. In demanding greater efficiency and
improved performance, it behooves all of us to look at
our own performance and support. Only by providing
the adequate resources will our combined efforts
deliver on our expectations.

We welcome the development of a comprehensive
performance policy on peacekeeping. Such a policy
should tackle several key aspects - such as how to
forge consensus around the strategic objectives set
out in peacekeeping mandates; which peacekeeping
stakeholders will deliver the mandate; how to improve
mandates' design, improve the prioritization of
tasks, and training; as well as sound monitoring of
achievements. The approach needs to be broad and
encompass all peacekeepers - civilian, military
and police. Harmonizing standards and evaluation
criteria so as to remove any ambiguities that could
lead peacekeepers to fail is a must. That can be
achieved by strengthening our working methods with
stronger leadership, accountability and transparency.
Moreover, we expect all stakeholders to play their part
in a renewed collective commitment to implementing
Security Council resolutions and the highest level
of peacekeeping performance. At the same time,
an approach aligned with the efforts of troop- and
police-contributing countries, as well as a close
dialogue with the Secretariat, are required.

For us, relevant and appropriate training remains
the cornerstone of any performance policy, and the
condition to translate some of the aforementioned
reforms into practice. On the basis of consolidated
standards, such training should include predeployment
and in-mission training on integrating a gender
perspective, international humanitarian law and human
rights components, including child protection, and
combating sexual and gender-based violence, as well as
sexual exploitation and abuse.

We welcome the Secretary-General's emphasis on
increased accountability and his efforts to strengthen
the system's ability to deal with sexual exploitation
and abuse swiftly and decisively. The European Union
member States have consistently expressed their support
for the policy of zero tolerance of sexual exploitation
and abuse. The European troop- and police-contributing
countries will continue to support the Secretariat
in bringing both the capacity and the willingness to
create safer environments for communities under the
protection of peacekeepers.

In conclusion, in support of political solutions,
peacekeeping missions and outputs must also be
assessed through a more inclusive and people-centred
approach. We continue to underscore the importance of
the protection ofcivilians as a core task ofpeacekeeping.
In this regard, regular assessments constitute an
indispensable part of performance evaluation. They
ensure that the protection of civilians under threat of
physical violence is fulfilled in accordance with the
requirements of necessity and proportionality. The better
integration of modern technology and peacekeeping
intelligence capabilities into peace operations should
therefore continue to be pursued. We can all agree that
a data-driven analysis can help improve the situational
awareness of troops in real time, thereby contributing
to the implementation of the missions' mandate, to the
protection of civilians and to the security of the United
Nations personnel on the ground.

The European Union welcomes efforts to
incentivize the deployment of greater numbers of
women in United Nations peacekeeping operations,
including for positions of leadership, and stands ready
to work with the Secretary-General on a revised strategy
to double the number of women in military and policy
contingents of United Nations peacekeeping operations
over the next five years.

