Mr. Celem (Turkey): Allow me at the outset to
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council for the month of December. We are
confident that under your skilful guidance the Council will
be able to fulfil its responsibilities successfully. I should
also like to pay tribute to your predecessor, Ambassador
Al-Khussaiby of Oman, for the outstanding manner in
which he conducted the work of the Council in November.

For almost four years, unspeakable horror prevailed in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. The people of Bosnia and
Herzegovina resisted with determination the evil forces of
ethnic and xenophobic nationalism. They struggled for
survival and democracy. Their aim was to maintain the
spirit and tradition of living and working together in
Bosnia, to preserve the territorial integrity, sovereignty and
unity of their multicultural, multi-ethnic and multi-religious
country. The tragedy unfolded before our eyes. Yesterday,
the signing, in Paris, of the Dayton Agreement marked, we
hope, the beginning of a new era in Bosnia. We welcome
the prospect and promise of peace embodied in this
Agreement.

The resolution just adopted starts the implementation
process. For a just and viable peace, the commitments
undertaken through this Agreement should be honoured in
good faith. Here, I should like to underline once again that

 

preservation of the sovereignty, territorial integrity and
political independence of Bosnia and Herzegovina, within
its internationally recognized borders, is and will remain
Vital for a lasting peace and for stability in the region.

Turkey will actively participate in all the military
and civilian aspects of peace implementation. We will
contribute troops to the Implementation Force (IFOR).
The Turkish civilian police have already assumed
responsibility as part of a joint police force which is
overseeing the return of refugees from Croatia to Bihae.
We will also shoulder our share of the responsibility for
the rehabilitation and reconstruction work ahead within
the Steering Board established for this purpose.

The conflict in the former Yugoslavia has illustrated
that ethnic nationalism, racism and intolerance are the
biggest threats to freedom and democracy, peace and
prosperity. Therefore, we should never forget the terrible
suffering of the Bosnian people, the mass executions, the
concentration camps, the "ethnic cleansing", the
campaigns of rape and terror. The Agreement signed
yesterday promises that those who have committed
crimes, that is, genocide, crimes against humanity and
war crimes which threaten international peace and
security, will be brought to justice. As was stated by the
President and the Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Tribunal, justice is an indispensable ingredient of the
process of national reconciliation and peace. If peace is to
take hold, justice must prevail. Turkey will continue to
stand by the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina in their
march on the long and difficult road to reconciliation.

