Mr. Kydyrov (Kyrgyzstan): Kyrgyzstan shares
the sentiments of the Secretary-General and others and
expresses its deep condolences to the victims and
families of the United Nations workers in Nigeria, and
to the people and Government of Nigeria. Kyrgyzstan
strongly condemns the attacks there today.

Let me thank you, Sir, for having organized this
open debate on the topical subject of United Nations
peacekeeping activities. Representatives of the Kyrgyz
Republic began participating in United Nations
peacekeeping missions in 1998 as military observers
and civilian police. Every year since then, we have sent
about 30 servicemen and officers from our law-
enforcement organizations to peacekeeping missions,
mainly in the States of the African continent. Given
that almost three-quarters of United Nations
peacekeeping personnel and budget allotments are used

in that region, Kyrgyzstan supports the proposal to
strengthen the peacekeeping capacity of the African
Union.

In recent years, along with its experience
participating in peacekeeping missions, Kyrgyzstan has
gained invaluable experience in the fields of preventive
diplomacy, peacebuilding and post-conflict
reconstruction during its two people's revolutions,
particularly in the fight against terrorism and in
combating drug trafficking. As a country ever striving
for greater democracy, we are therefore ready to
expand our participation in peacekeeping activities in
their current forms and within the broad mandate of
contributing to the maintenance of peace and security.

Today, the potential of United Nations
peacekeeping activity has significantly increased both
quantitatively and qualitatively, and thus demands a
comprehensive approach to peacebuilding and to
strengthening the partnership between the Security
Council, the General Assembly, the Secretariat, the
countries that send peacekeepers, and host States. It is
important that we have an organic system of military,
diplomatic and other measures for resolving conflicts.
And this will undoubtedly need additional measures in
order to develop and implement better mechanisms for
mobilizing the resources that peacekeeping operations
require. Only then can we expect to see improved
effectiveness in peacekeeping and peacebuilding
activities.

The significant growth in the role and scope of
peacekeeping operations and their expanded functions
require the enhanced effectiveness of regional and
subregional organizations. Given the experience of last
year's tragic events in Kyrgyzstan, we believe it is
important that, along with traditional partners like the
African Union and the European Union, the United
Nations foster increased cooperation with other
regional organizations. In particular, we refer to the
Collective Security Treaty Organization in order to
enhance the effectiveness of mediation and the
peaceful settlement of possible disputes in the region.

One of the important lessons which Kyrgyzstan
has learned concerns the need to clarify the legal
framework for international cooperation, including in
the mandates of regional organizations and in
non-standard situations. On the other hand, measures
taken at the national level must serve as a necessary
component. For example, Kyrgyzstan will make
additional efforts towards the legislative regulation of
peacekeeping activity at the national level. Currently, a
draft law on principles and modalities for the
participation of the Kyrgyz Republic in the activities of
maintaining international peace and security is being
elaborated. The law defines certain basic concepts for
the first time, including the components of
peacekeeping activity of the Kyrgyz Republic, and the
order of formation and deployment of peacekeepers
outside the country. It eliminates legal gaps and creates
the necessary legal mechanisms.

Kyrgyzstan is also in favour of improving the
planning system and expanding programmes on the
targeted training of peacekeeping personnel, especially
relating to promoting women to relevant positions in
United Nations peacekeeping missions. We see that as
another reserve for strengthening United Nations
peacekeeping capacity.

