Mr. Leon: By now, the Council will have received
the Secretary-General's special report on the strategic
assessment of the United Nations presence in Libya
(S/2015/113), as well as the Secretary-General's report
on the United Nations Support Mission in Libya
(S/2015/l44), detailing the Mission's work over the past
six months.
Two weeks ago, I briefed the Security Council
(see S/PV.7387) in the aftermath of the horrific
beheadings by Islamic State-affiliated elements of
21 men, including 20 Egyptian nationals. That was a
crime so heinous and vile, yet its perpetrators showed
no misgivings about presenting the world with images
of their brutal and base barbarity. On 20 February, two
days after my briefing to the Council, Libyans were
again reminded of the lengths to which terrorists and
extremists will go. A car bomb in Al-Qubba, the home
town of House of Representatives President Agila
Gwaider, left 44 people dead, according to official
figures released by the Government. That is the highest
number of fatalities recorded as a result of any single
act of terrorism in Libya. Even in the current climate
of political polarization and armed hostilities, the
nature and scale of that attack shocked all Libyans,
irrespective of political affiliations. Across political
divisions, condemnation was swift and unequivocal.

I have no doubt that the attack in Al-Qubba,
coming only days before a planned round of dialogue
talks, was a blatant attempt to derail any opportunity
of Libyans coming together to forge consensus on a
peaceful solution to the political crisis and the military
conflict that has gripped their country for much of the
past year. I also have no doubt that terrorist groups such
as Islamic State will stop at nothing in their bid to play
on existing political divisions and the sense of mutual
mistrust among the main political stakeholders in order
to consolidate their own presence and influence in
Libya.

The sense of fear and concern within Libya regarding
the threat of terrorism is very palpable. In meetings I
had over the past week, Libya's counterparts expressed
grave concern about the danger that terrorism posed to
Libya's security and stability, and about the very limited
capacities of the Libyan State to effectively confront
that challenge. It is crucial to create the right conditions
to address that threat. At the same time, we should be
ready to support Libyan efforts to tackle terrorism and
extremism. We should be careful not to underestimate
the sense of urgency and alarm underpinning that
request for international support on addressing the
threat of terrorism.

Earlier this week, I held a new round of
consultations with Libyan political leaders in Tobruk
and Tripoli. Both sides have since delivered a clear
and resounding message that terrorism will not be
allowed to prevail or hold hostage the dialogue process.
Following the conclusion of a seven-day mourning
period announced by the House of Representatives in
the aftermath of the latest terrorist attack, the House
formally voted to resume participation in the dialogue
talks. Tomorrow, dialogue teams representing the
major political stakeholders will convene in Morocco
to advance discussions with respect to proposals on the
three key agenda items.

The first item relates to the formation of a national
unity Government under whose umbrella Libyans can
adopt a unified approach to address the huge political,
security and economic challenges facing Libya. The
second will address security arrangements to pave
the way for a comprehensive ceasefire, the phased
withdrawal of all armed groups from towns and cities,
measures for weapons and arms control, and adequate
monitoring and implementation mechanisms. The third
is related to the completion of the constitution-drafting
process and the need for clear timelines in that regard.

To galvanize broader support for the ongoing talks,
UNSMIL will next week convene two other dialogue
meetings. The first meeting, in Algeria, will bring
together a range of prominent Libyan political leaders
and activists. The second meeting, in Brussels, will draw
together municipal representatives from across Libya to
further the implementation of the confidence-building
measures previously agreed in Geneva. Later on, we
will convene a meeting of tribal leaders, very probably

in Egypt.

While I am confident that there is sufficient
political will and determination on all sides to reach a
comprehensive political settlement, I cannot overstate
the challenges facing the process. Foremost among
those is the fluid security situation, as the warring
parties continue to engage in reciprocal attacks against
each other in different parts of the country. We have
repeatedly called on all parties, particularly on the
military front, to desist from taking any action that
would risk escalating tensions.

Yesterday's and today's attacks by both sides

on public infrastructure and facilities, including
airports, coming a day after the different parties
recommitted themselves to resume the dialogue talks,
is unacceptable, reckless and totally uncalled for. The
escalation calls into question the commitment of those
responsible behind those latest acts of aggression, and
is a stark reminder that more needs to be done on the
security front. I call on Libya's political leadership to
take all the necessary measures to prevent any further
attacks, and to exercise its authority in line with its legal
and political responsibilities to ensure that all forces
operating under its command comply with the political
commitment it has made with respect to the dialogue.
Moreover, the systematic campaign of misinformation
that recently surfaced in various Libyan media outlets
regarding the dialogue and its outcomes is symptomatic
of the deep mistrust that continues to manifest itself on
the Libyan political landscape.Only a few days ago I
met with a sizeable number of members of the House
of Representatives to discuss the dialogue process and
dissipate doubts regarding its scope and transparency.
In that context, I would like to take this opportunity
to once again reiterate the assurances I have given
publicly and in private to all parties in Libya that this
is a Libyan-Libyan dialogue that is anchored in the
principle of mutual consensus among the parties. The
role of the United Nations has been to facilitate the
talks without any imposition, while maintaining the
utmost respect for Libyan ownership of the process.
In our efforts to ensure transparency of the process,
every participant will be required to consult with its
respective constituency before any final agreement is
formally endorsed.

On behalfofthe Secretary-General, allow me to take
this opportunity to express my thanks and appreciation
to the Council for its unwavering support to the Libyan
political dialogue, as well as to all Member States and
other international partners that have been generous in
extending financial, logistical and other support to the
process.

Within just the span of a few weeks since the
first round of talks convened, on 15 January, Libya's
political leaders have come a long way towards
injecting hope that an end to their country's political
crisis and armed conflict is possible. The sense of
expectation and anticipation on the part of all segments
of the Libyan population is profound. While the onus
remains on Libya's leaders to agree on a road map for
a resumption of the political process and an end to the
conflict, the support of the international community
will be critical to the successful implementation of a
political agreement, should the parties conclude one.

The ability of a Government of national unity
to govern effectively and deliver a notable change
in the lives of ordinary Libyans, however, will be
largely dependent upon our collective ability, as the
international community, to rethink and articulate a
clear strategy for delivering technical assistance. The
limited progress made over the past three years towards
building capacities at all levels in the Libyan State
should serve as a stark warning of the huge challenges
ahead.

The worsening humanitarian situation in the
country, including in Warshafana, Benghazi and
Nafusa, calls for a stronger commitment on the part of
the international community to addressing the needs of
the people who have been victims of this conflict. In
Geneva, representatives ofmunicipal and local councils
agreed on a set of confidence-building measures, and
we must step up our efforts to implement those and start
making a difference in the lives of the Libyan people.
The international community should also move quickly
to present a clearly articulated strategy in support of
the Libyan State and the efforts of the national unity
Government to combat the growing threat of terrorism.
I believe that will be key to allaying the growing
concerns across Libya about what is perceived as the
real and imminent danger that extremist groups such as
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant pose to Libya's
overall security and stability.

The overall situation on the ground is deteriorating
rapidly, and Libya can no longer afford to allow the
political crisis and armed conflict that have gripped the
country for much of the past year to continue to fester.
Unless Libya's leaders act quickly and decisively, the
risks to their country's national unity and territorial
integrity are real and imminent. As difficult as the past
few years may have been for their country, the Libyan
people have not given up on their hopes and aspirations
for a modern Libyan democratic State based on the rule
oflaw and respect for human rights. Tomorrow's meeting
in Morocco is an important opportunity to honour the
sacrifices that they have made in their quest for a life
of dignity and respect and a country that safeguards
the interests of future generations. Difficult decisions
and compromises will be needed. But Libya's leaders
must be assured that as they make those decisions, the
United Nations and the international community will
be their partners in the difficult journey ahead.

