Ms. Bensouda: I welcome this opportunity to
engage with the Security Council once again as I
present my seventeenth report on the situation in Libya.
Before I do so, allow me to congratulate Indonesia on
assuming the presidency of the Council for the month
of May and thank it for presiding over this meeting.

As I address the Council today, to my great regret,
the fighting in Libya continues unabated. Over the
past six months, violence escalated and armed clashes
occurred in several areas of Libya, including Derna in
the east, Murzuq in the south, and Tripoli in the west.
As always, my Office continues to closely monitor the
ongoing conflict, while gathering information from
diverse sources and assessing whether crimes within
the jurisdiction of the International Criminal Court
may have been committed.

My Office is of course paying close attention
to the ongoing armed conflict in and around Tripoli
since early April this year. Reports indicate that the
fighting has already cost 432 lives, including at least
23 civilians. More than 50,000 people have reportedly
been internally displaced by the hostilities, while others
remain trapped in conflict-affected areas. In addition,
there are serious concerns for the safety of migrants
and refugees who are detained in centres near areas
of conflict.

On 16 April, I issued a statement calling on all
parties to the armed conflict to fully respect the rules
of international humanitarian law. I emphasized that all
parties to the armed conflict must take all necessary
measures to protect civilians and civilian infrastructure,
including schools, hospitals and detention centres.
In particular, I urged commanders, both military
and civilian, to ensure that their subordinates do not
commit Rome Statute crimes. The law on this is clear.
Where a commander knew or should have known that
his or her subordinates were committing or about to
commit crimes and failed to take all necessary and
reasonable measures within his or her power to prevent
or repress such crimes, the commander may be held
criminally responsible.

I take this opportunity once again to make my
message clear to all those involved in the fighting
in Libya. My Office stands ready to investigate and,
where appropriate, to prosecute any persons party to the
ongoing armed conflict should they engage in conduct
constituting a crime within the jurisdiction of the
International Criminal Court (ICC). The suffering of
the Libyan people must stop. I urge the Council and all
States Members of the United Nations to ensure that a
consistent and unambiguous message is conveyed to all
warring factions in Libya that the rules of international
humanitarian law must be fully respected and that
perpetrators of atrocity crimes will be held individually
and criminally responsible.

I would now like to update the Council in relation
to the case oer. SaifAl-Islam Al-Qadhafi. As Council
members are aware, in June 2018 Mr. Al-Qadhafi filed
a challenge to the admissibility of his case before the
ICC. Mr. Al-Qadhafi contended that his case was
inadmissible because he had already been tried in Libya
for the same conduct alleged in the case before the ICC.
Mr. Al-Qadhafi lost that challenge. On 5 April, the
majority of Pre-Trial Chamber I judges rejected this
admissibility challenge, deciding that Mr. Al-Qadhafi's
case remains admissible before the ICC. Earlier today,
a separate, concurring opinion was issued by Judge
Perrin de Brichambaut of the same Chamber, in which
he concurred with the majority decision on three main
points: first, that Mr. Al-Qadhafi has standing to lodge
the admissibility challenge; secondly, in rejecting
the admissibility challenge; and thirdly, that the case
against Mr. Al-Qadhafi is admissible.

In reaching its decision, the Chamber found that
Mr. Al-Qadhafi had not been tried in Libya within the
meaning of the relevant articles of the Rome Statute.
According to Libyan national law, since Mr. Al-Qadhafi
was convicted by the Tripoli Court of Assize in
absentia, once he is arrested his trial should start anew.
Thus, no final judgment on the merits had been issued
in the domestic proceedings against Mr. Al-Qadhafi. In
addition, the judgment passed against Mr. Al-Qadhafi
had not acquired a res judicata effect, which was
required in order to satisfy the applicable articles of the
Rome Statute.

Furthermore, the Chamber found that Mr. Al-Qadhafi
had not received amnesty in Libya. The Chamber
observed that granting amnesties and pardons for
serious acts such as murder constituting crimes
against humanity is incompatible with internationally
recognized human rights. It stated that amnesties and
pardons intervene with States' positive obligations to
investigate, prosecute and punish perpetrators of core
crimes and deny victims the right to truth, access to
justice, and to request reparations where appropriate.
These are important findings in relation to the fight
against impunity for international crimes and ones that
align with previous findings concerning amnesties and
pardons by several regional and international courts
and tribunals around the world. Mr. Al-Qadhafi has
filed an appeal against the Chamber's decision on the
admissibility challenge.

Irrespective of the current admissibility proceedings,
Libya remains under an obligation to arrest and
surrender Mr. Al-Qadhafi to the ICC. Unfortunately,
Mr. Al-Qadhafi's case is not the only one related to
Libya that remains at an impasse. Arrest warrants
are also outstanding in relation to all other suspects
in the Libya situation with respect to Mr. Al-Tuhamy
Mohamed Khaled and Mr. Mahmoud Mustafa Busayf
Al-Werfalli.

Ultimately, the execution of these arrest warrants
depends on the cooperation of States. Regrettably,
securing State cooperation in the arrest and surrender
of suspects remains one of the greatest challenges
faced by the ICC. The Court's performance cannot be
divorced from this reality. The Court's success largely
depends on the effective and concrete cooperation
of States.

Failure to arrest and surrender persons against
whom warrants of arrest have been issued can result
in real harm. A stark illustration of that can be found
in the case of Mr. Al-Werfalli. Despite the ICC warrant
of arrest against him for the war crime of murder in
relation to 33 people, Mr. Al-Werfalli remains at liberty
and allegedly murdered another 10 victims just five
months after the ICC arrest warrant was issued. Today,
two warrants for his arrest remain outstanding. The
fact that Mr. Al-Werfalli is in Libya is well known. He
is not detained and there is no evidence that he has been
genuinely prosecuted in Libya by his superiors in the
Libyan National Army.

Mr. Al-Tuhamy, former head of the Libyan Internal
Security Agency, who is accused of crimes relating to
the unlawful imprisonment, persecution and torture
of perceived political opponents of the Muammar
Al-Qadhafi regime, has been wanted since 2013.

Notwithstanding the grave crimes alleged against
them, all three suspects in the Libya situation remain at
large. The failure to arrest those suspects jeopardizes
the Office's ongoing investigations. It sends a message
to victims that alleged perpetrators can evade justice
and continue to commit crimes with impunity. It deters
witnesses from coming forward and putting their
confidence in the ICC, and places them in unnecessary
danger. In the long run, that lack of accountability
undermines respect for the rule of law and impedes
progress towards stability and security in Libya.

The status quo is not sustainable. Impunity for
atrocity crimes is hardly conducive to bringing peace
and stability to that war-torn country. I take this
opportunity to renew my call for State cooperation
with the arrest and transfer of ICC suspects, and ask
the Council to lend its support by taking a clear and
vocal position in support.

My Office also continues to follow the situation
relating to internally displaced persons in Libya. Tens
of thousands of persons reportedly remain internally
displaced. Internally displaced persons, especially
women and children, are among the most vulnerable
populations. They suffer not only significant social
and economic impacts, but are also exposed to acts
of violence.

Migrants also represent a highly vulnerable
population in Libya. Reports of serious and widespread
crimes being committed against migrants have not
diminished over the past six-month period. My team
continues to gather evidence in relation to those alleged
crimes through both investigative and cooperation
strategies. In doing so, we pay particular attention to
the commission of sexual and gender-based crimes.

The body of evidence collected by my Office
indicates that crimes including torture, unlawful
imprisonment, rape and enslavement are committed
against migrants throughout their journeys and in both
official and unofficial detention centres. The evidence
implicates individuals, militias and State actors in the
migrant smuggling and trafficking business in many
parts of Libya, including Misrata, Zawiya, Tripoli and
Bani Walid.

On the basis of the evidence collected to date, my
team continues to assess the feasibility ofbringing cases
before the ICC in relation to crimes against migrants.
At the same time, my Office is cooperating with a
number of States and organizations to support national
investigations and prosecutions that relate to human
smuggling and trafficking through Libya. This strategy
is aimed at closing the impunity gap by assisting
national systems in providing accountability for crimes
that may not fall within ICC jurisdiction. Feedback
from our partners shows that that strategy is already
proving effective and producing concrete results.

Before I conclude, I would like to express my
appreciation for the cooperation that my Office
receives from many States, including Libya, Tunisia,
the Netherlands, Italy and the United Kingdom. We
also receive valuable assistance from organizations,
such as the United Nations Support Mission in Libya
and INTERPOL. The practical support of those States
and organizations for the work of the ICC deserves
recognition. I would like to acknowledge the courage
of many Libyans who have cooperated with my Office
since 2011 to the present day. My team has spoken to
people who have endured unspeakable suffering and
lost loved ones in terrible circumstances. We are aware
that, given the prevailing climate of impunity in Libya,
there are people who see the ICC as their only hope
for holding alleged perpetrators of atrocity crimes
to account.

We also know that many people, understandably,
would like to see more results from the ICC sooner
rather than later. The types of investigations undertaken
by my Office are complex and often lengthy. However, I
assure the Council and the Libyan people that the Libya
situation remains a priority for my Office. My team
takes most seriously its responsibility to investigate
and prosecute ICC crimes in Libya and is working very
hard to advance its existing cases and also to bring
new ones.

Ultimately, my Office's progress in the Libya
situation is frustrated and confidence in the ICC is
undermined when, year after year, warrants of arrest
remain unexecuted. The credibility of the Council will
also be tarnished if it fails to take concrete measures
to secure the arrest and surrender of suspects. When
suspects are arrested and surrendered to the ICC, the
allegations against them can be tested in a fair and public
hearing. That gives the victims of their alleged crimes
the opportunity to participate in the proceedings, be
heard and see justice done.

Therefore, it is imperative that all of the outstanding
warrants of arrest in the Libya situation be executed. The
achievement of that goal requires the full cooperation
of members of the Council and all concerned States.
That includes States parties and non-States parties
alike, including Libya itself. Together, we can ensure
the effective implementation of resolution 1970 (2011)
and adequately respond to the hopes and expectations
that it generated for the Libyan people. The peace and
stability that the Libyan people have desired for so
long is closely intertwined with the ICC's ability to
effectively execute its mandate in the Libya situation.
In a country devastated by war and conflict, with
great human suffering, it is past time for the protective
embrace of the law to feel real and tangible to Libyans.

Acting within our respective mandates, we share a
joint burden and great responsibility in that regard for
the sake of all Libyans and Libya. We must not fail to
deliver on that joint duty.

