Mr. Prosor (Israel): First of all, allow me to
take this opportunity to congratulate Nigeria on its
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month.

Next week, Israel will celebrate Yom Ha'atzmaut,
its Independence Day, which commemorates the Jewish
people's return to the land of Israel after thousands of
years in exile. In the land ofIsrael, every hill and valley,
every stream and ravine is steeped in history. In Hebron,
one can visit the spot where Abraham purchased a burial
plot for his wife, Sarah. In Jerusalem, one can visit the
place where King David established his kingdom and
where King Solomon built the Jewish temple.

For thousands of years, the Jewish people
maintained a constant presence in the land of Israel,
watching empires rise and fall and conquerors come
and go, until 1948 when the modern State of Israel
was reborn. Since then, we have taken a desolate
land and made it flourish; we took a language on the
verge of extinction and brought it back to life; and we
took an ancient people and gave them refuge from the
persecutions that plagued them across the centuries and
across the globe.

The State of Israel is proof that the strength of a
nation can be measured by the freedom of its citizens.
From the Red Sea to the Caspian Sea, Israel is the only
democracy providing its citizens the right to worship
freely, the right to vote in elections, and the right to
read from an uncensored media. It is also the only
nation that defends the rule of law and upholds rights
of minorities. Israel does not preach these rights; we
practice them. Where else in the Middle East can a
member of a minority group serve as a Supreme Court
justice? In Israel, Salim Joubran, a Christian Arab
Israeli, has done so for more than a decade. I am proud
to represent an ancient people in its modern homeland, a
people whose numbers are few but whose contributions
are immeasurable. A people who confront terror and
pray for peace.

When I think about negotiations between Israel and
the Palestinians, there is a predictable pattern on the part
of the Palestinians - demand, delay and desert. Before
taking a single step towards the negotiation table, the
Palestinian leadership demands that Israel submit to
substantial concessions. Once Israel agrees, they drag
their feet and evoke every delay tactic in the book. Then,
as the deadline approaches and courageous leadership
decisions are required, Abbas deserts the talks. He
did so in 2008. After the Israeli Prime Minister had
offered an unprecedented and far-reaching peace deal,
the Palestinians simply walked away. He did it again in
2009. Prime Minister Netanyahu courageously extended
an olive branch to the Palestinians in his historic Bar-
Ilan speech, agreeing to a 10-month settlement freeze.
The Palestinians stalled and did not reciprocate. In
February 2012 - surprise, surprise -just as we were
on the verge of a breakthrough, Abbas abandoned the
talks and flew to Doha to sign a unity deal with Hamas,
an internationally recognized terrorist organization. A
few months later, the Palestinian leadership went to the
United Nations seeking to bypass direct negotiations.

While Israel makes tangible concessions to
advance peace, the Palestinian leadership has let every
window of opportunity fly out of the window. This
goes to the very heart of the problem. The Palestinians
pledge dialogue while fomenting hatred. They promise
tolerance while celebrating terrorists. And they make
commitments almost as quickly as they break them. The
Palestinian leadership recently broke a commitment
by applying to join 15 international treaties and
conventions. It seems to me that they have forgotten that
they also have to abide by those treaties and address the
rampant persecution of women, children and minorities
in Palestinian society.

Winston Churchill is famously quoted as saying
"The farther backward you look, the farther forward
you can see". Only those who can look back and see the
patterns in history can prevent the same mistakes from
occurring over and over again. Nine months ago, Israel
and the Palestinians returned to the negotiation table
and set a deadline of 29 April - today - for reaching
an agreement. True to form, the Palestinians have
performed their distinctive two-faced two-step. When
Israel tries to tango with Abbas, we find ourselves
abandoned on the dance floor as Abbas waltzes offwith
Hamas.

The Palestinians have made a career out of
squeezing more and more compromises out of Israel
without granting a single tangible compromise of their
own. In the latest round of peace negotiations, Israel
agreed to do what no other Government in the world
would even consider, releasing coldblooded murderers.
Imagine the pain felt by Israelis every time they watched
those terrorists receive a hero's welcome from President
Abbas. If these are the values that the Palestinians are
embracing, no wonder they are running into the arms
of Hamas.

All those in the international community who
are here today to commend and support the unity
Government agreement are in fact lending legitimacy
to terror attacks against Israel. Hamas makes no secret
of its intentions. Its Charter calls for the destruction
of Israel. Article 7 says, "The Day of Judgement will
not come until Muslims fight the Jews and kill them".
Last week, we received a painful reminder of Hamas's
brutality. Baruch Mizrahi, a 47-year-old Israeli father
of five was driving with his family when the car
was attacked by Palestinian terrorists. Baruch was
murdered and his wife and nine year-old son wounded.
Hamas leader Haniyeh praised the attack, saying that
the killing brought back life to the path of resistance,
and he commended the heroes of Hebron.

The Palestinian Authority's unity with Hamas
will only bring greater impunity for the terrorists who
fire rockets into our cities. In 2006, when Hamas took
control of Gaza, the international community devised
the Quartet principles in order to prevent international
funding from flowing to terrorist organizations. The
conditions the Quartet set were that Hamas must
renounce violence, recognize Israel and abide by prior
agreements. Some have even rushed to bless the Hamas
and Fatah union faster than a Las Vegas marriage clerk.
I have yet to hear Hamas agree to any of the Quartet's
conditions. Instead of choosing peace with Israel,
Abbas has chosen peace with Hamas. Israel wants to
negotiate with a single legitimate entity representing
the Palestinian people, but it will not negotiate with a
Palestinian Government backed by Hamas. If Hamas is
in the back office, Israel will not be at the negotiating
table. Anyone who wonders why Israel will not negotiate
with Hamas might as well be wondering why nobody
shows up to dinner parties thrown by Hannibal Lecter.

As we speak, millions ofdollars are being channeled
to the Palestinian Authority. Now that the Palestinians
have signed a unity agreement, that funding will be at
the disposal of Hamas, an internationally recognized
terrorist organization. I wonder how taxpayers in
London, Luxembourg and Paris will feel knowing that
they will enable Hamas to launch more rockets into
Israel, kidnap more Israelis and send more suicide
bombers into our cafe's. Not a day goes by when Hamas
does not seek Israel's destruction. Last month, the Israel
Defense Forces intercepted a cargo ship sent by Iran,
carrying advanced weaponry destined for the Hamas-
controlled Gaza Strip. The weapons included rockets,
ammunition and missiles capable of striking the very
heart of Israel.

The international community is quick to condemn
Israel, but never says a word when Israelis are the
victims of unrelenting attacks. How many times has the
international community criticized Israel for restricting
the entry of certain dual-use goods into Gaza? You do
not have to be Christopher Columbus to discover that
a second country borders Gaza, yet it is never, ever
mentioned by the Security Council. And how many
times has the Council criticized Israel for restricting the
entry of construction materials? And yet when Israel
does allow cement into Gaza, instead of building the
Palestinian people up, Hamas is committed to tearing
them down. They could be using the cement to build
schools, homes and hospitals, but instead they build
terror tunnels to smuggle weapons and attack Israel.
If the international community is truly committed to
advancing peace, it must stop pointing fingers at Israel
and demonstrate real resolve. The Palestinians must be
held accountable for their actions. Targeting civilians
must be unacceptable, and acts of terror should be
condemned publicly and unequivocally.

"No matter how big the lie, repeat it often enough
and the masses will regard it as the truth", is a remark
that has been attributed to President John F. Kennedy.
The Palestinians and the Arab States send letter after
letter and lodge complaint after complaint filled with
lies, misinformation and half-truths. Most recently,
they launched a campaign accusing Israel of impeding
freedom of worship and denying access to religious
sites. Certain parties have even criticized remarks made
in our Parliament. I know that freedom of expression is
a foreign concept to most regimes in the Middle East.
One is about as likely to hear a Saudi disagree with his
Government as to see a Saudi woman behind the wheel
of a race car in the next Indianapolis 500 - or any car,
for that matter.

Israel is the only nation in the Middle East that
grants full religious rights to people of all faiths.
After reuniting Jerusalem in 1967, Israel abolished
discriminatory laws and introduced religious freedoms
that allow millions of Muslims and Christians to visit
and pray at their holy sites. Every year, millions of
people visit Jerusalem to celebrate their holy days. The
vast crowds pose considerable public safety challenges,
but Israel is committed to ensuring that Jerusalem is an
open city for all faiths and one that celebrates religious
tolerance and diversity.

This is in stark contrast to the Palestinians' treatment
of minority faiths. Since the Hamas takeover of Gaza in
2007, more than half the Christian community has fled.
They face a grim choice: convert to Islam or face the
sword. In Bethlehem, which has been under Palestinian
Authority control since 1995, the Christian population
has fallen dramatically. Gunmen have terrorized the
Christian community and looted and desecrated the
Church of the Nativity, one of Christianity's holiest
sites.

One might think that the United Nations would
make every effort to support Israel's protection of
religious freedoms. Instead of taking constructive
actions to help mitigate the sensitive situation, Robert
Serry, the United Nations Special Coordinator for the
Middle East, took destructive steps that aggravated
tensions on the ground. It is unfortunate that a United
Nations official abused his position and the United
Nations platform to express his personal opinions. Both
Mr. Serry and the Arab nations need reminding that
core issues, including Jerusalem, must be dealt with at
the negotiating table and not by parties tabling false
accusations.

In its 65-year history, Israel has not experienced
a single day in which it was not confronting terrorist
groups - Hamas in the south and Hizbullah in the
north. This month alone, authorities in Thailand foiled
a plan by Hizbullah agents to attack Israeli tourists and
Hizbullah leader Hassan Nasrallah took responsibility
for planting a roadside bomb in northern Israel.
His admission offers concrete proof that Hizbullah
is operating south of the Litani river, in violation of
resolution 1701 (2006).

Both Hamas and Hizbullah receive funding and
support from the world's primary sponsor of terrorism
Iran. A close look at Iranian foreign policy reveals that
their strategy is to defy - "D, E, F, Y": deceive, evade,
falsify and yield absolutely nothing. Iran has violated
numerous resolutions aimed at curbing its nuclear
programme and it continues to evade International
Atomic Energy Agency inspections. Iran's campaign
to convince the world that its nuclear programme is
peaceful should have earned the regime at least an
honorary mention at the Oscars for best acting and best
adapted screenplay from a work of fiction.

Clearly the production is working. At a time when
sanctions should be increased they are being eased.
Make no mistake, ifyou leave Iran as a threshold nuclear
Power, you will be leaving the world on the threshold
of the abyss. Unravelling the sanctions regime against
Iran might prevent Iran from having a nuclear weapon
today, but it would virtually ensure that Iran has a
nuclear weapon tomorrow. That must not be allowed
to happen. Iran's nuclear weapons capability and long-
range missile capability should be fully dismantled.

None of this can disguise the fact that Iran is one
of the world's worst human rights abusers. The regime
is holding 1,000 people, including 35 journalists, as
so-called political prisoners. Last year, Iran executed
624 people - that is an average of two executions per
day. Among these so-called criminals were 28 women,
three children and a poet named Hashem Shaabani.
Shaabani's so-called crime was criticizing the regime's
treatment of minorities. The regime declared him a an
"enemy of God" and hanged him. This offers further
proof that the so-called justice system in Iran is
nothing short of an injustice. The messages of hate and
intolerance come straight from the top. Iran's Supreme
Leader of Holocaust denial, Ayatollah Khamenei, is
the head of the outlaw regime and continues to make
outlandish claims.

Yesterday Israel marked Holocaust Remembrance
Day. We recall how nations dismissed the murderous
Nazi rhetoric and downplayed the seriousness of the
danger. Ultimately, the Second World War claimed
the lives of 60 million people, including six millions
Jews. Today, in the face of Iran's nuclear ambitions,
what has the world really learned? The facts are clear
and the threat is very real. Iran is fanning the flames
of conflict across the Middle East. Rouhani and Assad
are brothers in bloodshed directing the world's worst
humanitarian crisis. Not satisfied at having murdered
the Syrian people with chemical weapons, snipers and
barrel bombs, they are now intentionally besieging
entire neighbourhoods and using starvation as a tool
of war.

The State of Israel is appalled by the violence. In
the face of the horrendous suffering, we are speaking
out against Al-Assad's ruthlessness. And in the face of
the unspeakable cruelty, we are acting compassionately
and providing medical treatment to hundreds of
Syrians. The Syrian people have seen first-hand that
Israel values human life above all else. This is a rare
quality in the Middle East. Repressive Arab regimes
have kept their people poor and uneducated. They have
brutally and mercilessly suppressed their rights. And
they have poisoned their people's minds with hatred.

Blaming Israel will not solve the problems
plaguing the Middle East. It will not stop Al-Assad
from dropping barrel bombs or create jobs for the
hungry masses in Egypt or empower women in Saudi
Arabia. The Palestinians must be held accountable for
their actions. Sanctions against Iran must extract a real
price. And dictators should not be allowed to target and
torture civilians with impunity.

Someday, I hope that we will read about attacks
on the Jewish people in history books rather than
newspapers. Someday, I hope that Israel will be
accepted as the nation-State of the Jewish people by
every Member of this Organization. And someday,
I hope that Israeli children will grow up free from
war. But that day has not yet come. As we prepare to
celebrate Israel's sixty-sixth anniversary as a free and
independent State, I wish to reaffirm the commitment
made in our Declaration of Independence:

"We offer peace and unity to all the
neighbouring States and their peoples, and invite
them to cooperate with the independent Jewish
nation for the common good of all."

