Ms. Hary: I thank the Council for the invitation to
be here today.

I was born in Haifa, in northern Israel, and became
a United States citizen at the age of five. My parents had
moved to Los Angeles in pursuit of a better life. Their
parents before them had fled to Israel to escape conflict
and poverty and, like most of us in this Chamber, I
believe, I took it for granted that the ability to travel
shaped every aspect of my life. I moved back to Israel
in June 2007, just days before Hamas took power in
Gaza and Israel's subsequent imposition of a near total
lockdown on the Strip. Over the past 12 years, I have
seen the devastating impact ofIsrael's closure policy on
Gaza but also on Israel. Three major military operations
and several smaller operations - like the one that we
saw last week - have taken the lives of thousands of
people. I do not believe that we are better off or safer
for it in Israel.

Gisha means "access" or "approach" in Hebrew. We
are the only Israeli human rights organization focusing
on the situation in Gaza and on how reality there is
shaped by our Government's actions. The permanent
discourse about Gaza, especially in Israel but also at
the United Nations, revolves around terror or crisis.
We are lucky at Gisha to see nuance, entrepreneurship,
resilience and potential through our broad caseload
and our range of contacts. In my comments here today,
I hope to share a sober analysis with the Council of
where we are, but I also hope to convey my optimism
about what the future could hold. There is much that can
be done to meaningfully alter course, given a broader
understanding ofwhat is at stake and also political will.

Today, Israel continues to exercise control over
many aspects of daily life in Gaza. The Rafah crossing,
which connects Gaza to Egypt, is vital. However, Israel
controls all access to the West Bank, the movement
of commercial and humanitarian goods and Gaza's
sea space, airspace, access to farmland, civilian
infrastructure and the Palestinian population registry.
In 2007, Israel further reduced access to a point of
closure. Entry of civilian goods was restricted, all exit
of goods was blocked and travel of people was allowed
only in what Israel called "exceptional humanitarian
cases". Far beyond just protecting legitimate security
concerns, Israel defined its approach as economic
warfare and also the separation policy. It was an effort
to apply pressure and simultaneously reinforce Gaza's
isolation from the West Bank, primarily to achieve
political goals.

Certain practices have changed, but overall the
picture remains the same. Israel believes that it can
manage the humanitarian situation in Gaza and it has
an interest in maintaining the physical and political
fragmentation of Palestinians, which allows it to
pursue annexation in the West Bank. The changes that
have been made to the closure, while important, have
not been significant enough to alleviate humanitarian
concerns, let alone address wider needs. Unemployment
in the Strip remains among the highest in the world.
Electricity is available just half of the day and families
struggle to secure clean water. Hopelessness and despair
have increased, particularly among young people, who
account for 70 per cent of the population - that is,
1.4 million of the 2 million residents of the Strip. They
see no future and feel abandoned by regional leaders
and by the international community.

Access is repeatedly cited by the World Bank and
by Israeli security officials as a catalyst for well-being
and stability, and yet as the situation in Gaza continues
to deteriorate, counterintuitively, obstacles are placed
on people trying to improve their conditions and live
their lives peacefully. To give a few examples, last year
Gisha invited 24 people from Gaza to a meeting of
Israeli, Palestinian and foreign stakeholders about the
situation in the Strip. Only four 4 all men - received
permits, while the State claimed that "women played
too minor of a role in the economy" to be relevant to
discussions about improving economic activity. If
you are a woman in Gaza, you are less likely to meet
Israel's criteria for work-related travel. Our own field
coordinator was also blocked - he and other human
rights defenders do not meet the criteria for travel. We
recently represented a company in Gaza wishing to sell
its cookies in the West Bank, but an ongoing ban on the
exit of food products continues to undermine the once
thriving food sector in the Strip.

I am honoured to be here today to share the stories
of these courageous women and men who joined us in
challenging movement restrictions. It actually gives me
no joy to expose the senselessness and even the cruelty
of decisions made daily, ostensibly in my name. In 2018,
Gisha was contacted by a man in Gaza whose father in
the West Bank had suffered a debilitating stroke. His
urgent application for a permit went unanswered for
two months until the army responded that the father
was "not sick enough to justify a visit". Two petitions
to the District Court and an appeal to the High Court
were unsuccessful. Security had nothing to do with it.
These stories are not just the unfortunate by-product
of conflict; they are an expression of Israel's intent to
maintain control of the West Bank while locking out
Palestinians in Gaza.

I am certain that many Council members will want
to make statements today reaffirming the illegality
of the settlements and citing that they are a primary
obstacle to peace. I encourage them to note that the
isolation of Gaza is also a primary obstacle, aggravated
certainly by Palestinian division but also driven by
deliberate choices on the part of Israel. In March this
year, in defending his decision to allow funds from
Qatar to enter the Strip, Prime Minister Benjamin
Netanyahu was cited as saying that whoever is against
a Palestinian State should be for transferring the funds
to Gaza, because maintaining a separation between
the Palestinian Authority in the West Bank and Hamas
helps prevent the establishment of a Palestinian
State. In the absence of self-determination, millions
of Palestinians cannot vote for the Government with
so much power over their lives and different legal
standards are applied to people literally living side by
side. The situation cannot be anything other than cause
for further instability not only in the region, but also
in some of the capitals of Council member States. The
erosion of norms entailed in maintaining the occupation
undermines the universal values of security and human
rights on which this very institution was founded.

So, what can be done? First, access - rather than
allowing the minimum access necessary to prevent
further crises, we believe that the international
community should insist that Israel allow the maximum
access possible, subject only to necessary and
reasonable security procedures. Since 2014, we have
seen the rate of exit of goods from Gaza increase, but
it remains a fraction of what it could be. Restrictions
could be lifted on the types of goods that can exit and to
which destinations. Also vital for industry, construction
and civilian infrastructure is the entry of building and
other raw materials, which remain heavily restricted by
Israel's broad definition Organizationf what constitutes
dual-use items.

When it comes to the movement of people, Israel
must remove obstacles on people travelling to reunite
with family and to reach jobs and other professional
opportunities, especially women, who, as I noted, are
disproportionately denied access. Israel must improve
access to medical care and also access for companions
of patients, including parents, who are routinely denied
permits to accompany their children to treatment.
Israel must allow safe and reliable access to Gaza's
sea and farmland. Egypt has operated the Rafah
crossing consistently since May 2018, allowing many
to travel abroad. It should be encouraged to continue
and expand operations.

The Palestinian authorities should refrain from
leveraging the critical services needed by the civilian
population in their factional dispute, including
electricity supply and health care. I also believe that
the two Israeli civilians allegedly held in Gaza should
be released immediately as a humanitarian imperative.

The humanitarian and economic situation in Gaza is
not an act of nature. It is the result of deliberate choices
made by policymakers - Israeli but also Palestinian and
regional actors, as well as the international community,
which has helped keep the people's heads above water
with the critical aid that it provides but must leverage
its influence for more sustainable change.

Given recent statements by Israeli officials and their
supporters and the current American Administration, I
do not think that we can delude ourselves that a peace
process isjust around the corner. In the absence ofpeace
and also to catalyse it, the international community
must confront the de facto annexation of the West
Bank together with the isolation of Gaza, taking action
to reverse these trends by abiding by its obligation to
protect civilians.

It should also provide support to civil society. A
vibrant community of civil-society organizations
operates in both Israel and Palestine, but we and our
allies are targeted for our work. We are outraged at
the expected deportation of our Human Rights Watch
colleague Omar Shakir, but as much as these actions
are cause for concern, I believe that they are also an
indication of our growing influence.

Many people in Israel may see my appearance
here today as an act of disloyalty, because we have
been taught that it is a zero-sum game, that it is us or
them. In fact, it is just the opposite: the well-being of
Israelis and Palestinians is interlinked, and we should
address Palestinian security just as much as we do
Israeli security.

To conclude, the international community has a
claim, a moral responsibility and a vested interest to
pursue peace and, with it, accountability for rights
violations. If nothing else, the desire of some to
undermine the foundations on which this institution,
the United Nations, rests should be a loud wake-up call
and should unite the international community in action.
Young people in Israel and in Palestine will be grateful
for it.

