Mr. Adnan: At the outset, the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA) welcomes the opportunity to
address the Council at this important meeting.

The IAEA's mission is Atoms for Peace and
Development, and nuclear security at the IAEA
addressed activities by non-State actors. The IAEA
contributes to global efforts to achieve effective
nuclear security in States by establishing current,
comprehensive and complete global nuclear security
guidance. It supports implementation of that guidance
through peer reviews and advisory services, and assists
in the form of capacity-building, including education
and training. It leads and enhances international
cooperation in nuclear security, in response to
IAEA policy-making organ's directions. The IAEA
further facilitates initiatives in nuclear security and
in organizing information exchange meetings with
other organizations. It strengthens the international
cooperation and coordination of assistance in a way that
underpins the use of nuclear energy and applications.
It also assists in adherence to, and the implementation
of, nuclear security related international instruments.
A key nuclear security instrument is the Amendment
to the Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear
Material (CPPNM), which finally entered into force in
May, 11 years after it was adopted. In that regard, all
countries are encouraged to adhere to the Convention
and its Amendment.

Reports to the IAEA's Incident and Trafficking
Database indicate continued reports ofnuclear material,
such as highly enriched uranium and other radioactive
material, including sealed sources out of regulatory
control - most notably lost or stolen. Such incidents
continue to occur and States must remain vigilant.
The fact that criminals have obtained high-enriched
uranium, albeit far less than the amount required to
make a nuclear weapon, indicates that there is interest
in such material. Additionally, the potential for missing
radioactive sources being used in a radiation dispersal
device cannot be ruled out.

In order to specifically address those issues, the
IAEA, in consultation with States, has developed a top
tier nuclear security fundamentals document containing
the objective and essential elements of a State's nuclear
security regime. That and three corresponding guidance
documents provide recommended requirements for the
physical protection of nuclear material and facilities,
physical protection of other radioactive material and
associated facilities, and nuclear and other radioactive
material out of regulatory control. In addition to those
recommended requirements, the IAEA will continue
to develop many implementing guides to support
Member States.

Last week, the IAEA held the International
Conference on Nuclear Security, where there were
extensive discussions that are relevant to today's
debate. It brought together some 2,000 participants,
including more than 45 ministers from over 130 Member
States. The Ministerial Declaration that was adopted
welcomed the positive impact of the IAEA's increasing
nuclear security efforts, inter alia, highlighting the
collective commitment to improve nuclear security at
the national, regional and global levels; being vigilant
about the threats, having concrete measures to protect
against malicious acts involving nuclear or radioactive
material; and, being cognizant of the need to support
the central role of the IAEA.

Each State carries full responsibility for nuclear
security within its borders. However, nuclear security in
a State may also depend on the effectiveness of the nuclear
security regime in other States. Therefore, continued
collective vigilance is essential as threats - including
insider threats and cybersecurity - evolve. Upon
request by States and subject to available resources,
the IAEA provides practical nuclear security assistance
by identifying national priorities based on threat
assessments and a gradual approach to implementation.

Nuclear security assistance is also provided through
mutually agreed individual national Integrated Nuclear
Security Support Plans (INSSPs). Planned activities
have to take account of technological developments
to make sure that they represent the state-of-the-art
response. The assistance provided through those plans
is approved by the IAEA policy-making organs. The
current plan runs from 2014 - 2017. Under the plan, we
draw up guidance to assist States to meet their respective
international obligations, which includes the CPPNM
and its Amendment, resolution 1540 (2004) and others.
Next year, a new nuclear security plan 2018 -2021 will
be developed and considered by the IAEA's policy-
making organs for approval. The recommendations of

the recent International Conference on Nuclear Security
will contribute to that new plan.
I would like to end by making a few points about
cooperation with resolution 1540 (2004). We encourage
States to share their INSSP with the cerp 1540 (2004) as
we believe that doing so helps the State to demonstrate
how it is meeting the obligations relating to nuclear
material, as set out in the resolution, and to identify
any assistance that it is receiving or may require. We
invite 1540 experts to attend our information exchange
meetings and, with the agreement of our Member
States,our regional INSSP meetings so those experts
can discuss and promote the resolution. We provide
those experts with the information that we have already
provided or are planning to provide a State that has
approached the Committee for assistance. In doing
so, we reduce duplication and unnecessary effort. We
look forward to continuing that close relationship in the
years ahead.

