Ms. Chan: I am sorry that I cannot participate at
this meeting in person.

I deeply appreciate this opportunity to brief the
Council, with full respect for the many heavy burdens
on its members' shoulders. The Council is looking at
new challenges to peace and security and at ways to
prevent conflict. I do not intend to make the Council's
burden heavier by suggesting a long list of health
problems that should be placed under the Council's
watch.

Many health problems addressed by the World
Health Organization (WHO) cause deep human misery;
several clearly deepen poverty. But most do not
directly threaten peace and security, and rarely
contribute to conflict. I shall therefore concentrate on a
few recent health trends that worry me personally the
most. These trends are part of what is happening in the
world at large, where health nearly everywhere is being
shaped by the same powerful, almost universal,
forces - such as ageing populations, the movement of
people within and between countries, rapid
urbanization and the globalization of unhealthy
lifestyles, including substance abuse, and, of course,
climate change.
Why are they new? They are new because they
arise from this century's unprecedented interdependence

and connectivity. The affairs and fates of nations are
intertwined as never before. Crises are increasingly
broadening their impact. They are highly contagious
and profoundly unfair, frequently damaging countries
that had nothing to do with the causes.

The world is becoming dangerously out of
balance. That worries me. Annual Government
expenditures on health range from as little $1 per
person to nearly $7,000 per person. The difference in
life expectancy between the richest and the poorest
countries now exceeds 40 years.

The rising costs of health care worry me, as there
are an estimated 2.7 billion people living in countries
with no safety net to cover medical costs. For a family
living on the fringes, selling the main household asset,
such as a cow, to pay for health care means ruin. WHO
estimates that 100 million people are driven below the
poverty line each year because of catastrophic medical
bills.

Infectious diseases worry me, especially new
diseases with pandemic potential. In this year alone,
WHO has investigated nearly 400 rumours of acute
threats to health, mostly from infectious diseases. Of
those, only 34 were false alarms, such as rumours of
small pox or anthrax cases. Seventy-six were judged to
be of low risk to international health. But 230 were
major events, such as Ebola outbreaks, multiple
outbreaks that threaten to destabilize flooded Pakistan,
and 54 cases and 29 deaths from the highly infectious
bird flu.

Conflicts worry me, as they are the perfect
breeding ground for outbreaks and malnutrition and a
perfect setting for the violation of human rights,
especially when sexual violence is used as a weapon.

Public misconceptions also worry me, such as the
belief that vaccines are dangerous. That is why we
have seen large outbreaks of measles that never should
have happened, especially in countries with a well-
educated public.

Those are some of my top worries. For some of
them, I have good news to report. In the past decade,
after the fuel, food and financial crises, the issue of
governance was hotly debated. For the financial crisis,
analysts cited a failure of governance, oversight and
risk management at every level of the system. Since
the start of this century, WHO and its member States
have been managing internationally shared health risks

through the development of new global governance
regimens. We have the International Health
Regulations, revised after the outbreak of acute
respiratory syndrome in 2003. They moved from a
reactive response to outbreaks at borders and points of
entry to a proactive response aimed at snuffing out a
threat at its source, before it had a chance to spread
internationally.

The International Health Regulations adopt an
all-hazards approach and are on the look out for any
acute event where people suddenly fall ill, whether
because of infections, food poisoning or exposure to
toxic chemicals or radiological materials. Solid
background information on what is usual for a season
or area make it easier to detect the unusual, such as
illness caused by a new pathogen or caused by
terrorism.

WHO gleans intelligence about potential
outbreaks from constant worldwide electronic
surveillance and responds through the Global Outbreak
Alert and Response Network, which draws experts
from more than 300 technical institutions. Many are in
the countries of members of the Council. I therefore
want to take this opportunity to express my
appreciation for their contribution.

We are also drawing on many high-level
biosecurity laboratories, as we have a new framework
that sets our obligations for the sharing of Viruses,
influence of viruses and of the benefits, such as
medicines and vaccines during an influenza pandemic.
That is the newest governance instrument, approved
just last May, by the World Health Assembly.

The negotiations behind the framework were the
most intense and potentially explosive that I have ever
seen during my 35 years in public health. But in a spirit
of consensus and fair play, member States eventually
produced a square deal for everybody, including the
pharmaceutical industry. These new governance
regimes tell us what countries really want. They want
collective security against shared threats. They want
risks to be proactively managed, with an emphasis on
prevention. They want rules of proper, responsible
conduct. They want fairness - a square deal for
everybody.

I have one final point. This year's protests in the
Middle East have captured world attention and toppled
some Governments. Many analysts saw those events as
uprisings against inequalities in income levels and

opportunities, especially for youth. Some experts now
believe that greater equality must become the new
economic and political imperative for a stable and
more secure world. I have no idea if that will happen.
Personally, I would welcome such a policy imperative
with open arms. Prevention is the heart of public
health, and equity is the soul.

