Mr. Llorentty Soliz (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): The Plurinational State of
Bolivia would like to congratulate you, Mr. President,
on having convened this important debate, which
is certainly timely. We hope that our statement and
the other interventions today will enable us to make
progress in achieving a lasting world peace based on
social justice and security for all sovereign nations on
the planet. Bolivia plays its role in that multilateral
arena in the belief that all countries must meet their
commitments equally.

The International Criminal Court must move
towards the goal of a truly universal jurisdiction. We
believe that war crimes, crimes against humanity
and genocide must be punished in an exemplary way.
That is a vital aim for those countries among us that
have been victims of such violations. Any individual
or group violating the dignity of people must be held
accountable before humanity. In that regard, Bolivia
wishes to underscore two fundamental points in its
brief statement.

First, in order to achieve our aspiration of true
universal jurisdiction, it must be emphasized that,
unfortunately, even today, 10 years since the adoption
of the Rome Statute, the countries with the largest
military capacity have still not ratified the Statute. If
the countries with the greatest military might, which
moreover control the Security Council, cannot and
do not respect the jurisdiction of the International
Criminal Court, we are talking of first - and second-
class countries. That violates the principle of equality
among members of the international community.

We also believe that there will never be full
international justice if the United Nations continues
to avoid internal reform. As President Evo Morales
Ayma of Bolivia said in his statement to the General
Assembly a few weeks ago, if the United Nations wants
to change the world, it first has to change itself (see A/67/PV.11). We cannot continue with the existing
archaic structures; they belong to another time and
do not necessarily correspond to the realities of today.
There is no point in 121 countries having acceded to the
Rome Statute in 10 years, if only a handful of Powers
control the Security Council. We should therefore be
resolute in proposing change. We must dismantle those
structures. It is vital that we build a new Council and
a new architecture for multilateral relations. Bolivia
commits its efforts to achieve that goal.

