Mr. Castaneda Solares (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish): We thank the delegation of Kuwait for
convening this open debate on the working methods
of the Security Council. We align ourselves with the
statement made by the Permanent Representative
of New Zealand at the beginning of the meeting.
We trust that our deliberations will not only allow
us to renew our commitment to continuing to make
progress in improving the efficiency, transparency and
interactivity of the Security Council, but also serve as
a solid basis for the effective implementation of note
by the President S/2017/507, to which our delegation
attaches great value and importance. We also thank
Ms. Landgren and Mr. Cockayne for their briefings at
the start of this meeting.

Guatemala acknowledges the progress made
with regard to some practices and the strengthening
of other measures included in note by the President
S/2017/507 thanks to the commendable work of the
Informal Working Group on Documentation and Other
Procedural Questions, chaired by your delegation,
Mr. President, and previously chaired by the delegation
of Japan. Codifying best practices is an infinite task
but an extremely useful exercise for the work of this
organ. Also taking into account our own experience as
a non-permanent member of the Security Council for
the period 2012-2013, we believe that there is always
room for improvement. In that regard, we would like
to highlight three issues that are currently important to
the working methods of the Security Council.

First, the quest for information and understanding
regarding the activities of the Council remains a
fundamental and legitimate request. Although there has
been an increase in the number of the Council's public
meetings, continuing the practice of open debates that
promote greater participation of non-members of the
Council and the holding of a number of Arria Formula
meetings in recent years have enabled the Council to
obtain accurate information so as to be more effective
in fulfilling its responsibility to maintain international
peace and security.

We believe that it is important to continue to hold
wrap-up meetings and to pursue greater interaction
with the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) - an
advisory body to the Council that plays an important
role in preventing the recurrence of conflicts - and
with the Chairs of the Commission's country-specific
configurations, as well as with other United Nations
bodies. We welcome the ongoing implementation of
the provisions of note S/2017/507 regarding according
due importance to the Peacebuilding Commission. That
would clearly make it possible to obtain reliable, first-
hand information and specific guidance on the PBC
country configurations.

Secondly, in the past the Security Council took
decisions on the appointment of the Chairs of the
subsidiary bodies in a balanced, transparent and
inclusive manner. That allowed for a change, since
there is now the impression that consultation on the
process take place, in particular among the newly
elected members of the Council. My delegation hopes
that this practice and trend will be reinforced in the
future. It is also necessary to ensure that the selection
and appointment processes of the various expert groups
are more transparent and balanced, so that there is as
wide a geographical and gender representation as
possible, bearing in mind the guidance in paragraph
111 of the annex of note S/2017/507, which indicates
that the appointment of the Chairs of subsidiary bodies
should be agreed by 1 October each year.

Thirdly, we appreciate section VIII of the annex,
which indicates the importance of consultation among
the Security Council, the Secretariat and troop- and
police-contributing countries, which is a valuable
contribution to enhancing the capacity of the Security
Council to take appropriate, effective and timely
decisions in the discharge of its responsibilities. Such
coordination is relevant in the case of transitions from
peacekeeping operations to special political missions,
as well as possible changes in mandates.

In conclusion, our delegation appreciates the work
to update the working methods of the Security Council,
which has been firmly sustained in recent years. We
welcome the steady progress over the past two years.
Past practice reminds us that elected members, who
are accountable to regional groups and to the entire
membership of the United Nations, are the ones most
likely to improve the Council's working methods.

The best way to highlight the representative and
democratic character of the Council is to strengthen
the standards of accountability and transparency. That,
in addition to cooperation with permanent members,
would lead to greater synergy and effectiveness in
the Council around the common goal of improving its
working methods, since the decisions ofthis organ have
an impact on the membership of the United Nations as
a whole.

