Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I should like to express our gratitude to you,
Mr. President, for allowing us to participate in today's
debate on the situation in the Middle East.

Despite the passage of years, the succession of
Governments, the plethora of initiatives and the deep
and unprecedented changes in international relations,
the Palestinian situation and the Middle East crisis
continue unchanged, awaiting a comprehensive and
just settlement and the realization of hopes and
aspirations for stability, security and cooperation.

All relevant resolutions of the Security Council
and the General Assembly emphasize the right of the
Palestinian people to establish a viable and
independent State, the need for Israel to withdraw from
the territories occupied in 1967 and respect the status
and character of Jerusalem, and the illegality of all of
Israel's administrative and legal measures, including
the confiscation of land and the construction of
settlements. Yet, the lives of the Palestinian people are
unchanged and the suffering of the Palestinians, due to
displacement, the siege, starvation, the imposition of
checkpoints and border crossings and the lack of access
and movement, continues.
The Palestinian Authority has demonstrated its
sincere willingness to achieve peace. It has taken a
positive part in all negotiations and has honoured all its
commitments - proof that it is a true partner for

peace. Yet Israel has countered this willingness with
procrastination and has continued its oppressive
practices aimed at compelling the Palestinian people to
give in.

All United Nations recent reports and all the
hearings of the Human Rights Council and its June and
July investigation into the incidents in Gaza have
documented Israel's practice of deliberately targeting
innocent Palestinian civilians. Testimony to that effect
has been given by some Israeli soldiers. Despite the
passage of six months since the adoption of Security
Council resolution 1860 (2009), the Palestinians are
still awaiting the full implementation of that resolution.

As regards Jerusalem, Israel continues its efforts
to Judaize the Holy City in order to undermine its
historical and religious nature as a Holy City which
represents coexistence and convergence among all
sacred religions.

The serious and tragic situation in the Middle
East requires the international community and the
Security Council to make intensive efforts to compel
Israel to resume the negotiations from the point at
which they were halted and to take practical and
tangible steps commensurate with the gravity of the
situation. Chief among these is the cessation of
settlement activity, which runs counter to all
international resolutions and to the commitments
undertaken by Israel under the Road Map.

As for the Arab side, it has continued to
emphasize its political will to achieve comprehensive
peace. It has put forward the Arab Peace Initiative,
which is serious and practical, offering a
comprehensive vision for the Middle East based on
coexistence, good-neighbourliness and mutual
cooperation.

The Kingdom of Morocco appreciates the
principled position expressed by the new United States
Administration vis-a-vis the two-State solution and the
necessity of putting an end to the settlements. We also
appreciate Washington's repeated endeavours to urge
all States to return to the negotiating table.

In that connection, we salute the positive position
enunciated by the Quartet at its joint meeting last
month with the League of Arab States Follow-up
Committee on the implementation of the Arab Peace
Initiative.

His Majesty the King of Morocco, Chairman of
the Al-Quds Committee, believes in peaceful
negotiations and dialogue as the best means to achieve
peaceful coexistence and peace. He continues to
support this vision and to support efforts to achieve the
creation of an independent Palestinian State, with
Jerusalem as its capital.

In a few weeks the world will mark the sixtieth
anniversary of the establishment of the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East. That will be an opportunity to recall the
injustice and the problems to which the Palestinians
have been subjected. It is time for the international
community to shoulder its responsibility towards the
Palestinian people with a view to achieving a
comprehensive and just peace agreement and
settlement - for which all people of the region yearn.

