Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): It is
with regret that we have today supported the adoption
of resolution 1997 (2011) on the withdrawal of the
United Nations Mission in the Sudan (UNMIS).

Since its inception in support of the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA) of 2005,
UNMIS has worked to support the parties in fulfilling
their commitments under the Agreement and, where
conflict has occurred, and has acted to protect civilians
and ensure the delivery of humanitarian assistance to
those in need. We thank UNMIS and Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Haile
Menkerios for their tireless efforts in this regard.

Sadly, the UNMIS presence is still needed in
Southern Kordofan state, where we continue to be
deeply concerned by reports of ongoing violations of
human rights and international humanitarian law.
Civilians continue to suffer the impact of conflict,
including aerial bombardment by the Sudanese Armed
Forces and other abuses, reportedly including
extrajudicial killings, forced displacement and arbitrary
arrests and detentions. We unreservedly condemn the
ongoing violence.

In the absence of agreement on an extension, we
call on the Sudanese authorities to cooperate with
UNMIS in accordance with the status-of-forces
agreement and the provisions of resolution 1997 (2011)
as it winds down its operations, and to allow and
support unfettered humanitarian access by
humanitarian personnel to populations in need. We
11-40867
further call on the Government of the Sudan and the
Sudan People's Liberation Movement North to end
hostilities and agree a ceasefire leading to new security
arrangements.

We reiterate the readiness of this Council, as set
out in the resolution that we have just adopted, both to
continue current United Nations operations in Southern
Kordofan and Blue Nile states and to assist the parties
in implementation of new arrangements to be agreed
between them. We recall the importance of completing
the CPA-mandated popular consultations processes, by
which the people of Southern Kordofan and Blue Nile
will express their views as to their future governance.

