Mr. Sparber (Liechtenstein): One fifth of all
children today live in conflict zones, and a record
number of children were killed or maimed in conflict
last year. United Nations reports and today's briefings
are alarming. Thousands of children have been killed
or maimed in Syria, many as a result of indiscriminate
or disproportionate attacks in populated areas. Others
became victims ofunlawful siege tactics or of chemical
weapons, which have been internationally prohibited for
a long time. There is an urgent need for accountability
for the atrocity crimes committed in the Syrian
conflict. Liechtenstein applauds the International,
Impartial and Independent Mechanism for Syria for its
important work in that respect. The progress achieved
in the collection of evidence and the building of case
files constitutes an essential step towards justice for all
victims of the conflict, particularly the children.

In Yemen, almost 12,000 United Nations-verified
grave violations were committed against children
between 2013 and 2018, pointing to much higher
actual figures. Killing and maiming as a result of air
strikes remains the most prevalent violation, but child
recruitment and attacks on humanitarian facilities,
schools and hospitals also prevail. The Council has
the responsibility to stop those violations and enforce
compliance with its own resolutions and respect
for international humanitarian law. In addition,
Liechtenstein sees great value in political commitments
by States, such as the Safe Schools Declaration, to
improve children's lives during armed conflict.

Liechtenstein remains deeply concerned about
the high occurrence of rape and other forms of sexual
violence against children, including trafficking
for sexual enslavement. Such violence is often
underreported owing to the fear and stigmatization
associated with it, in particular if perpetrated against
boys. A culture of silence continues to impede
accountability and justice and contributes to further
cycles of violence and persistent harmful gender
stereotypes. Liechtenstein welcomes the important
work of non-governmental organizations in that regard.
We support the work of Justice Rapid Response and
its child rights experts, who have investigated grave
violations against children in Myanmar, the Central
African Republic and Syria, among other places. The
Liechtenstein-based non-governmental organization
All Survivors Project conducts research and advocacy
to improve global responses for every victim and
survivor of sexual violence, including men and boys, in
situations of armed conflict and forced displacement.

International criminal justice mechanisms, in
particular the International Criminal Court (ICC), have
done groundbreaking work to address grave violations
against children. The ICC case against Dominic
Ongwen illustrates the possible complexity of such
violations. Indicted for war crimes, Ongwen began on
his path as a child soldier himself, kidnapped and forced
into military service at a young age. The judgment in
the case of Bosco Ntaganda, released in July, represents
another milestone in international criminal justice. The
Court held the crimes against male child soldiers to the
same standards as female child soldiers. And it was
explicit in determining that the acts committed against
male child soldiers amounted to rape and needed to be
addressed accordingly. That provides a new basis to
address sexual and gender-based violence in conflict,
for the Council and other stakeholders.

Liechtenstein reiterates its strong support for
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
on Children and Armed Conflict and thanks her for
her briefing today. Protecting the independence and
integrity of her mandate is crucial to its effectiveness
and credibility. An essential feature of the mandate
has been its impartiality and reliance on evidence,
which have led to concrete improvements by State and
non-State actors in their protection of children. The
strong support of States for the Special Representative
is also a call for the Security Council to do more to
preserve the key tenets of her mandate. In addition,
more effective monitoring, documenting, investigating
and reporting of violations against children by all
relevant United Nations entities would help broaden
the mandate's reach and depth, which we would
greatly welcome.

