Mr. Oshima (Japan): It is a matter of great regret
that the Council has been compelled to act in this
Chamber on another resolution regarding Iran's nuclear
issue only five months after adopting resolution 1696
(2006). Over the course of this year, we have had
intensive discussions on the Iranian nuclear issue in the
Council as concerted international efforts continued for
the purpose of seeking a peaceful and diplomatic
resolution of this problem by the States concerned,
including my own. These efforts, however, have failed
to produce positive results.

In defiance of resolution 1696 (2006), Iran has
refused to take any steps required of it to comply with
the measures set out by the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA) and the Security Council,
including the suspension of enrichment- and
reprocessing-related activities. On the contrary, the
situation has worsened, with Iran's expansion of its
enrichment- and reprocessing-related activities.

Japan attaches great importance to the non-
proliferation of nuclear weapons as an issue that can
affect its own national peace and security and that of
the international community. Proliferation of nuclear
and other weapons of mass destruction, along with
their means of delivery, is a clear and present global
challenge posing a great threat and must be handled
with firm determination. It is our strong belief that, in
order to counter such a threat, actual or potential, the
international community must act appropriately,
resolutely and in a timely manner wherever it occurs,
be it in the Middle East, North-East Asia or elsewhere
in the world. We believe that Iran's case, where it has
failed to comply with the requirements set out by the
IAEA and the Security Council, must be dealt with
based on the basis of a principled stand.

At the same time, the right to the peaceful use of
nuclear energy by all States is also important and must
be fully respected and protected. Iran has that right,
just as much as any other country. We hope and expect
that, in the exercise of that right, Iran will fully comply
with its international obligations and give its utmost
cooperation to the IAEA so that it will be able to enjoy
fully the fruits of the peaceful use of nuclear energy.

Because of the importance of non-proliferation,
and taking into account the measured approach in the
text, Japan voted in favour of the resolution. However,
this resolution does not mean the end of the
negotiations on the issue. The resolution keeps the door
open for negotiations with Iran and explicitly mentions
the reversibility of the measures that it introduces.

Japan enjoys the right to the peaceful of use of
nuclear energy to the fullest in full compliance with its
international obligations. We are a country that
traditionally has enjoyed good, important relations with
Iran. In adopting this resolution, we earnestly hope and
appeal to Iran that it will seek to resolve this issue at
the earliest possible time through diplomatic
negotiations in full respect of its international
obligations. That ought not to be impossible. To that
end, Japan will continue to contribute to the efforts to
resolve the issue through bilateral negotiations with
Iran and other diplomatic channels.

