Mr. Sow (Guinea) (spoke in French): The present
consultations on recent developments in Guinea-Bissau
come at the right time. My delegation would like to
express its gratitude to you, Mr. President, and to thank
Mr. Kalomoh for the excellent and thorough briefing
that he has just given us on this issue. I would also like
to convey my appreciation to Minister Jose Ramos
Horta for his interesting statement. I welcome the
presence today of our colleague Mr. Cabral, the
Permanent Representative of Guinea-Bissau to the
United Nations.

Given the precariousness of the situation and
uncertainty prevailing in Guinea-Bissau, the Council
must assume its principal responsibility for managing
conflict and restoring order. We must rise to the
challenge by being ever more vigilant and regularly
monitor the developments under way to better grasp the
situation.

The overthrow of President Kumba Yala during
the night of 13 and 14 of September by a military
committee that took it upon itself to claim that it was
restoring constitutional order and democracy once
again shows that, in Africa, only a collective and firm
response by the member States of the neighbouring
countries, the subregion and the entire continent is up
to the task of opposing a coup d'etat and preventing it
from succeeding. We therefore welcome the vigorous
and prompt action taken by the Economic Community
of West African States (ECOWAS), the African Union
and their member States to safeguard legality and to
ensure the gradual restoration of constitutional order in
Guinea-Bissau.

My delegation also welcomes the positive
contribution made by the United Nations and by the
Portuguese-speaking countries to stabilize the
situation. President Kumba Yala's relinquishing of
power - which he did, as he said, for the greater good
of the people, for peace and for national unity - and
the appeal he launched for the immediate establishment
of a civilian government of national unity, as well as
for the holding of general legislative elections
according to an agreed timetable, have been favourably
received by the people of Guinea-Bissau, the countries
of the subregion and a number of members of the
international community.

All of this has helped the negotiations and
facilitated the signing of a transitional political charter
by the political leadership of Guinea-Bissau.

Relative peace has been restored, and the troops
have returned to their barracks. This is a step in the
right direction - a step that needs to be consolidated
through robust political, economic and social measures
that will mobilize the participation and full support of
the international community and of aid organizations.

Today more than ever, Guinea-Bissau needs the
support of the international community in its efforts at
economic and political reconstruction. The failure of
President Kumba Yala, stems, in our opinion, from a
chaotic political transition and from disappointing
methods of governance and socio-economic results, as
well as from a lack of external diplomatic and financial
support, as is well known.

Promises were made in many bilateral and
multilateral forums, but these have not been translated
into facts on the ground. That is why Guinea-Bissau,
three years after having embarked on the democratic
process, following pluralist elections that were judged
free and transparent, which were held on 16 January
2000, remains in the grip of a severe crisis and in a
state of near-paralysis. All of this, added to an
explosive social situation characterized by excessive
arrears in the salaries of civil servants, opened the door
for the coup plotters, who used as a pretext the desire
to shield Guinea-Bissau from another civil war.

How then can we not agree with the Secretary-
General's analysis of the situation, when, in his
statement before the Council on justice and the rule of
law, he said that

"elections held when the rule of law is too fragile
seldom lead to lasting democratic governance. In
addressing these issues, sensitive questions are
involved - questions of sovereignty, tradition
and security, justice and reconciliation. The task
is not simply technically difficult. It is politically
delicate." (S/PV4833, p. 2)

The example of Guinea-Bissau is a test case for
our Council as to the relevance and validity of the
mechanisms that should be put in place during a
political transition period in a poor country, one that is
beset by many tensions and one that, by the way, does
not receive any financial assistance from the
International Monetary Fund or the World Bank.

The Security Council should therefore commit
itself fully, along with ECOWAS and the African
Union, to helping Guinea-Bissau to operationalize the
institutional machinery for its transition, with a view to
the holding of legislative and presidential elections that
will lead to greater stability and therefore to peace and
development.

In short, to help a new era emerge in Guinea-
Bissau and in West Africa, sustained efforts must be
made in order better to coordinate the economic
recovery and political reconstruction programmes
established by the Economic and Social Council, with
the assistance of the development partners and in
conjunction with the decisions that will be surely taken
by the Security Council in future in order to help
consolidate peace and prevent chaos.

We support the mobilization of international
support for the civilian transitional authorities and
welcome the extension of the mandate of the Peace-
Building Support Office in Guinea-Bissau. We hope
that this item will be given priority status on our
agenda.

