Mr. Badji (Senegal) (spoke in French): Allow me
at the outset warmly to congratulate Belgium on its
timely initiative to propose a process of reflection and
a public debate of the Security Council on the problem
of natural resources and conflicts.

Be it water, oil, diamonds or timber - to mention
just a few types of natural resources - in many
instances those gifts of nature, whose exploitation and
development revenues should have helped to improve
the social welfare of peoples, have instead brought
misery to those same peoples.

In paragraph 65 of his report (A/59/285) dated
20 August 2004, entitled "Implementation of the
recommendations contained in the report of the
Secretary-General on the causes of conflict and
promotion of durable peace and sustainable
development in Africa", the Secretary-General states:

"The management of natural resources
deserves further attention on the continent and by
the international community."

He adds in paragraph 66 that:

"As most of the intractable conflicts on the
continent come to an end, the durability of peace
will depend greatly on the capacity of each new
Government to take control of the natural
resources and manage the wealth of the State in a
transparent and accountable manner that will
benefit its people."

That excerpt from the report of the Secretary-
General highlights one of the problems related to a
country's natural resources - namely, their
responsible, equitable and productive management at
the economic and social levels.

However, the difficulties arising from the
existence of natural resources in a State go beyond
good governance or good management and involve a
number of other actors such as neighbouring States or
importing States, which may be interested in those
natural resources, as well as multinational companies
and other non-State actors, which are often intimately
involved in the exploitation of such resources.

The diversity and number of interested actors
further complicates the question before us and suggests
that to deal with it effectively, the international
community should adopt, in each case, a
comprehensive strategy that encompasses all of the
actors that have been determined, or are assumed, to be
involved.

Any strategy for dealing with this problem should
also take into account important data such as rapid
environmental changes, allocation of revenues
generated by the exploitation of natural resources, and
changes in consumption patterns that exacerbate
resource scarcity and promote cut-throat competition
among the actors.
Under these circumstances, we deem it important
that the international community stress dialogue,
consultation and mediation among the actors
concerned. The latter should be encouraged to place
the common interest over their particular interests.

In the case of countries in the grip of civil war or
faced with a rebellion, the international community
should ensure that revenues deriving from the
exploitation of natural resources are not used to finance
the activities of the conflicting parties. In that respect,
the Security Council should continue to be stringent in
the imposition and implementation of individual
sanctions, such freezing the assets or restricting the
movement of certain belligerents. In several cases,
particularly in Africa, such sanctions have proved
effective and decisive.

We also welcome the launch of the Kimberley
Process in 2000. That programme, which enjoys the
support of the United Nations, is aimed at putting an
end to the illegal trade in diamonds and other precious
stones coming from conflict zones. In the context of
that programme, all diamonds coming from
participating countries must be accompanied by a
certificate of authenticity indicating their origin.

However, the Kimberley Process's weakness lies
in the fact that it is not binding and depends on the
goodwill of States, companies and diamond traders.
That goodwill is not always present.

That is why it may be time for the international
community to consider ways and means by which the
aforementioned sanctions could be expanded to certain
multinational companies whose conduct is not always
beyond reproach.

We should like here to encourage the initiative
launched in 2002 by a coalition of 300 non-
governmental organization and civil society groups
which are carrying out a campaign entitled "Publish
what you pay", aimed at encouraging multinational oil
companies to be more transparent as regards the
modalities of their contracts in Africa and elsewhere.

We wish also to stress the importance of the
Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative -
launched in 2003 by the British Government - which
is aimed at improving management of the revenues
emanating from oil, gas and the extractive industries.
The primary goal is to encourage multinational
companies to be more transparent and accountable in
that respect.

All this more than demonstrates that any strategy
to control the link between natural resources and
conflict, if it is to be effective, should involve
multinational companies upstream and down.
Moreover, we should responsibly acknowledge that the
international community, and the Security Council
above all, ought to be more attentive to the actions of
certain States that, coveting the natural resources of
other countries, do not hesitate to foment instability in
the latter by supporting rebellions or by fuelling and
perpetuating civil war. Such actions are contrary to the
United Nations Charter and demand a forceful reaction
if we do not wish the race for increasingly rare natural
resources to pose a serious threat to international peace
and security.

Finally, given the growing scarcity of certain
natural resources that remain necessary to the
functioning of our industrial civilization, the
international community should continue to consider
the best way to promote alternative energies. Such
action, if decisive, would reduce the heavy pressure on
existing natural resources and have an impact on the
conflicts and tensions which the pernicious misuse of
revenues from the exploitation of such resources might
give rise to.

