As all of us stay safely in our own places, I cannot help but think about the millions of people in Idlib, internally displaced persons camps and other densely populated areas in Syria that are facing the risk of COVID-19 outbreaks. As reported earlier, we currently have 10 cases in Syria. This is the early stage of the pandemic. We are all aware of the potentially devastating impact if the virus continues to spread throughout the concerned areas, particularly where hostilities are taking place. We appreciate the ongoing prevention and response planning to minimize the transmission risk. In this regard, my delegation wishes to highlight several points: First, the health responses must be in parallel with a nationwide ceasefire throughout Syria. Indonesia fully supports the call for a global ceasefire by the Secretary -General, as well as the Special Envoy's appeal for a complete and immediate nationwide ceasefire to suppress COVID-19 in Syria. The fighting must end. And it is critical to end it now. All parties in the conflict need to firmly respect this. We are pleased that, since the ceasefire of 5 March, there have been no reports of airstrikes in the north-west. However, in the midst of this pandemic, it is not only about halting the airstrikes or stopping the shelling, but it is also about creating a safe environment for all civilians in Syria, particularly the most vulnerable communities, in every aspect of their daily lives. Secondly, Indonesia urges the United Nations and the Government of Syria, with strong support of other key parties, to strengthen their cooperation in ensuring the most effective prevention and response plan for COVID-19, as well as to guarantee the continuation of humanitarian assistance in the country. The immediate and timely delivery of humanitarian assistance remains critical. We are pleased to note that cross-border responses continue and have not been impacted by COVID-19 countermeasures. This is important to maintain. Thirdly, while the focus is now on COVID-19, it is also important to continue to move forward together, working on a political way out of the Syrian crisis. We appreciate the Special Envoy's continued engagement with all relevant parties in this regard and are delighted that agreement on the agenda within the Constitutional Committee has been reached. It is extremely important to ensure that we scale up efforts to address the displacement crisis; there are still around 900,000 people displaced in the north-west and 60 per cent of them are children. Again, they are also the most vulnerable to COVID-19. With the upcoming holy month of Ramadan, we call on all parties to set aside their differences and work together to alleviate the suffering of the Syrian people, including to confront the danger of the virus. The guns must be silenced for the medical workers to do their tasks.
