The Secretary-General: Let me begin by
thanking you, Mr. President, and the Government of
Brazil for focusing on the crucial linkages between
peace, security and development.

Recent events around the world are a sharp
reminder of the need for political stability to be
anchored in peace, opportunity, decent standards of
living and the consent of the governed.

Peace, security and development are
interdependent. Evidence abounds.

Nine of the 10 countries with the lowest human
development indicators have experienced conflict over
the past 20 years. Countries facing stark inequalities
and weak institutions are at increased risk of conflict.
Poorly distributed wealth and lack of sufficient jobs,
opportunities and freedoms, particularly for a large
youth population, can also increase the risk of
instability. Drug trafficking and international organized
crime have found fertile ground in places that lack
basic services and economic opportunities, leading to
fear in the streets and insecurity across entire regions.

Just as the lack of development can feed the
flames of conflict, economic and social progress can
help to prevent it and secure peace. Sustained, broadly
based development can help to address the roots of
conflict through such steps as ensuring the equitable
sharing of wealth, providing better access to
agricultural lands, strengthening governance and
ensuring justice for all. Above all, development should
be inclusive. By definition, this means including
women, who can play a critical role in negotiations and
peace processes, and young people, who have vast
potential to contribute to the development of their
societies. In short, inclusive development on the basis
of consensus and consultation is perhaps the most
effective route to diminishing the risks of conflict and
enabling long-term stability.

In recent years, we have come a long way in
incorporating these insights into our work. The
11-23119
Peacebuilding Commission, for example, brings
together a wide variety of actors to develop common
approaches, including the members of the Security
Council and the Economic and Social Council, troop
contributors and key donors, with the participation of
the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund
(IMF). The equally new Peacebuilding Fund works to
motivate and support the timely efforts of the full
United Nations family for peacebuilding.

I have also requested all United Nations
presences in places where there is both a United
Nations country team and a multidimensional
peacekeeping operation or political mission to identify
priority areas for peace consolidation and to develop
integrated strategic frameworks to guide their work in
these areas. It is increasingly recognized that these
strategic frameworks must be developed with the host
country to account for national priorities and to enable
ownership of the development process.

Furthermore, the 2008 United Nations-World
Bank Partnership Framework for Crisis and Post-Crisis
Situations provides a basis for developing coherent
approaches to post-conflict countries. These are
important steps, yet there is more we can do to ensure
truly integrated, mutually reinforcing approaches to
security and development. Let me highlight five areas.

First, if the United Nations is to act as one across
the security-development spectrum, we would benefit
from a "whole of Government" approach applied by
Member States across the multilateral system. In this
respect, I welcome the increasing emphasis placed by
Member States on strengthening coherence across
different multilateral institutions, including through
structured delivery and the engagement of the Security
Council, the Economic and Social Council, the
Peacebuilding Commission, United Nations executive
boards and the governing boards of the World Bank
and the IMF.

Secondly, we need to better manage the process
of drawdown and withdrawal of Security Council-
mandated operations, and provide a stronger basis for
seamless transitions of specific tasks to the United
Nations country team and other development actors.

T hirdly, we need to find innovative ways to build
and strengthen national institutions in fragile countries.
As last month's Security Council debate on institution-
building made clear (see S/PV.6472), effective
11-23119
institutions and strong national ownership are central
to sustainable peace.

Fourthly, we must focus more on the climate
change-security-development nexus. Lack of energy
and the effects of climate change are having
increasingly serious impacts on development and
security. We cannot achieve security without securing
energy and managing climate risks.

Fifthly, we need to consider how to reduce
criminal violence - an ever greater security concern in
many parts of the world. In some regions, organized
crime is threatening both development gains and the
very fabric of international peace and security.
Organized crime is a challenge to a modern functioning
State.

I would also add that, in too many places around
the world, the proliferation of small arms and
ammunition is a standing threat to the security of
ordinary people. In this context, the Council may wish
to consider strengthening its collaboration with the
General Assembly to advance strategies to halt the
illicit proliferation of small arms and ammunition.

As highlighted in my recent report on the causes
of conflict and the promotion of durable peace and
development in Africa,

"the next generation of security challenges will
require added emphasis on crisis management,
disaster risk reduction strategies, stronger civilian
components in peace operations and
strengthening the rule of law" (S/20]0/526*, para. 101).

At the strategic level, it will be necessary to better
prioritize and sequence security, governance and
development efforts, and to reach out to new partners.
The forthcoming World Development Report will
provide important insights in these areas. We have
ample experience and convincing evidence illustrating
the close links between peace, security and
development.

I look forward to continuing to work with the
Security Council and the full range of partners in
bringing this knowledge to bear on our efforts to fulfil
our Charter-driven mandate to promote peace and
human well-being. I thank the members of the Security
Council for their continuing focus on these challenges.
3
