Mr. MacKay (New Zealand): I should like to
begin by saying how much we welcome these
opportunities for non-members of the Council to
comment on important political and security issues
before the Council. To that end, I will be very brief.

We think that the political, security, economic and
social dimensions of the situation in Afghanistan are
inextricably linked. Indeed, that reality underpins the
international strategy represented by the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)
and the International Security Assistance Force (ISAF).
Not to recognize that would run the risk that the
country would relapse into warlordism and violence -
the very conditions that produced the Taliban and
encouraged terrorists to use Afghanistan as a base.

Clearly, the fundamental challenge in
Afghanistan is nation-building. The next moves
towards stabilization are likely to be political, and it is
clear that much rests on the success of the loya jirga.
We join others in their appeals to all Afghan leaders to
support the constitutional process involved here.

New Zealand will remain engaged in international
humanitarian assistance to Afghanistan through a
coordinated aid effort in partnership with the Afghan
people and in areas where we can add value. Donor
activity is rightly focusing on rehabilitation and
reconstruction. We recognize the value of "quick-start/
quick impact" projects to fast-track reconstruction and
to assist the Afghanistan Interim Authority in
establishing its credibility with the Afghan people. To
that end, we are contributing $400,000 to projects
identified in the United Nations Immediate and
Transitional Assistance Programme for the Afghan
People 2002 and a further $200,000 for New Zealand
non-governmental organization activities in
Afghanistan. Obviously, it is important that pledges of
financial assistance be paid as quickly as possible to
ensure the seamless provision of assistance at a time of
great need for the Afghan authorities and for the
Afghan people.

On the security side - which was given a great
deal of emphasis by Under-Secretary-General
Prendergast this morning - New Zealand is involved
in the coalition operation Enduring Freedom, which, in
addition to its broader objectives, provides a level of
reassurance to those, including UNAMA, operating
outside the area covered by ISAF. New Zealand is also
a contributor to ISAF itself, and the New Zealand
Minister of Defence today announced the
Government's willingness to continue contributing
personnel to ISAF in the forthcoming six-month
period, until the end of this year.

We very much welcome Turkey's agreement to
assume command of ISAF, and we look forward to
working under Turkish leadership in the coming
months. I would also like to thank the United Kingdom
for its leadership role during a crucial period for ISAF.
Clearly, ISAF has a key role in providing a secure
environment in which political processes can flourish
and rehabilitation and reconstruction can proceed, and
we very much support an extension of its mandate, as
proposed in the draft resolution before the Council.

