Mr. Matuszewski (Poland): The Polish delegation
supports the Secretary-General's recommendation to
extend the mandate of the United Nations Angola
Verification Mission (UNAVEM. III) until 28 February
1997, and will vote in favour of the draft resolution
before the Security Council to that effect.

We are fully aware of the mixed experiences that the
peace process in Angola has brought to all involved in
promoting it, including the Security Council. However,
we take some courage from the latest report of the
Secretary-General, in which he points to the recent
progress in the situation in Angola and stresses the fact
that, despite all the obstacles it is faced with, the peace
process is moving ahead.

With most of the objectives achieved, a number of
important issues remain to be properly attended to and
resolved. That is the case with the demobilization of
quartered UNITA troops, the disarmament of the civilian

 

population and the completion of the selection of the
UNITA troops to be incorporated into the Angolan Armed
Forces. There is a clear link between the successful
fulfilment of these tasks and the creation of the favourable
climate necessary for taking up outstanding political
problems, including the return of UNITA deputies to the
National Assembly, the founding of a constitutional basis
for the transitional plan in Angola, the establishment of the
Government of National Unity and Reconciliation and the
achievement of an agreement on the special status of Mr.
Savimbi as the leader of the largest opposition party.

We expect each party not to make their compliance
with their obligations conditional upon the performance of
the other side. This is important if the peace process in
Angola is to advance further. It is also important from the
point of view of the international community, the
continuing involvement of which in Angolan affairs will be
feasible only with both parties faithfully fulfilling their
commitments.

Speaking today, as the Security Council meets to
consider the extension of the mandate of UNAVEM. III,
currently the largest United Nations peacekeeping operation,
I would like to pay tribute to the personnel of the Mission
for having contributed significantly to peace, stabilization
and security in Angola.
Let me also express my delegation's gratitude to the
States observers of the Angolan peace process for their
efforts, including those that they made to prepare the draft
resolution before us.

