Mrs. Nineie (Serbia and Montenegro): Serbia and
Montenegro has been following the crisis over Iraq
with great attention and concern, well aware that it
threatens international peace and security. The crisis is
fraught with serious consequences not only for the
Middle East, but for the international order as such.

Iraq must comply fully and unequivocally with all
provisions of the relevant Security Council resolutions,
particularly resolution 1441 (2002). That resolution, by
which the Iraqi regime was given a chance to fulfil its

international obligations as mandated by the United
Nations, and the return of inspectors are the test and
the opportunity that the international community
presented to Baghdad to resolve the problem. It is up to
the Iraqi regime to take this opportunity and end this
crisis by fully cooperating with the international
inspectors and disarming, as demanded by the Security
Council. Failing to do so, the Iraqi regime will bear all
the consequences.

Serbia and Montenegro fully supports resolution
1441 (2002) and the work of the United Nations
Monitoring, Verification and Inspection Commission
(UNMOVIC) and the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA). It has followed UNMOVIC and IAEA
reports with great attention and is of the opinion that
the Security Council should consider them and assess
the degree of Iraq's cooperation on a continuous basis.

There is no doubt that every effort must be made
to preserve international peace and security, strengthen
the process of non-proliferation of arms of mass
destruction and secure Iraq's full cooperation with the
United Nations. Such full cooperation means that Iraqi
authorities must immediately provide unhindered
access to all relevant information, documents, locations
and persons to the inspectors. Serbia and Montenegro
considers that Iraq must without delay disarm
comprehensively and verifiably and provide credible
evidence that it has done so. That is the road to a
peaceful solution of the crisis for which we are all
striving.

Great responsibility lies with the Security
Council, which under the Charter has the primary role
in maintaining international peace and security. This is
particularly true of its responsibility to see to it that all
its resolutions are implemented and to take appropriate
measures if they are not. The Council should therefore
continue to be seized of the situation in Iraq and invest
every effort within its powers mandated by the Charter
to make Iraq comply with resolution 1441 (2002). The
authority of the Security Council must not be
questioned, and the patience of the international
community should not be tested.

Sharing the profound global concern over the
crisis in Iraq and convinced that the unity of the
international community is very important in the
current situation, Serbia and Montenegro pledges its
full support to all decisions of the Security Council and
in particular stands ready to contribute to its efforts to
implement resolution 1441 (2002).

