The President (spoke in French): I would like to
inform the Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Australia, Botswana, the Central
African Republic, Chad, Congo, Costa Rica,
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Germany,
Morocco, Republic of Korea, South Africa and
Switzerland, in which they request to be invited to
participate in the consideration of the item on the
Council's agenda. In accordance with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
consideration without the right to vote in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, the
representatives of the aforementioned countries
took the seats reservedfor them at the side of the
Council Chamber.

The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Antonio Maria
Costa, Executive Director of the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime.

It is so decided.

I invite Mr. Costa to take a seat at the Council
table.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
2
Mr. Sergio de Queiroz Duarte, High Representative for
Disarmament Affairs.

It is so decided.

I invite Mr. Duarte to take a seat at the Council
table.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to His
Excellency Mr. Louis Sylvain-Goma, Secretary
General of the Economic Community of Central
African States; His Excellency Mr. Tete Antonio,
Permanent Observer of the African Union to the United
Nations; and His Excellency Mr. Pedro Serrano, acting
head of the European Union delegation to the United
Nations.

It is so decided.

I invite the aforementioned representative to take
the seats reserved for them at the side of the Council
Chamber.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2010/ 143, which contains the text of a
letter dated 15 March 2010 from the Permanent
Representative of Gabon to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General.

I welcome the presence of the Deputy Secretary-
General, Her Excellency Ms. Asha-Rose Migiro. I
invite the Deputy Secretary-General to take the floor.


