Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in French): I
would like to begin by congratulating the French
presidency on having scheduled today's debate on drug
trafficking in the Sahel and West Africa, an issue that
intersects with several crises besetting the region.

We welcome the sustained attention that the
Security Council has given to the problem in our part of
the continent throughout this year. I would like to take
this opportunity to extend my thanks to the Secretary-
General for his personal participation in our debate
today and for his commitment to bringing stability,
peace and development to our continent. I would also
like to thank Mr. Yuri Fedotov, Executive Director of the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC)
and Mr. Said Djinnit, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Office for West Africa, for their briefings.

Since 2004, the reports of several institutions, in
particular the UNODC, confirm that the Sahel and
West Africa regions have become crossroads and hubs
for trafficking in various drugs. February's report
of the UNODC, "Transnational organized crime in
West Africa: A threat assessment", states that cocaine
traffickers have found in West Africa and the Sahel a
springboard for transferring their illegal activities to
the other side of the Atlantic. The statistics provided by
Mr. Fedotov this morning on the quantities in transit in
that region of Africa are alarming and leave no doubt as
to the entrenched position of drug cartels in that part of
the continent. One explanation for that is that the region
is less risky than traditional routes leading to the main
consumer markets of the world due to the vast size of
the territory and the lack of resources made available
by countries in the region to combat trafficking.

While they are hubs for this type of trafficking,
the Sahel and West Africa have in recent years
become places of destination, with illicit amphetamine
laboratories being set up and negative psychological,
social and economic consequences affecting the local
population. It is now undeniable that drug trafficking
feeds and is fed by other illicit trafficking, such
as trafficking in arms and human beings, illegal
immigration, piracy, transnational crime, terrorism,
rebellion and separatism, and is therefore a factor for
destabilization and insecurity in West Africa.

The extent of its effects of the phenomenon go
beyond West Africa, the Sahel and the Maghreb to other
parts ofour continent. In order to tackle the cross-border
threat, several initiatives have emerged, including
the Regional Response Action Plan of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) and the
West Africa Coast Initiative. My country, aware of the
challenge caused by transatlantic drug trafficking and
piracy in the Gulf of Guinea, took the initiative in 2009,
to implement a framework of cooperation amongst
the 22 African States on the Atlantic shore in order
to respond to the challenges arising from the Atlantic
Ocean.

In November, my country hosted the Second
Regional Ministerial Conference on border security
between Sahel, West African and Maghreb States. The
outcome of the Conference (S/2013/707, annex) was a
significant contribution to a coordinated and unified
response to the scourge of drug trafficking, terrorism
and organized crime in the region. We expect that the
forthcoming summit of the States of the Sahel and the
Sahara in Rabat will further contribute to the fight we
share.

It is not possible to combat drug trafficking and its
by-products - organized crime and terrorism -without
addressing its underlying causes, namely, poverty,
illiteracy and a lack of future prospects, particularly
for young people. The States of the Sahel region and
West Africa have fully understood that the fight cannot
prove successful without cooperation and unlimited,
inclusive regional cooperation. The establishment
of the Maritime Analysis and Operations Centre -
Narcotics by the European Union and the United States
has made it possible to stop the transfer of enormous
quantities of cocaine to Africa. Similarly, initiatives
such as the adoption of the ECOWAS Regional Action
Plan, the West Africa Coast Initiative, the Container
Control Programme launched by UNODC and the
World Customs Organization (WCO) in Ghana and
Senegal, and the Airport Communication Programme
organized by the UNODC, INTERPOL and the WCO
have largely stanched the scourge of drugs. The effort
must be pursued and intensified, and the UNODC, as
the leader in the fight, is called upon to play a central
role.

Combating drug trafficking in the Sahel and West
Africa is part and parcel of the strategy established by
the United Nations to meet the challenges the States in
the region are facing. To implement the strategy, the
States in the region have displayed their commitment
and determination to meet the challenges, individually
by taking an ownership stake in the aims of the
strategy, and collectively by means of subregional and
regional organizations to which they belong. We trust
that the international community will provide full
support to bringing about the success of the strategy in
the interests of peace, stability, enhanced democracy
and the rule of law in Africa. I assure the Council of
Morocco's commitment to making its contribution to
the effort at all levels and every step of the way.

I am pleased to be able almost to end Morocco's
term on the Security Council with a debate on Africa.
Africa, our continent, needs the United Nations to
support its efforts to bring about peace, stability and
development. Every day, Africa shows its ability to
make progress in all areas, be it the peaceful settlement
of disputes, development, strengthening democracy
or national reconciliation. Africa must continue to
enjoy the support and assistance of the international
community in order to address those challenges and to
fully play its international role.

