Mr. Bishnoi (India): Let me begin by thanking you,
Sir, for organizing this debate on the theme "Threats to
international peace and security: terrorism and cross-
border crime". I also thank the Under-Secretary General
for Political Affairs and the Permanent Observer of the
African Union for their very useful briefings. I will
avail myself of this opportunity to also compliment
your delegation for the very comprehensive concept
note that has been prepared (S/2014/869, annex).

India has been a victim of terrorism for over two and
a half decades. In our view, which we share with most
members of the international community, there can be no
reason or motivation that can possibly justify terrorism.
Terrorism is the most heinous of crimes, for which the
international community can only have a policy of zero
tolerance. The fact that terrorism is an international
problem that can only be tackled collectively is
something that is most clearly known to all of us who
have suffered it most. Terrorism is an international
phenomenon; it is international in its organization and
international in its effects. International solidarity is
required to meet an international threat. Countries that
have been preyed upon by a global network of terrorism
simply cannot cope with the challenge alone.

Every terrorist organization - be it Daesh,
Al-Shabaab, Lashkar-e-Toiba or Al-Qaida - has an
ideological basis that contradicts the basic tenets of
humanity. Ideology alone, however, is not enough to
sustain terrorists. They need sustained financing and
space to operate. These are, unfortunately, provided
to them. The concept note rightly draws attention
to the fact that financing is often supplemented by
illegal resources generated through drug trafficking,
piracy, kidnapping for ransom, extortion, and so on.
Apart from generating resources, these activities also
create conditions for the growth and proliferation of
terrorist networks. The revenue generated from poppy
cultivation in Afghanistan has more often than not
found its way to the Taliban and other terrorist network
in that country.

The listing of a terrorist organization is supposed
to lead to travel bans, the freezing of assets and an arms
embargo - in other words, cutting off the lifeline that
sustains terrorism. This, unfortunately, does not always
happen. Lashkar-e-Toiba was able to orchestrate an
attack on the Indian Consulate in Herat, Afghanistan, in
May. It is a listed organization. Its role in the attack has
been documented in the latest report of the Al-Qaida
and Taliban Monitoring Team. Lashkar-e-Toiba
obviously does not live on love and fresh air. It has
more than adequate funding. Regrettably, there seems
to be little that the Council's sanction committees
can do about such open and brazen violations of the

sanctions regime. This is an area that would benefit
from consideration by the Council.

The concept note mentions the strategic impact
of terrorism and cross-border crime. It very correctly
makes a point that cross-border crimes weaken the
State, including its military and police capabilities.
Examples from Somalia and Mali, where cross-border
crimes facilitate terrorism and make terrorist groups
even more formidable than the State, are indeed apt. We
also agree with the assessment that there is potential
for the Council to explore tools that would degrade the
ability of terrorist groups to take advantage of cross-
border crimes. Given the gravity and universality
of the problem, we would urge open and complete
consultation with Member States that are not members
of the Council.

I take this opportunity to also draw attention to
the fact that there is unfinished business in the General
Assembly as well. Leaders, at the 2005 World Summit,
decided that expeditious action would be taken to
finalize the comprehensive convention on international
terrorism. That, however, has not happened. The price
that we pay for procrastination is in human lives. That
should not be allowed to continue. Terrorism takes
away the foremost of human rights - the right to life.
It is truly a crime against humanity.

