Mr. Olguin Cigarroa (Chile) (spoke in Spanish):
We welcome the convening of this meeting and we
welcome the presence of the International Criminal
Court (ICC) Prosecutor, Ms. Fatou Bensouda. We also
appreciate her eighth report to the Council.

We begin our remarks recognizing the complex
political and security situations in Libya. On
6 November, the constitutional tribunal in Tripoli
declared invalid the Parliament that emerged following
the 25 June elections - and with that also the current
Government of Abdullah Al-Thinni, which we
recognize. It is essential to preserve the work and efforts
deployed for an inclusive political dialogue that favours
the strengthening of institutions, respect for the rule of
law and human rights as well as cooperation with the
Court and the Prosecutor pursuant to resolution 1970
(2011).

Those who cooperate with the international
community are strengthening their legitimacy.
Therefore, we call upon the legitimately elected
Libyan authorities to do what they can to comply with
the request to turn over Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi to
the International Criminal Court. Let us recall that,
following the decision of 7 August regarding Abdullah
Al-Senussi, the SaifAl-Islam Al-Qadhafi case is the only
case of the original three before the Court that needs to
be dealt with.

We believe that we also need to strengthen the
legitimacy of the Council. Since 15 February 2011,
there have been a series of acts that are worthy of our
attention: the situation of the thousands of detainees
who are being held without any charges, the killing of
countless people in the contect of the conflict in the
country, as well as the matter of the forced displacement
of some 30,000 Tawerghans. We appreciate the follow-
up work of the Prosecutor on the issue.
We reiterate our concern about the more than 7,000
detainees who have not been charged. Each passing day
that they remain in detention - in extremely difficult
conditions - serves to undermine their most basic
human rights. The situation cannot remain as it is.

We also condemn the politically motivated
assassinations, including the cowardice murder of
Salwa Bugaighis, who was stabbed to death in her
own home in Benghazi on the day of the parliamentary
elections last June.

We recognize the work of the Prosecutor in the
investigation of the crimes committed since February
2011. We urge her to persevere that work in order to
ensure accountability and to ensure that those guilty
of crimes, regardless of their origin, are brought before
justice, including those who carry out acts against
minority groups in Libya.

Lastly, we emphasized the importance of the
Libyan Government moving forward and sharing with
the Council and with the international community its
national strategy for facing those crimes. That would not
only allow for a reaffirmation of Libya's commitment to
the modern judicial system, in step with international
standards, but it would also help to identify the areas or
needs to which cooperation should be allocated in the
security sector reform efforts under way in Libya.

