Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I thank
the United States presidency for convening this
meeting, which comes at a critical moment and allows
us to reiterate collectively our serious concerns about
the situation in Idlib. I also thank Mr. John Ging and
Mr. Staffan de Mistura for their very enlightening
briefings and commitment and that of their teams.

Let us go straight to the facts. Syria is once again
on the verge of abyss, as the Idlib area has become a
humanitarian, migration and security time bomb. That
is the three-alarm fire that we would face in the event of
a massive military offensive on the part of the regime.
The risk is considerable and clearly defined. In recent
history, few disasters have been as clearly anticipated
and been the subject of as many convergent warnings
by the international community. As the moment of
truth approaches, those repeated warnings, made
through all means available, must be fully grasped by
the stakeholders. That is the very purpose of today's
meeting and there is not a minute to lose.

As we speak, a large-scale military offensive by the
regime, supported by its allies, appears to be imminent
in Idlib, where hundreds of thousands of Syrians have
taken refuge throughout the conflict. As John Ging
and Staffan de Mistura reminded us, Idlib counts
almost 3 million inhabitants. More than half of them
have already been displaced from other parts of Syria.
In that context, a large-scale military offensive would
create a new humanitarian disaster, given that those
civilians have nowhere else to go. We are now only all
too familiar with how such offensives repeatedly play
out, entailing large-scale violations of international
humanitarian law with deliberate, deadly attacks on
civilians, indiscriminate air raids and the risk of the
renewed use of chemical weapons by the regime. Such
an offensive would also lead to a major migration crisis
for northern Syria, Turkey, and potentially Europe and
even other parts of the world. Such an offensive would
also pose a serious threat to regional security with the
spillover ofjihadist fighters there. Lastly, a large-scale
military operation would have repercussions in Europe
and even beyond.

Given the gravity of the situation and the stakes, we
call on the Astana guarantors, who are meeting today
in Tehran and have the means at their disposal to stop
events from spiralling out of control - especially Syria,
Russia and Iran - to shoulder their responsibilities and
commit to three imperatives: to respect the ceasefire,
of which they are the guarantors; to guarantee full,
safe and unhindered humanitarian access throughout
Syria, while protecting civilians; and to make way
for a process leading to a credible political solution to
the Syrian crisis. Respect for the ceasefire is the only
viable path.

Let us make no mistake - the goal is to avoid a
humanitarian catastrophe and not merely to manage it
as best as we can. Those supporting the Syrian regime
have the means to prevent such a crisis, as the regime
does not have the ability to act alone. A new massacre
would therefore be the responsibility and the failure of
the regime's supporters. Conversely, they can still halt
the escalation and show the world that they have paved
the way for a peaceful settlement. There is still time
to avoid disaster in Idlib, but once again there is not a
minute to spare. That is why we call on Russia and Iran
to ensure the maintenance of the Idlib region as the last
de-escalation zone, to protect civilians and to respect
and enforce full respect for international humanitarian
law there.

I welcome the steps taken by the United Nations to
prevent escalation and its significant efforts to help the
civilian population, as John Ging mentioned earlier. I

also welcome Turkey's efforts to that end. For its part,
France has been fully engaged, in particular alongside
Presidents Erdogan and Putin, to avoid any offensive
and to relaunch the political process. At the same time,
we must do everything possible to ensure safe, full and
unhindered humanitarian access and the protection
of civilians, civilian infrastructure and humanitarian
personnel. We commend the difficult work of the United
Nations on the ground and encourage Mark Lowcock,
his team and John Ging to persevere in their requests to
the Syrian authorities.

I also recall the crucial nature of aid provided by
cross-border convoys, authorized by resolution 2393
(2017). Assistance via Turkey facilitates the daily
delivery of vital support to almost 2 million people in
the north-west. It is therefore our responsibility to help
maintain and strengthen cross-border aid. France will
maintain and adapt its assistance accordingly to north-
western Syria.

We must be extremely vigilant with regard
to exploiting the issue of humanitarian corridors.
The forced displacement of thousands of people to
areas under the regime's control in the total absence
of international supervision would in no way be
humanitarian, but would rather amount to war crimes.
Priority should continue to be placed on the delivery of
humanitarian assistance.

Lastly, as our highest-level political authorities
have stressed on more than one occasion, I reaffirm
in the strongest terms that we will exercise the utmost
vigilance concerning any verified renewed use of
chemical weapons by the regime and our full resolve
to take action in any such situation, alongside the
United Kingdom and the United States, as we have
stated previously.

Concerning the fight against the terrorist threat, in
which France is on the front line, it can in no wayjustify
what we have witnessed in Syria. When the struggle
against terrorism is used to justify indiscriminate
attacks on civilians and serious violations of
international humanitarian law, it becomes merely a
pretext whose effect - and perhaps goal - only fuels
the terrorism that it asserts to combat.

Everyone here must carefully consider the fact
that a massacre in Idlib would undermine the efforts
undertaken to reach a political solution. We must
therefore strive for a sustainable, inclusive and credible
political solution, pursuant to resolution 2254 (2015),
which the Council adopted by consensus. In the
immediate term, we must support the establishment
of a constitutional committee with the help of Special
Envoy Staffan de Mistura, whom I thank once again.
Such a committee must meet as soon as possible and
carry out its work in a completely independent manner
under the auspices of the United Nations, which is the
very prerequisite for its credibility. We all know that
this is just one step, and it will be essential to quickly
address the issue of the holding of free and fair elections,
open to all Syrians, including refugees and internally
displaced persons, as well as the creation of a neutral
environment conducive to the restoration of trust and
the implementation substantive reforms. Those will be
essential steps, and that is the only way to avoid the
prolongation of the crisis ad vitam oeternam.

In conclusion, I stress that a deadly offensive in Idlib
would mark not the end of the Syrian crisis, as certain
experts in the art of confusion would have us believe,
but rather the beginning ofa new phase in the protracted
Syrian tragedy, which would be characterized by
radicalization, instability, an endless cycle of the same
causes and effects, the entrenchment of terrorism and a
possible geographic spread of the conflict. Beyond the
looming humanitarian disaster, that is what is at stake
in Idlib.

Our collective responsibility is to look to the future.
The European Union and several partners have clearly
reiterated that they can assist in rebuilding Syria only
when an irreversible, credible and inclusive political
transition is indeed under way. There will be no blank
cheque for Syria or a massive return of refugees
without confidence-building measures that guarantee
a secure environment. Contrary to what the regime
and its allies would have us believe, it is clear that it
is not the lack of rebuilding that prevents the return of
refugees, but rather the lack of credible progress in the
political process.

We are therefore at a crossroads. France again
calls on the Astana guarantors to respect the ceasefire
because an escalation of violence is in no one's interest
and, as we speak, could even be avoided. That alone
will enable us to move towards an inclusive political
solution. It is in our best interest and above all that of
the Syrian people. On behalf of France and in support
of the Geneva process, I invite us all to forge ahead
towards a political solution that is within reach if we
unite our efforts and overcome all difficulties.
