Mr. Jiirgenson (Estonia): Estonia aligns itself with
the statement delivered by the observer of the European
Union.

First, we would like to thank the Chinese presidency
for convening today's open debate. We welcome the
efforts of the African Union (AU) to respond effectively
to conflicts and crises in Africa. A lot has been
achieved but a lot remains to be done. The international
community's role and support in that regard are vital.

We welcome the signing of the Joint United
Nations-African Union Framework for an Enhanced
Partnership in Peace and Security, which took place in
April. We also commend the African Union Assembly
decision from January 2015 to fund 25 per cent of AU
peace-support operations, as well as the subsequent
AU Assembly decision to operationalize the AU
Peace Fund. Furthermore, the AU Master Roadmap of
Practical Steps to Silence the Guns in Africa by 2020 is
a welcome step forward. It is now crucial to implement
all of those important decisions.

In order to silence the guns in Africa, it is
imperative to address the root causes of conflict. The
AU Agenda 2063 identifies democratic deficit and
weak governance as the root causes of conflict and
impediments to sustainable development in Africa.
Forging synergies between governance and peace and
security is crucial in order to address conflicts in a
holistic manner. We welcome the African efforts on
concrete structural conflict prevention initiatives, early
warning, mediation, and preventive diplomacy. We
encourage further efforts to that end.

We believe that one of the most important
guarantees for the world's sustainable development and
the expansion of the influence of democracy and rule
of law is mainstreaming gender equality to all areas of
life. Women can play a key role in conflict prevention
and resolution, peace negotiations and peacebuilding,
as well in post-conflict reconstruction.

Furthermore, the AU theme for 2017 is "Harnessing
the demographic dividend through investments in the
youth", and 2018-27 was just declared the African
Decade for Technical, Professional, Entrepreneurial
Training and Youth Employment. Africa is the youngest
continent on Earth and creating enabling conditions,
jobs, education, and the rule of law for young people
at home will play a crucial role in silencing the guns
in Africa.

Estonia stands ready to work with all partners to
enhance capacities and work on solutions, including
in the digital sphere for conflict prevention and good
governance. That is also something we prioritize in
our quest to become a non-permanent member of the
Security Council in 2020-2021.

Since we celebrated Nelson Mandela International The President (spoke in Chinese): There are still
Day yesterday, let me finish my intervention with a a number of speakers remaining on my list. Given
quote from him: "It is easy [0 break down and destroy. the lateness of the hour, I intend, with the consent of
The heroes are those who make peace and build." That the members Of the Security Council, to suspend the
is something that we, as the international community, mcemg until 3 pm.
The meeting was suspended at 1.20pm.
