Mr. Almunayekh (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic):
We thank Under Secretary-General Lacroix,
Ms. Fitah-Kona and the Police Commissioners from
the peacekeeping missions in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Abyei and Mali. I would like to address
three issues during our discussion today - the pivotal
work of the United Nations Police, their anticipated
role and the importance of women's participation in
peace operations.

With regard to the work of the United Nations
Police, the presence ofthe Commissioners in the Council
with us today during the annual holding of United
Nations Police Week is a testament to the continuing
confidence of the Security Council in the growing
importance of policing in peace operations, whether
by effecting smooth transitions for countries emerging
from conflict or in capacity-building and reforming
the security sector, including correctional institutions.
Such multidimensional operations have been created
to respond to conflicts that themselves have multiple
dimensions with similarly multiple effects on society,
which necessitates the diversification of peacekeeping
instruments to suit individual countries. That was the
reason for the Security Council's adoption of resolution
2382 (2017), which acknowledges the importance of
including policing as an element when considering the
establishment of peacekeeping operations.

Turning to the anticipated role of the United
Nations Police, peacekeeping is evolving as the nature
of conflicts evolves, and the needs and expectations of
policing also change in line with the three principles of
peacekeeping. That is why it is worth considering the
issue of not leaving the deployment of United Nations
police to the end of peacekeeping operations. We
should be guided by resolution 2382 (2017) in ensuring
police work, based on each individual situation, when
we consider establishing peace operations. It should
be emphasized that we very much appreciate the role
of troop- and police-contributing countries and their
efforts to rehabilitate peacekeepers and sustain their
training. We also emphasize the principles of discipline
and accountability at all levels.

With regard to the importance of women's
contribution to peace operations, women play a vital
role at all stages of a conflict. Women in United
Nations Police can also make a particularly significant
contribution in the work of communicating with local
communities and victims of violence or abuse, as well
as by providing the kind of sympathy and protection
that only women's participation in peacekeeping
operations can ensure, and we must therefore maintain
and strengthen that participation. In that regard, we
would like to congratulate Senegal and Major Diouf on
her award as female police officer of the year, which
in itself testifies to the effectiveness of women police.

In conclusion, many important questions were
raised by my colleagues and we listened to the briefers'
responses. I would like to emphasize what my colleagues
have said regarding the role that the Security Council
should play in ensuring that the United Nations Police
can fully carry out their responsibilities.

