The President (interpretation from Arabic): As this is
the first meeting of the Security Council for the month of
June, I should like to take this opportunity to pay tribute,
on behalf of the Council, to His Excellency Mr. Qin
Huasun, Permanent Representative of the People' s Republic
of China to the United Nations, for his service as President
of the Security Council for the month of May 1996. I am
sure I speak for all members of the Security Council in
expressing deep appreciation to Ambassador Qin Huasun
for the great diplomatic skill with which he conducted the
Council's business last month.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation between Iraq and Kuwait

The President (interpretation from Arabic): The
Security Council will now begin its consideration of the
item on the agenda. The Security Council is meeting in
accordance with the understanding reached in its prior
consultations.

Members of the Council have before them document
S/1996/426, which contains the text of a draft resolution
submitted by the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland and the United States of America.

I should like to draw the attention of the members of
the Council to the following revisions to be made in the
text of the draft resolution contained in document
S/ 1996/426 in its provisional form.

In the fifth preambular paragraph, the following words

should be inserted after the word "made . in the work of
the Special Commission".

In the second line of the fifth preambular paragraph,
a comma should be inserted after the word "problems".

The penultimate preambular paragraph should be
deleted.

It is my understanding that the Council is ready to
proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it, as
orally revised in its provisional form. Unless I hear any
objection, I shall put the draft resolution to the vote.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
 

I shall first call on those members of the Council
who wish to make statements before the voting.


