Mr. Patriota (Brazil): I thank you, Madam, for
convening this timely and important debate on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict. I would
also like to thank High Commissioner Navi Pillay,
Under-Secretaries-General Valerie Amos and Herve'
Ladsous, and Director-General Yves Daccord for their
presentations.

Brazil firmly believes that conflict prevention
is one of the most effective ways to protect civilians.
The international community must be guided, first
and foremost, by the objective of avoiding the risks of
armed conflict and the human costs associated with it.
In situations where conflicts occur, diplomacy should
be given priority and coercion should remain a last
resort. As the international community has observed
in many of the challenges it has had to confront, the
mirage of the military solution often degenerates into
the nightmare of greater civilian suffering.

Where coercive measures may be contemplated,
the use of force needs to be as moderate as possible, in
order to avoid harming civilians, who must be protected.
That is why Brazil is of the view that the international
community should not only abide by its responsibility
to protect civilians, but also demonstrate responsibility
while protecting civilians.

Furthermore, as highlighted on previous occasions,
we understand that, in order to create a more stable
environment for civilians, it is crucial to address the
root causes of conflict. Social and economic issues can
become potential drivers of conflict. A comprehensive
approach is of the utmost importance for achieving
sustainable solutions and, as a consequence, the
long-term protection of civilians. Also, in a world
with thousands of nuclear weapons, civilians will be
truly safe and protected only when genuine nuclear
disarmament is materialized.

As the concept note (S/2014/74, annex) prepared
by Lithuania rightly underlines, 2014 marks the
fifteenth anniversary of the Security Council's formal
engagement with the protection of civilians. The United
Nations has made great strides in this area since then,
both in the Council and in other forums. Protection
mandates are now regarded as an essential dimension of
peacekeeping operations. The international community
agrees that it is part of our collective responsibility to
safeguard civilians from the scourge of conflicts. The
commitments that all Member States undertook in the
Charter of the United Nations and in the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights must be upheld.

However, as is pointed out by the Secretary-
General in his latest report (S/2013/689), the current
state of the protection of civilians leaves little room
for optimism, with serious Violations being reported
in Afghanistan, Iraq, Syria, the Central African
Republic, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the
occupied Palestinian territory and elsewhere. Clearly in
many cases, a military-centred approach to peace and
stability, with the aim of providing improved protection
to civilians, has not achieved satisfactory goals from
either a security or a moral perspective. That only
enhances our responsibility in ascribing priority to
mediation, diplomacy and negotiation. If we mean what
we say when we adopt texts affirming that there is no
military solution to a certain situation, we must act
accordingly and invest more resources in mediation and
preventive diplomacy.

In peacekeeping operations, the protection of
civilians should be seen as a multidimensional task to
be pursued by all mission components in the field, and
by both the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
and the Department of Field Support at Headquarters.
Let me also recall that we are currently witnessing
new experiments in some pivotal peacekeeping
concepts. The authorization for more robust and
offensive mandates, which may pose serious risks to
the protection of civilians, requires an even higher and
more careful degree of planning and training. It is also
essential to ensure that peacekeeping missions have the
capabilities and resources they need to discharge their
protection responsibilities as effectively as possible.
Too many missions lack the equipment, personnel or
assets that are necessary to properly protect civilians.

The humanitarian imperative that should guide the
United Nations requires that the protection of civilians
be implemented in a universal and non-selective manner.
It is worth recalling, in that regard, that multilateral
efforts must comply with international human rights
law and international humanitarian law, including in
the context of the fight against terrorism.

We should also reflect on the use of new weapon
technologies, particularly the use of drones. As the
Secretary-General emphasizes in his report, the use of
such technologies raises important concerns over

"compliance with international human rights law
and with the international humanitarian law rules
of distinction, proportionality and precaution"
(S/2013/689, para. 26).

The International Committee of the Red Cross
has also underlined that there can be no doubt that
international humanitarian law applies to new weaponry
and to all new technology used in warfare.

One should not underestimate the complexities
that arise from the use of such new autonomous
weapons systems and their extraterritorial deployment,
which, especially when armed, may violate airspace
sovereignty, including in areas outside of conflict
zones. Many elements have to be carefully considered,
such as the fact that armed drones subject targeted
countries, communities, families and individuals to a
high degree of asymmetric vulnerability, in defiance of
international law, international humanitarian law and
human rights.

When discussing the protection of civilians, one
should also note that the adoption of sanctions may
have a profound negative impact in the lives of the
civilian population, while not necessarily contributing
to the solution of a crisis. As a matter of fact, the rush
to economic sanctions may aggravate situations of
concern, instead of resolving them. In many occasions,
it creates a logic ofpunishment and isolation, instead of
a dynamic of dialogue and persuasion.

The situation in Syria serves as an example in
that regard. The international community has failed
so far to reach an agreement to end the provision
of weapons to parties in conflict, which would be
instrumental in protecting civilians and would send
a clear message indicating that there is no military
solution to the conflict. On the other hand, some States
have decided to adopt unilateral economic sanctions,
which, as demonstrated by the Human Rights Council's
Independent International Commission of Inquiry on
the Syrian Arab Republic, end up having a harmful
impact on the Syrian civilian population.

Brazil believes that the fifth revision of the
aide-memoire prepared by the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and adopted by
the Council today (S/PRST/2014/3, annex) is a useful
and practical lessons-learned guide. We hope that it
will further contribute to the concrete implementation
of the Council's decisions on the protection of civilians
in armed conflict. The Council can count on Brazil's
support for that goal.
