Mrs. Patterson (United States of America): As
mandated by United Nations Security Council
resolution 1546 (2004), I am pleased to report to the
Security Council, on behalf of the 30 countries making
up the Multinational Force, on the efforts and progress
of the Force in fulfilling its mandate.

There have been important developments since
our last report. Most notably, the Iraqi people met
another critical milestone by submitting a draft
Constitution for referendum. We congratulate the Iraqis
on their steady and courageous progress in their
political transition. We urge all Iraqis to eschew
violence and participate in the referendum and
elections as they set the course for Iraq's future.

The insurgents remain capable, adaptable and
intent on carrying out attacks against Iraqi civilians,
officials and security forces, with the goal of
destabilizing and de-legitimizing the Iraqi Government
in order to pursue their own goals.

We witnessed - and the Council condemned -
the atrocious murders of members of the Transitional
National Assembly, a member of the constitutional
Drafting Committee, a Committee adviser, officials,
electoral workers and countless other Iraqis, as well as
appalling attacks on senior Algerian, Egyptian and
Pakistani diplomats, and Iraqi and multinational forces.

The total number of terror incidents has been
relatively steady in the post-election period, with
attacks concentrated in four of Iraq's 18 provinces. The
frequency of attacks on Iraq's infrastructure, such as
electricity generation and oil facilities, has decreased
since the election, but they continue to have an adverse
impact on the availability of electricity and on oil
revenues.

As previously reported, the goal of the
Multinational Force is to assist Iraqis in providing for
their own security. The capacity of Iraqi Security
Forces is increasing, reducing the influence and
effectiveness of insurgents, and strengthening Iraqi
rule-of-law capabilities. The Force and the coalition, in
close coordination with the Iraqi Government, are
helping to strengthen Iraqi law enforcement, justice,
and corrections systems as well.

In addition, the Multinational Force works with
the Iraqi Government and security forces, international
donors, and national and international non-
governmental organizations to complete critical
infrastructure projects, ranging from water purification
facilities and electrical power stations to educational
infrastructure, medical facilities and administrative
buildings. During July and August alone, the
Multinational Force in the central-south sector
completed approximately 100 reconstruction projects.

Turning to progress in training the Iraqi security
forces, the Iraqi Government, working with the
Multinational Force, has identified a force structure to
meet Iraq's needs for internal and external security.
The majority of those personnel have completed
individual entry training and have been equipped.

As of 19 September, there were a total of 193,000
trained and equipped Iraqi security forces. That
included 104,000 police, highway patrol and other
forces under the Ministry of the Interior, as well as
89,000 in the army, air force and navy.

Even as the Multinational Force helps build and
train the Iraqi security forces, Iraqi forces are
employed in active combat operations. A key indicator
of progress is the Iraqi security forces' role in the
recent counter-insurgency campaign in Tal Afar.
Eleven Iraqi combat units were employed as
independent manoeuvre elements during that operation.

Iraqi security forces, in partnership with the
Multinational Force, increasingly conduct the full
spectrum of counter-insurgency operations to isolate
and neutralize former regime extremists and foreign
terrorists. Special border forces consisting of more than
17,000 trained and equipped personnel are arrayed in
36 battalions that man 258 border forts around Iraq. To
stem the flow of foreign fighters, priority has been
placed on securing the Iraqi-Syrian border.

To further advance Iraqi capacity for independent
operations, the Multinational Force, in partnership with
the Iraqi Ministry of Defence, has implemented a
programme to embed military transition teams at the
battalion, brigade and division levels. Those teams
provide transition readiness assessments, identifying
areas of progress and shortcomings, ultimately
preparing individual units to assume independent
control of their area of responsibility.

While the Multinational Force's work is far from
complete, it has already been able to transfer some
security responsibilities. The following are some
examples. On 1 June, the Multinational Force officially
transferred full responsibility for security at a base in
Dibbis to the Iraqi army. On 21 August, the
Multinational Force turned over Camp Zulu in
as-Suwayrah, Iraq, in the central-south sector, to the
Iraqi army. On 31 August, the Iraqi Base Support Unit
assumed control of all perimeter force protection in a
sector in Kirkuk. On 6 September, the Multinational
Force handed over security responsibility in Najaf.
Iraqi army units continue to assume security
responsibility in the western region. They are currently
conducting independent security and offensive
operations in Rawah and combined zone
reconnaissance near the Syrian border.

The Multinational Force and the Iraqi
Government are developing a conditions-based security
plan to define the environment necessary for further
and greater transfers of responsibility from the
Multinational Force to the Iraqi security forces.

Per resolution 1546 (2004), the Multinational
Force, notably the Georgians and the Romanians,
continue to take all necessary measures to contribute to
the maintenance of security and stability in Iraq so
that, inter alia, the United Nations can fulfil its role in
assisting the Iraqi people. The United Nations has
made important contributions in Iraq, especially in the
constitutional process. The United Nations continues to
have leading roles, including supporting the Iraqis in
the October referendum and the December election and
helping to coordinate reconstruction and donor
assistance. We urge the United Nations to assume its
role fully and to deploy the necessary experts rapidly.

We remind Member States that as the United
Nations expands its activities in Iraq, its security needs
increase. We attach priority to our efforts to ensure full
security coverage for the United Nations and welcome
the contributions of South Korea and Mongolia in Irbil.
We encourage countries to consider providing
monetary and/or troop assistance for this effort.

Success will be achieved when Iraqis themselves
can guarantee their own liberty, security and prosperity.
Training Iraqi security forces to take over primary
responsibility for security is critical. Continued
progress in national reconciliation will also assist Iraqi
security forces development and hasten the process of
bringing security and stability.

The international community, particularly Iraq's
neighbours, and especially Syria, must do more to stop
foreign terrorists entering Iraq and retarding efforts to
stabilize and secure the country.

Finally, the Multinational Force and the
combined efforts of the Multinational Force and Iraqi
security forces continue to provide a shield for
democracy to take shape, evolve and take hold in Iraq.
The Multinational Force remains committed to staying
the course and to ensuring success. We in this Chamber
also owe it to the Iraqi people to do our part to help
ensure success.

