Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I too thank all our briefers
this morning

I want to start by commending the countries of
the region for their very valuable efforts for peace and
security in the Sahel. We understand how those efforts
are carried out under very difficult circumstances, and
I take the opportunity to express our condolences for
the loss of lives among security forces and civilians.
We share the grave concern about the deteriorating
security situation in the region. We are especially
worried about the situation in central Mali and the
spill-over of violence to Burkina Faso and the Niger.
The high number of civilian casualties and allegations
of violations of human rights and of international
humanitarian law are alarming. I think our briefers
rightly underlined the effect that all this has on the
people, not least the youth, of the region.

We therefore welcome the determination of the
G-5 Sahel countries to make a united effort to meet the
security challenges. We are encouraged by the steps
taken so far in the operationalization of the G-5 Sahel
Joint Force, as well as the extensive support provided
by partners, including not least the European Union.
We know from our experience in the Security Council
how regional efforts and cooperation provide such a
huge and important boost to any United Nations efforts
for peace.

It is now crucial to swiftly implement the remaining
elements of resolution 2391 (2017). Creating the
conditions for outstanding troops to be deployed and the
police component of the Joint Force to be established
without delay should be a priority. To ensure the full
functioning and credibility of the Force, authority over
battalions must be transferred to the Force Commander.
A new timeline for reaching full operational capacity
should be defined soon, as others have said this
morning. The further development and clarification
of the Joint Force's strategic concept of operations are
equally important. Clarity on the desired end state
would demonstrate unity of purpose and bolster donor
confidence.

As stated in the Secretary-General's report
(S/2018/ 1006), respect for human rights and international
humanitarian law will be a key determining factor for
the success of the Joint Force. It is imperative that
alleged human rights violations, including those related
to the operations of the Joint Force, be prevented and
investigated. Perpetrators must be held to account.

We appreciate initiatives aimed at increasing
confidence between populations and the G-5 Sahel
countries' security forces. We are encouraged by the
continued work on the establishment of a robust human
rights and international humanitarian law compliance
framework. The operational and logistical support
provided by the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA)
to the Joint Force is important. At the same time, we
continue to emphasize that this support should not
affect MINUSMA's capacity to implement its own
mandate and strategic priorities in Mali.

As we move forward, options for further United
Nations support must be seriously considered.
Predictable and reliable funding is vital if the Joint
Force is to be able to carry out planning and operations
in an effective and sustainable manner. To achieve that,
it is imperative in turn that the Force live up to existing
standards and expectations.

The full implementation of the Agreement
on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali remains key.
Achieving long-term stability and sustaining peace in
the region also require taking a holistic and inclusive
approach. The Joint Force needs to be embedded within
a larger political and institutional framework, as also
emphasized by the Secretary-General. We welcome
the establishment of the support group for the Joint
Force, but note that further efforts to enhance strategic
direction are needed. That must be carried out in close
coordination with regional structures and organizations.

Durable peace and stability requires a combination
of security and development measures. In that regard,
we appreciate the joint efforts by regional actors, the
African Union and the European Union with the United
Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel and the
United Nations Support Plan for the Sahel. That Plan
now provides a unique opportunity for more coherent
and coordinated international support. The upcoming
donor coordination conference in December, which
will discuss the priority investment plan, will be
important. We note Secretary Sidikou's very good point
that pledges must be translated into real support.

Earlier this week the annual session of the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) also focused on
the Sahel and the joint PBC-Economic and Social
Council meeting on climate change. There was strong
support for the priorities identified in the United
Nations Integrated Strategy, including focusing on
economic growth, governance and climate change.
The importance of youth and increasing women's
participation was also highlighted. It is important
that the PBC continue to engage in order to mobilize
support, sustain international attention and coordinate
efforts. The Peacebuilding Commission remains a
unique platform for convening actors, bringing about
a holistic understanding of security and development
and politically accompanying countries and regions
in transition.

The Deputy Secretary-General and Sweden's
Minister for Foreign Affairs visited countries in the
Sahel region last July. We then organized a high-level
Council meeting on women and peace and security
(see S/PV.8306). The conclusions from that visit and
the meeting, as reflected in the presidential statement
on the United Nations Office for West Africa and the
Sahel (S/PRST/2018/l6), emphasize the importance
of enhancing the role of women in preventing and
resolving conflict and building peace.

Sweden remains committed to supporting Mali
and the Sahel in their efforts to enhance security and
development and build sustainable peace. In addition to
our substantial troop contribution to MINUSMA, our
broad commitment includes support through the EU as
well as bilateral and regional development cooperation
and humanitarian assistance. Strong international
support, a united Security Council and effective
regional cooperation through the G-5 Sahel will be key
for the Sahel region's forward progress towards peace
and stability.
