Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, I extend my
congratulations on the commemoration of International
Women's Day, a day on which we celebrate the progress
made and raise awareness on the work that lies ahead in

order to achieve gender equality.

Returning to the theme at hand, we wish to thank
Ms. Angelina Nyajima Simon Jial and Mr. David
Shearer for their important briefings on the situation in
South Sudan.

Since the signing of the Revitalized Agreement on
the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South
Sudan last year, some progress has been made in the
situation in South Sudan. For example, the number of
victims of political violence has decreased, opposition
political leaders can move freely in Juba and can
participate in the peace process and some displaced
persons have returned to their places of origin.

Nevertheless, that modest progress is fragile and
easily reversible. In this precarious environment, threats
against civilians and the humanitarian crisis persist.
Sexual violence continues to rise, intercommunal
conflicts linger and humanitarian personnel are still
being blocked access. Humanitarian personnel must
be able to move freely without restriction in those
territories. The Government of South Sudan must
also live up to its responsibility to protect, including
through the full implementation of the Revitalized
Agreement. More substantive progress is critical. The
signatory parties must resolve their differences and put
in place measures to reach a timely political solution
to the crisis. Regional and international stakeholders
must focus on and fully support the process to resolve
the conflict and enable the United Nations Mission in
South Sudan (UNMISS) to play a supporting role.

In addition to the political crisis, we are concerned
about civilian vulnerability and the grim reports of
human rights violations and sexual violence. It is
unthinkable that in a period of 10 days, more than 100
women and girls were sexually assaulted in Bentiu, and
that the prevalence of such acts in 2018 was significantly
higher than in 2017. Such violations, kidnappings and
other sexual crimes are a constant occurrence in this
conflict. It is alarming that those instances of abuse
are not investigated, persecuted or sanctioned, and
that the Government's efforts to eradicate such actions
are insufficient.

That leads us to wonder whether there is truly
the necessary will to put an end to this cruel reality.
Impunity should be the rare exception, not the norm. We
call on the Government of South Sudan and the parties
to hold the perpetrators accountable, regardless of rank
or seniority, and submit them to justice in accordance
with the 2014 joint communique, and to honour their
commitment to the action plan of the Office of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict.

In that regard, we welcome the initiative of the
South Sudan People's Defence Forces to develop and
endorse their own action plan, to be launched next week.
We also commend the Government of South Sudan for
ratifying the Optional Protocol to the Convention on
the Rights of the Child on the Involvement of Children
in Armed Conflict, and we hope that the Government's
action plan on this issue will be revised to address the
six serious violations committed against children.
We also welcome the setting up of mobile courts
and the upcoming launch of a special court in Juba
to hear cases on sexual and gender-based violence.
Nevertheless, it is vital to establish without delay the
independent hybrid court for South Sudan and the other
transitional justice mechanisms. It is also essential to
provide comprehensive services to survivors of sexual
violence and to ensure that conflict-related sexual
violence is addressed as a central element of the 2018
Revitalized Agreement.

It is the responsibility of UNMISS to support
those processes and to promote the political will to
implement them. It is crucial to invest in mediation and
peacebuilding efforts that are led by women and youth.
Even though the Revitalized Agreement includes
important provisions on women and peace and security,
including the requirement of a minimum composition
of 35 per cent women in important decision-making
bodies, only one of the mechanisms and committees
have done so, while the Joint Transitional Security
Committee and the Joint Defence Board do not have
a single female member. The quota provisions are
not optional. We therefore call upon the parties to the
agreement to follow through on that commitment.

This crisis has destroyed the living conditions of
the people and forced more than 4.2 million people
to leave their homes. The number of people in need
of humanitarian assistance in 2019 is 7 million, half
of whom are suffering from severe food insecurity.
Given those circumstances and as we prepare to renew
the UNMISS mandate, we need the political will
and leadership to face these challenges. It is time to
redouble our efforts in South Sudan. The failure of the
peace agreement is unthinkable. Even though it is not
a perfect tool, it is what we have available to ensure
sustainable peace. As Mr. Shearer said, this is plan A.
There is no plan B.

