Mr. Petrella (Argentina) (interpretation from Spanish): I wish to begin, Mr. President, by conveying to
you our most respectful greetings. You represent a
country that has long played a central role in international
affairs. The end of the cold war has enhanced your
country's great capacity to have a decisive influence on
events. For those reasons, and because of your own vast
professional and personal experience, we are confident
that you are ideally qualified to ensure that work on this
item is crowned with success.

I wish also to pay tribute to Ambassador Park of the
Republic of Korea for the way in which he guided the
work of the Council last month.

I cordially congratulate the People's Republic of
China and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland on the dialogue that has made possible

 

the transfer of Hong Kong, which we have been following
closely thanks to modern communications technology.

Argentina is participating in this debate on Angola for
the following reasons: first, because of our continuing
commitment to international peace and security and our
friendship towards the Angolan people and their democracy;
secondly, because Angola is part of the Ibero-Lusitanian
cultural community, with which Argentina itself is deeply
identified; and finally, because we possess geographical
links with Angola because of its Atlantic presence and its
active participation in the zone of peace and cooperation of
the South Atlantic.

Having said that, I believe that we have reason to
renew our appeal to the Government of Angola and to
UNITA to resolve the issues that impede the
implementation of the Lusaka agreements, to bring an end
to tension in the North-East of Angola, to extend State
administration throughout the country, and to move forward
with demobilization. In that context, we believe that a
meeting between President Dos Santos and Mr. Savimbi
would be conducive to the common objective of peace. The
opportunity that has arisen with the 11 April establishment
of the Government of Unity and National Reconciliation
should not be wasted.

We are grateful to the Secretary-General for his most
recent report, and we support the establishment of a United
Nations observer mission in Angola (MON UA) to succeed
the United Nations Angola Verification Mission (UNAVEM. III), to whose members we pay tribute. We are confident
that, through its political, civilian police, human rights and
military components, MONUA will make an important
contribution for the Angolan people. We therefore support
the draft resolution before the Security Council, by which
it would establish the observer mission.

I conclude by recalling that Angola achieved its
independence through military and political struggles that
took place in its territory and here in the United Nations, in
the Special Committee on the Situation with Regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples. In both
arenas, a number of countries that sit on the Security
Council played a constructive, key role. Today, the problem
must be addressed with the same spirit and the same
determination.

