Mr. Khalilzad (United States of America): It is
my pleasure to report to today on behalf of the
Multinational Forces in Iraq (MNF-I), as requested by
Security Council resolutions 1546 (2004), 1637 (2005),
1723 (2006) and 1790 (2007).

I was pleased to hear the report on the work of
the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq
(UNAMI) and to see the progress it is making under
the leadership of Special Representative De Mistura,
particularly in helping to address issues associated with
article 140 of the Iraqi Constitution. We look forward
to its anticipated contributions to meeting all objectives
of resolution 1770 (2007) and appreciate the
Secretariat's support for the UNAMI mission.

We are pleased that the Council unanimously
adopted resolution 1790 (2007) on 18 December,
extending the mandate of MNF-I for another year and
allowing Iraq time to achieve the objectives it has set
for itself as an independent and sovereign State.

The United States shares with the Iraqi people the
goal of achieving a secure, stable and democratic Iraq
at peace with itself and its neighbours. It was with that
goal in mind one year ago that President Bush
approved an increase in our troop strength in Iraq so as
to help Iraqis secure the population, isolate extremists,
create the conditions for political and economic
progress, and accelerate the transition to Iraqi
responsibility.

The continued implementation of the New Way
Forward strategy, combined with the surge in overall
force levels in Iraq, has considerably improved levels
of security during the past quarter. Efforts to enhance
population security, such as the establishment of joint
security stations in key areas, have enhanced coalition
and Iraqi forces' ability to interact with local residents
and obtain information on insurgents and illegal militia
activities. Improved security is beginning to achieve
momentum that, if maintained, may lead to sustained
stability. The number of security incidents has fallen
significantly and is now at levels last seen in early
2005. Monthly overall attacks - those against Iraqi
security forces, civilians, the coalition forces and
infrastructure have been reduced by 60 per cent
since June 2007.

 

The overall reduction in security incidents can be
attributed to several factors, including the continued
decrease in the capabilities of Al-Qaida in Iraq and
militia extremists, increased tribal initiatives against
Al-Qaida and other extremists, Muqtada al-Sadr's
ceasefire order to his Jaish al-Mahdi militia, the
increased capability of Iraqi military and police, and
the sustained presence of coalition and Iraqi forces
among the population.

Today, we can look back at some of the gains of
the surge in MNF-I forces. Let me introduce some
specific examples.

The overall number of civilian casualties has
declined significantly this quarter and is now below the
level of February 2006, prior to the Samarra mosque
bombing. Coalition casualty rates have dropped as
well, and December 2007 saw the second-lowest death
toll of the war going back to May 2003. Another
striking trend is the reduction in ethno-sectarian attacks
and deaths, both of which decreased over 90 per cent in
Baghdad's security districts from January to December
2007. Weekly incidents involving improvised explosive
devices (IED) have fallen 68 per cent since the start of
Operation Phantom Thunder in late June 2006. That
drop in IED incidents may be attributed to the
disruption of insurgent networks that has hindered their
operational capability. Finally, high-profile attacks in
Iraq, such as car bombs and suicide attacks, have
declined by over 50 per cent since March 2007.
08-21255

There are currently 33 countries playing an
essential role to support security in Iraq, as part of
either coalition or UNAMI operations. Coalition
members other than the United States and Iraq
contribute approximately 10,300 troops to the coalition
and another 450 to support UNAMI. The specific
contributions run from major patrolling operations,
such as the 1,850-soldier-strong Georgian contingent
that operates in Wasit province, to the Albanian
contingent guarding an airfield, to the
37-soldier contingent of Bosnians who find and destroy
unexploded ordnance. These troops play an
indispensable role in the coalition's daily operations
and successes in Iraq.

The Government of Iraq is also moving forward
to take greater control of the country's security. Iraqi
forces conducted a surge of their own in 2007,
providing well over 100,000 more Iraqi police and
soldiers. As of 24 December 2007, the number of Iraqi
Defence and Interior Ministry personnel had risen to
516,646. Ten divisions, 34 brigades and 108 battalions
have the lead in counter-insurgency operations in their
areas of responsibility - an increase of one brigade
and five battalions since last quarter. And of all formed
Iraqi armed units, 77 per cent are rated as being able to
plan, execute and sustain operations with minimal or
no assistance from the coalition forces. The coalition
continues to transfer responsibility for security to the
Government of Iraq, which now has the lead security
responsibly for 9 out of 18 provinces. Prime Minister
Al-Maliki has pledged that Iraq will assume security
responsibility for the remaining nine provinces by the
end of 2008. The provinces under the coalition's
security control will continue to transition in the
coming months as Iraqi forces demonstrate their
readiness to assume this responsibility.

This transition to provincial Iraqi control is
proceeding as planned. On 29 October Karbala
province made the transition, and on 16 December
Basra province did the same. Over the previous four
months, Iraqi security forces had maintained their own
security and successfully demonstrated their readiness
to assume full responsibility over Iraq's second largest
city and its environment.

Bottom-up reconciliation in the provinces has
made significant advances. Local leaders, both Arab-
Sunni and Arab-Shia, are working with coalition
forces, provincial reconstruction teams and the

Government of Iraq to improve security and economic
conditions in their areas.

There are about 80,000 local citizens who have
volunteered to fight against extremists under coalition
force supervision in many parts of Iraq. These citizens
protect critical infrastructure in their neighbourhoods,
and some form neighbourhood watch groups.

Anbar province continues to show dramatic
improvement in security. A year ago, Anbar province
was the most violent province in Iraq, accounting for
more than 25 per cent of all attacks throughout the
country. Its citizens grew weary of the violence and
turmoil that plagued their province and began to
cooperate closely with Iraqi and coalition forces. The
Anbar awakening turned the tide in the fight against
Al-Qaida in Iraq in the Arab-Sunni tribal areas. Today,
local citizens are fighting Al-Qaida and working with
coalition and Iraqi forces to bring security to their
neighbourhoods. As a result, during this quarter attacks
in Anbar plummeted to less than 6 per cent of the total,
and life is rapidly returning to normal.

Despite these security gains, foreign terrorists
and suicide bombers still enter Iraq through Syria.
Syria must do more to stem these flows, including
instituting a stricter visa regime, detaining known
facilitators, increasing information-sharing with
countries of origin and transit and further enhancing
border security. The Iranian Islamic Revolutionary
Guard Corps continues to train, equip and fund Shia
extremists despite reported assurances to Prime
Minister Al-Maliki that Iran will cease lethal aid.

Iraq has come a long way, but much work
remains to be done. Looking ahead, we know that Iraq
faces challenges in several areas. In 2008, the
coalition's four main areas of focus for the Ministries
of Defence and Interior and their forces will continue
to be: to develop ministerial capacity; to improve the
capabilities of the Iraqi forces; to build specific
enabling capabilities, including logistics, sustainment
and training capabilities; and to support the expansion
of the Iraqi forces. Politically, Iraq's leaders need to
foster an atmosphere of cooperation and compromise,
placing national interests over parochial ones. They
must work together to address issues such as
corruption and terrorist financing and to pass laws on
provincial powers, hydrocarbons and elections, to lay
the groundwork for provincial elections that are long
overdue.

The Government must also address the mounting
problem of corruption, including repairing the damage
to the Commission on Public Integrity. This quarter,
the Council of Representatives of Iraq overcame
significant hurdles to pass the de-Baathification reform
bill. This legislation, which would allow many former
members of the Baath party to assume positions in
Government, took months to achieve and involved
considerable compromise and collaboration by many
political leaders. The Presidency Council is currently
considering the ratification.

Turning to economic issues, Iraqi ministries
executed 43 per cent of their capital budget as of
30 September 2007, which is a substantial
improvement over full-year 2006 budget execution.
This investment in the economy should help to
stimulate growth and reduce vulnerability. In many
parts of Iraq, the reopening of schools, clinics and
markets and improvements in essential services all
suggest improvements resulting from hard-fought
security gains. Year-on-year inflation fell from 65 per
cent in 2006 to 16 per cent through November 2007.
The International Monetary Fund projected that Iraq
will have modest growth of 1.3 per cent in 2007 but
significant improvement in the coming year. In
addition, 44 countries agreed to debt-reduction for the
Government of Iraq on Paris Club terms.

International and regional engagement also
continue to improve. We are grateful for the Secretary-
General's participation in the expanded neighbours
ministerial meeting, in Istanbul in November 2007, and
for UNAMI's offer to support the Government of Iraq
in coordinating future meetings. UNAMI has played an
important role in the development of the terms of
reference for an ad hoc expanded neighbours' support
mechanism office to be established in Baghdad.
UNAMI's commitment to provide technical assistance
and personnel for the office will be elemental to its
success and will help the expanded neighbours process
to continue to serve as a valuable forum for Iraq and its
neighbours to address common security concerns and
create opportunities for greater cooperation.

UNAMI has also demonstrated its leadership and
its role as co-lead for the International Compact with
Iraq and in its support for the United Nations
Development Group, which administers one of the Iraq
trust funds of the International Reconstruction Fund
Facility for Iraq. In recent months, UNAMI has
contributed substantially to setting up the secretariat
that is helping Iraq and its donor partners to implement
the reforms and initiatives that are called for in the
Compact and helping Iraq to achieve economic self-
sufficiency.

Iraq is now a different place from one year ago.
Much hard work remains, but levels of violence are
significantly reduced and solid progress is being made.
Hope is returning to Baghdad and returning to towns
and villages throughout the country. Iraqis who fled the
violence are beginning to return and to rebuild their
lives. Some 20,000 Iraqis were able to travel to Mecca
by air and ground from 11 December to 7 January to
perform the hajj. In preparation for that, the Mosul
airport reopened to civilian flights after being closed
for several years.

In my remarks today, I have described how
tactical and operational momentum is continuing to
build. The key to channeling this hard-won momentum
into long-term success will be the willingness and
ability of national leaders to capitalize upon these local
gains, pass and implement remaining key legislation
and promote reconciliation. Success in Iraq is
important, not only for the Iraqi people, but for Iraq's
neighbours, the region and the entire international
community. I renew our call upon all parties,
particularly Iraq's neighbours, to take concrete steps to
sustain this momentum.

