Judge Robinson: It is indeed an honour for me to
appear before you today in my capacity as President of
the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) and to do so under the presidency
of Turkey.

My remarks today will be brief, as the details of
the measures the Tribunal has undertaken to complete
its mandate are set out in my written biannual report
(see S/2009/252), which has been duly submitted to the
Council.

Since my most recent presentation before you, the
Tribunal has continued to focus its energy on
completing its work as expeditiously as possible. Three
appeal judgments have been rendered, including in
some of our most complex cases, and seven trials are
being heard simultaneously in our three courtrooms.

Of the remaining caseload, the trial of two
accused, Stanisie and Simatovie, will begin tomorrow,
5 June 2009, and that of Karadiie will commence in
late August 2009. Both Tolimir and the final case of
Mic'o Stanisie and Stojan Zupljanin will commence in
September 2009.

Our current estimates suggest that all but three of
our trials will conclude in 2010, two more in early
2011 and the final trial, that of Karadzie, in early 2012.

As you can see, our trial activity is entering the
final stretch. However, one serious hurdle remains: the
continued flight from justice of Ratko Mladic' and
Goran Hadzic'. The failure to bring these two men to
justice will leave a stain on the Security Council's
historic contribution to peacebuilding in the former
Yugoslavia.

Allow me to turn to the current projection of the
remaining appeals, including those anticipated from the
ICTY and our sister tribunal, the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR), it being recalled that the
two Tribunals share an appellate function. Following a
detailed analysis, the Tribunal estimated that, absent a
redeployment of eight trial judges to the Appeals
Chamber upon the completion of their trial work, the
ICTY/ICTR Appeals Chamber would be occupied with
appellate work into 2015. However, with the
redeployment of four ICTY and four ICTR judges,
most appellate work will be completed by the end of
2012, with four cases spilling into the first half of
2013.

This proposal for deployment was presented in
the Tribunal's biennium budget for 2010-2011 as part
of the Tribunal's downsizing programme and is a
matter that is now formally before the Security Council
in the form of a request for an extension of the
mandates of the permanent trial and appeal judges and
the Tribunal's ad litem judges. In this regard, I thank
the Austrian Chair of the Security Council Working
Group on the ad hoc Tribunals and the Office of the
Legal Counsel for their assistance in expediting the
consideration of these proposals to ensure that the
work of the Tribunal is not frustrated.

I note, however, that the heavy appellate
workload of the Tribunal is in part due to the failure of
rule 11 bis transfers from the Rwanda Tribunal to

national jurisdictions. Rwanda was found not to have
sufficient capacity to try such cases, and in response
the international community is taking measures to
address this deficiency. But perhaps more troubling is
the lack of capacity or readiness to try such cases
present in European countries, where the ICTR had
also sought to transfer cases pursuant to rule 11 bis. I
consider this to be a critical issue that needs to be
addressed by the Security Council and the international
community. Surely, countries with highly developed
judicial systems could make a greater effort to accept a
limited number of 11 bis transfers. In so doing, they
would make a real contribution to the international
community's efforts to bring the work of the Tribunal
to completion in full respect of due process.

It may be that the Security Council's proscription
in paragraph 6 of resolution 1534 (2004), which
requested the Tribunal not to try cases involving
intermediate and lower rank accused, was inexorably
linked to the transfer of cases to the States of the
former Yugoslavia. However, with the blessing of the
Security Council, we could make a renewed effort to
transfer to a developed country one major case of a
senior accused. That move alone would save one trial
bench 14 months of court sitting, not to count the
required time for consideration of an appeal.

While the Tribunal continues to make every effort
to expedite its work, it has identified some factors that
may cause delays to its schedule, which need to be
more extensively addressed. First is the issue of
translation. Observing the United Nations standard of
5.5 pages per day per translator, the need for extensive
referencing and indispensable review process to ensure
quality translation requires significant time. The
situation is further aggravated by the extraordinary
demands made on our limited language resources.
Owing to the highly technical and often confidential
nature of the legal translation work required,
outsourcing translations has necessarily been restricted
in scope.

Efforts continue to identify ways of minimizing
the impact of the need for translation on trial and
appeal schedules and to identify and recruit qualified
translators. However, 20 vacancies remain in the
language service, and recruitment is hindered by the
completion strategy. In most cases, it takes at least
three to five months to recruit a suitable candidate. As
the ICTY is facing increasing competition in hiring
qualified language staff without retention incentives, it
is likely that the number of translators will decrease
rather than increase in the future.

Another matter which has had a negative impact
on the expeditious progress of trials is contempt
proceedings. I need only mention the Seselj trial,
which has been adjourned since March 2009. In light
of the impact of contempt proceedings on the
completion of our trials, I established a working group
to examine ways in which contempt may be dealt with
without delaying proceedings. That report will be
submitted to me shortly, and I am hopeful that it will
contain concrete measures that Judges may adopt when
faced with contempt issues during their trials.
Additionally, the Rules Committee is considering the
adoption of a rule to allow the admission of written
statements of witnesses who are kept away from trial
through intimidation.

Let me return to the issue of staff retention; it is a
difficulty which cuts across all areas of the Tribunal's
operations. In the past three months, we have lost 82
staff members at a rough average of 27 per month.
Much has been said about the need for highly qualified
personnel for the orderly completion of our work. I
appeal to the Security Council to exercise foresight so
that concrete measures can be implemented now to
retain our staff. The only measure that has been taken
so far by the General Assembly is resolution 63/256,
adopted at its sixty-third session on 24 December 2008.
In paragraph 5 of that resolution, the General Assembly
requested the Secretary-General

"to use the existing contractual frameworks to
offer contracts to staff, in line with dates of
planned post reductions in accordance with the
relevant prevailing trial schedules, in order to
remove uncertainty with regard to future
employment with the aim of ensuring that the
Tribunals have the necessary capacity to
complete their respective mandates effectively".

It is my intention to ensure the implementation of
the resolution as soon as possible, but even so I doubt
that this will be enough. I do not want to return here in
six months and be berated by the Security Council for
a report that indicates substantial delays in the
anticipated schedule I am presenting today due to the
continuing departures of our uniquely qualified and
experienced staff. I have a genuine fear that we will
soon find ourselves without sufficient staff, but it
appears to me that Member States that are in a position

to assist have adopted an attitude of uninterestedness in
this matter. I am not normally given to hyperbolic
comments, but if we continue to lose staff at the rate of
27 per month I fear that one day the judges may come
to work and find themselves alone.

The Tribunal is doing all it can to retain its staff,
but without appropriate assistance and concrete
measures it will not be successful. This is a matter that
I will continue to raise with the Secretary-General, the
Office of Human Resources Management and the
Controller, and the Security Council's active support in
this matter would be very helpful.

That said, I note that all indications are that our
request for extensions of our judges consonant with our
remaining work load will not be granted by the
Security Council and that, at most, all judges will be
granted an extension until 31 December 2010. Now,
this is a political decision taken by the Security
Council, but I cannot impress on the Security Council
enough the signal such a piecemeal approach to
extensions of the mandates of our judges sends to our
staff. Such an approach only operates to enhance their
desire to secure other employment as soon as possible.
I would ask the Council to seriously reconsider the
wisdom of its approach to this issue.

I must thank the Security Council Working Group
on the ad hoc international tribunals and the Austrian
Chair, for their work on the residual mechanism. The
Tribunal is grateful to the Office of the Legal Counsel
for the extensive opportunities it gave the Tribunal to
provide input for the report of the Secretary-General on
the budgetary and administrative aspects of the residual
mechanism.

Let me close my remarks by stating, in the words
of Henry Wadsworth Longfellow: "Great is the art of
beginning, but greater is the art of ending." In the very
near future, our cases will be completed. Provided that
the Security Council ensures that the Tribunal is given
sufficient resources to complete its work expeditiously
and fairly and provided that sufficient incentives are
adopted immediately to retain staff, great indeed will
be the art of our ending.

