Mr. Ke (Cambodia): At the outset, my delegation would like to congratulate Viet Nam on assuming the presidency of the Security Council for this month. We wish to thank Viet Nam for convening this important debate. I would also like to thank Secretary-General Antonio Guterres and the Chair of The Elders, Mrs. Mary Robinson, for their informative briefings yesterday (see S/PV.8699). Cambodia aligns itself with the statements delivered by the representative of the Philippines on behalf of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) and by the representative of Azerbaijan on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries. As we enter the new decade, it is important to reflect on the difficulties and successes the global community has faced since the turn of the twenty- first century. Despite tremendous achievements in the sciences and technologies, with the Internet bringing people closer together, it is unfortunate that conflicts, crises and power politics have left a lasting negative imprint on the world. The year 2020 marks the seventy- fifth anniversary of the United Nations and calls for concerted, collaborative action. The United Nations was established to maintain international peace and security, safeguard human rights and promote international development, with the Charter of the United Nations guiding the global community in the achievement of those aspirations. As is highlighted in the concept note (S/2020/1, annex), the Charter of the United Nations has helped Member States record significant achievements and progress in fostering peace, security and international cooperation, while its purposes and principles have become the foundation of international law. As such, the Charter is the central pillar upon which peace, security and global development must stand. In that light, the Royal Government of Cambodia would like to reiterate its unyielding commitment to the purposes and principles of the Charter. Cambodia strongly believes that the principles of respect for the sovereign equality, independence and territorial integrity of States, as well as non-interference in the domestic affairs of States, play an important part in building long-lasting peace and prosperity for all. In seeking to promote respect for the Charter with a view to safeguarding the three pillars of the United Nations, my delegation would like to focus on the following points. First, our collective whole must ensure that the United Nations is a more responsive, transparent and accountable institution for the future. The changing realities of the twenty-first century require the Council to act decisively in a cooperative and transparent approach. One way for the Security Council to promote effective peace and security action, in line with the purposes and principles of the Charter, is by strengthening its peacekeeping engagement, including through the provision of clear, focused mandates for missions. Since 2006, Cambodia has deployed thousands of its peacekeepers to some of the most demanding missions across the world. Experience shows that clear peacekeeping mandates, together with political support and sufficient resources, as well as adequate financing and logistical support, are key elements necessary for the United Nations to effectively safeguard and protect the most vulnerable civilian populations in conflict situations. Secondly, the international community must focus its efforts on the peaceful settlement of disputes, which is a central tenet of the Charter. The prevention of conflict must be at the core of our work, with early and decisive action taken to curtail any unnecessary escalation of disputes. Moreover, greater political will must be exercised by all parties. The promotion of socioeconomic development should be increasingly focused, with purposeful cooperation among. all United Nations Members. That will further reinforce respect for the Charter while promoting peace and security globally. Furthermore, States should make every effort to resolve their disputes peacefully through negotiation, mediation and dialogue. Indeed, in upholding the Charter of the United Nations, respect for international law should be promoted, while double standards in the application of such law and the use of economic coercive measures against States must be avoided. As I conclude, allow me to note that regional organizations such as ASEAN, of which my country is a member, have taken it upon themselves to further promote the purposes and principles enshrined in the Charter and have closely collaborated with the United Nations in that respect. The Royal Government of Cambodia will continue its active work to uphold the three pillars of the United Nations, namely, the maintenance of international peace and _ security, respect for human rights and development, in order to strengthen and promote the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations for the future.
