Mr. Wali (Nigeria): I thank you, Mr. President,
for organizing this important debate and for inviting
me to participate in it. I also thank your delegation for
the excellent concept note (S/2015/87, annex) provided
to guide our discussion. Let me also commend the
Secretary-General for his well-informed briefing.

As we look forward to celebrating this year the
seventieth anniversary of the founding of the United
Nations, reflecting on history and reaffirming our
strong commitment to the purposes and principles of
the Charter of the United Nations becomes not only
a desirable exercise but, indeed, an obligation. As
rightly noted in the concept note, the United Nations
has endured many trials and traversed an extraordinary
journey. Despite those trials, the United Nations has
remained an indispensable instrument for the good of
humankind. We cannot envisage a world without it.

The Charter, as the primary instrument binding
on all Member States, has stood the test of time. Its
pre-eminence as an international treaty is affirmed
by Article 103, which places the obligations of
Member States under the Charter over and above their
obligations under any other international agreement
or treaty. Despite its pre-eminence, however, we have
oftentimes seen cases where the Charter has played a
secondary role to national political expedience, where
international law has been interpreted in accordance
with the national interest and objectives have been
pursued not in compliance with the purposes and
principles of the Charter.
Nigeria firmly believes that there can be no
substitute to Charter principles, especially concerning
State sovereignty and all its ramifications under
international law. Respect for State sovereignty and
territorial integrity forms the very foundation of the
United Nations and remains at the core of the operating
principles of international law. We cannot dispose with
that for any reason, and we shall continue to defend it
as the most elemental obligation of all States to protect
and advocate.

The purposes of the United Nations as stated in
the Charter are as relevant today as they were in 1945,
when the world was just emerging from a disastrous
war. For the United Nations to achieve its purpose of
maintaining international peace and security, human
rights and sustainable development, all Member States
must show a strong commitment to acting on the
international stage in a manner that does not undermine
or diminish the effectiveness of the Charter of the
United Nations.

Acts of aggression and other hostile acts inimical
to international peace and security remain veritable
threats to the aspirations of the Charter. Where disputes
arise, it is essential that Member States use exclusively
pacific means to resolve them. That is the only path
to achieving solutions that will endure. Dialogue and
negotiation offer more reassuring guarantees of lasting
peace than the use or threat of use of force.

The Security Council, as the principal organ
of the United Nations, is charged with the primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security, and is therefore in a unique position
to promote the peaceful resolution of disputes. The
Council should explore all avenues for achieving that.
It should also remain open to collaboration with other
global players, including regional and subregional
organizations that have a significant role to play in the
pacific settlement of disputes.

It is important to reiterate that all United Nations
States Members should respect the sovereignty of other
States and refrain from actions that may infringe upon
it. Sovereign States under international law are meant to
have control over their domestic affairs without the fear
or threat of external interference. That is a hallmark
of political independence and it must be respected by
all Member States. It is a breach of that principle that
has been responsible for so many of the incidents of
conflict and instability around the world.

Contemporary international relations are becoming
increasingly complex, with multiple overlapping
dimensions. That sometimes leads to competition and a
clash of interests among States. Against that backdrop,
the way to minimize the risk of conflict in the conduct of
international relations is for States to act in accordance
with international law at all times. Experience shows
that attempts to distort international law on the basis
of national interests can generate tension and even lead
to conflict between States. Nigeria therefore enjoins all
States to respect their obligations under international
law. Mutually beneficial cooperation leading to
development, peace and security should be preferred
over and above competition irrevocably.

In a world that is fast becoming singular by virtue
of scientific and technological advances, accelerated
means of travel and instantaneous communication, the
development and prosperity of all countries and peoples
should constitute the foundation of our common security.
We are convinced of the need for all countries to have
a fair chance to develop and improve the lives of their
citizens. As we reach the target date for the Millennium
Development Goals (MDGs), deep disparities still exist
between the global North and the global South. Those
disparities can be seen across a broad range of indices,
including life expectancy, infant and maternal mortality,
per capita income, access to health care, access to clean
drinking water and in many other areas. Clearly, more
needs to be done to promote development in the global
South. The United Nations with its agencies, funds
and programmes is in a unique position to lead that
effort. Indeed, the Charter recognizes the need for the
Organization to promote international cooperation in
solving international problems, including problems of
an economic nature. It is appropriate, therefore, that the
United Nations is leading the global effort to elaborate
the post-2015 development agenda, the sustainable
development goals and the successive frameworks to
the MDGs.

Allow me once again to congratulate you,
Mr. President, for convening this important debate on
the critical issue of the pre-eminence of the Charter
of the United Nations. It is Nigeria's hope that, as we
steadily and assuredly move the United Nations upward
to loftier heights, we will ensure that its ability to solve
global challenges, particularly those of peace and
security, will be enhanced and made more effective.

