The President (spoke in French): I thank the
representative of Algeria for his kind words to me and
to my country, Benin. I should now like to make a
statement in my capacity as the Minister for Foreign
Affairs and African Integration of Benin.

I thank the Council members for their kind words
addressed to my country. My gratitude goes
particularly to my colleagues, the Ministers for Foreign
Affairs, as well as others, who have come to New York
to take active part in our thematic debate today,
engaging in forward-looking brainstorming with
respect to the situation of child soldiers, particularly in
Africa, within the framework of the report of the
Secretary-General on children and armed conflict.

The insertion of the situation of children affected
by armed conflict on the Security Council's agenda in
1998 demonstrated the determination of the
international community to put children and their
security at the centre of action aimed at maintaining
international peace and security. Genuine progress has
been made to improve and strengthen the legal arsenal
for protecting children - not only through the
unwavering commitment of the Secretary-General and
his Special Representative for Children and Armed
Conflict, but also through the role played by United
Nations missions and the United Nations Children's
Fund, along with the invaluable contributions of other
United Nations institutions, such as the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization
(UNESCO) and the United Nations Population Fund,
as well as national and international non-governmental
organizations. We pay a well-deserved tribute to all of
them here.

However, as seen in the latest, highly instructive
report of the Secretary-General, which is before the
Council today, this problem persists. We have seen a
striking dichotomy between the strict international
standards and the ongoing atrocities victimizing
children affected by armed conflict, compounded by
the impunity enjoyed by perpetrators of those
violations of international law and humanitarian
international law.

Beyond the intolerable practice of recruitment
and use of children as soldiers, this report highlights a
range of other serious abuses and major violations of
children's rights, which pose a true challenge to the
Security Council. That is why my country, Benin, has
proposed forward-looking brainstorming on this
subject. The aim here is to mobilize the international
community towards resolute action in order to bring
about an end to the practices we have condemned and
to put an end to the impunity enjoyed to date by those
who violate international standards in force in the area
of protection of children in situations of armed
conflict.

This also has to do with preventing violations and
abuses and promoting the reintegration of war-affected
children. In that respect, we fully endorse the
recommendations of the Secretary-General aimed at
implementing the relevant Council resolutions. We
reiterate here the need to scrupulously implement the
plan of action proposed by the Secretary-General in
accordance with paragraph 2 of resolution 1539 (2004)
to establish a monitoring and reporting mechanism,
which is needed by the Council in order to ensure
effective action to promote compliance with
international standards.

Beyond establishing such a mechanism, which we
believe is a top priority, and setting up ways to ensure
appropriate use of the information gathered, we need to
give specific attention to a number of key
considerations that have to do with coordinated and
effective action to promote the protection of children in
situations of armed conflict. From this standpoint, the
following three pillars of action deserve particular
attention.

First, we need to identify weaknesses in
international law in the area of the protection of
children affected by war and to address those
weaknesses. To that end, my country, Benin, proposes
establishing an open-ended working group under the
auspices of the General Assembly to study the issue of
reclassifying the crime of recruiting and using child
soldiers, with a view to treating it as a more serious
crime.

Clearly, this means undertaking a negotiation
process that would be aimed at achieving a consensus
on the need to reclassify this phenomenon - currently
considered as a war crime - as a crime against
humanity in view of its disturbing recent evolution and
the seriousness of the abuses seen in recent years,
which you all have mentioned in your statements and
which give this phenomenon some of the basic
characteristics of a crime against humanity. To be sure,
we have increasingly seen this in a context in which
the parties involved pursue a targeted policy of
widespread recruitment of children with the clear intent
to dehumanize them and make them into war machines
and true cannon fodder.

In addition, it is disturbing and revolting to note
that the grim statistics on the victims of armed
conflicts do not reflect the tens of thousands of

children - soldiers or non-soldiers - who die
annually in situations of armed conflict. Those
innocent victims - our hopes for tomorrow - die

anonymously and through the guilty indifference of all.

That is why we ask the international community
as a whole to work to make the standards of
international law greater deterrents in order to defuse
this time bomb that the abuses and violations
perpetrated against children affected by situations of
armed conflict represent for our societies. Benin, my
country, adheres fully to international instruments that
protect human rights. We invite the States that have not
yet done so to accede to the Convention on the Rights
of the Child. Benin has ratified the Convention and its
Optional Protocols, including the Optional Protocol on
the involvement of children in armed conflict, adopted
by the General Assembly on 25 May 2000, and in
addition made a binding statement setting the minimum
age for recruitment into the armed forces at 18.

The second direction for action would be to
develop a comprehensive and integrated transboundary
strategy aimed at the recovery, rehabilitation,
reinsertion and reintegration of child victims of
violations and abuses related to war situations. To do
that, we need to carry out a census of the children
concerned, including those older than 18, and an
assessment of institutional capacities at the
international and domestic levels, of the legislative and
regulatory framework at the national level and of the
potential of civil society, including the private sector.

The monitoring and reporting mechanism to be
created could be used by the United Nations to begin a
survey aimed at identifying shelter facilities and
assessing how well their capacities meet new specific
needs in protecting war-affected children so that we
can properly identify what resources should be
mobilized to ensure the recovery, rehabilitation and
reintegration or reinsertion of such children.
International actors must support efforts undertaken at
the local level and must support local grass-roots
communities in order to strengthen traditional child
protection norms. The establishment of child protection
advisers at the local level must be expanded to all
countries affected by this phenomenon.

The third direction that action should take would
be to articulate at the regional level - particularly in
the African region - a resolute policy that includes
practical measures and specific programmes to solve
the serious development problems that the
phenomenon of child soldiers poses for the societies
concerned, particularly African societies. In fact, if
nothing is done today, child soldiers will be
destabilizing elements for our States and for our young
democracies. These child victims of armed conflict,
who lack education or professional training and know
only the language of weapons, will be a potential
breeding ground for mercenaries, criminals and
outlaws if the international community - particularly
the Security Council - does not adopt strong measures
to save this young generation, which our societies are
in the process of losing.

Therefore, we recommend holding regional and
subregional seminars to address the following issues:
the link between the phenomenon of child soldiers and
the continent's socio-economic problems, such as
poverty and unemployment; the adaptation of bilateral
and multilateral assistance programmes to the specific
needs of child soldiers; the specific needs of girl
soldiers, who are often given very little attention in the
context of official disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programmes; the establishment by the
countries concerned of national focal points for child
soldiers and other conflict-affected children to better
coordinate financing at the subregional and
interregional levels; and, finally, the elaboration and
implementation of specialized educational and training
programmes, with international assistance, for children
affected by conflict situations.

My country, Benin, faithful to its political choice
to resolutely combat the phenomenon of child soldiers,
will host in Cotonou, during the week of 13 to 17 June
2005, a conference of Ministers for Foreign Affairs of
the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) to assess the role played by national
Governments and ECOWAS in protecting war-affected
children. We chose that week because 17 June each
year is dedicated to the African child. In that context,
we would like to appeal to members of the Council, the
United Nations system, our bilateral and multilateral
partners and non-governmental organizations to
support us in our efforts to organize, hold, follow up
and implement the outcome of the conference, which
will be along the lines of this public debate.

For us, today's debate is a point of departure for a
new impetus in mobilizing the international community
to ensure better protection for children in armed
conflict and to make significant progress in combating
the atrocities of which they are victims. To accomplish

that, we must adopt a draft resolution as soon as
possible to operationalize the monitoring and reporting
mechanism. To that end, we have before us a plan of
action to establish the mechanism, and We must
institute it in order to give ourselves the appropriate
tools to enable us to effectively undertake the
implementation phase described in the Secretary-
Genernl's report.

I new resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

As there are still a number of speakers inscribed
on my list. and in View of the lateness of the hour. I
propose. with the concurrence of members of the
Council. to suspend the meeting until 3.15 p.m.

The meeting was suspended at 1.40 p.m.
