Mr. Duval (Canada): The Canadian delegation is very
appreciative of the briefings provided by the Secretary-
General, Mr. Wolfensohn, Mr. Malloch Brown and
Dr. Peter Piot on ongoing efforts to address the unfolding
tragedy of AIDS in Africa. We also very much welcome
the profile given this crucial problem by the participation of
Vice-President Gore in this important meeting of the
Security Council. Canada has consistently argued that the
Council must broaden its definition of security to include
non-traditional threats, especially those which affect human
security. We commend you, Mr. President, and the
American delegation for giving the Security Council the
opportunity to consider the AIDS issue in the context of
peace and security in Africa. We also wish to commend the
work of Ambassador Greenstock of the United Kingdom
delegation, focused during December on difficult issues of
peace and security in Africa.

(spoke in French)

The AIDS pandemic represents a formidable threat to
the development of government institutions, economic
growth, political stability and human security in several
parts of the world. The figures that we heard this morning
show that in Africa this pandemic is more murderous than
war. The reality is that a third, if not half, of Africans
employed in the sectors of health, education, and security
and in the civil service are likely to die of AIDS over the
next five to 10 years. This is not just a human tragedy but
also a real threat to peace and stability in the countries
affected, which are already confronting many other
challenges. The efforts of African Governments to stem the
AIDS tide are hampered by civil strife, refugee flows, rapid
urbanization and poverty, each of which, in turn,
contributes to the further spread of HIV infection and
AIDS.

We must also consider the pandemic's impact on the
ability of African States to continue to play their part in
several peacekeeping operations around the world and in
Africa itself. In sub-Saharan Africa, Ministries of Defence
report averages of 20 to 40 per cent HIV positivity within
their armed services. As the disease progresses, this will
mean a loss of continuity at command level and within
the ranks of the army, and a reduction in the effectiveness
of prior peacekeeping training. Furthermore, in line with
the guidance provided by the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations, all peacekeepers, international observers and
relief aid workers need to fully understand, both
personally and professionally, the risks associated with
inappropriate sexual behaviour, and this is usually what
is involved.
Canada has been involved in the international fight
against AIDS since 1987. Total Canadian funding in
support of HIV/AIDS projects in developing countries
reached $22 million in 1999 alone. Canada's focus has
very much been on Africa, with four of five major
projects on that continent dealing with the promotion of
sexual health, HIV/AIDS control and prevention, the
strengthening of primary health-care capacity and
addressing the special needs of women and vulnerable
groups.

Last September, Carol Bellamy spoke of the need to
break the conspiracy of silence surrounding AIDS as an
important step in addressing the problem in Africa. We
congratulate Uganda and its Minister; indeed, that country
has set an example by reversing this devastating trend.
We also welcome the importance given to the issue by
President Moi of Kenya and President Mkapa of Tanzania
in their recent millennium addresses.

Like Secretary-General Kofi Annan, we also
welcome the courageous decisions of most African
Governments in recognizing that the first battle to be won
in the war against HIV/AIDS is to break the silence and
remove the stigma surrounding it. Dr. Piot reminded us
this morning that efforts already taken have yielded
positive results. Clearly, strong political commitment and
a united response on the part of Africans themselves will
go a long way in mitigating the impact of AIDS over the
short term, stemming the diseases growth over the
medium term and, hopefully, over the longer term
working towards its complete eradication.

It is equally clear that Africa cannot face this
problem alone. Canada is one of many countries which
has joined efforts with non-governmental and multilateral
organizations to assist Africans in their fight against
AIDS. The Secretary-General's launch of the International
Partnership against AIDS in Africa last December is a

 

welcome development which should help ensure a
coordinated approach involving national Governments,
private enterprise and multilateral agencies.

Only two decades after the breakout of HIV/AIDS,
important progress has been made in understanding the
virus and the relationship between HIV/AIDS and human
development. AIDS is no longer a single health problem. It
has become a complex, multifaceted issue for development.

The pervasiveness of conflict in Africa has been a key
stumbling block to development. War steals resources.
Therefore, the first and most obvious way the Council can
contribute to Africa's fight against AIDS is to intensify its
engagement in preventing and resolving conflict on that
continent.

For its part, Canada pledges to support African
Governments as they take the lead in generating their own
national strategic plans to combat HIV/AIDS, to support
communities and community groups in their responses to
HIV/AIDS, to establish priorities in programming to ensure
optimal impact and cost effective interventions, and to
promote sustainable human development through a broad
approach including basic human needs - basic education,
primary health care and gender equity.

