Mr. Ramirez Carreflo (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): The Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela once again expresses its concern about
the horrendous armed conflict that has caused a blood
bath in Syria, and in particular about the suffering
among civilians. We condemn the indiscriminate
attacks, irrespective of who carries them out, against
the civilian population and humanitarian actors, such
as the bombing of hospitals and health centres and
the practice of besieging civilians. In that connection,
we condemn the recent attacks perpetrated by armed
groups of the so-called moderate opposition against a
Russian field hospital and its humanitarian personnel,
killing two Russian health professionals.

Our country voted against the draft resolution
(S/2012/1026) on the situation in eastern Aleppo because
we believe that the text does not appropriately reflect
the situation on the ground, in particular the threat
represented by the Al-Nusra Front and its associated
groups in the eastern part of Aleppo. We regret that
since the beginning of the armed conflict, five years
ago, some members of the Security Council, which are
directly involved in the gruelling war, have continued
to impose their own particular geopolitical agenda to
the detriment of the people of Syria and the objective
treatment of the humanitarian situation.

Unfortunately, the humanitarian dimension has
been politicized anew, and the justifications and
ingredients that triggered and fuelled the tragedy
are again being ignored. In Syria, a terrible war has
been imposed, and some countries have unflaggingly
supported terrorist groups, the executioners of the
Syrian people. The perpetrators of this horror even
speak out against and offend those countries in the
Security Council that do not give the green light to
their continued aggression against Syria. I therefore
fully support the views expressed by the Permanent
Representative of China.

As we said on 8 October (see S/PV.7785), the
fight against terrorism being conducted jointly by the
Governments of Syria and Russia is the most effective
way to protect the Syrian population from the terror
and death that the terrorists are carrying out in the
territories under their control in eastern Aleppo. A
genuine threat exists in that region and is reflected by
the thousands of fighters of the Al-Nusra Front and other
terrorist groups that are holding hostage the thousands
of civilians living there and using them as human
shields - all in breach of international humanitarian
law and international human rights law. This type of
fighting by terrorist groups can be seen on all fronts in
the battle, including currently in Mosul. This terrorist
tactic cannot be used to inhibit a frontal attack on the
scourge of terrorism.

The purpose of today's draft resolution was not
to assist the people of Aleppo who are suffering the
onslaught of war. Rather, it gave propaganda treatment to
the humanitarian issue in order to frustrate the Russian
Federation in its efforts to combat terrorism. Today, by
voting on the draft, the Security Council, despite the
views of several of its members, demonstrated its lack
of unity on this issue, which is detrimental to finding
a political solution to the conflict. Had there been a
genuine interest in coming up with a compromise draft
resolution, as was done in resolution 2319 (2016) on
the renewal of the mandate of the Joint Investigation
Mechanism, the Security Council would have been in a
position to adopt a draft resolution that might have dealt
with the complex situation on the ground. Today's vote
is unfortunate, particularly when diplomatic efforts are
being made in Geneva between the co-Chairs of the
International Syria Support Group. We demand that the
diplomatic path be followed.

It is also necessary to bear in mind that the Syrian
Government has the full right to defend its sovereignty
and territorial integrity when threatened with terrorism
from the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant and the
Al-Nusra Front. Further, we should also keep in mind
that the military operations under way in coordination
with Russia are aimed at retaking the territory occupied
by these terrorist groups. It is therefore a matter of
maintaining territorial unity and political independence
of the nation, in accordance with the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations.

In the fight against these terrorist groups, it is
clear that the full commitment and efforts of the Syrian
Government to protect its own people from terrorist
barbarism have been handicapped by external forces
that have pledged to defeat the legitimate authorities of
the country. For us, it is remarkable how the civilians
of eastern Aleppo are fleeing terrorists who are trying
to use them as human shields, and trying to reach
Government-controlled territory where they find safety
and humanitarian assistance.

In eastern Aleppo, terrorist groups are using these
people as human shields, as the Islamic State has done
in areas that it controls. It is using humanitarian aid for
its own purposes rather than the undoing the tragedy
that it represents for the Syrian people. We have insisted
that the so-called moderate opposition be separated
from Al-Qaida and the Al-Nusra Front in order to
show its true intentions with regard to achieving peace
through political negotiations. The opposition needs to
join the fight against terrorism and cease to be part of
the scourge as it has unfortunately been until now.

Ofcourse, the solution to the conflict is not military
one but political. That does not mean, however, that the
Syrian Government relinquishes its responsibility to
protect the people from terrorism and defend its own
territory. We once again support the Special Envoy for
Syria, Mr. Staffan de Mistura, with a view to achieving
a peaceful and political solution to the conflict. We
call on the parties to commit themselves decisively to
advancing the shared goal of peace and stability in this
country, beginning with an effective withdrawal of all
fighters in eastern Aleppo.

Finally, we support a negotiated and political
settlement of this terrible crisis. Foreign interference in
Syria must cease. The Syrian people are paying a very
high price in defending its integrity and sovereignty and
in defeating terrorism. The international community,
and particularly the Security Council, must reach
consensus and take constructive steps in order to stop
the violence and re-establish peace.

