Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
thank you, Madam President, for convening today's
meeting. We also thank Mr. Tadamichi Yamamoto for
his briefing on the situation in Afghanistan.

We welcome in particular Ms. Sigrid Kaag, Acting
Minister for Foreign Affairs and Minister for Foreign
Trade and Development Cooperation of the Netherlands.
We salute all women on International Women's Day
and reiterate our commitment to the Security Council's
women and peace and security agenda. It promotes
the protection of women in situations of conflict and
during humanitarian crises, their empowerment and
their participation in peacebuilding and peacekeeping
efforts. We thank Mrs. Habiba Sarabi and Ms. Mariam
Safi for their briefings and for their efforts in support
of women's rights and participation and their leadership
on the path to lasting peace in the country.

During the Council's visit to Afghanistan in
January, we were able to see the commendable efforts
of the Government, the First Lady of Afghanistan and
women's organizations to promote peace and stability.
As we renew the mandate of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), we
would like to acknowledge its efforts in support of
Afghan women. Similarly, we would like to recognize
the efforts of the Netherlands as penholder to strengthen
its mandate in support of the national plan on women
and peace and security and to highlight the importance
of funding its implementation.

Peru pays close attention to, and is concerned
about, developments in Afghanistan. We must condemn
ongoing violence committed by terrorists, in particular
the recent attacks in Kabul and Jalalabad, and extend
sympathy and solidarity to the victims. We believe
that it is crucial to investigate and punish according to
the rule of law and due process all terrorist acts and
activities. The Taliban, including the Haqqani Network,
Al-Qaida and Da'esh, must be held accountable for
the crimes they commit. We also believe that it is
important to strengthen efforts to address corruption
and pay special attention to illicit drug trafficking. In
many cases, such scourges benefit terrorist groups,
undermine institutions and weaken the social fabric of
the country.
Given the clear deterioration of the security
situation in Afghanistan, we highlight the importance
of preserving stability in order to make headway in
fostering political dialogue and national reconciliation,
holding inclusive elections in 2018 and 2019 and
achieving lasting peace. Peru supports the Kabul
Process, which was developed and led by Afghans, and
supports greater participation from women and young
people. We welcome efforts to begin peace negotiations.
We hope that the counterparts will commit in good faith
to the process of reconciliation

We would like to underscore the importance
of international, regional and bilateral support and
cooperation for the Afghan process. We highlight
in particular the efforts of UNAMA and the support
of Central Asian States, as well as the initiative put
forward by the People's Republic of China to establish
a trilateral dialogue with Afghanistan and Pakistan.

In conclusion, as we celebrate women and their
struggle, we would like to underscore the words
of Secretary-General Antonio Guterres: women's
participation makes peace agreements stronger,
societies more resilient and economies more vigorous.

