Mr. Belinga-Eboutou (Cameroon)(spoke in French): My delegation welcomes the holding of this
open meeting, which bears witness to the will of the
Security Council to continue to play the role conferred
upon it by the Charter: the maintenance of international
peace and security.

We are fully aware of the exceptional situation in
which we now find ourselves at this late hour. The
Council, because it was unable to reach a compromise
among its members, is now at a crossroads. Some
among us hoped for a miracle until the very last
moment. We have to recognize that the collective burst
of activity so greatly hoped for and called for did not
happen. Who is responsible? Each and everyone one of
us, undoubtedly.

On 17 March 2003, we were confronted with a
challenge to the maintenance of international peace and
security. Because we all are wrong to some extent, we
all are also right to some extent. Retrospectively, that
was the merit of resolution 1441 (2002), but
unfortunately it was also its weakness.

The conjunction of factors that ultimately escaped
our attention have led to what is apparently the failure
of the diplomatic approach and initiatives, because
whatever our position is, the result lies before us.

The peaceful disarmament of Iraq by means of
inspections based on immediate, unconditional, full
and active cooperation ended, at least temporarily, with
yesterday's departure from Baghdad for Cyprus of the
inspectors of the United Nations Monitoring,
Verification and Inspection Commission (UNMOVIC)
and the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA).
Cameroon would like to pay homage to them for their
professionalism, commitment and objectivity. They
have fully justified the trust placed in them. I would
also like to thank Mr. Blix and Mr. ElBaradei for their
leadership. Despite that suspension, I am convinced
that at some point in the process the Council will
entrust them with new tasks, whether in this context or
elsewhere.

My delegation has examined with interest, despite
the exceptional circumstances surrounding our
meeting, the programme of work prepared by Mr. Blix
and the UNMOVIC team. The document would have
been a good basis for work. Nevertheless, after reading
the 12 key disarmament tasks, we wish to say that even
if some progress was made since 27 November 2002,
when inspections began, obviously much remained to
be done. My delegation does not see how the inspectors
would have achieved their heavy task in the absence of
full, active and unconditional cooperation.

This morning we find ourselves in a completely
different situation. Of course we wish that, a few hours
from now, the unexpected would happen. Of course we
would like to see our cohesion and unity restored by
the end of the day. If scepticism is winning over us the
optimists, it is because of what we see, what we hear
and what we perceive.

I say to myself, let us reflect on the measures
necessary to minimize the humanitarian impact of a
possible conflict on the population, in particular on
women and children.

The oil for food programme has been suspended
de facto since the humanitarian personnel stationed in
Iraq were recalled. Cameroon understands and
approves the Secretary-General's decision to remove
the entire United Nations staff from Iraq at this
troubled time. But Cameroon is also very concerned
about the effect of that measure on the Iraqi
populations. We would be happy to have firm
assurances in this matter.

This brings to mind other consequences,
particularly as regards the providers of the
humanitarian programme, other service providers, on
United Nations personnel, and so forth. This problem
must also arise for the United Nations Monitoring,
Verification and Inspection Commission (UNMOVIC)
and the International Atomic Energy Agency.

That is why Cameroon suggests that the sanctions
Committee established by resolution 661 (1990) meet
as soon as possible at the level of Permanent
Representatives, on the basis of proposals to be made
by the Secretary-General, the oil for food programme
and UNMOVIC, so that it can adopt any emergency
measures needed at the humanitarian level.

It seems too soon for us to analyse the impact of
current events on collective security and on the future
capacity of the Security Council to manage major
conflicts and the new threats that burden our twenty-
first century society.

Cameroon harbours great hope that trust will soon
be revived among us, and that differences brought on
by the Iraqi crisis, however deep, will just be a
temporary episode.

Cameroon, a ward of the United Nations, has
faith in our Organization. The United Nations is the
framework, the only framework, which reassures and
protects us.

