Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): We thank
Martin Griffiths, Mark Lowcock, David Beasley and
Rasha Jarhum for their impressive and convincing
briefings. They presented us with a grave description
of the humanitarian crisis in Yemen. Their strong
words underline the urgency of the Security Council's
action and decision-making. They made it clear that
we need a peaceful, sustainable political solution.
In that context, I will focus on three issues - first,
conflict and hunger; secondly, the responsibility of the
international community; and, thirdly, the urgent need
for a political solution.

On my first point, there is a vicious cycle of conflict
and hunger in armed conflicts around the world. In May
(see S/PV.8267), the Council unanimously adopted a
resolution we facilitated (resolution 2417 (2018)) that
called on all of us to break that cycle. In that context,
the end of extreme hunger in Yemen ultimately depends
on our collective political will.

The situation in Yemen is compounded by
interference with United Nations depots, continued air
strikes and indiscriminate shelling. Those attacks have
led to damage to critical civilian infrastructure and to
water, sanitation and health facilities, as Mr. Lowcock
just described. In general, depriving civilians of objects
indispensable to their survival - indeed, starving
civilians intentionally as a method of warfare - is under
no circumstance permissible; it may even constitute a
war crime.

We took note of Mr. Lowcock's remarks about
the current lull in the fighting around Al-Hudaydah,
which must become permanent. The year-long partial
blockade is already creating essential shortages. In the
event of renewed escalation, the port of Al-Hudaydah
might become inaccessible to any ship carrying
commodities that are vital to a population in need.
The port is an essential lifeline for millions of Yemeni
people. On many occasions, we have also expressed
our concern over Houthi missiles targeting civilians in
Saudi Arabia. Those missiles attacks should stop.

That brings me to my second point - the
responsibility of the international community. Secretary-
General Guterres has said it very clearly: it is time to
act. The international community must do its utmost to
protect civilians in times of conflict. The most effective
way to do so is for the Council to fully support the
five requests from the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA). Let me reiterate them
and express how we see them.

First, as an initial step towards the full cessation of

hostilities, a humanitarian cease-fire is the only way to
prevent mass starvation. Secondly, in order to protect
the supply of food and essential goods across the
country, all routes need to be opened for those goods.
Thirdly, we need a larger and faster injection of foreign
exchange into the economy through the Central Bank.
We welcome the recent injection, as Special Envoy
Griffiths just described. Fourthly, the humanitarian
operation needs increased funding. The Kingdom
of the Netherlands is doing its share in that regard.
And, fifthly, there must be full engagement with the
Special Envoy to end the conflict. The Council should
support those five asks. We therefore welcome the
announcement just made by the United Kingdom that
it will circulate a draft resolution on Monday endorsing
those five asks.

It is the Council's responsibility to take a firm
stance against the persistent violations of international
humanitarian law, like the ones we see on a daily basis in
Yemen. We need to stand up for the brave humanitarian
personnel; they should never be the target of attacks.
Humanitarian access must not be politicized by the
parties to the conflict. And all parties should make it
possible for the United Nations to collect objective data
in order to draw up reliable needs assessments based on
the real needs of the people.
The international community should continue to
raise its voice against impunity. Perpetrators must, and
will, be held accountable, not only to provide justice for
victims in the future but also to deter offences in the
present. In that context, we are grateful for the ongoing
work of the Human Rights Council's Group of Eminent
Experts on Yemen and of the sanctions committee
Panel of Experts on Yemen.

My third and final point is the need for a political
solution. To respond to OCHA's fifth ask, I can say
that both the European Union and the Netherlands
fully support the tireless efforts of Mr. Griffiths to
achieve a sustainable political solution. As others
have said, all parties should participate in the talks in
Sweden without preconditions. And they should work
with Mr. Griffiths in good faith and in a constructive
manner. The countries with influence over the parties
to the conflict should use their position to ensure
successful talks. The talks must be inclusive and should
also address local grievances in Yemen. We commend
Sweden for its willingness to host the talks, we thank
Kuwait for its offer of logistical support and we thank
Oman for its constructive role.

We thank Ms. Jarhum for her briefing, which

underlined both the conflict's effect on women and the
determination of women to contribute in a meaningful
way to peace and a better Yemen. Resolution 1325
(2000) can guide us in that regard. First of all, the
horrible violence against women and girls, as described
by Ms. Jarhum, must stop, but that is not enough. We
call on the parties to include women in their delegations.
We are pleased that Mr. Griffiths has already attended
meetings with a number of women representatives. The
fact that the men are the ones fighting does not mean
that only the men must make peace. We need the proud
women of Yemen to be fully involved in the peace
process. They know what is needed for all of the people
of Yemen.

In conclusion, we are extremely concerned
about the millions of Yemeni people on the brink of
starvation. We call on all parties to work together to
make humanitarian access possible and to bring about
a humanitarian ceasefire now so that people in need
can be reached. It is urgent that the Council support
OCHA's five asks. Following the advice of the Group
of Eminent Experts on Yemen, we also call upon the
international community, including the countries of
the League of Arab States, to stop delivering arms to
this theatre of war and its main combatants. We must
now focus on immediately addressing the famine and
finding a peaceful and sustainable political solution to
this terrible conflict. The Council should fully support
the efforts of Mr. Lowcock and Mr. Griffiths. That is
what the people of Yemen need from the Council.

