Mr. Andjaba (Namibia): My delegation commends
you, Sir, and your delegation for convening this meeting on
this very important subject of terrorism, and for the draft
resolution before us.

The wheel of time is bringing us closer to the entry
into the third millennium. Against the backdrop of this
historic benchmark, we believe that humankind will have to
fight relentlessly against terrorism. For many years,
humanity was haunted by terrorism, which has acquired
many definitions at every turn during its long history.
Whatever the meaning to different generations and peoples,
terrorism has brought about human tragedy of unparalleled
magnitude to innocent and unsuspecting ordinary citizens,
culminating in tragic loss of life, fear, panic and destruction
of property.

Terrorists bury themselves within their surrounding
communities, indistinguishable from ordinary law-abiding
citizens. At the appropriate moment they emerge from the
shadows to strike, before disappearing back into anonymity.

Terrorism undermines the confidence in a
Government's ability to maintain law and order by sowing
fear among the citizens. In turn, the Government imposes
a harsh regimen of security measures, including states of
emergency, curfews and a daily routine of road blocks,
snap-checks and cordon-and-search operations, which are
sometimes repressive counter-measures that Governments
are forced into in order to protect their citizens from
terrorism.
Namibia attaches great importance to the United
Nations declarations of 1994 and 1996 on measures to
eliminate international terrorism, and other measures
adopted by the United Nations on this matter. The
adoption of this draft resolution will therefore contribute
to the ongoing effort to eliminate terrorism.

We condemn all acts of terrorism regardless of their
motivation, manifestations, perpetrator or victim. In
finalizing pending conventions, therefore, we must make
sure that all those who commit acts of terrorism are
properly covered. To put it simply, no exemption should
be entertained in the war against terrorism.

Against this background, my delegation will vote in
favour of the draft resolution before us.

