Mr. Barbalie (Bosnia and Herzegovina): I thank
Mr. Menkerios, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General; President Mkapa, Chair of the
Secretary-General's Panel on the Referenda in the
Sudan; and Ambassador Mahmoud Kane. We also
welcome the participation of the Permanent
Representative of the Sudan and the Minister of
Regional Cooperation of the Government of Southern
Sudan.

We welcome the announcement of the final
results of the referendum on Southern Sudan and
commend the parties for their constructive cooperation
in the referendum process. Bosnia and Herzegovina
supports the full and timely implementation of the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA). In that
regard, we urge the parties to redouble their efforts to
find solutions for Abyei and other outstanding CPA
issues - including wealth-sharing, management of
assets and debts, citizenship and border security
arrangements - before the end of the interim period.

We praise the African Union High-Level
Implementation Panel and other international partners
for their roles in assisting the CPA parties in this
important endeavour. We are encouraged by the
activities of the international community and the
United Nations in anticipating the future engagement
of the United Nations in Southern Sudan. Special
attention should be given to capacity-building,
economic development and efforts to develop
cooperation between the North and South as a crucial
component of long-term stability in the region.

We are concerned by the fact that the parties have
not yet reached an agreement on Abyei. We urge them
to reconcile their differences and find an acceptable
solution regarding this important part of the CPA as
soon as possible.

We commend the United Nations Mission in the
Sudan (UNMIS) for its efforts in Abyei at this critical
time. With regard to restrictions on the freedom of
movement of UNMIS, we call on the Sudanese
authorities to ensure the Mission's unhindered access.

A just, comprehensive and inclusive solution
must be found for Darfur. It is high time to end the
vicious cycle of violence and bring peace to the people
of that region. We reiterate our full support for the
United Nations and African Union-led peace process in
Doha and the efforts of the Joint Chief Mediator,
Mr. Bassole. We urge all parties to join the Doha peace
process without preconditions or further delays.

We are concerned by the upsurge of violence in
Darfur and call upon all parties to cease hostilities and
ensure unrestricted access to personnel of the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID) and humanitarian workers to the affected
areas and population in need. We strongly condemn the
continued attacks on and kidnapping of UNAMID and
humanitarian personnel. We urge the Government to
ensure law and order in Darfur and to bring the
perpetrators of such acts to justice. Ending impunity is
a critical factor for ensuring lasting peace and stability
in Darfur.

Finally, we commend UNMIS and UNAMID
personnel for their tireless efforts in carrying out their
mandates in difficult circumstances.

