The President: Following consultations among
members of the Security Council, I have been
authorized to make the following statement on behalf
of the Council:

"The Security Council reaffirms its primary
responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security in accordance
with the Charter of the United Nations.

"The Security Council recognizes the
important role of regional and subregional
organizations in the prevention, management and
resolution of conflicts in accordance with Chapter
VIII of the Charter of the United Nations as well
as its relevant resolutions, in particular
resolutions 1625 (2005) and 1631 (2005), and
previous relevant presidential statements on
cooperation with regional and subregional
organizations.

"The Security Council emphasizes that the
growing contribution made by regional and
subregional organizations in cooperation with the
United Nations can usefully support the work of
the Organization in maintaining international
peace and security, and stresses in this regard that
such contribution should be made in accordance
with Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United
Nations.

"The Security Council further recognizes
that regional and subregional organizations are
well positioned to understand the root causes of
many conflicts and other security challenges
close to home and to influence their prevention or
resolution, owing to their knowledge of the
region.

"The Security Council recalls its
determination to take appropriate steps to further
the development of cooperation between the
United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations in maintaining international peace

and security. It welcomes recent developments
with regard to the cooperation between the
United Nations, the African Union and the
European Union.

"The Security Council, while maintaining
the primary responsibility for maintaining
international peace and security, encourages
regional and subregional organizations to
strengthen and increase cooperation among them,
including to enhance their respective capacity, in
the maintenance of international peace and
security. The Security Council underlines the
importance of the United Nations political
support and technical expertise in this regard.

"The Security Council encourages regional
cooperation, including through the involvement
of regional and subregional organizations in the
peaceful settlement of disputes, and intends to
consult closely with them whenever appropriate
on their role in future peacekeeping operations as
well as political and integrated missions
authorized by the Security Council.

"The Security Council stresses the need to
develop effective partnership between the
Council and regional and subregional
organizations in order to enable early response to
disputes and emerging crises.

"The Security Council underlines the
importance of exploring the potential and existing
capacities of regional and subregional
organizations in the field of peace and security,
covering, inter alia, the spectrum of conflict
prevention, confidence-building, conflict
resolution, peacemaking, peacekeeping, and post-
conflict peacebuilding, and welcomes regional
dialogue and the promotion of shared norms as
well as common regional approaches to the
settlement of disputes and other issues relating to
peace and security.

"The Security Council stresses the potential
role of regional and subregional organizations in
addressing the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons and the need to take into account in the
peacekeeping operations' mandates, where
appropriate, the regional instruments enabling
States to identify and trace illegal small arms and
light weapons.

"The Security Council welcomes the efforts
undertaken by its subsidiary bodies with
responsibilities in counter-terrorism to foster
cooperation with regional and subregional
organizations, notes with appreciation the efforts
made by an increasing number of regional and
subregional organizations in countering terrorism
and urges all relevant regional and subregional
organizations to enhance the effectiveness of their
counter-terrorism efforts within their respective
mandates and in accordance with international
law, including with a view to develop their
capacity to help Member States in their efforts to
tackle the threats to international peace and
security posed by acts of terrorism.

"The Security Council recognizes the
importance of promoting the identification and
further development of modalities which enhance
the contribution of regional and subregional
organizations to the work of the Council in
maintaining international peace and security in
accordance with Chapter VIII of the United
Nations Charter. For that purpose, the Council
deems it useful to consider further strengthening
its interaction and cooperation with regional and
subregional organizations in accordance with
Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United
Nations. The Council recognizes the
Peacebuilding Commission, in its area of
competence, as a forum for coordination in the
26

the

area of post-conflict between the United Nations
system and regional and subregional
organizations, in accordance with its resolution
1645 (2005) and General Assembly resolution
60/ 180.

"The Security Council requests the
Secretary-General to include in his report
pursuant to its presidential statement of 28 March
2007 (S/PRST/2007/7) a recommendation on
practical ways and means to increase and
strengthen cooperation between the United
Nations and regional and subregional
organizations in the maintenance of international
peace and security.

"The Security Council invites all Member
States to contribute more actively to the
strengthening of the capacity of regional and
subregional organizations in all parts of the
world, in issues relating to the maintenance of
international peace and security."

This statement will be issued as a document of
Security Council under the symbol

S/PRST/2007/42.

There are no further speakers inscribed on my

list. The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 5.30 pm.
07-58467
