We thank Mr. James Swan, Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Somalia, and Mr. Francisco Madeira, Special Representative of the Chairperson of the African Union Commission for Somalia and Head of the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), for their detailed briefings on the situation in Somalia. We also thank Ms. Agnes Marcaillou, Director of the United Nations Mine Action Service (UNMAS), for her useful update on our delegation's request regarding the situation with the improvised explosive device (IED) threat. We have carefully studied the Secretary-General's recent report (S/2020/398) and share its conclusion that the country's security situation remains turbulent. The Federal Government faces numerous challenges, including the need to restore State institutions and establish dialogue between the centre and the regions and among the regions. Lack of progress in preparing for the general elections and on constitutional review is really worrisome. We deplore the continuing tensions in Jubaland and Galmudug. All those issues are now further exacerbated by the spread of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. Particularly worrisome is the ceaseless terrorist activity of Al-Shabaab and its fighters' growing reliance on the use of IEDs, mortar attacks and political assassinations. Importantly, the Somalis themselves recognize that IEDs have already caused more fatalities to the Somali National Army (SNA) and the population than bullets. We fully appreciate the picture that Ms. Marcaillou has presented to the Council and hope that it will contribute to better identifying the appropriate response for the international community to the IED threat. We also note some positive developments in Mogadishu. The Federal Parliament had a productive winter session. We commend the establishment of an ad hoc parliamentary committee to address key issues concerning the electoral law and the continued work of the National Electoral Security Task Force. We welcome the communication between President Farmajo and President Bihi of Somaliland, as well as the positive political changes in South-West state and Hirshabelle. We urge Special Representative Swan to continue his efforts to foster dialogue between and within federal member states with a view to holding an all-Somalia summit. In view of the upcoming AMISOM mandate renewal, we believe that the Mission continues to be critical to the country's stabilization. Considering the upcoming general elections and the COVID-19 pandemic, a reduction in the number of peacekeepers is unacceptable. Both AMISOM and the SNA should build on the progress demonstrated in the transition operations in the town of Janaale. Regarding the AMISOM resolution itself, we see it as a concise document that sends a clear message to the Somali people - that they will have the full backing of the international community both prior to and during the upcoming general elections, which are an important milestone in the country's modern history. In general, we are convinced that effective collaborative work in building a unified national security architecture is necessary if we are to address the persistent security challenges in Somalia. The international community should continue to take measures to increase the operational readiness of the African peacekeeping units and the SNA. Progress in that arena will be decisive in ensuring the effective transition of security responsibilities to the Somalis. In conclusion, let me reiterate my country's firm commitment to continue to work efficiently in the Security Council to solve the crisis in Somalia, while respecting its sovereignty and territorial integrity. I also have a couple of questions for Ms. Marcaillou. We know that UNMAS is conducting very useful awareness-raising work on the IED threat worldwide, particularly in Geneva through the annual conference on the Convention on Certain Conventional Weapons. How does Ms. Marcaillou think the mechanisms under this Convention could be used to assist Somalia to address the issue of IEDs? In her view, what else can be done to deny Al-Shabaab access to explosives and ammunition abandoned on battlefields and to mitigate the explosive ordnance threat? Does she think that AMISOM and the SNA are doing enough in that regard? Finally, what can the States Members of the United Nations do to assist Somalis to be better prepared and trained to overcome these challenges?
