At the outset, allow me to congratulate you, Sir, on the assumption by France of the presidency of the Security Council for the month of June, express my delegation's support for your tireless efforts in managing the Council's work and wish you continued success. The issue of the protection of children in armed conflicts is acquiring ever greater importance. Such protection could help to break the cycle that perpetuates these conflicts in the long term. It is all the more significant given the role that today's children will play in building their homelands and societies and bringing about their future stability and prosperity. Strengthening the protection of children in armed conflicts can be used as a peacebuilding tool to address the negative effects of those conflicts on children, thereby contributing to transforming the present situation of the affected societies into a more stable future. The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia therefore believes that the protection of children in armed conflicts around the world is the shared responsibility of all parties in the international community, and calls for collective confrontation and concerted efforts to address the ramifications of armed conflicts for children. These efforts should be crystallized by taking a number of important steps. First of all, strict and effective measures should be taken against armed militias that use children as human shields or recruit them and force them to become involved in armed conflicts. Measures should also be taken against the States that back such militias, support them with money and weapons and fuel them with extremist ideas to spread their destructive ideologies. Such practices end up implanting violent extremist tendencies in many of those innocent children and the communities to which they belong. Secondly, the occupation of States should be condemned. Such occupations engage in brutal practices towards civilians and children. They violate their rights, deprive them of their freedoms and impose painful realities on those children and their communities. It is important to hold occupiers accountable and compel them to desist from their violations and comply with the relevant international terms of reference. The practices of the Israeli occupation authorities are the most egregious example. That occupation's atrocities against the defenceless children of Palestine - which include murder, displacement, imprisonment and torture - demand a strong and firm stand by the international community and the Security Council. Thirdly, we must invest in efforts to help children who face social neglect as a result of such practices. They must be provided with the necessary health, psychological and social support through rehabilitation and integration programmes, and guaranteed access to uninterrupted education during conflicts. Education provides victims with alternatives. It enables children and young people to acquire the skills and achieve the economic security necessary to break the cycle of violence. Moreover, it addresses one of the root causes of conflict by instilling and promoting the values of peace and a culture of tolerance in children's hearts and minds. The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia emphasizes that protection of civilians and children, especially in armed conflicts, is of the utmost importance. In that connection, my country has joined many international frameworks. It has acceded to the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the involvement of children in armed conflict, as well as the Geneva Convention and a number of protocols thereto. It is also a member of the steering committee of the Global Coalition for Reintegration of Child Soldiers and a member of the Friends of Reintegration Group. I reiterate my country's commitment to international law and international humanitarian law and its determination that all measures possible should be taken to protect children in armed conflicts. My country welcomes the removal of the Coalition to Support Legitimacy in Yemen from the list annexed to the 2020 report of the Secretary-General on children and armed conflict (S/2020/525) of parties that have not put in place adequate measures to improve the protection of children. That development is a reflection of the ability of Coalition countries to provide a model for protecting children during armed conflicts. It is a testament to the Coalition's commitment to protecting children and the effectiveness of its significant and ongoing measures to strengthen the protection of children in the conflict in Yemen in accordance with international standards. The most notable of these measures are as follows. A child protection unit has been established to develop mechanisms to strengthen the protection of children in armed conflict and meet obligations under international law. Children recruited by Houthi militias are cared for and provided with health and psychological support prior to being handed over to the Yemeni Government to be reintegrated into society. Support is provided to the Yemeni Government's programmes in Yemen to rehabilitate children prior to their being returned to their families. Ongoing proactive engagement with the Special Representative of the Secretary-General on Children and Armed Conflict has resulted in the signing of a memorandum of understanding with the United Nations and the development of an action plan. Additional preventive measures are being taken to protect children in the ongoing armed conflict in Yemen. In that regard, we affirm our support for the mandate of Ms. Virginia Gamba de Potgieter, Special Representative of the Secretary-General on Children and Armed Conflict, and we look forward to continuing constructive cooperation between her and the Coalition to develop mechanisms for the protection of children in the armed conflict in Yemen. We stress that the Coalition must be provided with sufficient information regarding the allegations made against it in the report in order to conduct the relevant investigations. My country values the major role the Secretary-General plays in ending and resolving armed conflicts, and his efforts to strengthen the protection of children in times of conflict. The Coalition to Support Legitimacy in Yemen has been responsive to the Secretary-General's recent call for a ceasefire in Yemen, and Saudi Arabia has supported the Secretary-General's call for a global ceasefire in the light of the coronavirus disease pandemic, as well as the efforts of his Special Envoy for Yemen to push forward the political process. These positions flow from a firm faith that a comprehensive political solution to the conflict in Yemen can be reached on the basis of the three terms of reference, namely, the Gulf Cooperation Council Initiative, the outcomes of the Comprehensive National Dialogue Conference and the relevant Security Council resolutions, particularly resolution 2216 (2015). That conflict was instigated by an illegitimate coup staged by the Houthi militia, backed by Iran, with no regard for its consequences for the Yemeni people. The resources of Yemen have been plundered. Its people have been plunged into chaos, hunger and disease. Its children have been exploited. All this damage has been done for authoritarian gains. The international community and the Security Council should take strict measures to support of the efforts of the Secretary-General and his Special Envoy with regard to that insurrectionist militia, which rejects peace, and compel it to accept a political solution to avoid further suffering for the Yemeni people, especially children.
