Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): As today is the last day of May, I once again
congratulate Indonesia and its entire delegation for
the excellent work carried out during its hyperactive
presidency, with extensive debates on numerous
themes. I also take this opportunity to wish Kuwait
a successful presidency for the month of June and to
convey our total readiness to collaborate as much as
possible in order to ensure its resounding success.

We thank the United Kingdom for its dedication
and hard work. As penholder, it used all the necessary
means to facilitate the negotiations on resolution 2472
(2019).

We also thank each of the other delegations for
the level of flexibility they demonstrated in order to
reach the consensus achieved. Allow me, however, to
point out our impression of the current situation on
the ground.

We understand that, despite the political will shown
by the Somali Government and the many efforts made
by the international community, the Somali security
forces still need support before they can take charge
of the situation in the country. Accordingly, the three
African members of the Council introduced into the
text a provision conditioning future reductions on a
joint United Nations-African Union assessment of the
security context and ongoing threats in the country prior
to any further action in that direction. The flexibility
shown in the negotiations on introducing this provision
led us to vote in favour of the draft resolution that has
become resolution 2472 (2019).

Bearing in mind the difficult trajectory that
Somalia has experienced since the beginning of
the 1990s, we can presume that the efforts of the
international community are making great strides in
advancing the country's process of State-building, but
despite the political achievements there is still much
to be done on the security situation, which is notably
threatened by the terrorist organization Al-Shabaab
and other extremist groups, which also affects other
countries of the region and impedes peacebuilding and
sociopolitical development in Somalia.

For our delegation, the contribution of the African
Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) to this delicate
process remains very important. It is therefore important
in this new phase that the international community and
the Somali Government ensure that the Somali security
forces are sufficiently trained and equipped to properly
and responsibly ensure the safety of the country's
citizens, bearing in mind that general elections are
approaching and that any premature handover could
undo all the efforts expended in Somalia.

To this end, the Security Council and the
international community must strive to resolutely
support AMISOM. and the Somali Government so that
the efforts they deploy have the desired effects both for
Somalia, in particular, and for the entire region of the
Horn of Africa in general.

