Mr. Mayoral (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation thanks the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Jessen-Petersen, for the report
he has just introduced on the activities of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK). We are also grateful for the presence of the
President of the Republic of Serbia, Mr. Boris Tadic,
and thank him for his informative statement to the
Council.

Allow me at the outset to convey our condolences
to the people of Kosovo on the passing of President
Ibrahim Rugova, a man who will surely be
remembered for his militant commitment to the cause
of Kosovo and for his prudence. We also express our
satisfaction on the recent election of Mr. F atmir Sejdiu
as his successor. We hope that President Sejdiu will
continue his predecessor's efforts in the pursuit of a
successful conclusion of the ongoing process in the
province.

The two processes currently under way in Kosovo
are related and interdependent. On the one hand,
significant progress has been made in the process to
determine Kosovo's future status. Argentina supported
the Security Council's decision last November to
launch a political process and welcomes the efforts
made by the political leaders involved in preparing the
negotiations. In that regard, we wish the Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Martti Ahtisaari, every
success in his future tasks.

In the meantime, the process of implementing the
so-called eight standards has undergone delays or
setbacks and has not progressed as we would have
wished. We agree with Mr. Jessen-Petersen that the
implementation of the standards by Kosovo's political
leaders and institutions is an obligation to the people of
Kosovo. We are concerned in particular that progress
in that field should transcend the relative
improvements described in the report on property
rights and the Kosovo Protection Corps.

In our opinion, the Provisional Institutions of
Self-Government must persist in vigorously
implementing the standards if they wish to fulfil the
aim of creating a basis for a multi-ethnic and
democratic society in which all communities can live
in safety and dignity. The effective implementation of
the standards is also a sine qua non of the fulfilment of
Kosovo's long-term European perspective. It must be
the focus of efforts throughout and beyond the status
process.

Argentina believes that there cannot be a
prosperous and peaceful future for Kosovo without full
respect for the diversity of the people who live there. A
sustainable resolution of the question of Kosovo must
be achieved with full application of the principle of
territorial integrity. In this context, we attach the
greatest importance to respect for human rights,
including the rights of refugees and displaced persons,
as well as for international humanitarian law and
minority rights.

Once again, we would like to stress that the
political process must be moved forward by making
effective progress in implementing the eight standards,
which is essential for the sustainability of the process
to determine Kosovo's future status.

We welcome the efforts that have begun and urge
the parties to do their best to bring to a successful
conclusion the work that is under way and the efforts
to be undertaken shortly in Vienna.

