Ms. Sulaiman (Brunei Darussalam): I would like to congratulate Viet Nam on assuming this month's presidency of the Council and to thank you, Sir, for having organized this timely and important debate, particularly as we commemorate the seventy-fifth anniversary of this body. I would also like to thank the Secretary-General, Antonio Guterres, and the Chair of The Elders, Mrs. Mary Robinson, for their remarks. Brunei Darussalam aligns itself with the statements delivered by the representatives of Azerbaijan and the Philippines, on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries and the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), respectively (see S/PV.8699, Res.1). The United Nations was born after two world wars that made it crucial for nations to come together in forging collective peace and security and preventing another such global destruction. Seventy-five years on, the United Nations has no equal. As the world becomes increasingly interconnected, its mandate has also evolved, but our lofty goal of sustained peace remains constant. The United Nations Charter has been the cornerstone of the success of the Organization. It has been a meaningful compass that has seen us through both significant advancements and difficult times. The Charter has also been a means of empowerment, especially for small States such as ours. We firmly believe that the security and well-being of our country are ensured in a rules-based international order, with strict adherence to the principles of the Charter. It has ensured our equal participation in pursuing the goals of achieving international peace, security and development, along with the rest of the world. It bears recalling that we are meeting here, at the United Nations, where multilateralism and diplomacy are at the core of our work. And yet we do so against the backdrop of a backsliding on multilateralism. Thus today's debate provides an opportune moment of self- reflection, with a focus on our concerted efforts in respecting and upholding the United Nations Charter. As great and as many as our differences may be, it is evident that the Charter has been an effective commonality that has contributed to our overall unity. The effectiveness of the United Nations is contingent on each and every Member State upholding the Charter. On its part, Brunei Darussalam reaffirms the principles and purposes of the Charter that govern our conduct in the international arena and recognizes it as a key document to guide the Security Council in implementing its mandate of maintaining international peace and security. We are mindful that much more needs to be done. We continue to see conflicts all over the globe that have resulted in the loss of lives as well as distress and much suffering. We share the concern that security developments and the escalation of conflicts in many parts of the world could weaken our resolve to achieve our common goals. We continue to look to the leadership of the Security Council for global collective security and stress the importance of engaging regional organizations such as ASEAN. Such partnerships are crucial to addressing global challenges. Indeed, a big part of ASEAN's identity is our shared commitment to upholding the United Nations Charter and international law, as enshrined in the ASEAN Charter. On that note, we are committed to seeing a more robust ASEAN-United Nations partnership in enhancing ASEAN's capacity in preventive diplomacy and conflict prevention as well as peacekeeping for the maintenance of peace and stability. These are vital tools that are conducive to an environment of trust and constructive cooperation and promote the peaceful settlement of disputes without resort to the threat or use of force. For Brunei Darussalam, the United Nations Charter is not merely an abstract concept. It has moral and legal significance for big and small countries alike. We look to the Security Council's moral and persuasive authority to further demonstrate the principles and fundamentals contained therein for the maintenance of international peace and security. On our part, we will always strive to achieve congruence between those principles and our own conduct in world affairs.
