Mr. Kolby (Norway): I shall also shorten my
statement.

Like others, we believe that it is not possible to
look at developments in one country without taking the
situation in the entire region into consideration.
Norway encourages close cooperation within the
United Nations system and close contacts between the
United Nations and regional organizations. The role of
the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) is of particular importance. Norway
encourages efforts to strengthen that organization.

Adequate funding is needed for the United
Nations to fulfil its obligations in the region. It is
therefore with great concern that we note that the
appeals for Sierra Leone and West Africa have not
received the needed donor support. Norway, for its
part, will continue to provide humanitarian support for
the international humanitarian efforts in the region. We
strongly encourage all Member States to increase their
contributions.

Easy access to small arms fuels conflicts
throughout the West African region. Preventing the
proliferation of small arms is therefore a paramount
issue in conflict prevention. Several countries in the
region, Mali being one of them, have shown a strong
commitment to that important issue. An important
factor in reducing the number of small arms is the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR)
of former combatants. We believe that an effective
DDR programme is a precondition for the successful
completion of the United Nations peace operation in
Sierra Leone. However, in Sierra Leone that process is
not progressing as expected. We would therefore
appreciate more information. If indeed needed, Norway
is prepared to consider providing additional support to
the United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone
(UNAMSIL), particularly in the field of DDR.

New developments after the Abuja ceasefire
review meeting give us hope that the DDR process will
now be revitalized. The implementation of an
agreement in this field and the possible deployment of
the Sierra Leone Army in the Kambia district will be of
significant importance for the many internally
displaced persons and returnees in the country. If a
substantial repatriation and resettlement operation is
started, it will be crucial that steps be taken by local
Governments, in cooperation with UNAMSIL, to
ensure the security of the returning populations and of
the personnel of the humanitarian agencies. We also
believe that it is of the utmost importance that Sierra
Leonean refugees who originate from areas that are
declared secure get assistance to leave their internally
displaced persons camps and reintegrate into their
home regions as soon as possible. However, the
demobilization process is moving at a slow pace. The
unwillingness of the Revolutionary United Front (RUF)
to let the Government of Sierra Leone rebuild
institutions in the new areas of UNAMSIL deployment
is a matter of concern, as it is seriously undermining
reconstruction and reconciliation efforts.

Developments in the region continue to give us
reason for concern. The Security Council and the
United Nations as a whole must therefore continue to
follow the situation in West Africa closely. We believe
that the new sanctions imposed by resolution 1343
(2001) are the result of the emphasis the Council puts
on the need to have a comprehensive approach to
developments in West Africa. Political stability and
development in the countries of the region can come
only as a result of the collective efforts of local
political leaders and the international community to
build peace and to commit the needed resources to
secure economic development for the long-suffering
people in that part of the world.

