Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, we wish to express our deepest condolences at the deaths today of two humanitarian workers, which provide yet further impetus for collective action on our part to stop the violence in north-western Syria. We thank Ambassador Pedersen and Mr. Lowcock for their briefings. We take this opportunity to reiterate our support for them and our determination to continueforging ahead in consolidating the peace process in Syria. The Dominican Republic reiterates once again its deep concern about the situation in the Syrian Arab Republic in general and in the north-west of the country in particular. We reiterate that, as long as such violence prevails, characterized by violations of international law, including international humanitarian law, progress towards a negotiated political solution will remain impossible. This has meant, notwithstanding other possible factors, that it has not yet been possible to resume the Constitutional Committee. We believe that it is both regrettable and unacceptable that, after so much effort, time and energy was invested in establishing the Committee, there seems only a remote possibility that it will fulfil its mandate. That is to say, a military solution, incorporating counter-terrorism measures, and a political process are simply mutually exclusive. There must be a way to find a third way allowing us to both address the alarming situation of the civilian population in the north-west and to protect the political process. There are 900,000 reasons to seek such a middle way and to do so urgently; 900,000 is the number of Syrians who have been displaced, half of them children, and they need solutions. They are dying of cold and hunger. They deserve protection and have the right to a decent life. However, Syrian refugees also have the right to return ina safe, dignified and voluntary way to their places of origin or some other place of their choosing, provided they receive lasting guarantees for their well-being and development. The same goes for the Syrian civilians who were left behind - those who, in the absence of economic means to move north away from the violence, had no option but to remain, perhaps facing death, in the places they once knew as safe. I would like to highlight some very specific aspects of this difficult and delicate situation. A complete and immediate ceasefire in the north-west must be the absolute priority to avoid large-scale escalation. The United Nations must be at the heart of such efforts, as the supporter and facilitator of a lasting solution. In that spirit, we call on the parties to come to the negotiating table and renew their commitment to abiding by the ceasefire agreements and to restore calm. The fight against terrorism cannot be conducted as business as usual in Idlib. Given the presence of 3 million Syrian civilians, counter-terrorism actions must respect international law, including international humanitarian law, so as to ensure the protection of the civilian population. Humanitarian access must be guaranteed and facilitated to meet the pressing needs of a population crushed, shaken and traumatized by too many years of Syrian-on-Syrian violence. Finally, we regret that the door the Constitutional Committee could have opened toa broad political process does not seem to have materialized. The prevailing lack of trust and apparent apathy will require greater efforts from all of us in the Council, as guarantors resolution 2254 (2015), to break the cycle and move ahead without further delay or excuse. I remind the members of the Council and the representatives of the United Nations that history will judge us for our lack of action.
