Mr. Vilovie (Croatia): Allow me to begin by
welcoming and extending our gratitude to the President
and the Prosecutor of the Special Court for sharing
with the Security Council the latest information on the
considerable progress made in implementing the
Court's mandate. We appreciate their personal
commitment in carrying out this mandate.

The Court's establishment, which broke new
ground in international criminal justice, and its
jurisprudence and accomplishments represent a strong
contribution to the global fight against impunity and
the fostering of the rule of law. It continues to
demonstrate that peace and justice are not
contradictory terms.

Earlier this year, a significant milestone was
achieved with the conviction of Revolutionary United
Front leaders for atrocities committed during the civil
war in Sierra Leone, sending a strong message against
impunity for war crimes and crimes against humanity.

Croatia continues to closely follow the trial of
Charles Taylor in The Hague. We appreciate the
extensive outreach efforts undertaken by the Court.
Together with its capacity-building projects, these
efforts represent an excellent way of not only
spreading awareness and understanding of the Court's
mission, but also preserving its legacy and thus
contributing to lasting peace and stability in Sierra
Leone and in the region of West Africa.
09-40569

As the operations in Freetown are nearing
conclusion, we understand that certain challenges
remain. Funding remains a critical issue for the Court
in this phase. One of the pressing outstanding questions
is securing the appropriate arrangements and financing
for the enforcement of sentences, and we welcome the
steps taken by the Court and its Management
Committee to address these issues.

We also understand that continuing international
support is indispensable to achieving the orderly
completion of the Court's work, which in turn will be
the best guarantee for securing its lasting legacy. As an
ad hoc institution, the Special Court will once again
break new ground in the field of international justice
by having to provide solutions to support its residual
functions while respecting international standards in
ensuring the ongoing protection of the human rights of
individuals affected by its work. We support the
Court's efforts to that end.

Croatia has highly appreciated the opportunity to
consult with the representatives of the Special Court in
the context of the ongoing discussions within the
Security Council's informal working group on
international tribunals, which is currently examining
options for setting up residual mechanisms for the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia and the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda. Croatia hopes to see the continuation of this
exchange, which could certainly be of mutual interest
and benefit for both sides.

