Mr. Pressman (United States of America): I would
like to thank the Secretary-General, the Prime Minister
of Jamaica, the Prime Minister of Samoa and the
Minister of Finance of Seychelles for their briefings,
and I thank all of the other distinguished leaders who
are present to participate in this open debate today.
In particular, I would like to thank New Zealand for
focusing the Council on such an important and too
often overlooked topic.

Rusina Rusin lives in Majuro, the capital of the
Marshall Islands, on land that has been in her family for
generations. She told journalists that she has never seen
storms like the ones she has seen in recent years, which
occur with much greater frequency and without the rain
and wind that used to signal their imminent arrival.
Rusina told reporters that in 2014, one of those storms
flooded her home, pulling many of her belongings and
those of her grandchildren who live with her out to
sea. More floods followed in February and March of
this year. Rusina, who described herself as not having
anything precious except land and grandchildren, said:

"Every time it floods, it affects the land, and it
costs me. I depend on the crops - the coconut
trees, bananas, and herbs for medicine. I could
never manage a subsistence life if this continues".

Rusina's story is the story of so many people
living in the small island developing States, who are
disproportionately bearing the consequences of global
and man-made problems. Today, I would like to speak to
three of those problems and what we as the international
community must do to address them.

The first is climate change. As President Obama said
recently, "This is not a problem for another generation.
It has serious implications for the way we live right
now". Fourteen of the hottest fifteen years on record
have fallen in the first fifteen years of this century.
Last winter was the warmest winter the world has ever
recorded. Storms are getting stronger, droughts are
getting longer and, as Rusina's story demonstrates, the
consequences of climate change impact virtually every
aspect of our lives, from our health to our livelihoods,
from our habitats to our security. The science is real,
the problems are real, and so too is our commitment to
addressing them and to doing so together.

One of the most effective ways to help small
island developing States and other territories already
experiencing the dramatic effects of climate change is
to reduce the activities that cause it. The United States is
committed to leading that effort, as is demonstrated by
our commitment, in March, to reduce our greenhouse
gas emissions to 26 to 28 per cent below 2005 levels by
2025. But in order to reach the crucial goal oflimiting the
global temperature increase to two degrees Celsius, all
countries must reduce their footprint and work together
to reach an ambitious climate change agreement at the
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change Conference in December, in Paris.

Many small island developing States are making
important contributions of their own to mitigate
climate change and adapt to its impact, as the Marshall
Islands recently did by committing to reduce emissions
by 32 per cent below 2010 levels by 2025. But they
cannot do it alone. We in the international community
have a critical role to play in supporting their efforts.
To give just one example, the United States Agency
for International Development's Climate Change
Adaptation Project Preparation Facility - ADAPT
Asia-Pacific - is helping to build the capacity of
Governments to access and manage funding to meet
needs ranging from coastal resilience to food and water
security. In just two years, the ADAPT programme has
helped Pacific small island developing States to access
some $67 million from multilateral adaptation funds.

The second challenge is energy security. Small
island developing States lack large natural energy
resource endowments and dependence on high-
cost imported energy creates profound economic
vulnerability. As with their response to climate
change, small island developing States have shown real
leadership in addressing that challenge, in large part
by developing renewable energy sources. Samoa has
committed to achieving 100 per cent renewable energy
electricity-generation by 2017, and Aruba is well
on its way to meeting that goal by 2020. In Jamaica,
ground was broken earlier this year on the country's
largest private sector renewable energy project - a
36-megawatt wind farm.

The United States has been and will continue to
be a key partner to the small island developing States
in developing clean energy sources. That is the aim of
President Obama's announcement, in April, together
with our Caribbean and Central American partners, of
the creation of an energy security task force to drive
investment in renewable alternatives. It was also the
aim ofa series of meetings the United States co-chaired
with the International Renewable Energy Agency and
the Secretariat of the Pacific Community just last
week in Hawaii - in which a number of small island
developing States participated - to share best practices
in generating clean energy alternatives.

And the third and final challenge I would like
to address today is ensuring the protection and
sustainability of our oceans. As Secretary of State John
Kerry said at the June 2014 Our Ocean conference he
convened,

"The protection of our oceans is a vital
international security issue...The connection
between a healthy ocean and life itself for every
single person on Earth cannot be overstated."

While that connection holds for all people, there are
few places where the health of communities and the
oceans are more inextricably linked than in small island
developing States.

The United States understands the imperative
to protect our ocean and coastal environments -
particularly when they are endangered by pollution,
overfishing, acidification and other threats. To that
end, we have partnered with the Nature Conservancy to
implement a five year Caribbean Marine Biodiversity
Program, aimed at reducing threats to marine-coastal
biodiversity in the Caribbean.

We are also taking new action against illegal,
unreported, and unregulated fishing and seafood
fraud. Last year, President Obama tasked United States
Government agencies with developing concrete steps to
address that problem. The resulting 15 recommendations
include strengthening international enforcement and
developing a traceability system for all seafood sold in
the United States. We urge other countries to undertake

similar efforts to tackle that transnational threat to
sustainability.

Families like Rusina Rusin's are already
experiencing the acute impact of man-made threats
to international security like climate change. Their
communities and nations are on the front lines, bearing
the disproportionate impact of problems that others
bear responsibility for causing. That, in itself, should
be enough to motivate us to take action.

If that is not enough - and it should be - if it is
not enough, consider this: if we do not act swiftly to
address those problems, all of the threats manifested
in Rusina's community to health, livelihoods,
security - all of those threats will eventually be felt
in all of our communities. They are not someone else's
problems, they are all of our problems. And they are
problems we must tackle with determination, with
speed and with unity.

