The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the United States.

I thank Assistant Secretary-General Mueller for
her briefing. Ijoin others in welcoming His Excellency
Mr. Aljarallah, Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Kuwait, and in commending Kuwait on its term on
the Security Council and the strong partnership and
leadership which that country has exhibited on several
issues, including the humanitarian issues that we are
discussing today. We look forward to continuing our
strong partnership with Kuwait.

A new year is on the horizon in Syria, and with it
comes the hope not only that the Council's efforts in
the country will improve, but also that the 11 million
Syrians who have endured years of suffering might see
an end to the violent conflict. However, before we look
ahead to what the Council should do next year to improve
humanitarian conditions in Syria, there is still one thing
the Council must achieve in 2019, and that is the renewal
of the life-saving provisions of the Security Council's
cross-border aid mandate - resolution 2165 (2014).

The United States rises alongside the Secretary-
General, the Office for the Coordination ofHumanitarian
Affairs, the millions of Syrians who depend on that
resolution, and United Nations implementers to demand
the renewal of the resolution's provisions for all existing
crossings. As we set our intentions for the new year, we
see several achievable steps that the Council can take to
demonstrate our commitment to real peace for Syrians
in 2020.

First, the Council can and should do much more
to demand that the parties on the ground verifiably
improve humanitarian access. In 2020, no Syrian
should be denied lifesaving assistance because he or she
lives in an area not under regime control or fears that
military operations by the Al-Assad regime, Russia or
any other party will cause United Nations aid convoys
to turn back before completing a delivery.

We call on the Al-Assad regime and the Russian
Federation to uphold an immediate cessation of
hostilities in north-western Syria and in the rest of the
country. A ceasefire is essential to addressing the needs
of the people in Idlib and to honouring commitments
made by Presidents Putin and Erdogan in Sochi in
2018. The regime's cynical strategy of attacking its own
population, while asking the international community
to provide reconstruction assistance to Damascus, will
not go without a response. But our response cannot
come at the expense of innocent victims. Rather, the
Council must redouble its commitment to the political
process outlined in resolution 2254 (2015) and its
promise to reform how the Al-Assad regime treats the
Syrian people.

Secondly, the Security Council must take steps to
increase the quality and quantity of United Nations
regular access to Syria, which remains at just 30 per
cent of the desired level. The United Nations must be
allowed to expand operations to areas including south-
western Syria, Homs, and the Damascus suburbs.
For too long, the world has watched the Al-Assad
regime block the delivery of food, medicine and other
humanitarian relief to reassert control over the Syrian
people. Next year, the Council must work together
and press Damascus to permit the United Nations to
have regular and unhindered access to people in need
throughout the country.

Thirdly, we ask that the Council support
humanitarian access to north-eastern Syria for all
relevant partners, including the United Nations and
other international humanitarian organizations.
Access to north-eastern Syria is critical to ensuring
that communities recovering from the scourge of the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham (ISIS) can receive the
provisions they need. It is equally critical to ensuring
that ISIS cannot re-emerge in Iraq or Syria.

Finally, the Council must remain united in its
efforts to keep the United Nations at the centre of any
attempts to facilitate the principled return of Syrian
refugees and internally displaced persons to a place
of their choosing. The United States is alarmed by
reports that more than 150 people who voluntarily
left the Rukban encampment for Horns were arrested
and arbitrarily detained by the regime, and that that
was carried out despite the United Nations, the United
States and the Russian Federation working together to
facilitate safe and informed departures. We call for the
immediate release of those civilians in regime custody
and for the regime to stop its use of torture and the
denial of due process.

The Council must not retreat from its commitment
to ensuring that the conditions on the ground are
verifiably safe for people to return home after years
of war. The United States believes that, with focus
and effort, the Council can achieve the goals that I
just described in the next 12 months. Doing so would
represent a meaningful and necessary step towards
a more lasting peace in line with resolution 2254
(2015) - a peace that would allow the Syrian people to
at last begin the work of rebuilding their lives.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I give the floor to the representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic.

