Mr. Hilale (Morocco) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I should like to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month. I also thank you for your initiative
to hold this debate on a subject to which my country
attaches the utmost importance based on our Arab
and Islamic commitment. We would also like to thank
Assistant Secretary-General ad interim Toyberg-
Frandzen for briefing this morning on the most recent
developments in the Middle East, especially concerning
the Palestinian question.

Today's meeting is being held following yet another
year when the Palestinian people held out the hope for a
better future and for fulfilling their dream to establish
an independent Palestinian State along the 4 June 1967

borders and with East Jerusalem as its capital. That hope
was engendered by the peace talks launched in July 2013
under the auspices of the United States of America, and
it was encouraged by the General Assembly's adoption
of a resolution to declare 2014 as the International Year
of Solidarity with the Palestinian People. That hope was
also fuelled by the fact that Palestinians came together
to establish the Government of National Consensus to
faciliate the two-State solution. However, hope is now
illusory. This issue is still unresolved and the situation
is worsening. As a poet once said, existence is a heavy
burden and there is no hope. However, there is still
hope in the hearts of peace-loving people.

Talks have stalled owing to Israeli obstinacy. The
world saw unjustified aggression against the Gaza Strip
that resulted in more than 2,000 martyrs, including old
people, women and children. It also produced thousands
of wounded and displaced persons whose homes and
property were destroyed and who now are exposed to
the elements. Worse yet, in violation of the Charter of
the United Nations and the principles of international
law and international humanitarian law, it was civilians
themselves who were targeted. Schools, even those
of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East in which the
displaced had taken refuge, were targeted. All of this
has produced a disastrous humanitarian situation from
which the Palestinian people continue to suffer. We
reject those actions, which will lead only to greater
extremism, violence and hatred.

The systematic plans to clamp down on the
Palestinians extend as well to religious practices,
including opening up access to the Al-Aqsa Mosque to
incompatible use. Efforts are also being made to Judaize
important religious sites. That is a major provocation to
the religious sentiments not just of Palestinians, but of
Muslims throughout the world.

From the beginning, Morocco's King, Government
and people have condemned this Israeli aggression
against the Palestinian people in Gaza. At the instruction
of His Majesty King Mohammed VI, Morocco has
provided humanitarian and financial assistance to the
Palestinian people as a sign of solidarity, in particular
in the context of rebuilding Gaza.

His Majesty, who chairs the Al-Quds Committee,

is very concerned about the situation of the Palestinian
people, especially the situation in East Jerusalem. That
concern extends to the Judaization of the Holy City, the
ongoing settlement policy, the displacement of people
and the repeated violations against the sacred nature
of the Al-Aqsa Mosque and against worshipers. We
are also gravely concerned about attemps to obliterate
the legal status of East Jerusalem as established under
international law: since 1967, East Jerusalem has been
considered as occupied Palestinian territory.

On ideological terms, all of this is giving rise to
questions of a religious nature. It is for that reason that
His Majesty the King convened a meeting ofthe Al-Quds
Committee at Marrakesh last January. The meeting's
final communique reiterated the central nature and the
role of East Jerusalem for the Muslim Ummah. That is
a key element of any political resolution to the crisis.
Any violation of the Al-Aqsa Mosque will lead only to
further violence and tenstion.

Following the ministerial meeting ofthe Organization
of Islamic Cooperation, a futher coordination meeting
was held in Rabat on 12 November 2014, which issued
a call to influential parties as to the need to defend the
Al-Aqsa Mosque. The meeting also reasserted the right
of the Palestinian people to establish a State for the
sake of peace and and security.

On numerous ocassions, both bilaterally and
at international events, His Majesty the King has
emphasized the need to put an end to the occupation and
Judaization of Jerusalem. He has also sent a message to
the Pope in which he expressed the seriousness of the
situation.
On 30 December 2014, the international community
had an important opportunity to consider a draft
resolution on ending the occupation (S/2014/916),
which was submitted by Jordan. Unfortunately, that
opportunity was missed. The Kingdom of Morocco will
continue to support all efforts to create a Palestinian
State along the June 1967 borders.

The Syrian situation is growing worse by the
day at every level. That has repercussions not only
for the Syrian people but for all States in the region
in the Middle East. It is therefore necessary to bring
and end to this crisis, the price of which is being paid
by the people of Syria. Thousands of people have
died, while millions have been displaced. Policies
are aimed at producing displacement, famine, hunger
and the destruction of infrastructure and the means
of survival. We demand that access be granted for
humanitarian and medical assistance. In that regard, we
support the implementation of resolutions 2139 (2014)
and 2165 (2014).

In that regard, Morocco has helped to set up a
mobile hospital in the Za'atari refugee camp. Through
the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs, we are also supporting efforts to alleviate the
suffering of the Syrian people.

We reiterate the need to preserve the sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity of Syria. We
support Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura in finding a
political solution and launching a democratic transition
on the basis of the Geneva communique (S/2012/522, annex), so as to prevent any further destruction.

Morocco has not changed its position with regard
to its support for the independence and territorial
integrity of Lebanon. We commend the entire Lebanese
people for their patriotism and responsible attitude
in safeguarding the country's security, stability and
sovereignty. We are convinced that Lebanon's wisdom
will prevent that country from being drawn into the
Syrian crisis. In that regard, we condemn the recent
terrorist bombing in Tripoli, which resulted in many
innocent victims.

The situation in Yemen remains of great concern.
Terrorist acts are increasing. Senior political, security
and military officials were recently assassinated. Cadets
were also attacked recently at the police academy.
Such acts of sabotage and terrorism are serving
only to worsen the situation. They are undermining
the consensus and coooperation that made possible
an agreement on the National Dialogue. This will
hamper the holding of the constitutional referendum
and the presidential and parliamentary elections. We
therefore call upon all Yemeni political stakeholders
to safeguard their State, implement the outcome of the
National Dialogue, support the initiative of the Gulf
Cooperation Council in its entiretly and to support the
efforts of the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General,
so as to realize the aspirations of the people of Yemen
to create a democratic and modern State that respects
human rights and freedoms and meets the aspirations
for economic and social development. We call upon
brotherly and friendly States to provide support to
Yemen so that it can overcome the current situation and
achieve stability and development.

We cannot talk about the Middle East today
without dealing with the scourge of terrorism, which
is a threat not just for the region but the entire world.
The growth of the so-called Islamic State in Iraq and
Syria (ISIS), along with its crimes, attacks and killings,
is an illustration of that threat. Terrorist groups that,
whatever they are called - Al-Qaida, Al-Qaida in
the Islamic Maghreb, Daesh, ISIS, Boko Haram or
the Nusra Front - cloak themselves in religion to
justify their expansionist and exclusionist political and
ideological goals in fact have nothing whatever to do
with Islam - to the contrary, they go against a religion
that calls for unity and coexistence.

Let us be vigilant. Let us not allow the terrorists
create disagreement among States or religions. We
reiterate our condemnation of terrorism in every form.
We also reiterate the need not to associate terrorism
with any State, people, ethnic group or religion. We
must face up to this scourge through cooperation. In
that connection, the phenomenon of foreign terrorist
fighters must be confronted robustly so as to eradicate
it, and we emphasize resolutions 2170 (2014) and 2178
(2014) in that regard.

