Mr. Dejammet (France) (spoke in French): Drawing
lessons from the tragedy that took place in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, France and its partners in the Contact Group
mobilized very early to react to the crisis in Kosovo, the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. That action was aimed
at bringing to an end the violence by the parties and at
arriving at a comprehensive settlement of the conflict.

The Security Council also endorsed those concerns,
in particular in resolutions 1160 (1998), 1199 (1998) and
1203 (1998), which it adopted in relation to the situation
in Kosovo. The Council indicated that in those resolutions
it was acting under Chapter VII of the Charter.

In resolutions 1199 (1998) and 1203 (1998), the
Security Council affirmed that the deterioration of the
situation in Kosovo posed a threat to peace and security
in the region. In resolution 1199 (1998), the Council
demanded in particular that the Belgrade authorities
immediately cease hostilities and maintain a ceasefire in
Kosovo; that they take immediate steps to avert the
impending humanitarian catastrophe; that they cease all
action by the security forces affecting the civilian
population and order the withdrawal of security units used
for repression of civilians; and that they make rapid
progress, in the framework of a dialogue with the
Albanian community of Kosovo, towards a political
solution to the problems of Kosovo.

In resolution 1203 (1998), the Security Council
furthermore endorsed and supported the agreements
concluded between the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
and the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe on the one hand, and between the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia and the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization on the other. The Council demanded the
prompt and full implementation of those agreements by
the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. Those agreements

 

included precise commitments and obligations on the part
of the Yugoslav Government.

Those obligations were not respected by Belgrade.
However, every effort was made to prompt the Yugoslav
Government to meet its obligations on the ground and to
adhere to the Rambouillet agreements. Those efforts have
been exhausted.

In recent weeks we have witnessed, together with the
inflexibility of the Belgrade authorities in negotiating a
peace agreement, an increase in tension and confrontation,
with the massing of a powerful offensive capacity by the
Yugoslav army, inspiring fears that there will be a new
upsurge of massacres in a community of 2 million people.
We cannot abandon that community to violent repression.
What is at stake today is peace, peace in Europe - but
human rights are also at stake.

The actions that have been decided upon are a
response to the violation by Belgrade of its international
obligations, which stem in particular from the Security
Council resolutions adopted under Chapter VII of the
United Nations Charter. The Belgrade authorities must be
persuaded that the only way to settle the crisis in Kosovo
is for them to halt their military offensives in Kosovo and
to accept the framework defined by the Rambouillet
agreements.

