Mr. Moussa (spoke in French): Allow me to thank
you, Mr. President, for this opportunity to present to
the Security Council the second report (S/2012/421) of
the Secretary-General on the activities of the United
Nations Regional Office for Central Africa (UNOCA),
including the efforts undertaken by the Organization to
combat the Lord's Resistance Army. Given the fact that
Ambassador Madeira, Special Envoy ofthe Chairperson
of the African Union Commission on Lord's Resistance
Army Issues, is with us today, my statement on this
issue fill focus essentially on the United Nations
regional strategy to address this scourge.

For more than a year now, UNOCA has been working
in close cooperation with the Economic Community of
Central African States (ECCAS), its member States
and other partners in an effort to overcome various
challenges faced by the subregion in the areas of peace,
security and development. Those challenges include
political governance, institutional weakness, managing
electoral processes, environmental degradation,
socio-economic development, the consequences of
the Libyan crisis, combating the proliferation of illicit
small arms and light weapons, and the cross-border
threats posed by armed groups such as Boko Haram and
the Lord's Resistance Army. Thanks to the experience
we have gained on the ground, we have been able to
identify priority areas for UNOCA-ECCAS engagement
that will guide our efforts in the subregion.

(spoke in English)

As the secretariat of the United Nations Standing
Advisory Committee on Security Questions in Central
Africa, we have also successfully facilitated the
functioning of that Committee, including the convening
of two ministerial meetings. Moving forward, we will
help the Committee to implement the counter-terrorism
road map that it adopted last December. We will
also support the Committee's twentieth anniversary
celebrations.

UNOCA, together with the United Nations Office
for West Africa, has been actively engaged in facilitating
the implementation of resolution 2039 (2012), on piracy
and armed robbery in the Gulf of Guinea, in close
collaboration with ECCAS, the Economic Community
ofWest African States, the Gulf of Guinea Commission
and the African Union. Together, and as requested by
this body, we are working towards the holding of a
regional summit before the end of the year.
The subregion has rich reserves ofnatural resources.
However, the effective management of those resources
and their judicious exploitation for the benefit of the
majority of the populations remains a major challenge.
A most encouraging development in the subregion is the
current healthy state of the economies of the countries
ofCentral Africa, with a reported average growth rate of
more than 5 per cent in 2011. In spite of that good news,
there are indications that, partly due to shortcomings in
economic governance, the benefits of that growth at the
macroeconomic level are yet to trickle down to the level
of the vast majority of the population.

During his visit to the subregion last February, the
Secretary-General highlighted the necessity of bridging
the widening gaps between the rich and the poor in some
Central African states. He urged Governments to "do
more to strengthen the social fabric by promoting social
equity and ensuring a better distribution of income"
and better prospects for sustainable growth, peace and
prosperity.

On 14 November 2011, I briefed the Council (see S/PV.6657) on the tremendous suffering that the most
brutal criminal group in Central Africa, the LRA, was
inflicting on the local population. For over two decades,
this group has maimed, killed, kidnapped women and
children, and caused the displacement of more than
445,000 people. Following my briefing, at the end of
its meeting the Council adopted presidential statement
S/PRST/2011/21, in which it encouraged UNOCA, in
coordination with the United Nations Office to the
African Union, to engage with the United Nations
presences in the LRA-affected region and the AU to
develop a regional strategy to address the threat posed
by the LRA. In that regard, we consulted extensively
with the Governments in the affected countries,
national and regional actors and the wider international
community to develop a coordinated strategy.

The strategy, which has been submitted to
the Council, focuses on five key objectives. They
include, first, support for the operationalization and
full implementation of the African Union regional
cooperation initiative against the LRA, secondly,
enhancing efforts to promote the protection of civilians;
thirdly, expanding disarmament, demobilization,
repatriation, resettlement and reintegration (DDRRR)
activities to cover all LRA-affected areas; fourthly,
promoting a coordinated humanitarian and child
protection response in all LRA-affected areas and;
lastly, supporting LRA-affected Governments in the
fields of peacebuilding, human rights, the rule of law
and development, so as to enable them to extend State
authority across their territories. Once the strategy is
endorsed, the United Nations and its partners will need
to agree on its implementation plan.

The strategy goes beyond military operations and
DDRRR. It addresses the plight of the victims to ensure
their social and economic reintegration into their
respective communities. However, the strategy must
only represent the beginning of vigorous attention by
the Council to address the LRA issues, in order to put
an end to these atrocities once and for all. Its successful
implementation will depend on the level of cooperation
and engagement among the countries affected, and on
the mobilization of resources to address funding gaps.

In spite of the recent capture of one of its senior
commanders and its significantly diminished
capability, the LRA remains extremely dangerous and
retains the capacity to inflict considerable suffering on
the population. In that regard, I appeal to the Security
Council and the wider international community to
actively support the implementation of the United
Nations regional strategy and the AU Regional
Cooperation Initiative. It is also imperative to ensure
that the LRA's source of funding is investigated.

UNOCA is committed to continuing to support the
countries of the subregion in their efforts to foster peace
and security. In that regard, UNOCA will continue to
support subregional initiatives to address the major
challenges to peace and security in Central Africa, in
particular the implementation of the regional strategy
on the LRA, measures to curb the threat posed by piracy
and armed robbery at sea in the Gulf of Guinea, and
support to the activities of the United Nations Standing
Advisory Committee on Security Questions in Central
Africa.

