Mr. Schulz (Germany): At the outset, let me thank
our briefers for the very insightful picture that they have
painted for us. I extend my gratitude to Martin Griffiths,
Mark Lowcock, Henrietta Fore and, of course, the Chair
of the Committee established pursuant to resolution
2140 (2014). Let me also express our deep appreciation
to Martin Griffiths and Lieutenant General Lollesgaard
for their tireless efforts on the political front, and to all
the many humanitarian actors. We know how difficult
but also how important their job is, and we give them
thanks for that.

I would like to focus on three important issues.
First of all, I would like to express our support for the
steps taken to implement the Stockholm Agreement
and to once again underline our support for the Special
Envoy and for the United Nations Mission to Support
the Hodeidah Agreement (UNMHA). The start of the
unilateral redeployment of Houthi forces from the
three ports of Al-Hudaydah, Saleef and Ras Isa, as
verified by UNMHA, is a first positive step on the
road to making progress on the implementation of the
Stockholm Agreement. We feel it is necessary to seize
that opportunity and that the parties continue with
broader redeployments in Al-Hudaydah in a transparent
and sustained manner.

Al-Hudaydah is only one part of the larger puzzle
that we are facing, but it is a particularly important
part. We continue to hope, of course, that success in
Al-Hudaydah could serve as a confidence-building
measure that would then serve as a blueprint for the
many other conflict zones in Yemen. For that reason,
all parties should refrain from any action that could
endanger the resumption of a political process. We
are therefore deeply worried about the deplorable and
unacceptable drone attacks in Saudi Arabia.

We also find it essential to finalize the pending
negotiations, including on economic provisions of
the Hodeidah agreement, and to allow for a full
implementation of the first and second phases of the
agreement. The Special Envoy and Lieutenant General
Lollesgaard have our full support in that regard as well.

As the monitoring has started, it has become more
important than ever that UNMHA have the means, the
personnel and the access to fulfil its task. Germany
is supporting UNMHA with personnel and strongly
encourages others to also consider providing concrete
support to that important Mission. We call on the
parties to give the Mission full access and support, in
particular by issuing Visas in a timely manner. As soon
as redeployment is complete, it is of critical importance
to upgrade port facilities, as the port of Al-Hudaydah
is the lifeline for the north of Yemen. Germany stands
ready to offer the United Nations any support needed
in that regard.

My second point - and here I can be brief - is
to stress the need to return to the political process in
Yemen, as the Special Envoy and others have said
very strongly. We are very ready to support that.
The implementation of the Stockholm Agreement is
obviously of utmost priority, but we must not lose sight
of the overall situation in the region and in Yemen.
The Special Envoy talked about that in his briefing
today, and we are very concerned about other current
developments. With the exception of Al-Hudaydah,
violence has flared up throughout the country, and we
have heard about the 30 or so active conflicts that he
referred to. Despite being a long and difficult road, the
political process must resume in order to pave the way
for a comprehensive and inclusive political solution.
Germany is prepared to support that. We reiterate our
readiness to host a next round of talks, if they happen.

Thirdly and lastly, I have a word to say concerning
the humanitarian situation. A very bleak picture has
been painted, and it is very alarming. Unfortunately, it
is not the first time. We have taken note of some of the
positive developments referred to, but of course those
developments need to be seen in the broader context
of a still very frightening and alarming situation. The
humanitarian situation remains catastrophic and for
that reason has to continue to be on the priority list
of the Council. I think it is very important to remind
the parties of their obligations - as was mentioned
in the briefings - under international humanitarian
law and human rights law to protect civilians, in
particular the most vulnerable groups, namely, women
and children, and to respect civilian infrastructure, in
particular hospitals.

We also call on parties to disburse pledges made in
Geneva without further delay in order to avert so-called
pipeline breaks of major United Nations programmes.
We strongly encourage the disbursement of those
pledges through the humanitarian response plan of the
United Nations.

The people in Yemen need a strong and coordinated
response that is in accordance with humanitarian
principles. In that regard, we call on all parties to
refrain from politicizing humanitarian aid or diverting
aid for other purposes. Moreover, the Security Council,
its members and the international community should
step up action to support humanitarian access and
the unrestricted delivery of humanitarian aid. I think
we have to think even more creatively about concrete
steps to achieve that and about how to achieve real and
lasting improvements in that vein.

In conclusion, I also want to emphasize the
worrisome increase in cholera cases since the
beginning of this year, which Ms. Fore also pointed out.
Priority must be given to providing funding for cholera
preparedness interventions.

