Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola) (spoke in French):
It is quite a pleasure to have the Foreign Minister
of Senegal here to preside over this meeting of the
Security Council to guide and shape our discussions
on a matter that occupies a unique place within the
deliberations of the Council and is, of course, a matter
of great importance to Africa.

(spoke in English)

I would like to begin by commending Senegal and
the Senegalese presidency for convening this debate
on strengthening the partnership between the United
Nations and African Union on peace and security.
We thank the briefers, namely, Mr. El-Ghassim
Wane, Assistant Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations; Mr. Haile Menkerios, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General to the African
Union; Mr. Te'te Anto'nio, Permanent Observer of the
African Union to the United Nations; and Mr. Donald
Kaberuka, African Union High Representative for the
Peace Fund. Their comments, remarks and proposals
have very much enriched our debate this morning on a
theme that is very dear to the African continent and to
the entire global community, given the threats to peace
and security facing the world.

The contemporary and evolving challenges posed
by violent conflict, humanitarian crises, extremism,
terrorism, war crimes and crimes against humanity call
for a more coordinated response and complementary
action on the part of all stakeholders in addressing
issues related to peace and security at the international
and regional levels. In that regard, cooperation between
the African Union (AU) and the United Nations based
on a shared vision, goals and comparative advantages
plays a critical role in tackling the numerous conflicts
on the African continent.

The Council has just returned from a mission to
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, where members
of the Council were able to personally observe the
challenges that we face, and I think that the debate this
morning will provide valuable insights into what we
are called upon to do. The Addis Ababa Declaration
of 2006, which established a 10-year capacity-building
programme for the African Union, provided the basis
for cooperation between the two organizations and
the establishment of an institutional framework,
inter alia, the United Nations Office to the African
Union, the annual joint consultative meetings, African
non-permanent members of the United Nations Security
Council coordination group, the joint framework
between the United Nations and the Peace and Security
Department of the African Union, and the Joint Task
Force on Peace and Security. Important Council
resolutions have been adopted, in particular resolutions
2023 (2011) and 2067 (2012), which seek to strengthen
the relationship between the two organizations and
develop a more effective partnership. Those were
positive developments that we are now called upon
to refine by improving the mechanisms established,
and the debate today provides a unique opportunity
to enhance our joint responsibility to render our
cooperation more effective.

In that connection, bearing in mind the need to
further develop the relationship from a level based on
cooperation to one consisting of a strategic partnership,
the Assembly of the African Union adopted a decision
in July 2015 to establish the 2017-2028 framework
for a renewed partnership on Africa's integration
and development agenda, based on, among other
provisions, the guiding principles ofAfrican ownership
and leadership. The agenda is built upon important and
strategic policy decisions taken by the African Union,
namely, Agenda 2063, which is aimed at creating the
conditions for the sustainable development of the
African continent, and Vision 2020, which together
provide the AU framework to put an end to all conflicts
on the continent by 2020.

In its fiftieth anniversary solemn declaration, the
AU proclaimed the need for a stronger commitment
by African States to efforts to address conflicts on
the continent and to review their policies on peace
and security. The African Union member States
have expressed a clear commitment to engage in
peacekeeping missions with robust mandates aimed
at deterring violence and, if necessary, enforcing
peace. That endeavour can be achieved only with
close coordination and complementarity with the
United Nations and the Security Council, given the
Council's premier responsibility in the maintenance of
international peace and security. In 2015, we adopted
the African Peace and Security Architecture Roadmap
for the period 2016 to 2020, which is a strategic blueprint
putting particular emphasis on effective delivery by
all stakeholders involved in the peace and security
architecture, including partners and external actors.
The Roadmap aims at covering the various phases
of the conflict cycle through five strategic priorities:
conflict prevention, conflict management, post-conflict
reconstruction and peacebuilding, strategic security
issues and coordination and partnership. The central
question remains: How can the United Nations Security
Council support the successful implementation of those
priorities?

The United Nations went through a review of
peacekeeping operations. The High-level Independent
Panel on Peace Operations presented a comprehensive
report (see S/2015/446), regarding which the African
Union was extensively consulted by the Panel, and the AU
was given an opportunity to lay out its common position
focused on priorities, including crisis management
by regional institutions, a recognition of the Security
Council's primacy in authorizing enforcement action,
the need for permanent consultations and exchanges of
information relating to ongoing crises and conflicts, and
the need for better coordination and the strengthening
of complementarities.

In the search for African solutions to the conflicts
affecting the continent, given the unprecedented
threats faced by some African countries and the delays
in the operationalization of the African Standby Force,
which was initially due to global events of 2008,
some AU member States launched discussions on the
establishment of the African Capacity for Immediate
Response to Crisis, so as to provide the African
continent with the means to ensure their ownership
in tackling conflict situations on the continent and
capabilities for immediately responding to crises.

In finalizing those strategic operational decisions
based on African Union-led experiences, some
common denominators became apparent: first, the
joint commitment by the AU and the United Nations
to strengthen their strategic partnership on issues
related to peace and security, and, secondly, the need
to explore options for ensuring predictable, reliable and
sustainable funding for peace-support operations in
the continent. Angola commends the AU Peace Fund
report entitled "Securing predictable and sustainable
financing for peace in Africa".

On the long road towards finding more
appropriate responses to the unprecedented threats
to peace and security globally, particularly in Africa,
considering the need for predictable funding in order
to ensure peacekeeping operations in Africa, the High
Representative of the AU Peace Fund, who is present
here this morning, has presented a commendable
proposal that the Council has been called upon
to consider.

We reiterate our support for the draft resolution
(S/2016/977) to be adopted shortly. We look forward to
options on the operationalization of the commitments
by the African Union and the outcomes of today's
discussion on the issue and the follow-up action by the
Fifth Committee of the General Assembly, as well as
later on by the African Union Summit to be convened
in January in Addis Ababa.

