Mr. Shava (Zimbabwe): At the outset, I wish to
congratulate you, Madam President, on assuming
the presidency of the Security Council for the month
of October. On behalf of the 15 member States of the
South African Development Community (SADC), I
wish to thank you for convening this very important
debate on the Middle East.

SADC aligns itself with the statement delivered by
the representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran on
behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.

We continue to witness the persecution ofthe people
of Palestine at the hands of Israel. Recently, the world
witnessed the brutal and indiscriminate bombardment
of the Gaza Strip that resulted in the deaths of over
2,000 civilians, rendered 103,000 homeless and
destroyed social and economic infrastructure. While
Israel perpetrated those heinous acts, some in the
international community who always preach about the
responsibility to protect remained conspicuously silent.
It is unacceptable that Israel violates the territorial
integrity of Gaza and the human rights ofthe Palestinian
people, and the Security Council fails to intervene
decisively. The Council must uphold its responsibilities
under the Charter of the United Nations and act to
protect innocent Palestinian civilians. The collective
failure of the Security Council and the international
community has fostered Israel's flagrant violations of
all Security Council resolutions on the Arab-Israeli
conflict.

The pretext by Israel that it acts in self-defence
against victims of its illegal occupation defies all
logic. Israel's self- defence cannot justify the scale
of violence it perpetrated in its maiming of innocent
women and children. Israel must be held accountable
and perpetrators must be brought to justice. SADC
welcomes the decision by the Human Rights Council
to establish an independent international commission
of inquiry to investigate all violations of international
humanitarian and human rights law in the occupied
Palestinian territory. We call on Israel to lift the
seven-year illegal blockade on Gaza. The international
community must exert the necessary pressure to compel
Israel to end the inhuman blockade by which it has
wilfully inflicted a humanitarian disaster in Gaza that
affects every single dimension of life for every woman,
man and child.

Israel's recent announcement that it would acquire
1,000 acres of Palestinian territory in the West Bank
is a blatant violation of various Security Council
resolutions. It demonstrates Israel's belief that it can
continue to act with impunity, which arises from the
protection it receives from some within the Security
Council. The international community's constant
appeasement of Israel has fostered the belief that it
is a State above the law, and has enabled it to pursue
atrocities against the Palestinian people. The illegal
acquisition of Palestinian territory continues to
undermine the vision of a two-State solution based on
the pre-1967 borders.

This tragedy underscores the need for serious
efforts by all concerned to address the root causes
of the conflict, if the international community truly
wants to realize a just and lasting peace between the
Palestinian and Israeli peoples. The core problem,
which is Israel's belligerent occupation of Palestinian
territory, must be addressed in accordance with the
United Nations resolutions and international law.
While we commend efforts to mobilize resources for
the reconstruction of Gaza, SADC believes it will be an
exercise in futility if a more comprehensive agreement
is not reached that includes the lifting of the illegal
blockade. It is ironic that some Member States leading
the campaign to mobilize funds for the reconstruction
process in Gaza are the same that give tacit approval to
massive destruction by Israel under the so-called right
to self-defence. The international community must act
in unison to compel Israel to comply with international
law.

History has shown us that we run the risk of getting
into a cycle of building and destroying if the status quo
is maintained. The key to moving forward is addressing
all issues undermining prospects for attaining a peace
agreement. We urge the international community to
address the conflict in its entirety rather than narrowly
focusing on the recent events in Gaza. In that vein,
SADC expresses its unwavering support to current
efforts by Prime Minister Abbas to garner support
for a peace plan that he hopes will compel Israel to
negotiate the framework for a two-State solution
within a specific time frame. The plan, announced by
Prime Minister Abbas when he addressed the General
Assembly on 26 September (see A/69/PV.12), entails a
resumption of negotiations to demarcate the borders,
reach a comprehensive agreement and draft a peace
treaty. Palestinian authorities hope that the plan will be
adopted in a Security Council draft resolution.

SADC supports negotiations towards a just,
comprehensive and lasting peace in the Middle East
leading to the restoration of the Palestinian people's
legitimate right to establish an independent State
coexisting peacefully with the State of Israel. There
is no option to peaceful dialogue to achieve the two-
State solution based on the June 1967 borders. Any
other manoeuvres to change demographic realities
through settlements or use of force will only prolong
the suffering of the Palestinian people.

In conclusion, allow me to recognize Egypt's
important role in brokering the ceasefire that ended
50 days of Israel's bombardment of Gaza, its continued
efforts in trying to find a lasting solution to the
Palestinian-Israeli conflict and for hosting a successful
reconstruction conference that brought some hope to all
those whose homes were destroyed in Gaza.

