Mrs. Mele Colifa (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): Before I begin my statement, I would like to
express our full solidarity with the Libyan people who
continue to suffer the barbarity of war to this day.

My delegation would like to express its gratitude and
congratulations to Ms. Fatou Bensouda, Prosecutor of
the International Criminal Court, for her comprehensive
briefing today on her seventeenth report to the Council
and for her commitment to executing her functions.

The Republic of Equatorial Guinea promotes
respect for international law and international
humanitarian law. We therefore commend the major
efforts of the United Nations, especially the Security
Council, in the area of accountability and impunity.
We hope they continue unchanged and with the same
intensity, regardless of the origin of the accused. The
international community expects the criteria and the
will of the International Criminal Court in prosecuting
crimes to be uniform, and that it will carry out its tasks
with objectivity, credibility and impartiality while
ensuring that its cases are not politicized.

The tragic deterioration of the situation in Libya in
recent weeks, which has resulted in the loss of hundreds
of lives and in injury to thousands, is intolerable and
should not be accepted. We are deeply worried about
the seriousness of the current situation. We therefore
believe that at this point the priority should be to stop
the fighting, immediately establish a ceasefire and bring
the Libyans back to the negotiating table to re-establish
peace in Libya, since only inclusive negotiations can
enable peace to be achieved and normality restored to
this battered country. The Libyan people are clamouring
desperately for it, and this body must act accordingly.

The continuing violations of human rights and
international humanitarian law in Libya remain a
concern, as does the commission of war crimes with
total impunity. By way of example, explosive weapons
are being used indiscriminately in civilian areas and
innocent people are being murdered, as the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General rightly
indicated in his press release of 17 April. This matter
falls under the purview of the Criminal Court, which
must therefore take action in accordance with the legally
established procedures. We encourage all members of
the Council and the international community to take
urgent action in response to these events by taking
measures to protect civilians and medical personnel, as
well as civilian infrastructure.

In conclusion, it is important to bear in mind that
the current situation in Libya has serious regional
repercussions. It directly and adversely affects the
migrants and refugees stranded there who have
remained or been returned to Libyan territory, which
makes the situation even more complex against the
backdrop of existing tensions.

