Mr. O'Brien: The conflict in Yemen continues
unabated since my latest briefing (see S/PV.7622) to
the Security Council, on 16 February. By far the most
pressing concern today is the protection of civilians,
millions of whom daily face relentless, and often
indiscriminate, bombing and shelling of urban areas by
the parties to the conflict. That was again made starkly
clear on Saturday, 27 February, when approximately 30
people were killed and 40 injured in an apparent air
strike on a busy market in the Nahem district of Sana'a
governorate. Six children were among those killed in
the attack. That was one of four air strikes in Nahem
during February that reportedly killed civilians. More
than 2,000 children are estimated to have been killed
or injured since the start of the conflcit - including at
least 90 children killed this year alone * by airstrikes,
shelling, ground fighting and unexploded ordnance.

Protected places, such as hospitals, schools and
homes, continue to be hit by all parties. On 24 February,
coalition air strikes reportedly hit a health centre in
Bidbadah district, Marib governorate, completely
destroying the facility. On 1 March, airstrikes
reportedly landed within 20 metres of a hospital in
Sa'ada. I reiterate my previous calls: air strikes and
random shelling of civilians and civilian areas violate
cardinal rules of international humanitarian law and
constitute unlawful conduct of hostilities. All parties
to the conflict have an obligation under international
humanitarian law to take every measure to ensure
that civilians and civilian objects are protected. It is
unacceptable that health facilities are being hit, and it
is critical that the parties make guarantees that those
locations will be protected.

In the absence of a political, negotiated end to
the conflict, the security situation across much of
the country is rapidly deteriorating. In Aden, regular
attacks by parties - including Al-Qaida in the Arabian
Peninsula, the so-called Aden and Abyan branch of
the Islamic State and local militants - take place
against security personnel and other segments of the
Government of Yemen. Those attacks and the general
lawlessness in Aden have prevented the United Nations
from redeploying international staff there since October
2015, thereby directly impacting our ability to assess
needs and monitor response. Intense fighting around
Sana'a, Marib, Ta'izz and Sa'ada also restrict our ability
to deliver assistance where it is needed most.

The proliferation of checkpoints across the
country further impedes humanitarian action, slowing
the transport of key goods and services and in some
instances halting movement altogether. Command-and-
control lines within armed groups are often tenuous,
with agreements and guarantees reached at the national
level not necessarily communicated downstream to
the individuals at checkpoints. Despite permission to
move, trucks are often held up and sometimes delayed
for days or even weeks.

Bureaucratic requirements imposed by Houthi
authorities also delay and impede the rapid delivery
of humanitarian assistance. In one week alone in
February, the Ministry of the Interior in Sana'a refused
travel permission to three separate United Nations-led
missions from Sana'a to Ibb and Ta'izz. Increasingly,
the movement of United Nations security staff into and
out of the country is also being made difficult, having
a direct impact on our ability to expand operations.
Of particular concern, however, is the fact that for
over three months the World Food Programme (WFP),
together with the United Nations Food and Agriculture
Organization and UNICEF, have been trying to conduct
an emergency food security and nutrition assessment
throughout the country. Originally intended to be
launched in October 2015, the assessment continues to
be blocked by authorities in Sana'a. This assessment is
critically needed in order to update information on food
security and nutrition to inform humanitarian response.
Let me therefore remind all parties that providing
timely and unimpeded access to humanitarian
organizations is not only the fundamental prerequisite
to any meaningful humanitarian response, but also an
obligation under international humanitarian law. I call
upon the Council to request all parties, in no uncertain
terms, to stop any denial of access and facilitate
life-saving needs immediately.

Despite these challenges, United Nations agencies
and partners continue to deliver assistance, often at gave
risk, across all sectors. In February, for example, over
3 million people received WFP food assistance - some
400,000 more than the month before. The humanitarian
community remains committed to expanding its overall
response to 13.4 million people this year in Yemen. To
achieve this, the Yemen humanitarian response plan for
2016 appeals for $1.8 billion.

On 12 February, the Secretary-General instituted
the United Nations Verification and Inspection
Mechanism (UNVIM) at the request of the Government
of Yemen. The Mechanism, based in Djibouti, is
intended to expedite legitimate commercial imports of
critical commodities such as food, fuel and medicines.
All States and relevant organizations, including the
International Maritime Organization, have since
been notified of the Mechanism's procedures. The
nominations for the UNVIM. tripartite steering
committee consisting of a representative of the
Government of Yemen, the coalition and the United
Nations will be finalized this week, allowing the full
commencement of UNVIM. operations.

In recent months there has been a significant
increase of the delivery of fuel and other life-saving
imports through Yemeni ports, and it is critical that
every effort be made by all Member States directly
concerned to encourage, and not hinder, that trend. It
is imperative that imports to Yemen and trading within
Yemen be allowed to continue. I call on all parties
to ensure the protection of civilian infrastructure,
including shipping ports and associated equipment.

I am also pleased to report that the WFP chartered
vessel, the Mainport Cedar, which had been diverted
and taken by the coalition to the Saudi port of Jizan,
was released on 25 February. Humanitarian food and
medical supplies were subsequently delivered, as
planned, to Hudaydah. The humanitarian information
technology equipment will be delivered to Aden on
6 March

Once again, I underscore the urgent need for
the Council and the international community more
broadly to impress upon the parties to the conflict their
obligations to take greater measures to protect civilians
and to facilitate unconditional and sustained access to
all parts of Yemen. I also ask the Council to press the
parties to resume peace talks and agree to a cessation
of hostilities.

