Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): I wish to thank the delegation of the United
States for having convened this briefing and for giving
me the opportunity to address the Security Council
as outgoing Chair of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 2048 (2012),
concerning Guinea-Bissau. It has been a privilege
indeed, over the course of Equatorial Guinea's two-year
term on the Security Council, to serve in this important
organ. I wish to share with the members of the Council
some purely personal observations I have made in my
capacity in the Committee and on behalf of my country,
the Republic of Equatorial Guinea.

As Chair of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 2048 (2012),
concerning Guinea-Bissau, our main objective was to
ensure the full implementation of the basic mandates
of that subsidiary body. In conducting the work of
the Committees, Equatorial Guinea endeavoured to
be transparent, as we strictly followed the rules of
procedure and refrained from politicizing the issues.
Guinea-Bissau has been facing a chronic political
crisis for years, and the root causes of instability in
the country have yet to be resolved. International
and regional efforts to find a lasting solution to the
political crisis already appear to have had an effect
on the ground, as some of the key provisions of the
Conakry Agreement have been implemented, mainly
as a result of the appeals made and the significant
pressure exerted by the Security Council, as well as by
regional and international actors such as the Economic
Community of West African States, the African Union,
the Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries and
the European Union.

The international community has the capacity to
promote the use of different tools such as dialogue,
good offices, the maintenance of special political
missions in the field and sanctions, among others. But
the best solution for ultimately achieving institutional
stability and peace in Guinea-Bissau lies in the hands of
its leaders. As the Council is aware, 2019 is an election
year in Guinea-Bissau, and ensuring the stability,
transparency and legitimacy of its institutions must be
the cornerstone of its democratic process, a key element
for consolidating peace in the country. We hope that
the second round of presidential elections, scheduled to
be held 28 December, as well as the peaceful transfer
of power in the coming weeks to the newly elected
President, will put a definitive end to the uncertain
political situation in the country and give way to clear
signs of substantive progress towards the achievement
of a solution in the near future.

I made my second field visit to Guinea-Bissau at
the end of October, and there I was able to meet with
the political class at the highest level, as well as various
military and civil-society stakeholders and members of
the diplomatic community. It should be noted that in
the seven years since the adoption of the sanctions, that
was the third time that a Chair of the Committee had
visited the country. The first visit of such visits was
made in 2017 by my predecessor from Uruguay. Some
of the remarks that I have made at previous meetings on
the issue are still valid in the current context; however,
I would like to highlight some of the observations from
my report that are still valid.

First, the lack of political will to reach a solution
can be attributed to personal interests and ambitions,
and not diverging religious, ideological, ethnic or
philosophical views.
Secondly, since 2012 the sanctioned military has
maintained a republic-oriented conduct that respects
the constitutional order and the laws of the country
and refrained from interfering in the political life of
Guinea-Bissau. I personally consider the meetings
I had with civil-society and religious community
representatives - both during my first visit, in June
2018, when we also visited Guinea-Conakry to meet
with its leader, His Excellency President Alpha Conde,
who is working to mediate the crisis in Guinea-Bissau,
and during my second visit this year - to have been the
most memorable and moving moments during my time
as Chair of the Committee. Civil society and religious
communities have indeed faithfully expressed the
legitimate aspirations of the people of Guinea-Bissau to
put an end to the political instability that has persisted
since the end of the 1990s, to encourage them to truly
come together and to promote economic development
so that young people and future generations can enjoy
better living standards and conditions.

On the other hand, all the components of society in
Guinea-Bissau have been calling for the lifting of the
sanctions against the military, given that that political
leaders, and not the military, are those responsible for
the political and institutional instability. During the
current electoral process, the military has committed
itself to remaining completely on the sidelines of the
elections. I also observed the neutrality of the military
during my recent visit to the country, when I witnessed
the appointment of a parallel Government by the
outgoing President Vaz, which led to heightened tensions
in all the social sectors of the country. Those facts are
undoubtedly very positive signs of the neutral and
constitutional conduct of the military. To summarize,
there is no doubt that the sanctions have played an
important role in maintaining the constitutional order
in Guinea-Bissau. The imposition of sanctions is not an
end in itself, but rather a means or tool at the disposal
of the Security Council to achieve a given objective.
Sanctions must be maintained or updated with a View
to achieving that objective.

As I have said on previous occasions, after seven
years of exemplary conduct on the part of the military
of Guinea-Bissau, I believe that it is now appropriate for
the Security Council to consider and take the decision
to lift the sanctions on the military, or end the sanctions
regime itself, following the end of the electoral cycle
and the peaceful transfer of power to the newly elected
President of the Republic. I strongly recommend that
the Council consider my recommendation and sincerely
thank its members for the support they have provided
to my delegation over its two years as Chair of the
Sanctions Committee, especially in the form of the
Council's visit to Guinea-Bissau in February and for the
strong encouragement it provided to all the country's
political actors. It is with great emotion that I end my
term as Chair of the Committee.

Personally, I know the country of Guinea-Bissau
well, as I served there for four years as an official of
the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations. I know the lands and villages, as well as the
people and their leaders. As I conclude my term as Chair
of the Committee, I hope, above all other things, that
there will be a successful transfer of power in Guinea-
Bissau and that the situation there can in the coming
years be phased out of the agenda of the Security
Council, as in the cases of Cote d'Ivoire and Liberia.
My delegation would have been delighted to witness
those achievements, but owing to events that will not
be possible. We therefore wish the incoming Chair of
the Committee, His Excellency Ambassador Moncef
Baati of Tunisia, every success. I assure him that I will
always be available to cooperate on this issue. I wish to
express the importance of the international community
continuing to support Guinea-Bissau through multiple
channels, as it has done to date. However, it will be
essential that such support be accompanied by positive
signals and tangible progress on the part of Guinea-
Bissau's political leaders, especially during this
electoral process and even more so during the post-
electoral phase, in which the country plans to embark
on a number of institutional reforms.

To conclude, I wish to convey the sincere thanks
of my delegation to all the members of the highly
professional team of the Security Council Affairs
Division, which has supported us throughout this
delicate undertaking. Its ongoing cooperation has been
vital to the successful discharge of our mandate. Special
thanks must be extended to Manuel Bressan, Assiata
Abdouroihamane and Ma Da, as well as to all the
interpreters and all Committee experts, including those
from the delegation of Equatorial Guinea; without them
we would not have been able to successfully complete
our work.

Finally, we convey our most sincere thanks to the The President: On behalfof the Security Council,
United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in I take this Opportunity to express appreciatmn to the
Guinea-Bissau, whose staff and logistical support have outgoing Chairs for the manner in which they have

always been available to us. I thank also the diplomatic discharged their important responsibilities on behalf of

Missions in Guinea-Bissau for their support and the the Councfl.

contributions they made during our visits. The meeting rose at 11.10 mm.
