First, I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for convening this important meeting. I also wish to thank the Secretary-General and the Chairperson of the African Union Commission for their comprehensive briefings. This meeting is timely, for at least two reasons: the world continues to suffer from the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic and the United Nations is marking its seventy-fifth year. As the Secretary-General highlighted in a previous debate of the Security Council, COVID-19 impacts our lives in profound ways. The pandemic may prolong existing conflicts and risk creating new ones, perpetuate poor humanitarian conditions and insecurity and create economic and social disruptions, thus triggering relapses of conflict. We also see worrisome trends in the broader geopolitical reality, such as escalating political rivalries that, at times, seem to paralyse international institutions and emerging powers asserting their leadership in regional contexts. Against that backdrop, I would like to reiterate three points. First, I wish to highlight the role of the Security Council. Since the outbreak of the pandemic, the United Nations has utilized all the tools at its disposal to respond to it, such as the call for a global ceasefire, the COVID-19 Global Humanitarian Response Plan, and United Nations missions on the ground. In addition, the Security Council unanimously adopted resolution 2532 (2020), which contains important provisions to fight COVID-19. Moving forward, the Council should continue to play an important role. It must continue to monitor ceasefire commitments; support the efforts of United Nations missions on the ground in assisting host countries; ensure the delivery of humanitarian assistance; and ensure, along with other bodies like the Peacebuilding Commission, that peacebuilding progress is not reversed. Secondly, beyond that role, the Security Council must respond to potential changes in the security environment in the aftermath of the pandemic. The COVID-19 pandemic has shifted the world's preoccupation with security threats to existential threats. The United Nations system, including the Security Council, must rise to that task. It must be noted, however, that the Security Council is not the only United Nations organ with the competence to tackle this issue. We must enhance coordination and coherence with all United Nations bodies and organs, while leveraging individual advantages and expertise. Synergy and the division of labour based on individual mandates and competencies are crucial if we are to avoid overlapping and working in silos. We must ensure that the Security Council remains responsive, adaptable and action-oriented. Thirdly, the pandemic is likely to accelerate the fragmentation and recomposition of the global world order. While a coordinated international response is more urgent than ever, power frictions could, unfortunately, reinforce factors that render many United Nations bodies dysfunctional. That, in turn, could result in the further erosion of trust in global institutions. Some might even argue for a total overhaul of the principles and commitments to the global governance system. Nevertheless, there is currently no alternative structure to help us coordinate a better global response to the pandemic or other global calamities. A more realistic approach is to look for room for improvement. To that end, Indonesia is of the view that it is important for the United Nations to remain fit for purpose and enhance its relevance. That means, inter alia, better representation to ensure inclusiveness and enhanced effectiveness, transparency, and accountability. The United Nations system must also move past rhetoric and deliver results. In the short term, we must focus on facilitating access to affordable vaccines and treatment. But, we must also develop a long-term, comprehensive strategy to recovery and resilience. We should also continue to plan for an unpredictable future. That requires far-sighted leadership, adaptability and a strong early warning capacity. Lastly, the COVID-19 pandemic serves as a stern reminder that the future demands far better international cooperation, stronger collective leadership and more decisive action. The pandemic exposes the shortcomings of the multilateral system and, at the same time, shows what we all can do to overcome those weaknesses. The post-pandemic global governance that we wish to see is one in which everyone works together with a renewed sense of global solidarity, unity and responsibility, for the benefit of all. Statement by the Permanent Representative of Indonesia to the United Nations, Dian Triansyah Djani I am sorry to take the floor again. I wish to reiterate our appreciation to the Niger for convening this meeting. I would simply like to add, in addition to the statement of the Indonesian delegation, made by the Indonesian Vice-Minister for Foreign Affairs, and in the context of today's discussion on the COVID-19 pandemic, to draw the attention of all Council members to the statement delivered on 22 September, the first day of the Assembly's high-level general debate, by President Joko Widodo. Specifically, I would like to conclude as he did: "A healthy world, a productive world, needs to be our priority. All of these will only be achieved if all of us continue to work together, work together and work together. Let us solidify our commitment and consistently carry out our commitment to work together." (A/75/PV.5)
