Mr. Manjeev Singh Puri (India): India has been
following with serious concern the developments in
Libya, which have led to the loss of numerous lives
and injuries to many more. We are very concerned
about the welfare of the civilian population and of
foreigners in Libya. We deplore the use of force, which
is totally unacceptable and must not be resorted to.
The Secretary-General has appointed a Special
Envoy, who has just visited Libya. We support his
appointment and his mission. However, we have not
had the benefit of his report or even a report from the
Secretariat on his assessment as yet. That would have
given us an objective analysis of the situation on the
ground. The African Union is also sending a high-level
panel to Libya to make serious efforts for a peaceful
end to the crisis there. We must stress the importance
of political efforts, including those of the Secretary-
General's Special Envoy, to address the situation.

The Council has today adopted a resolution that
authorizes far-reaching measures under Chapter VII of
the United Nations Charter, with relatively little
credible information on the situation on the ground in
Libya. We also do not have clarity about details of
enforcement measures, including who will participate
and with what assets, and how these measures will
exactly be carried out. It is of course very important
that there be full respect for the sovereignty, unity and
territorial integrity of Libya.

The financial measures that are proposed in the
resolution could impact directly or through indirect
routes the ongoing trade and investment activities of a
number of Member States, thereby adversely affecting
the economic interests of the Libyan people and others
dependent on these trade and economic ties. Moreover,
we have to ensure that the measures will mitigate and
not exacerbate an already difficult situation for the
people of Libya. Clarity in the resolution on any
spillover effects of these measures would have been
very important.

We abstained in the voting on the resolution in
view of the aforementioned. I would like to
re-emphasize that India continues to be gravely
concerned about the deteriorating humanitarian
situation in Libya and calls on the Libyan authorities to
cease fire, protect the civilian population and address
the legitimate demands of the Libyan people.

