Mr. Kolby (Norway): I am also pleased to see
you presiding over the Council, Mr. President. I too
would like to thank the Jamaican delegation for their
excellent work last month. I also want to thank the
Secretary-General for his report, and Mr. Annabi for
his introduction.

Norway commends the United Nations Mission in
Bosnia and Herzegovina (UNMIBH) for its
contribution to the implementation of the Dayton-Paris
Peace Agreements. We welcome the progress made in
the areas of police reform, the State Border Service and
the rule of law. An effective police service and an
impartial judiciary are necessary to ensure the rule of
law, a democratic, multi-ethnic society, and safety for
minority returnees.

Local, entity and State officials in Bosnia and
Herzegovina must bear the primary responsibility -
and do more in this respect - for reforming the police
and the judiciary. This must include efforts to combat
organized crime and any support for terrorism within
their territory. But it is clear that international support
will continue to be needed if these efforts are to be
successful. This is in the interests not only of Bosnia
and Herzegovina itself, but also of the wider Balkan
region and Europe at large.

We must recognize the interdependence of police
and judicial reform. The pace of judicial reform has
lagged behind, and further efforts are needed if it is to
catch up with the police reforms. In the police sector,
we would like to see improved cooperation between
entity police forces. Minority representation in local
police forces continues to be inadequate in both
entities. There is also a need for the further training
and equipping of entity police and the State Border
Service. Norway has therefore decided to support the
State Border Service by providing 200,000 euros.

The police and judiciary of Bosnia and
Herzegovina will continue to require international
support and supervision after the completion of
UNMIBH's core mandate in December 2002. Norway
will also continue to support the international
community's efforts to preserve UNMIBH's important
achievements beyond 2002. Work is in progress to
evaluate the most practical and efficient ways and
means of achieving this. The Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe has demonstrated
throughout the Balkans, not least in Croatia, where it
took up the mantle from the United Nations
Transitional Administration for Eastern Slavonia,
Baranja and Western Sirmium, that it has the necessary
experience, capacity and capability in this regard.

Norway emphasizes the important contributions
that neighbouring countries can make in promoting
stability, the rule of law and democracy in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. Ethnic tension, organized crime,
trafficking, illegal migration and political instability
can be adequately dealt with only through cooperation
within a regional framework and through a unified
international approach. We strongly welcome regional
inter-police cooperation and the regional strategy to
combat organized crime and terrorism, approved by the
interior ministers of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia and Croatia, the entity interior ministers of
Bosnia and Herzegovina and the Director of the State
Border Service. This is a positive development.

