Mr. Guehenno (spoke in French): I welcome this
opportunity to introduce to the members of the Security
Council the special report of the Secretary-General on
the United Nations Mission of Support in East Timor
(UNMISET) (S/2003/243).

Before presenting the report, however, I wish to
formally express the Secretariat's regret and sadness at
the news of the tragic loss last week of five UNMISET
Blue Helmets from the Republic of Korea. As Council
members may be aware, those young soldiers lost their
lives when they were swept away in a swollen river in
the Oecussi district. Three of them drowned as a result
of their brave efforts to rescue their compatriots. This
tragic accident reminds us of the perils that our
dedicated peacekeepers face every day; it reminds us of
the tremendous sacrifices that they and their families
make and of the enormous debt we owe to them. I
should like once more to express our sincere
condolences to the Government of the Republic of
Korea and to the families of the victims.

I should now like to turn to the report and to
examine its key recommendations and their underlying
logic. In much of the information that we have
communicated to the Security Council over the past
three and a half years - first on East Timor and then
on Timor-Leste - we have been able to cite
remarkable successes. Those have included the
establishment of a public administration, two peaceful
elections and Timor-Leste's independence nearly a year
ago.

Unfortunately, the report before the Council today
has a different focus. This is not a general report on
progress towards implementation of the mandate; that
report will be forthcoming at the end of April or
beginning of May, as UNMISET's first year draws to a
close. This is, rather, an effort to sound an alarm at a
critical time, to indicate to the Council a number of
worrisome developments and to recommend, in good
time, what we consider realistic and prudent
adjustments of UNMISET'S troop-reduction plans so as
to reflect a situation on the ground that has changed
and to protect the considerable investments that the
international community has made in Timor-Leste.

(spoke in English)

The report of the Secretary-General notes that the
success story in Timor-Leste appears to be threatened
by two types of developments in the security
environment. First, there have been threats and
incidents of civil disturbance, the most significant
being the destructive riot in Dili on 4 December last
year - although there have been other riots, including
one in Baucau in November. Secondly, there has been a
rise in armed groups in rural areas, particularly in the
west of the country. Prominent activities carried out by
such groups are the killings in Ermera on 4 January and
in Bobonaro on 24 February. Much about these groups
remains unclear, but they appear to be driven by a
blend of political and criminal motivations and to be
drawing on a variety of sources of support.

The report then identifies obstacles to increased
reliance upon the Timorese capacity to address such
threats. These kinds of tasks are not best suited for the
Timor-Leste defence force (Falintil-FDTL) in terms of
its mandate, its equipment or its present training. Nor is
it realistic to propose that the Timorese police (PNTL)
assume a substantially greater role in addressing these
most difficult types of security challenges for another
year. Seeking to rely upon these agencies prematurely,
or in ways that are inappropriate, could compromise
their training, set bad precedents and harm their
standing in the community.

At the same time, the downsizing plans that were
prepared nine months ago, at a far more peaceful time,
would make it increasingly difficult for UNMISET to
give the Timorese agencies the time they need to
develop fully.

According to the original plans for the operation,
further downsizing in the middle of this year would see
the removal of around 750 infantry, primarily those
located in the south-west. With only 2,580 infantry in
the military component at present, this is a reduction of
around a third in the very capacity needed if
UNMISET is to respond effectively to armed groups.

This would make it difficult to maintain the
regular and frequent presence in rural areas that is
crucial to obtain information on evolving threats. It
would inhibit UNMISET'S ability to concentrate its
forces in response to threat groups. It could force the
Mission to make undesirable choices; thus, if the
military had to assist in dealing with a further riot in
Dili next August, this would likely require relocation
of forces from the west that would open the door to
infiltration by threat groups on an opportunity basis.
This is assuming that the level of problems stays the
same; it does not factor in the risk that such
downsizing could in itself encourage greater problems,
by sending the wrong signal to potential troublemakers.

As for the international police, it currently has no
remaining crowd-control capability. At the same time,
it lacks the specialized training capabilities that are
required to ensure the most effective, rapid and
thorough development of its Timorese counterparts.

For these reasons, the report to the Security
Council includes two kinds of recommendations.

First, the report proposes an enhancement of the
Mission's ability to support development of the
Timorese police. This will entail recruitment of
personnel with the ability to train in such areas as
crowd control, police administration, finance, logistics,
forensics, tactical operations, border security and
community policing, and a renewed emphasis on
human rights training. It suggests retaining a higher
number of police advisers in districts where Timorese
police have assumed responsibility for patrolling.
Furthermore, UNMISET police, in coordination with
donors, will also be working with the Government to
develop its strategy to follow up recommendations of
the report of the Joint Assessment Mission.

At the same time, as a short-term measure to
strengthen the Mission's operational capacity to deal
with the threat posed by armed groups, the report
proposes a delay in the downsizing of the military
component and its reconfiguration in key areas,
including increasing mobility. It may be useful to note
that the last time the peacekeeping operation faced
significant armed activity was nearly a year ago, when
the operation included over 5,000 troops. The report
also underlines the importance of the reduction of
restrictions on military components by troop-
contributing countries.

Finally, the report suggests deployment of a
formed police company, which would help the Mission
to deal with civil disturbance and crowd control.

I would like to note that the report does not
propose deferring the operation's withdrawal date, nor
does it propose a new overall strategy; this remains the
establishment of a sustainable Timorese structure that
can maintain security after UNMISET leaves. But a
premature downsizing of the Mission could imperil that
strategy, as the security situation could rapidly
deteriorate, and the development of Timorese capacity
could suffer.

While my remarks today have necessarily focused
on the problems that remain, I wish also to draw to the
Security Council's attention a major positive
development. This is the conclusion of the agreements
and legislative processes in Timor-Leste and in
Australia that should pave the way for exploitation of
mineral resources in the Timor Sea. The development
of these resources is of cardinal importance for Timor-
Leste's economic future. But the hope that this
progress implies could be undermined unless security
issues are resolved.

The decision before the Security Council is a
difficult one. As I mentioned, much about the new
threat groups in Timor-Leste - their scale, sources of
support and motivation - remains ambiguous. But it is
already apparent that they exceed the capability of
regular police - either international or Timorese.

Furthermore, the information that we continue to
receive has generally increased, rather than allayed, our
concern. This included the information obtained since
the report, during UNMISET's efforts to find the
attackers in Bobonaro, when peacekeepers came across
a campsite with considerable military equipment,
including firearms, nearly 1,000 rounds of ammunition
and military packs.

We are here seeking to provide the Council with
the information it needs, and with recommendations
that we believe appropriate. In the light of past
experience, we would urge that the Council consider
the following key questions.

In a fragile but unclear situation, should the
international community continue to seek a more
"minimalist" approach, which was first mooted in the
more optimistic pre-independence period?

Or, as is strongly supported by military expertise
here and in Dili, should the international community
lean towards prudence and make the additional effort
suggested here?

These recommendations are presented on the
premise that it is easier and less expensive to pre-empt
a problem than to try to fix a problem after it has
occurred. The cost that is implied would be modest
compared to the $1 billion to $2 billion that the
international community has spent in Timor-Leste over
the past three years. However, we believe that this
additional effort could help secure the much larger
investment that has been made to date.

Members of the Security Council, together with
troop contributors and other Member States, have
already made an outstanding contribution to Timor-
Leste. We hope that, in the midst of competing
demands, the Security Council can continue to ensure
that Timor-Leste gets the resources and attention that it
needs and can bring to fruition the extraordinary efforts
it has made to date.
