Mexico thanks Germany and the Dominican Republic for convening this debate. Twenty-five years ago, by adopting the Beijing Platform for Action, States committed themselves to increasing women's participation in conflict resolution and decision-making, as well as to protecting women living in situations of armed conflict, which was also mandated by this organ in its resolution 1325 (2000). Unfortunately, despite numerous calls to end sexual violence, it continues to be used as a tactic of war, causing deep trauma that fractures the social fabric and communities. It is perpetrated by both State forces and illegal armed groups. In some cases, it has become systematic and the incidence of impunity is alarming despite being a violation of international humanitarian law and international human rights law. However, the opening this week of the first trial on gender grounds before the International Criminal Court (ICC) against Al Hassan Ag Abdoul Aziz Ag Mohamed Ag Mahmoud, accused of crimes against humanity and war crimes as a result of forced marriages, rape and sexual slavery, represents a milestone in the fight against impunity and the reparation of victims. Mexico will closely follow the development of that case and will reiterate its full support for the ICC. Strengthening the relationship between the Council and the ICC may be instrumental in closing the accountability gap for those egregious crimes. We also acknowledge the leadership of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General on Conflict-Related Sexual Violence, Ms. Pramila Patten, and the work of the United Nations Action against Sexual Violence in Conflict. The accession in 2019 of the Office for Disarmament Affairs to that initiative is a positive development. Unfortunately, the pandemic has created challenges for conflict prevention and peacekeeping. Community violence has escalated in some regions, leading to an increase in conflict-related sexual violence. Some mitigation measures for the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) have exacerbated inequalities, exposing women and girls to higher levels of domestic violence in their homes. Prevention policies must put women and girls at the centre of their response, particularly in conflict and post-conflict situations. We commend the publication of the guidelines Jmplications of COVID-19 for the Prevention of and Response to Conflict-Related Sexual Violence. While women and girls are the primary victims of such violations of their rights, men and boys also experience them. It is unacceptable for people to be persecuted based on their sexual orientation, gender identity, ethnicity or disability status. It is therefore crucial to ensure a survivor-centred approach to preventing and responding to that scourge in safe and secure conditions, recognizing that survivors are not a homogeneous group. The social stigmatization to which victims are exposed in their communities can put their physical integrity at risk and lead to psychological trauma, which, if not properly treated, can continue for decades. Victims must therefore be empowered to become key and resilient actors for recovery, reconciliation, development and sustainable peace. The resurgence of hostilities, militarization, the proliferation of small arms and light weapons, mass displacement of the population and the increasing violent extremism leading to terrorism can result in conflict. However, discrimination, structural marginalization, exclusion, the struggle for natural resources and inequalities of all kinds also trigger violence. The full, effective and meaningful participation of women in decision-making processes cannot be achieved without addressing the root causes of sexual and gender-based violence. The social norms, stereotypes and unequal power relations engrained in patriarchal societies consign women and girls to a secondary role and prevent them from reaching their full potential. States must therefore ensure the conditions for achieving gender equality and the empowerment of women and girls. More than 10 years since the adoption of resolution 1888 (2009), compliance by parties with the normative framework for prevention and sexual violence in armed conflict is very limited, particularly in terms of accountability and the delivery of justice. We must not allow those atrocities to be mainstreamed in post-conflict societies. It is unacceptable that to date, 42 of the 54 parties listed in the annex to the Secretary-General's report have not entered into any commitments and that 30 of them - 71 per cent - have been on the list for more than five years. Women and girls face additional barriers to access to justice linked to cultural, social and economic issues. Special protection must be given to women human rights defenders and peacebuilders, who work in increasingly difficult conditions due to threats and intimidation. In line with its commitment to gender equality, Mexico has supported the inclusion of the women and peace and security agenda as a fundamental part of the Generation Equality Forum, to be held in 2021. Mexico calls on the Security Council to do the following. First, it should systematically strengthen mandates for the protection of civilians in peace operations with women and child protection units and advisers. Second, it should promote the collection of disaggregated data and specific early warning indicators on possible patterns of sexual violence. Third, it should encourage more meaningful participation of women at different stages of conflict, in all activities of peace operations and special political missions and in the negotiation and implementation of peace and ceasefire agreements and ensure the inclusion of provisions on sexual violence in such agreements. Fourth, it should consider, where relevant, the adoption of sanctions targeting the perpetrators listed in the annex to the Secretary-General's report. Fifth, the Council should strengthen cooperation with the ICC to close the impunity gap, including, where appropriate, by referring to the Court situations where war crimes and crimes against humanity involving sexual abuse and exploitation are committed. Sixth, it should strengthen the capacities of the justice and security sectors with a gender-sensitive perspective and provide integrated care, including medical and psychological support and access to health services and sexual and reproductive rights for women and girls. Seventh, it should ensure that survivors have full access, on an equal footing, to compensation and reparation programmes for crimes of conflict-related sexual violence as part of transitional justice, including innovative strategies to achieve sustainable funding. Eighth, it should support mechanisms and mandates for the prevention of and response to conflict-related sexual violence and achieve better coordination among them. Finally, Mexico reiterates the need to further implement the commitments made by the signatories to the Action for Peacekeeping initiative, especially those aimed at strengthening the United Nations zero-tolerance policy and ensuring that personnel to be deployed in peace operations comply with the Organization's standards, since acts of intimidation and sexual violence are unacceptable.
