Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China thanks Assistant Secretary-General Fernandez-
Taranco, African Union Commissioner Chergui and
Ambassador Lauber for their briefings. China welcomes
Ambassador Lauber's recent visit to Burundi, which
will contribute to enhancing mutual understanding and
cooperation between Burundi and the United Nations
and the international community as a whole.

In recent years, the political and security situation
in Burundi has remained stable and the Government
has been making efforts to implement the Arusha
Peace and Reconciliation Agreement in order to
promote reconciliation among the country's various
ethnic groups and maintain domestic stability. It has
formulated a lO-year development plan for the period
from 2018 to 2027, and has been actively cooperating
at the international level on the economic and social
fronts. In the past four years, more than 60,000
Burundian refugees have voluntarily returned home
from neighbouring countries, in a demonstration of
the continued improvement in Burundi's situation and
the strong aspirations of its Government and people for
peace and development. However, peace, stability and
development in Burundi cannot be achieved without the
support and assistance of the international community.

China believes that the international community
should prioritize its efforts in two areas. It must
first show genuine respect for Burundi's ownership
and leadership and create an external environment
conducive to ensuring the country's peace and stability.
At the end of last year, the Burundian Government kick-
started preparations for the 2020 elections. Through
consultations with various political parties in the
country it has formulated a road map for the elections,
established the Independent National Electoral
Commission and committed to raising all the necessary
funding for the elections, in a full demonstration of the
ability and resolve of the Burundian Government and
people to take care of their own problems.

Since elections are the internal affairs of any
country, it is important to ensure that the international
community fully respects Burundi's ownership and
leadership of its elections and provides assistance
in accordance with the Government's needs. The
Burundian Government has said many times that
its situation does not pose a threat to regional peace
and security and that the Burundi issue should not
remain on the Council's agenda. The Council should
pay serious heed to Burundi's views and make
timely and appropriate adjustments in the light of the
latest developments.

Secondly, in order to continue scaling up their
humanitarian and socioeconomic assistance to
Burundi, we hope that the international community
and international partners will deliver on their
commitments in a timely manner, support the
continuing return of Burundian refugees and help the
country with its socioeconomic recovery. The relevant
international organizations and agencies should resume
their economic cooperation with Burundi as well as
their development assistance. China appreciates and
supports the efforts of the Peacebuilding Commission
and the United Nations country team in providing
continued and constructive assistance to Burundi. As
an active supporter of Burundi's political process and
national reconstruction, China has been doing what
it can to render assistance in many sectors, including
agriculture, education and infrastructure development.
We stand ready to continue to contribute to peace,
stability and sustainable development in Burundi.

