Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): It is a
pleasure to welcome Mr. Parfait Onanga-Anyanga to the
table here in the Security Council in his new capacity
as Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Horn
of Africa. I wish him every success in his mission to
support efforts towards peace in a context of profound
change in the region, and I hope that such efforts will
lead to lasting peace and better and fairer conditions
for all. I thank him, as well as the Under--Secretary-
General for Peace Operations, Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix,
for their clear and informative briefings, as always.

I would like to briefly address two points of
particular interest for my delegation.

First, the political process has, unfortunately,
not made enough progress. France regrets the lack of
progress in the implementation of the 2011 Agreement
on Temporary Arrangements for the Administration
and Security of the Abyei Area, as our two briefers
mentioned. In his latest report (S/2019/319), the
Secretary-General calls on the parties to relaunch the
political process so that the Abyei issue does not join
the long list of frozen conflicts. We share that concern
and call on the parties to implement their commitments
without delay.

The mere presence of the United Nations Interim
Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA) will not be enough
to resolve the Abyei issue. Only the sincere and
determined commitment of both parties to resolving
their differences, with the support of the African Union
and the United Nations, will allow progress towards
a lasting solution. The establishment of the Abyei
police service and the meeting of the Joint Oversight
Committee are essential steps in that direction. in
that regard, I would like to ask our briefers about the
prospects of that happening. The political status quo
is not inevitable. We have seen in recent months that
the demanding attention of the Council has resulted
in encouraging progress on border demarcation. The
political developments in the Sudan represent an
opportunity that we must seize to encourage the parties
to relaunch the political process.

Secondly, we must proceed with the reconfiguration
of UNISFA. The recommendations that the Secretary-
General made in his letter on 20 August (S/2018/778)
and his latest report provide a good basis for
reconfiguring the mission. France supports a further
strengthening of the police component of UNISFA
to address the challenge of crime, particularly in the
Amiet common market. Those police forces are also
intended to prevent the escalation of intercommunal
tensions that we have been witnessing, which are often
rooted in the theft of livestock. In that regard, I regret
that the Jordanian police unit that was to be deployed
could not be so due to the lack of visas. France calls on
the Sudanese authorities to do their utmost to facilitate
the implementation of resolution 2445 (2018) as soon
as possible.

We believe that it is also important to strengthen
the civilian component of the mission by deploying a
political section and appointing a civilian as deputy
head of mission. That would allow UNISFA to better
prevent local conflicts and strengthen cooperation with
the African Union High-level Implementation Panel
for Sudan. We agree that UNISFA should support the
political process more actively, without replacing the
African Union's High-level Panel, which has our full
support. We also support an adjustment of the troop
strength and believe that a moderate reduction in the
overall strength could take place without impacting the
mission's effectiveness.
In conclusion, I would like to commend the work of
the Ethiopian troops, who make it possible, on a daily
basis, to stabilize the situation in Abyei and along the
border between the Sudan and South Sudan.

