We thank Under-Secretary-General Jean-Pierre Lacroix and the representative of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel), the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Mauritania, Ismail Ould Cheikh Ahmed, for their briefings. We agree with the alarming assessments of the situation in the Sahel. Security threats in this part of Africa remain high. Against the backdrop of the coronavirus pandemic and the related quarantine measures, terrorist activity has again intensified, and drug trafficking and organized crime are expanding. Unfortunately, we are receiving almost every week tragic reports of heinous terrorist attacks. The pandemic has led to serious humanitarian consequences for the region, which was in a difficult situation long before the current crisis. Schools are closed, and more and more people need food and medical care. This state of affairs creates fertile ground for the radicalization of the population. In this regard, the countries of the region must be assisted in effectively opposing the expansion of extremist ideology, begin to address the severe socioeconomic problems, strengthen State institutions and foster a culture of respect for human rights. We support the efforts of the G-5 Sahel States to deploy the Joint Force to combat terrorism and organized crime. It seems that in a relatively short period of time it has already become an important element of regional security. We are pleased to take note of information on several successful counter-terrorism operations carried out by the Joint Force in the reporting period. Improved planning and coordination between military units expanded the scale and duration of operations. We welcome the establishment of a joint coordination mechanism in Niamey between the G-5 Sahel and other military presences in the region. We hope that the current difficulties associated with the coronavirus will be temporary in nature and that the Joint Force will be able to resume operations in the near future. We are convinced of the importance of further coordinated steps on the part of both Africa and the international community aimed at combating terrorism in the Sahelo-Saharan region. We support the initiative of the African Union to develop a plan for the deployment of the African Standby Force there. We note the timely decision of the West African Monetary and Economic Union to adopt an action plan to finance the fight against terrorism in the region through 2024. It is obvious that the full-fledged functioning of the G-5 Sahel forces depends on two important factors: ensuring its stable and predictable financing and providing appropriate transport and logistics assistance. We note that the funds promised by foreign donors are gradually reaching the region. We support the assistance provided to the Joint Force by the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA), in accordance with the mandate set out in resolution 2480 (2019). We are ready to consider options for improving the assistance provided by MINUSMA, which were included in the recent report of the Secretary-General on Mali (S/2020/476). Russia is closely monitoring the developments of the situation in the region. We are already providing a number of countries with appropriate military and technical assistance and training of military and police personnel. In general, we believe that in the near future the armed forces of the Sahel region will become an even more effective tool in restoring and maintaining peace in West Africa.
