Mr. Taula (New Zealand): We very much welcome
this open briefing, which we believe increases
transparency and helps implementation. The Somalia
sanctions regime has transformed over its long history
since the 1990s, and it now fulfils an important role in
supporting Somali State-building goals.

As we said in last week's debate (see S/PV. 7620),
sanctions are not imposed in isolation. The sanctions
regime can assist in achieving the political, security
and humanitarian goals in Somalia, namely completing
Vision 2016, accelerating the fight against Al-Shabaab
and addressing Somalia's humanitarian needs. When
the Council discusses Somalia in 2016, in what is
a precarious year for the country, we must include
discussion of sanctions, and we must take into account
the valuable information contained in the Somalia and
Eritrea Monitoring Group's reports.

One important example is in the area of natural
resources. Generous maritime and mineral wealth
present a great opportunity for Somalia, but they also
present a possible driver of conflict, in the absence
of an effective regulatory framework. This risk is
exacerbated during the federalism process. The Council
will need to remain alert to how it can support Somalia
in its stewardship of its natural resources, drawing
on the expertise of the Monitoring Group, the United
Nations presence on the ground, and partners. That role
includes support for governance of natural resources,
but also extends to assisting Somalia in channelling its
natural resource wealth into State-building and other
key issues, for example, ensuring full and regular
payment to soldiers in the Somali National Army.

Resolution 2244 (2015), adopted last year, touched
on illegal fishing. That issue remains of concern and we
are ready to support the Federal Government's efforts
to establish and enforce an appropriate legal regime as
contemplated by the resolution. Security sector reform
efforts and depriving Al-Shabaab of financing are also
priorities.

The Somalia sanctions regime must be implemented
by Somalia and other States Members of the United
Nations, including its neighbours. But to be truly
effective a range of other actors also have important
roles to play, including the African Union Mission
in Somalia and multinational partnerships like the
Combined Maritime Forces. Continued outreach by
the Committee and the Monitoring Group with those
partners is needed to ensure that sanctions are fully
implemented. An example of that is the progress made
on avoiding technical breaches of the arms embargo
through more consistent advance notifications of
imports under the arms embargo. We also welcome
the Committee's recent initiative to develop an
implementation assistance notice on arms. That is
a practical initiative that has the potential to be very
useful in clarifying obligations, particularly for those
Member States not on the Council.

Finally, on Eritrea, we are hopeful that 2016 could
be a positive year for engagement with the Committee
and the Monitoring Group. We believe a visit to the
region by the Committee - something that was
discussed last year - would be a helpful step. We are
ready to support such efforts.

