Mr. Djinnit (Spoke in French): I have the honour to
present the sixth report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Region (S/2015/173). I am pleased to do so
under the presidency of France, whose support and
contributions to achieving the aims of the Framework
Agreement, together with those of the other members of
the Council, I welcome.

Two years on from the signing of the Framework
Agreement in Addis Ababa, which breathed new
life into efforts seeking to stabilize the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and lay the groundwork for
regional cooperation, the region remains at a crossroads.
The crises that have broken out in the Central African
Republic and South Sudan serve to remind us that the
region as a whole remains vulnerable to factors of
instability. Despite the significant progress made in
establishing an atmosphere of peace and security, major
challenges remain to be overcome in order to achieve
the objectives of the Framework Agreement.

Those include, first, the neutralization of the armed
groups operating in the eastern Democratic Republic of
the Congo. These negative forces continue to commit
violence against the civilian population, particularly
against women and children, to illegally exploit natural
resources and to fuel a climate of mistrust among the
countries ofthe region. Since taking office, I have made
it a priority to mobilize the countries of the region and
other stakeholders around that goal. I have encouraged
the mi1itary operations conducted by the Forces armees
de la Republique democratique du Congo against the
Allied Democratic Forces with the support of the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO),
and I went to Beni with my colleague Martin Kobler
and the Special Representative of the Chairperson of
the Commission of the African Union, Mr. Boubacar
Diarra, to encourage collaboration.

My Office has also worked together with the
stakeholders to implement the Nairobi declarations,
including for the repatriation of the former combatants
of the Mouvement du 23 mars (M-23) from Rwanda and
Uganda. To date, a small number of them have agreed
to return to the Democratic Republic of the Congo
as part of the repatriation plan agreed with Uganda,
while the repatriation process has yet to commence
with Rwanda in follow-up to the visit of the delegation
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo to Kigali in
February. Everything must be done to turn the page
definitively on the chapter of the M-23 rebellion so that
all energies can be focused on the other negative forces.

At the same time, Ijoined in efforts encouraging
the launching of military action against the Forces
democratiques de libe'ration du Rwanda (FDLR)
following the passing of the deadline of2 January 2015.
I took part in the series of consultations organized by
the International Conference on the Great Lakes Region
(ICGLR) and the Southern African Development
Community (SADC) towards the end of last year. I
welcome the consensus that eventually emerged on this
sensitive issue. I take this opportunity to congratulate
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and its armed
forces on the military operations they launched against
the FDLR. I encourage once again the Government of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and MONUSCO
to resume their full cooperation in the framework of
operations against the FDLR and to strengthen their
partnership through a structured strategic dialogue.
During my meeting with President Kabila on 13 March,
he assured assured me of the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo's readiness for such
dialogue.

Secondly, in my various interactions in the region,
I encouraged efforts and called for initiatives aiming to
improve relations among the countries of the region with
a view to resolving misunderstandings and suspicions
and building the level of trust needed for progress in
the Framework Agreement process. I want to thank
President Dos Santos, in his capacity as Chairman of
the ICGLR, and other leaders of the region for their
commitment in that regard. I reiterate my readiness
to support these efforts at reconciliation among States
so as to promote a climate that is more conducive to
cooperation. In that context, I welcome the intention of
President Kabila to convene a summit of the Economic
Community of the Great Lakes Countries.

Finally, aware that the region was embarking on an
election cycle that would be crucial for strengthening
democracy and stability, I sought, in liaison with my
United Nations colleagues in the region and the group
of Special Envoys, to provide my contribution to
efforts aimed at encouraging the holding of inclusive,
transparent and peaceful elections. We will continue to
make efforts to help the countries of the region to make
of those elections opportunities to strengthen their
democratic achievements and stability, in accordance
with the spirit of the Framework Agreement.
Beyond those crucial actions, we must tackle
the other underlying causes of the instability in the
eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
region, as per our commitments under the Addis Ababa
Framework Agreement. To that end, in liaison with the
ICGLR and all stakeholders, my Office will contribute
to the initiatives - already under way or planned - in
order to create conditions conducive to the return of
refugees, reconciliation among local communities and
lasting solutions to the complex issues of citizenship
and land. That area of work and others, such as the fight
against the illegal exploitation of natural resources and
the promotion of regional judicial cooperation, are
among the priority actions of my road map.

In terms of economic development, I am pleased to
note the many development and cooperation initiatives
launched in recent years, in particular the various
regional development corridors. My Office is working
to support those commendable efforts, including
by organizing this coming July ~ in collaboration
with the World Bank, the European Union and the
African Union - a conference for partners focusing
on regional development issues in the Great Lakes
region. Moreover, following the regional consultations
held in Luanda in December 2014, which endorsed the
investment opportunities document, my Office and
the ICGLR, with the support of other partners, began
making preparations for the conference on private
sector investment in the Great Lakes region, to be
held in Kinshasa in the last quarter of 2015. That first
conference of its kind aims to promote investment and
job-creation opportunities, strengthen public-private
partnerships and create a platform for exchange among
investors. The conference will enhance the prospects
for peace through investment opportunities in the
region.

The participation of civil society and women's
organizations in efforts aiming to end instability
and facilitate the implementation of the Framework
Agreement is essential. In that regard, efforts are
under way to establish a regional coalition of civil
society, with the joint support of my Office and ICGLR
Executive Secretariat. We are likewise working closely
with the ICGLR to strengthen initiatives in favour of
women that contribute to peace in the Great Lakes
region. In that respect, the Women's Platform for the
Framework Agreement, launched by Mary Robinson,
continues, under my auspices, to support the political
and economic empowerment of women, including
through the financing of socioeconomic activities. I
am pleased to inform the Council that the first round
of grants from a special trust fund established by my
Office to support the Women's Platform was awarded
in November 2014 for women's organizations from
Burundi, the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Rwanda and Uganda. I want to thank the Governments
of the Netherlands, Ireland and Norway, which
contributed to my Office's special trust fund.

(spoke in English)

In conclusion, let me say a few words on the
governance structures and monitoring mechanisms of
the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework. The
current regional context calls for the strengthening of
these structures and mechanisms in order to maintain
momentum to effectively deliver national, regional
and international commitments through proactive
engagement within the Regional Oversight Mechanism
and an enhanced role for the Technical Support
Committee. In the weeks ahead, I will consult with
the leadership of the African Union and the other
co-guarantors of the Framework Agreement, the
ICGLR and SADC, on the best ways to improve the
Framework's governance structures and monitoring
mechanisms.

Let me also put on record my appreciation for
the cooperation I am receiving from the signatory
countries and the excellent collaboration developed
with my colleagues in the region, especially Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Kobler and
Special Envoy Uteem, as well as the United Nations
system in the Great Lakes region. I wish to express my
appreciation for the good cooperation we have forged
with the African Union, as the co-promoter of the
Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework process,
and the other co-guarantors of the agreement - ICGLR
and SADC. I would like to also thank my fellow Special
Envoys, including Russ Feingold, who recently left his
position after 18 months of brilliant service, for their
support and contribution.

Sustaining the momentum of the Framework
agreement lies in the continued commitment of the
signatory countries and concerned stakeholders.
I wish, in this regard, to continue to count on the
continued engagement and support of the Council. The
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Great Lakes
region have made considerable progress in overcoming
the tragedies of the past, but they have yet to achieve
irreversible progress for lasting peace. I reiterate my
commitment to working tirelessly and joining hands
with regional and other stakeholders towards delivering
the promises of the Framework agreement and assisting
the region in fulfilling its aspirations for shared peace
and prosperity.
