The President (spoke in French): I shall now
make a brief statement in my capacity as Permanent
Representative of Bulgaria.

As an associate country of the European Union,
Bulgaria clearly and fully supports the statement to be
made shortly by the Italian presidency ofthe Union.

My job has been made easier by the fact that
there is agreement in the Council on the extremely
important and burning topic of the protection of
civilians in armed conflict. My job has also been
broadly facilitated by the excellent briefing by
Mr. Egeland. It was very exhaustive and I have nothing
to add to it. I should, however, like to make a few
general comments.

Clearly, the United Nations today is playing a
central coordinating role in the international
community's efforts better to protect civilians in armed
conflict. Naturally, this is one of the most important
provisions and strengths of our Organization's Charter.
Mr. Egeland's briefing highlighted the long list of
problems that still face us, some of which are new.
Among the most disturbing of these is the problem of
security for the personnel of the United Nations and
humanitarian organizations in the field. As
Ambassador Mufioz pointed out earlier, after the 19
August incident in Baghdad, in particular, the United
Nations lost its innocence, as it were. It is now a target
of terrorist attacks. I believe that resolution 1502
(2003) was a rather swift and categorical response from
the Council to these new and extremely disturbing
phenomena, which may make the United Nations job
even more difficult.

Secondly, we must note that the continent most
affected by the problems under consideration is Africa.
I was very shocked by the information provided by
Mr. Egeland about the situation in northern Uganda, in
particular. In the past, the Council has not generally
discussed Uganda from that particular perspective, and
it is a sad reality. I should like to thank Mr. Egeland for
having also referred in his briefing to Somalia, a
country beset by serious problems and where civilians
have suffered for over a decade, given that there is
essentially no real State there and the country is in the
hand of warlords.
Thirdly, I should like to thank Mr. Egeland and
his colleagues for having provided the Council with the
updated aide-memoire. The delegation of Bulgaria is
currently coordinating the work on a presidential
statement that will make it possible for the Council to
endorse that important document. I hope that that work
will be concluded very soon.

It is also important to ensure consistency and
synergy between the revised aide-memoire and the
action plan recommendations now being updated. That
is a very important instrument that will structure the
efforts of both the United Nations and the entire
humanitarian community. We must ensure that all the
details are fleshed out and coordinated.

I would like to conclude on that point.

I would once again like to thank Mr. Egeland and
his associates, as well as all Council members, for their
very active and substantial participation in this
important debate. It is often said that we discuss the
problems associated with the protection of civilians too
much. But the contrary is in fact true: we neither talk
or act enough in that regard. It is important for the
Council to put all its political weight behind this effort
by the Secretariat. I think today's discussion provides
eloquent proof ofthat point.

I now resume my function as President of the
Security Council.

I shall now call on the non-members on my list.
In order to maximize the time available to us, I shall
not call on speakers individually to come to the table or
to resume their seats at the side of the Council
Chamber. Once a speaker takes the floor, conference
officers will indicate to the following speaker the seat
he or she should take at the Council table.

I now give the floor to the representative ofItaly.

