Mr. Bushati (Albania): Let me thank you, Madam
President, for calling this timely meeting on this
particularly complex issue. We highly appreciate
the leadership the United States has been showing,
including in particular during its Security Council
presidency, on the issue of countering terrorism and the
rise of foreign terrorist fighters.

Last Sunday, in his first visit to a European country,
Pope Francis chose Albania, a secular country where
Muslims and Christians are living and prospering
together. As Pope Francis exhorted during his visit:

"May no one use religion as a pretext for actions
against human dignity and against the fundamental
rights of every man and woman".

Contrary to these fundamental values, the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) has clearly shown
what it is capable of. ISIL must be defeated and its
extremist ideology, which promotes and justifies
terrorism, and ruthless methods must be countered.

In this context, we highly appreciate President
Obama's remarks and the determination of the United
States to degrade and, ultimately, defeat ISIL. As ISIL
actively tries to recruit citizens everywhere to join its
terrorist cause, the phenomenon of foreign fighters is
now ofparticular concern. Indeed, foreign fighters pose
a serious threat throughout the whole trajectory of their
journey, to the transit States and the destination States.

But the threat is also great for the States of origin, as
the return of foreign fighters to their countries of origin
carries potential risks, particularly where security
structures are insufficient, where political stability is
fragile, where social cohesion is yet unformed or where
there is a complex religious and ethnic fabric, as is the
case in the Balkans.

The international effort to counter ISIL has been
picking up momentum and contributors. Albania is
proud to have been one of the first countries to respond
to this challenge. But it has now become clear that it is
a challenge that will require our long-term engagement
in different ways, whether through military support to
Iraq or by stopping the flow of foreign fighters, and
all of that without forgetting the social, economic and
humanitarian dimensions of the crises in Iraq and Syria.

We condemn unequivocally and in the strongest
terms every terrorist act committed by terrorist groups
and organizations everywhere. No cause can justify
terror; no logic can accept the death of innocent people.
In that regard, Albania has been at the forefront of
international efforts in the Western Balkans to stop
the flow of fighters. My country has taken concrete
legislative, administrative and security measures,
passing specific laws that punish participation in
conflicts and wars in other countries.

But let us not forget that the use of force is hardly
the only way to defeat and put an end to terrorism and
to discourage the dark appeal of foreign fighters. If we
are serious about eradicating this phenomenon, we must
also think in social and economic terms about what we
can offer marginalized groups within these societies.
That will give us a greater chance of success in
countering incitement to commit terrorist acts not only
through the force of the rule of law, but also by doing
more to achieve the social inclusion ofthe marginalized
through education, solidarity and support.

Today's resolution 2178 (2014), of which my
country is proud to be a sponsor, underlines the
importance of cooperation between all Member States
in addressing the threat posed by foreign terrorist
fighters. My country stands ready to further contribute
to international efforts to strengthen peace, stability
and cooperation among nations.

