Mr. Wang Yingfan (China) (spoke in Chinese):
At the outset, I wish to welcome the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the Somali Transitional National
Government, Mr. Yusuf Hassan Ibrahim, to today's
meeting. I should like also to congratulate the newly
appointed Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Tubman, head of the United Nations Political
Office for Somalia.

In accordance with the decision taken by the
lntergovernmental Authority on Development (lGAD)
Summit and the IGAD Foreign Ministers Committee
on Somalia, the Somali National Reconciliation
Conference will be held in April in Nairobi.
Preparations for the Conference are to be handled
jointly by the three neighbouring countries and by the
IGAD secretariat.

We welcome and support the encouraging
developments that have taken place in the Somali peace
process. Allow me to point out that the responsibility
for national reconciliation and durable peace in
Somalia lies, in the final analysis, in the hands of the
Somali parties themselves. Without the participation
and support of all parties in Somalia, even the best
peace initiative will remain on paper - an exercise in
armchair strategizing.

We endorse the Secretary-General's view that
only Somalia's leaders can decide to end the suffering
of their people and that only they can decide to
negotiate an end to the conflict. Therefore we urge the
Somali parties, in the supreme interest of national
reconciliation, to demonstrate the necessary goodwill,
attend the April Nairobi Conference without any
preconditions and endeavour to resolve, through
dialogue and negotiations, problems that are not
amenable to settlement by force.

As pointed out in the report of the Secretary-
General's, the Somali peace process will require not
only political will on the part of the Somali political
leaders and the sustained encouragement and support
of Somalia's immediate neighbours and of the wider
international community, but also greater unity of
purpose and coordination of the initiatives of the
international community. This is the only way to
contribute to the establishment of a broad-based and
all-inclusive Government, on the basis of the
maintenance of the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of Somalia.

We appreciate the tremendous amount of
humanitarian relief work done by the United Nations
system and other organizations in very harsh conditions
on the ground. We call on the Somali factions to ensure
the freedom of movement and safety and security of
humanitarian personnel and provide them with the
necessary facilities.

Effective implementation of the arms embargo on
Somalia can play a positive catalytic role in the peace
process. We hope that the long-standing situation of
ineffective implementation of the sanctions will soon
be reversed. We will continue to support the work of
the sanctions Committee, and we hope that countries
and regional organizations concerned will actively
cooperate with it.

