Mr. Mohammad Kama] (Malaysia): Mr. President,
like those who have spoken before me, my delegation
would also like to warmly welcome you to New York and
to say how pleased we are to see you preside over this
important meeting. Like our British colleague, I, too, have
some personal affiliation with Namibia which I will
always cherish. During the transitional period prior to
independence, I had the rare opportunity to visit and stay
in your beautiful country for three weeks meeting its
leaders, including His Excellency the President of
Namibia and you, Sir, and the warm people of Namibia
as part of the Commonwealth Observer Group to ensure
free and fair elections in your country. During that crucial
period, too, Malaysia was one of the three largest
contingents that participated in the United Nations
Transition Assistance Group in Namibia and which was
located in Ovamboland.

 

Above all, it was under the presidency of Malaysia in
the Security Council in this Chamber that the enabling
resolution 435 (1978) was adopted.

My delegation wishes to congratulate you for the
initiative you have taken to hold an open meeting of the
Council on a subject which is of great concern to the
international community. We also wish to extend our
sincere appreciation to the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict, Mr.
Olara Otunnu, for his very lucid and comprehensive
statement on the subject.

This is the second time in fourteen months that the
Council is holding an open debate on the item "Children
and armed conflict", a clear reflection of the Council's
serious and continuing concern on the matter. Following the
Council's first debate in June last year, it issued a
presidential statement which, inter alia, condemned the
targeting of children, including their humiliation,
brutalization, sexual abuse, abduction and forced
displacement and recruitment as soldiers. These are
immoral acts which flagrantly violate the principles of
international law and international humanitarian laws and
instruments, including the Convention on the Rights of the
Child.

The 1996 independent report entitled "Impact of
Armed Conflict on Children" provided the first, most
comprehensive and compelling assessment of the multiple
ways in which children are abused and brutalized in the
context of armed conflict. The report, inter alia,
underscored the urgent need for a public advocate and
moral voice on behalf of children whose rights and welfare
have been and are being violated in situations of armed
conflict in a number of countries. Since then, the United
Nations has undertaken several actions and programmes to
address this phenomenon. In this regard, the appointment of
Mr. Otunnu as the Secretary-General's Special
Representative for Children and Armed Conflict was a
welcome and timely move in the right direction to address
this issue. My delegation commends the Special
Representative for the outstanding manner with which he
carried out his mandate, particularly in sensitizing the
international community on the gravity of the matter and on
the need for concrete measures to stop these practices.

The Special Representative, in his report of 21
October 1998, highlighted that not only millions of children
are still victims of war but far too often they are its
principal targets, and even its instruments. It is very
alarming and disturbing to know that today, according to
the United Nations Children's Fund, there are 300,000
children under the age of 18 who are serving as regular
soldiers, guerilla fighters, spies, cooks, sexual slaves and
even suicide commandos, in a number of the ongoing
conflicts throughout the world. Over the last decade
alone, these wars have taken a heavy toll on children.
They have claimed the lives of more than two million of
them, caused six million to be maimed or permanently
disabled, left one million orphaned and ten million
psychologically traumatized and have resulted in children
accounting for half the world's 24 million refugees.

In the light of these dismal and dismaying statistics,
the question that begs to be asked is: what is the
international community doing to protect these innocent
and hapless children? Is it doing enough to ensure the
promotion of the rights and protection of children
victimized by armed conflict? As my delegation stated on
an earlier occasion, the issue of children in armed conflict
deserved the serious attention of the international
community in its own right. The Special Representative
for Children and Armed Conflict has identified selected
measures to alleviate the sufferings of children caught in
armed conflict. He has rightly pointed out that a strong
political will is necessary to translate existing standards
and commitments into actions to make substantive
progress in the protection of these children. It is
imperative that the United Nations, through the Security
Council, call on States involved in armed conflicts to
protect children, using the measures available to it.

My delegation also strongly supports the Special
Representative's views that the problem of children in
armed conflict must be tackled in a comprehensive
manner: that is, to provide protection for them during the
armed conflict and to assist in their recuperation and
reintegration in post-conflict situations, but, more
importantly, to try to prevent the onset of conflict in the
first place. Believing in the adage that "prevention is
better than cure", my delegation endorses the Special
Representative's call for international and national actors
to take actions to prevent conflicts rather than to allow
inequities and marginalization to escalate into armed
conflicts. We should not be content to play a fireman's
role of merely putting out fires. A "band-aid" solution
will not resolve the conflict nor provide a lasting and
permanent peace. The measures outlined by the Special
Representative deserve the strong support of the
international community and the Council.

My delegation wishes to reiterate that those who are
guilty of acts of violence against children during armed

 

conflicts should be punished with the severity they deserve.
We are gratified that among such punitive measures, the
conscripting or enlisting of children under the age of 15
into armed forces or of using them to participate in
hostilities, and the targeting of schools have now been
made war crimes under the statute of the International
Criminal Court. The Security Council, whenever it adopts
measures under Article 41 of the Charter of the United
Nations in dealing with armed conflicts, must give due
consideration to their impact on children in order to
consider appropriate humanitarian exemptions.

Children are the hope of the future. Indeed, they are
the future of every society and of civilization itself. Scarred
and abused children may well grow up to be scarred and
abusive adults who will perpetrate and perpetuate the
scarring and the abusing. Children who grow up in a
culture of violence are unlikely to have the skills and
knowledge to inculcate a culture of peace. They are the
least responsible for conflicts, yet the most vulnerable and
hapless victims. There is even today, a continuing
enlistment and deployment of children as soldiers; some
properly recruited, others kidnapped or coerced into service.
Children should have no role whatsoever in warfare. Yet
studies have shown that children participate actively in most
of today's armed conflicts, some driven by ideology but
most of them exploited because they come from poor and
disadvantaged communities. Such children must be
reintegrated into post-civil-war society. All parties should
take part in the rehabilitation of child soldiers, especially
young girls traumatized by their wartime experiences.

My delegation supports the enhanced focus of the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees (UNHCR) on child refugees to promote the
protection of refugees and internally displaced children. We
call on all parties, both Governments and rebels, to end the
use of child soldiers, and we urge them to stop recruiting
children, demobilize those already recruited and seek ways
to reintegrate demobilized child soldiers into society. All
programmes pertaining to the disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration of ex-combatants should include children
as an integral component of the effort. My delegation
would also like to take this opportunity to commend the
tireless efforts of all international agencies involved in the
protection of children affected by armed conflict,
particularly the United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF)
and UNHCR.

As a signatory to the 1989 Convention on the Rights
of the Child, Malaysia calls on the few remaining countries
that have not signed or ratified this Convention to do so.
We are also actively considering the possibility of
acceding to the International Labour Organization
Convention No. 182 concerning the Prohibition and
Immediate Action for the Elimination of the Worst Forms
of Child Labour, as we are of the view that child
soldiering is one of the worst forms of child labour.
Malaysia strongly supports the optional protocol to the
Convention on the Rights of the Child which calls for a
minimum age of 18 for peacekeepers.

We are gratified to note that the Special
Representative has reported that several countries and
rebel factions currently embroiled in armed conflict and
bloodshed pledged not to recruit child soldiers. We are
equally gratified that the recently concluded Lome Peace
Agreement for Sierra Leone contained provisions that
guarantee special care and protection for children and for
their inherent rights to life, survival and development, in
accordance with international conventions. Wherever
relevant, all peace agreements must include
comprehensive demobilization programmes for child
soldiers, family tracing and reunification and
rehabilitation, as well as provisions for meeting the
special educational and vocational needs of former child
soldiers.
My delegation supports the draft resolution on
children and armed conflict that will be tabled in the
Council later on. We believe that the adoption of this
draft resolution by the Council would constitute a
concrete and timely measure to address this important
issue with a view to halting this cruel and inhumane
practice so that future generations of children in situations
of armed conflict will be spared the fates of the current
generation. We believe the draft resolution contains all the
necessary elements for addressing the issue in a
comprehensive fashion, and we recommend that it be
adopted by the Council.

