Mr. Andjaba (Namibia): We all recognize that
conflict, wherever it erupts, has a tremendous impact on
civilians, who are nowadays the first and principal targets.
Women and children, the elderly, the sick and refugees are
attacked in large numbers and continue to be methodically
forced from their homes, in search of safety. We condemn
acts of violence against civilians in the strongest terms.
Perpetrators of such crimes must be held accountable. We
support making perpetrators financially liable to victims,
and the establishment of machinery to that end.

We welcome the very important report of the
Secretary-General on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict and the bold recommendations contained therein.
We believe that the recommendations deserve thorough
consideration by the Security Council. We will thus only
highlight a few salient points and look forward to
participating in the working mechanism that will be
established for this purpose.

Just three and a half weeks ago, on 25 August 1999,
in this very same Chamber, the Security Council adopted
resolution 1261 (1999) on children and armed conflict.
Our position on children and armed conflict was well
reflected at that meeting and I will therefore avoid
unnecessary repetition. Here, I would just reiterate our
call for the minimum age for recruitment and participation
in hostilities to be raised to 18 years.

The continued deliberate targeting of
non-combatants, in violation of international law, remains
an unacceptable phenomenon. We are particularly
concerned about women and girls, who are vulnerable to
gender-based violence and sexual exploitation, including
rape and prostitution. Such violations of international
humanitarian, human rights and refugee law cannot be
condoned and should not be allowed to go unpunished.

We cannot over-emphasize the importance of
guaranteeing the safety and security of humanitarian
personnel. Namibia is currently in the process of ratifying
the Convention on the Safety of United Nations and
Associated Personnel. In addition, parties to conflicts
must allow unhindered access of humanitarian workers to
people affected by conflicts. Failure to allow unhindered
access is a serious violation of humanitarian law and is
completely unacceptable.

Civilians continue to be killed and maimed by the
hundreds of landmines planted in previous and current
conflict zones in many parts of the world. Namibia
remains committed to the implementation of the Ottawa
Convention, and we join the Secretary-General in calling
upon States that have not already done so to sign and
ratify the Ottawa Convention.

In discharging its mandate of maintaining
international peace and security, the Security Council
must bear the responsibility of preventing military
conflicts and contributing to their resolution. The Council
should work to prevent conflicts by placing emphasis on
preventive measures and early-warning systems, which
should include education on human rights and on the
principles of humanitarian law and strict compliance
therewith. The root causes of the conflicts, namely,
poverty and underdevelopment, must be addressed.

We continue to believe that the uncontrolled flow of
small arms and all types of sophisticated arms into areas

 

of conflict needs to be addressed. It is unfortunate that
some arms-producing countries have made Africa their
dumping ground at the expense of Africans. We renew our
call to all arms-producing countries not to transfer anti-
personnel landmines and other arms to regions where armed
conflict is imminent.

The draft resolution that we will adopt at the end of
this debate addresses the wider impact of armed conflict on
civilians. Namibia is in full support of the draft resolution
and hopes that its adoption will ultimately contribute to the
alleviation of the plight of civilians in armed conflict. In
this connection, we commend the delegation of Canada for
this timely initiative.

The Secretary-General has done his part and we are
most grateful to him. It is now up to the Security Council
to make good use of the recommendations contained in his
report and to ensure that appropriate action is effected to
address the plight of civilians in armed conflict.

