Mr. Wisnumurti (Indonesia): I should like at the
outset, Sir, to extend my delegation's congratulations on
your assumption of the presidency of the Council for this
month. We remain fully confident that with the wisdom and
diplomatic skill you have shown in the past you will
provide the Council with effective leadership.

May I also express our appreciation to your
predecessor, Ambassador Manzi Bakuramutsa, the
Permanent Representative of Rwanda, for the able guidance
he provided the Council during last month.

May I also avail myself of this opportunity to express
my delegation's gratitude for the words of welcome by the
members of the Council to Indonesia as one of its new
members. Let me also join other members of the Council
in welcoming the Foreign Minister of Italy in our midst.

The Security Council has been seized of the conflict
in Bosnia and Herzegovina for nearly three years. It is a
conflict which poses a continuing threat to the maintenance
of international peace and security. The death and
destruction, the atrocities committed and the suffering it has
inflicted is of such magnitude that it has shocked the world.
Denied its right to defend itself as a result of an
ill-conceived arms embargo, Bosnia and Herzegovina faces
the bleak prospect of a forcible dismantling of its
multi-ethnic, multi-cultural and multi-religious society, the
brutal decimation of its people and the erosion of its
independence and sovereignty.

The wanton aggression by the Bosnian Serbs has been
sustained by the stark military imbalance in their favour,
which they have exploited to seize what now amounts to 70
per cent of Bosnian territory in their bid to carve a "Greater
Serbia" out of Bosnian soil. Condemnation, warnings,
sanctions and international isolation have not deterred
them from aggression and duplicity.

Meanwhile, the pleas of the people of Bosnia and
Herzegovina for effective international intervention, or at
least the lifting of the arms embargo, have gone
unheeded. The consequences of a continued arms
embargo on the victims of the conflict are obvious: there
will be more killing of defenceless civilians, more
atrocities and more destruction.

The Bosnian Serbs' rejection of the peace plan
launched by the five-nation Contact Group means only
that they intend to keep up the slaughter. While the siege
and strangulation of Sarajevo continues, we have
witnessed their brazen attacks on "safe areas", as
evidenced by their treacherous assault on the town of
Bihac. In this instance, the United Nations Protection
Force failed to discharge fully its mandate to block or
repel the aggression of the Bosnian Serbs. Recent
developments in the Bihac region were particularly
disturbing, as they involved cross-border aggression by
the so-called Croatian Serb forces, launched from the
United Nations Protected Areas in the Republic of
Croatia. Meanwhile, the repatriation of hundreds of
thousands of refugees and a sharp increase in the number
of displaced persons have further aggravated the already
deteriorating situation.

Realization of the hope engendered by the
agreements on a cease-fire and the cessation of hostilities
that were reached last month - the hope that the
agreements would lead to the termination of war and to
a durable and just peace - remains elusive, as the
aggressors have continued to violate with impunity the
commitments they made under the agreement.

It is against this backdrop that my delegation views
the tragedy that has befallen the people of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. Indonesia must reiterate that an unjust peace
should not be imposed on Bosnia and Herzegovina, and
that the Bosnian Serbs should not be allowed to dictate
terms for a political settlement. Appeasing the Bosnian
Serbs could lead to a tragedy on an even greater scale
than is evident now in that embattled land. The
international community should vigorously pressure the
Bosnian Serbs to accept the peace proposal of the five-
nation Contact Group.

The delegation of Indonesia has noted the reports
submitted by the Co-Chairmen of the Steering Committee
of the International Conference on the Former

 

Yugoslavia. We fully sympathize with the members of the
Mission for the hardships to which they are being subjected
in carrying out their tasks under severe financial, physical
and operational constraints and in stressful conditions.
These simply increase our appreciation of the reports.

Indonesia' s principal concern, however, is that, despite
the reports' certification that the Government of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia is continuing to meet its
commitment to close its border with the areas of the
Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina under the control of
the Bosnian Serb forces, there have been widespread
allegations of violations in the form of the transportation of
strategic materials and personnel. Reports of the illegal
supply of contraband fuel by the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia to the so-called Krajina Serbs in the United
Nations Protected Areas in Croatia, as well as Serbian
deployment of surface-to-air missiles around the Gorazde,
Zepa and Srebrenica safe areas, are illustrative of our
concern about the extent to which the border closure has in
fact been effected.

The question of the transportation of fuel is included
in the latest report of the Mission, but my delegation would
have liked to see the question of the alleged supply of air-
defence systems across the border of the Federal Republic
of Yugoslavia and in areas of the Republic of Bosnia and
Herzegovina under Serb forces similarly addressed. It is our
view that, unless concerns such as these are addressed, the
International Conference Mission to the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia runs the risk of being increasingly regarded as
irrelevant to the developments on the ground.

The perception of discrepancy between actual
developments on the ground and the certifications issued by
the Mission on the continued commitment of the
Government of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia to close
its border with the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina is
almost inevitable, given the constraints under which the
Mission has had to work and, in particular, the terms of
reference within which it has had to operate. Without
wishing in any way to belittle the dedication of the
members of the Mission, we must recognize that under the
current terms of reference, and given the limitation of
resources under which it has had to operate, its capacity
more effectively to ensure compliance by the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia with its commitment seems to have
been compromised.

As regards the draft resolution now before us, it
should be recalled that my delegation has already expressed
its reservations concerning the casing of sanctions against
the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, as called for in
Security Council resolution 943 (1994). In our view, such
action was premature. It was taken with undue haste and
in utter disregard of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia's
complicity in the whole crisis. Equally important,
resolutions adopted by the Council in this context have
explicitly stipulated the steps that the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia should take if sanctions were to be eased.
These clearly went beyond the mere promise to close the
border with the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

Specifically, Indonesia attaches particular
importance, inter alia, to the following measures that
should be taken before the easing of the sanctions regime:
recognition by the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia of the
independence and territorial integrity of Bosnia and
Herzegovina; effective defence of the "safe areas" and
enforcement of exclusion zones; termination of the arms
embargo against the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina;
ending of the unconscionable policy of "ethnic cleansing"
by Bosnian Serbs; and full cooperation by the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia with the international war crimes
tribunal, including the surrender of wanted suspects for
trial. In short, there should not be any easing of sanctions
unless and until all consequences of aggression are
reversed and territories occupied through the use of force
are surrendered.

My delegation therefore has serious reservations
regarding the provision for an extension for a further
hundred days of the suspension of sanctions, as contained
in the draft resolution before the Council. Despite the
dedication shown by the members of the Mission, we
doubt whether its monitors can effectively police a 450-
kilometre border, when previous estimates called for a far
bigger Mission. We therefore call for concerted efforts to
strengthen the Mission's capacity and to ensure the
fulfilment by the Government of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia of its solemn commitment to close its border
with the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

In particular, we should like to underscore the fact
that during the past hundred days there has been little to
indicate that the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia has
initiated steps, beyond the alleged closure of its border
with the Federal Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina, to
fulfil the requirements laid down in the relevant Security
Council resolutions, steps that are necessary if the
sanctions against it are to be lifted.

Despite our misgivings, we are fully cognizant of the
positive elements contained in the draft resolution before

 

us. We are heartened, for example, by the fact that, through
the draft resolution, the Council calls upon all States and
others concerned to respect the sovereignty, territorial
integrity and international borders of all States in the
region. We particularly welcome the provision in the draft
resolution which reaffirms the requirement contained in
paragraph 12 of resolution 820 (1993) that imports to,
exports from and transshipment through the United Nations
Protected Areas in the Republic of Croatia and those areas
of the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina under the
control of the Serb forces - with the exception of essential
humanitarian supplies - shall be permitted only with
proper authorization from the Government of Croatia or the
Government of Bosnia and Herzegovina. This provision
goes some way towards addressing the concerns about the
illegal supply of fuel to the so-called Krajina Serbs, to
which we referred earlier.

Against this background, and despite our misgivings
about the extension of the casing of sanctions against the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, my delegation voted in
favour of the resolution just adopted. Our position on this
matter is based on the understanding that since resolution
943 (1994) has already initiated the process of relaxing
sanctions, the Government in Belgrade will scrupulously
fulfil the commitments that it has undertaken. Our
endorsement is also predicated upon the stipulation that
should at any time the Secretary-General report a wilful
violation the suspension of sanctions will be terminated
forthwith.

It would be reasonable to expect that the conduct of
the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia will be above reproach.
Otherwise, its Government must be prepared to face even
more and tougher sanctions. Finally, it should prevail upon
the Bosnian Serbs to accept the peace proposals advanced
by the five-nation Contact Group and already accepted by
the Government of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

