Mr. Fischer (Germany): I would like to thank the
Security Council presidency for its excellent work at
this difficult time.

The Security Council is meeting here today in a
dramatic situation. At this moment, the world is facing
an imminent war in Iraq.

The Security Council cannot remain silent in this
situation. Today more than ever, our task must be to
safeguard its function and to preserve its relevance. We
have come together once more in New York today to
emphasize that.

The developments of the last few hours have
radically changed the international situation and
brought the work of the United Nations on the ground
to a standstill. Those developments are cause for the
deepest concern.

Nevertheless, I would like to thank Mr. Blix for
his briefing on the work programme. Germany fully
supports his approach, even under the current
circumstances. The work programme with its realistic
description of unresolved disarmament issues now lies
before us. It provides clear and convincing guidelines
on how to disarm Iraq peacefully within a short space
of time.

I want to stress this fact, particularly today. It is
possible to disarm Iraq peacefully by upholding those
demands with tight deadlines. Peaceful means have
therefore not been exhausted. Also for that reason,
Germany emphatically rejects the impending war.

We deeply regret that our considerable efforts to
disarm Iraq using peaceful means in accordance with
Security Council resolution 1441 (2002) seem to have
no chance of success. Time and again during the last
few weeks, we have collaborated with France and
Russia to put forward proposals for a more efficient
inspections regime consisting of clear disarmament
steps with deadlines, most recently on 15 March.

Other members also submitted constructive
proposals until the final hours of the negotiations. We
are grateful to them for their efforts.

During the last few days, we have moved
significantly closer to our common objective: that of
effectively countering the risk posed by Iraqi weapons
of mass destruction with complete and comprehensive
arms control. Especially in recent weeks, substantial
progress was made in disarmament. The scrapping of
the Al Samoud missiles made headway: 70 of them
have now been destroyed. And the regime in Baghdad
is beginning, under pressure, to clear up the
unanswered questions on VX and anthrax.

Iraq's readiness to cooperate was unsatisfactory.
It was hesitant and slow. The Council agrees on that.
But can this seriously be regarded as grounds for war
with all its terrible consequences?

There is no doubt that, particularly in recent
weeks, Baghdad has begun to cooperate more. The
information Iraq has provided to UNMOVIC and the
IAEA are steps in the right direction. Baghdad is
meeting more and more of the demands contained in
the Security Council resolutions. But why should we
now - especially now - abandon our plan to disarm
Iraq by peaceful means?

The majority of Security Council members
believe that there are no grounds now for breaking off
the disarmament process carried out under the
supervision of the United Nations.

In this connection, I would like to make the
following three points. First, the Security Council has
not failed. We must counter that myth. The Security
Council has made available the instruments to disarm
Iraq peacefully. The Security Council is not responsible
for what is happening outside the United Nations.

Secondly, we have to state clearly, under the
current circumstances the policy of military
intervention has no credibility. It does not have the
support of our people. It would not have taken much to
safeguard the unity of the Security Council. There is no
basis in the United Nations Charter for regime change
by military means.

Thirdly, we have to preserve the inspection
regime and to endorse the working programme because
we need both after the end of military action.
Resolutions 1284 (1999) and 1441 (2002) are still in
force, even if some adjustments are needed.

Germany is convinced that the United Nations
and the Security Council must continue to play the
central role in the Iraq conflict. This is crucial to world
order and must continue to be the case in future. The
United Nations is the key institution for the
preservation of peace and stability and for the peaceful
reconciliation of interests in the world of today and of
tomorrow. There is no substitute for its functions as a
guardian of peace.

The Security Council bears the primary
responsibility for world peace and international
security. The negotiations on the Iraq crisis, which
were followed by millions of people worldwide during
the last few weeks and months, have shown how
relevant and how indispensable the peacemaking role
of the Security Council is. There is no alternative to
this.

We continue to need an effective international
non-proliferation and disarmament regime. This can
eliminate the risk of the proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction, using the instruments developed in
this process to make the world a safer place. The
United Nations is the only appropriate framework for
this. No one can seriously believe that disarmament
wars are the way forward.

We are deeply concerned about the humanitarian
consequences of a war in Iraq. Our task now is to do
everything we possibly can to avert a humanitarian
disaster. The Secretary-General is to present proposals
on this. Yesterday, the Security Council declared its
readiness to take up these proposals. Through the oil
for food programme, the United Nations has provided
60 per cent of the Iraqi population with essential
supplies. This experience must be used in the future.

A very large majority of people in Germany and
Europe are greatly troubled by the impending war in
Iraq. Our continent has experienced the horrors of war
too often. Those who know our European history
understand that we do not live on Venus but, rather,
that we are the survivors of Mars. War is terrible. It is a
great tragedy for those affected and for us all. It can
only be the very last resort when all peaceful
alternatives really have been exhausted.

Nevertheless, Germany has accepted the necessity
of war on two occasions during the last few years
because all peaceful alternatives had proved
unsuccessful.

Germany fought side by side with its allies in
Kosovo to prevent the mass deportation of the
Albanian population and to avert an impending
genocide. It did likewise in Afghanistan to combat the
brutal and dangerous terrorism of the Taliban and Al
Qaeda after the terrible and criminal attacks on the
Government and the people of the United States. And
we will stick to our commitment in this war against
terror.

Today, however, we in Germany do not believe
that there is no alternative to military force as a last
resort. To the contrary, we feel that Iraq can be
disarmed using peaceful means. We will, therefore,
seize any opportunity, no matter how small, to bring
about a peaceful solution.

