Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We congratulate you, Madam President, on
your accession to the presidency ofthe Security Council,
and thank the United Kingdom for its presidency last
month. We also want to thank Ms. Jeanine Hennis-
Plasschaert, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Iraq, Archbishop Bashar Matti Warda and
Mr. Mardini, Permanent Observer of the International
Committee of the Red Cross to the United Nations, for
their briefings.

The Russian Federation has consistently advocated
for maintaining the sovereignty, independence and
territorial integrity of Iraq and ensuring its internal
stability and security. We are closely following the
developing situation in this Arab country. We understand
that the underlying reasons for the current protests that
have engulfed it are socioeconomic in nature. Clearly,
the layers of problems that have been accumulating for
years cannot be dealt with overnight. That is why it is
important for the international community to support
Baghdad in establishing comprehensive measures to
restore its economy and improve the situation in the
social arena. Our hope is that the leading parliamentary
factions will be able to select a new consensus candidate
for Prime Minister within the timelines set by Iraq's
Constitution and prevent the emergence of a power
vacuum in the country that could seriously exacerbate

its domestic political crisis. It would help to overcome
internal disagreements and restore stability to Iraq,
which is of key significance to the whole of the Middle
East. In the context of the national dialogue, is it
important to continue dialogue in the efforts to restore
mutual understanding between Baghdad and Erbil. We
are positive that improving relations between them will
help Iraq to improve its security.

We are troubled by the fact that the terrorist
threat in Iraq remains high. The situation has been
compounded by the flood of terrorists leaving Syria
in the wake of the military defeat of the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) there. We believe that
the only way to effectively counter this challenge is
by coordinating counter-terrorism efforts as fully
as possible. It is also essential to ensure that all the
stakeholders involved in combating terrorism in Iraq
respect the sovereignty of the Iraqi State and coordinate
their actions with Baghdad.

Having listened attentively to the statement
delivered by His Grace the Archbishop, we would like
to underscore the importance of maintaining the ethnic
and religious diversity that has characterized the region
for millenniums both in Iraq and in the Middle East
as a whole. However, that hard-won balance of the
peoples of the region has been disrupted by the heinous
crimes of pseudo-Muslim terrorist groups. As a result,
Christians and other religious minorities who were to a
large extent a stabilizing factor have been forced into
exile. Immediate measures must be taken to halt the
mass exodus of Christians and other minorities from
the countries of the Middle East and to maintain the
unique balance in their coexistence. In that connection,
we feel compelled to remind the Council of the recent
tragedy in Qamishli, Syria, in which ISIL terrorists
murdered Hovsep Bedoyan, an Armenian Catholic
priest, and his father. Kirill, Patriarch of Moscow and
all Rus', has condemned the crime and expressed his
condolences. We also continue to focus on determining
the fate of two Christian metropolitans of Aleppo,
Yohanna Ibrahim and Paul.

We are concerned about the potential negative
influence that the artificial fomenting of events
around Iran could have on the domestic political
situation in Iraq. The attempts to drag Iraq into a
regional confrontation are destabilizing its internal
environment. Iraq has the right to build and develop
normal relations with its neighbours, and no one has
the right to undermine those relations. Once again we
stress the importance of launching mechanisms for
dialogue in the region instead of imposing sanctions
and making threats. In that connection we would like
to point out that the Secretary-General has a mandate
to develop security- and confidence-building measures
in the region, pursuant to resolution 598 (1987). We are
open to cooperation on such a basis with all regional
and international partners in the framework of the
concept we have proposed for collective security in the
Persian Gulf region.

In conclusion, we would like to note the efforts
of the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq.
We believe that its efforts should facilitate national
reconciliation processes and the achievement of long-
term stabilization in the country. For our part, through
our contacts with all Iraqi political forces we are urging
them to unite their efforts in order to settle all the issues
on Iraq's domestic agenda through a national dialogue
and by arriving at mutually acceptable agreements
that take account of the interests of all of this Arab
republic's ethnic and religious groups.

