Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): First of all, I would like to stress the
importance of the political and legal analysis just given
by my colleague, the Permanent Representative of
Venezuela.

The international community has understood that
the issue of the protection of civilians cannot be dealt
with selectively or on a discretionary basis, but is
exclusively limited to situations of armed conflict. We
therefore believe, along with the majority of the
international community, that the protection of
Palestinian, Syrian and Lebanese civilians suffering
under Israeli occupation is part and parcel of this
much-appreciated international effort in the context of
the full and impartial implementation of the mandate to
protect civilians in armed conflict. I say this in
particular because the Security Council has long been
involved in debating this important matter, while
Israel, rightly referred to as the occupying Power, has
all the while continued its gross violations against
civilian populations in occupied Arab territories.

We are concerned that some of the countries
whose representatives have delivered relevant
statements on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict during today's debate have sometimes
espoused their own special and selective views of
civilians and armed conflicts. Those views contradict
international humanitarian law and international
jurisprudence. We are also concerned that some
countries are trying to transform the suffering of
civilians in some areas of conflict into unacceptable
and controversial academic debates, which does not
help to alleviate the suffering of civilians.

11-5866]

Jurisprudence has shown that international efforts
to protect civilians in armed conflict must be carried
out in strict observance of the principles of the Charter
of the United Nations - which affirm the need to
respect the sovereignty of States, their political
independence and their territorial integrity, as well as
the principle of non-interference in their internal
affairs - and be consistent with the provisions of the
Geneva Conventions and international humanitarian
law. Every international instrument has affirmed that
national Governments bear the primary responsibility
for protecting their own citizens, and that such
responsibility is exclusive and cannot be substituted for
or influenced by any given political agenda.

We must therefore not confuse the issue of the
protection of civilians, on the one hand, with threats to
international peace and security, on the other. We must
also avoid using loose interpretations of the question of
the protection of civilians, as well as the use of
controversial terminology outside United Nations
documents and materials, such as the responsibility to
protect and humanitarian intervention. Were that to
happen, it would inevitably jeopardize the credibility
and neutrality of the United Nations, be it at the level
of Member States or the Secretariat. That will, in turn,
lead to the undermining of the noble efforts made to
protect civilians in armed conflicts. Paradoxically,

while concepts of international law - in its two
divisions, namely, public law and international
humanitarian law - have developed over the past

several decades, the suffering of civilians has
worsened. Indeed, the number of conflicts has also
increased. Those countries that have militarily
occupied other countries in violation of international
law, and have shown disrespect for the principles of
international humanitarian law have benefited from
impunity.

Allow me to put the following questions to the
Council. Have the occupation and military invasions of
Member States of the United Nations and the killing of
millions of innocent citizens furthered the goal of
providing protection for civilians, while some countries
in the Council today, and on previous occasions, have
called for regime change in some countries under the
pretext of providing protection for the civilians of
those countries? Was this call seen as a noble objective
allowing for the protection of civilians in armed
conflicts? Are such pretexts consistent with the
provisions of the Charter? Does the suffering of
millions of civilians resulting from unilateral financial
and economic sanctions serve the well-being of the
citizens? Does it protect them or does it weaken them,
jeopardizing their right to live in dignity and
development?

How can we explain how some NATO members
have killed 130,000 Libyan civilians on the pretext of
protecting civilians in that country? How can we
understand the explicit call by the spokesperson of the
United States Department of State to armed groups in
Syria not to turn themselves in or their weapons to the
authorities of the Syrian Government, in line with the
Syrian Government's decision to grant amnesty to all
those who turn themselves and their weapons in to
Government authorities? Does this not mean that the
United States is publicly and directly involved in
exacerbating discord and violence in Syria? Discord
and violence have caused our people - our army,
police and civilians - a lot ofinnocent victims.

Should this incitement to armed groups to
continue their criminal acts against the State and
civilians not be reason enough to hold those who were
responsible for the incitement accountable, at least in
the framework of providing protection for civilians?
Does the United States policy, supported by some
European countries, jeopardize the work of the Arab
League and its initiative aimed at putting an end to the
crisis in Syria and restoring security and stability for
its civilian population? Is remaining silent towards
Israel's blatant settlement activities, which jeopardize
the principle of peace, not a contradiction of the most
fundamental rights of Palestinian and Syrian civilians
to live in their homelands in freedom and sovereignty?

We do not know how long we can close our eyes
to Israel's continued inhumane practices and its
occupation of Arab territories, including the Syrian
Golan, Jerusalem, the Sheba'a farm lands and
al-Ghajar village. Why do we not see the same degree
of enthusiasm expressed in dealing with Israeli acts of
aggression by some countries that express their keen
interest in providing protection to civilians in some
parts of the world? They have used the Security
Council, which specializes in international peace and
security, to adopt a flawed and erroneous interpretation
of the question of providing protection for civilians in
armed conflict. That interpretation serves their interest
in interfering in the internal affairs of Member States
without any accountability. We have not heard any
responsible United Nations official who has taken part
in this important debate speak about the illegality and
illegitimacy of the unacceptable interference in the
internal affairs of Member States, pursuant to the
provisions of Article 2 of the Charter.

Those colonial countries, particularly France and
the United Kingdom, which spoke this morning before
the Council and used indecent terms against my
country, are wrong to think that human memory is too
short to recall the crimes against humanity that they
perpetrated during the eras of colonialism and slavery.
Is apologizing for these crimes compatible with the
concept of the protection of civilians? Or are there
different categories and classes of civilians - some
from the North, some from the South? Are they not
equal as human beings?

