Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank the Spanish presidency of the Council
for the organization of this ministerial meeting on the
situation in the Middle East. I also wish to thank the
Deputy Secretary-General for his briefing.

This meeting, following the public meeting last
week (see S/PV.7536) and the Council's exchange
yesterday with the Secretary-General directly from
Amman, as well as the numerous diplomatic efforts
that all of us have made, again demonstrate how serious
the situation in Israel and the occupied Palestinian
territories is and the extent to which our mobilization
is necessary.

We face an especially alarming escalation of
violence in the Middle East, which sadly has been
growing worse on the ground. France, I wish to
emphasize, strongly condemned the Violence of the
recent weeks, whoever the perpetrators. The toll in
terms of Victims, wounded, suffering and frustration
is especially heavy. That deadly spiral is the concrete
result of an impasse in the peace process, especially
from the threat posed by the continued settlement
policy, which is illegal under international law, impacts
on the viability of a two-State solution and fuels both
despair and Violence. It constitutes an obstacle to the
aspirations of both parties, namely, the creation of
a Palestinian State and the right of Israel to live in
security.

While some have urged us to postpone the issue
when faced with an international agenda replete with
other crises, we have been working tirelessly in recent
months to propose solutions to break the vicious cycle
of violence in the Middle East. The current situation
highlights the validity and need for such proposals
as well as the need to stay the course. The time is
not right to fold our arms. We need to assume our
collective responsibility, and France, as a permanent
member of the Security Council and a friend of both
the Israeli and Palestinian people, intends to assume
its responsibilities. In that spirit, we have insisted for
a long time on the need for a collective mobilization
to find a lasting political solution to the conflict.
Despite the proliferation of crises in the region, we
have remained true to the conviction that the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict must remain an international
priority. Not only are the parameters of a solution to
the conflict well known, but moreover, the lack of a
settlement remains a powerful recruitment argument
for terrorism in the region and remains a factor in the
destabilization of the region. We cannot run the risk
of Daesh seizing the Palestinian issue, with all of its
unimaginable consequences.

It is the responsibility of the international
community and the Security Council to find a response
to the conflict. As a priority, we strongly urge the
parties to redouble their efforts to promote a calming of
the situation by refraining from any acts or words that
could stoke the Violence. Maintaining the 1967 status
quo for the holy sites in Jerusalem is an imperative,
as underscored yesterday by the Secretary-General.
France would like the Security Council to make its
voice heard - its unanimous voice heard - to preserve
the status quo and restore calm. Again, that is our
responsibility.

At the same time, we must rededicate ourselves
towards allowing a political solution to emerge on
the horizon. We must work together to support the
resumption of a credible political process to serve a
two-State solution. That is the thrust of our initiative,
alongside that of the Quartet, for renewed international
support for the peace process. That drive is aimed at
fully involving Arab and European partners to support
a settlement of the conflict. We intend to continue on
that path. The absence of any political prospect serves
no one. The two-State solution can be the only response
to the conflict. France remains mobilized and prepared
to work to that end with its partners and to support the
actions of the United Nations.

Allow me to say a few words on Syria. On
17 August, the adoption of a presidential statement
(S/PRST/2015/15) represented, after four years of
deadlock, a glimmer of hope for the emergence of a
settlement of the Syrian crisis. We thought that the
Security Council was finally ready to tackle the root
causes ofthe evils ravaging that country and to advance
three main, among several, priorities, namely, to fight
more effectively against terrorism and against Daesh
in particular. It is Daesh we need to strike, not the
moderate opposition. We need to implement a real
political transition, and we need to bring a response
to the horrors experienced by the Syrian civilian
population.

Thepastfewweeks-thisisanunderstatement-have
not given us concrete hope and have instead given
us new reasons for concern. France and its partners
have repeated untiringly that backing Mr. Bashar
Al-Assad to combat the terrorists is a false solution,
which will do nothing more than strengthen Daesh and
prolong the tragedy. That equation will never work
because it precludes Syrians from coming together
against terrorism. It fuels Daesh propaganda and will
ultimately increase its attractiveness. That would be not
simply a moral error, but it would be a strategic error,
for which the Syrian people, the entire Middle East and
beyond will have to pay the price. The fate ofthe Syrian
people cannot be limited to an alternative to terror or
a dictatorship based on bloody repression or barbarous
terrorism.

The root causes of the Syrian tragedy must
be tackled at its source, which requires a political
transition that can lead to national reconciliation.
What we should seek is already included in the June
2012 Geneva communique (S/2012/522, annex): a
Government enjoying full executive authority and
which brings together both the elements of the regime
and the elements of the opposition who reject terrorism.
We know what the main parameters and objectives are
as well as who the main players of such a transition are.
We should not resign ourselves to the current impasse.
Rather, we should continue to back the efforts of the
Special Envoy for Syria, Mr. Staffan de Mistura, to
engage in discussions and negotiations with all parties
and to determine the outline for an orderly solution.

With more than 250,000 dead and more than
10 million displaced persons and refugees, Syria is the
stage of the worst human tragedy of the early twenty-
first century. Against the backgdrop of that chaotic
situation, the immediate responsibility of the Council
should be to effectively protect the civilian population.
It is the Syrian authorities who have the responsibility
to protect their population. However, the regime, now
heavily supported from the outside, is using its military
resources, including air assets, to terrorize and kill
civilians, in continued violation of its obligations under
international law and Security Council resolutions.

Entire areas in Syria are currently under
indiscriminate fire, including by the use ofbarrel bombs.
Everyone knows the horrible nature of those actions,
which strike indiscriminately and which, to quote
Mr. Staffan de Mistura, bear the sinister "hallmark"
of the Bashar Al-Assad regime. Barrel bombs are
not defensive weapons. They are weapons of terror,
weapons that fuel the displacement of individuals and,
ultimately, the flows of refugees towards neighbouring
countries and towards Europe. It is the immediate
responsibility of the members of the Security Council
to take steps to effectively halt the use of such ghastly
weapons in Syria. France, along with Spain and the
United Kingdom, will soon make concrete proposals to
its partners to achieve that objective.

