The President (spoke in French): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of Sierra Leone, in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the discussion of the item on the
Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, I
propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite that
representative to participate in the discussion, without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of
the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Dabor (Sierra Leone) took a seat at the Council table.

The President (spoke in French): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on its
agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

I should like to draw the attention of the members of
the Council to document 5/1999/508, which contains the
text of the letter dated 3 May 1999 from the
Charge d'affaires ad interim of the Permanent Mission of
Sierra Leone to the United Nations addressed to the
President of the Security Council.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council stresses that an overall
political settlement and national reconciliation are
essential to achieving the peaceful resolution of the
conflict in Sierra Leone. In this context, it welcomes
the recent holding of internal talks by a rebel
delegation in Lome, and urges the Government of
Sierra Leone and rebel representatives to ensure that
there are no further obstacles to a start to direct talks
without delay.

"The Security Council calls upon all concerned
to remain committed to the process of negotiation and
to demonstrate flexibility in their approach to the
process. In this context, the Council underlines its
strong support for the mediation efforts of the
United Nations within the Lome process, in
particular the work of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General to facilitate dialogue, and for
the key role being played by the President of Togo.

"The Security Council commends, once again,
the continued efforts of the Government of Sierra
Leone and the Military Observer Group of the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOMOG) towards the restoration of peace,
security and stability in Sierra Leone, and calls for
sustained support for ECOMOG from the
international community.

"The Security Council condemns the recent
killings, atrocities, destruction of property and other
violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law perpetrated on civilians by the
rebels in recent attacks, in particular at Masiaka and
Port Loko. It calls upon the rebels to cease such
actions immediately and urges the rebel leadership
to release all hostages and abductees without delay.

"The Security Council urges both parties to
commit themselves to a cessation of hostilities for
the duration of the Lome talks, to ensure that this is
fully respected on the ground and to work
constructively and in good faith for a ceasefire
agreement. It calls upon both sides to refrain from
any hostile or aggressive act which could undermine
the talks process.

"The Security Council welcomes the intention
of the Secretary-General to increase, as security
conditions permit, the presence on the ground of the
United Nations Observer Mission in Sierra Leone
(UNOMSIL) within currently authorized levels, in
anticipation of a cessation of hostilities. The Council
also welcomes the Secretary-General's intention to
send an assessment team to Sierra Leone to examine
how an expanded UNOMSIL with a revised mandate
and concept of operations might contribute to the
implementation of a ceasefire and peace agreement
in the event of a successful outcome to the
negotiations between the Government of Sierra
Leone and the rebels, and expresses its readiness to
consider recommendations from the
Secretary-General to that end.
 

"The Security Council stresses, however, that it
will be prepared to consider deploying monitors
throughout Sierra Leone only when a credible
ceasefire is in place and is being respected by all
sides, and there is a commitment of all parties to a
framework peace agreement.

"The Security Council underlines the importance,
in the context of a lasting solution to the conflict in
Sierra Leone, of a plan for the internationally
supervised disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration of ex-combatants, including child
soldiers. It also draws attention to the need for the
secure and timely disposal of collected arms, in
accordance with any peace agreement reached.

"The Security Council reaffirms the obligation of
all States to comply strictly with the provision of the
embargo on the sale or supply of arms and related
materiel imposed by its resolution 1171 (1998) of 5
June 1998.

"The Security Council reiterates its grave concern
at the humanitarian situation in Sierra Leone
and urges all parties, in particular the rebel
leadership, to guarantee safe and unhindered
humanitarian access to all those in need.

"The Security Council reiterates that a peaceful
and lasting solution to the conflict in Sierra Leone
remains the responsibility of the Government and
people of Sierra Leone, but again emphasizes the
strong commitment of the international community
to support a sustainable peace settlement.

"The Security Council will remain seized of the
matter."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/1999/13.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda. The

Security Council will remain seized of the matter.

The meeting rose at 2.20 am.

