Mrs. Zappia (Italy): We thank the United Kingdom
for organizing this open debate. We also thank the
Secretary-General and today's briefers.

Italy aligns itself with the statement to be delivered
by the observer of the European Union.

Experience has shown that recourse to the peaceful
prevention and settlement of disputes is the best and most
cost-effective solution in promoting peace and security.
There is no single recipe for success. Given that every
conflict and ensuing settlement is different, so too the
related reconciliation process may vary. Nevertheless,
we need to take into account a few elements.

First, reconciliation is a long-term process that
takes time and cannot be rushed. It applies not only to
victims and perpetrators but to everyone in society. It
must therefore be nationally owned and not imposed.
It must take place at all levels, from national to grass
roots, and be inclusive. Local communities, faith
leaders and civil society play an essential role. Their
unique position enables them to engage and represent
large segments of society.

Women's participation in particular is crucial to
guaranteeing such inclusivity. Today, however, too few
women are involved in reconciliation and mediation
efforts. In order to address those limitations, Italy
launchedtheMediterraneanWomenMediatorsNetwork.
We are proud of the results it has achieved so far. New
members have joined; the first two local antennas, in
Cyprus and Turkey, have been established; training,
capacity-building and networking opportunities have
been provided; and fruitful synergies with the United
Nations, the African Union and other regional networks
have developed. The latest achievement is the creation
of the Global Alliance of Regional Women Mediator
Networks, which successfully launched in New York
in September.

Secondly, in order for peace to be lasting, there must
be a linkage between national and local reconciliation
initiatives. Italy firmly believes in the essential
contributions that local authorities and communities can
make to reconciliation processes, and I would mention
Libya and Mali as examples in that regard. Religious
leaders and civil society have proven to be key partners.
One such example is the support of the Comunita di
Sant'Egidio for the Central African Republic peace
process, aiming to carefully balance its work on the
need to ensure accountability without jeopardizing the
final outcome of the reconciliation process. Another
example was the key role of the National Episcopal
Conference of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
during the recent political crisis in that country. As a
national best practice, I would like to recall the activity
of the Italian non-governmental organization Rondine
Cittadella della Pace, an organization committed to
reducing global armed conflicts by educating young
generations in conflict resolution, track-two diplomacy
and the promotion of peace and human rights.

Finally, to make reconciliation an effective tool, we
must continue to look at this process in a systematic
and comprehensive way, both as the Organization
and as Member States. In drafting the mandates of
peace operations, for example, actionable and precise
deliverables should be associated with reconciliation
activities, in particular linking national and local
perspectives. The Peacebuilding Commission could
also serve as an important platform to monitor this
process. The review of the peacebuilding architecture
in 2020 may also serve as an opportunity to reinforce
that role. As a Member State, our contribution is of the
utmost importance. 1 refer to our action as a troop-
contributing country, a function in which our ability to
dialogue and bring together opposing sides could make
a tangible difference in reconciliation processes.

Let me conclude by recalling the fifth edition
of the Mediterranean Dialogue, which we will host
in Rome on 6 and 7 December, as an example of our
tireless efforts to create opportunities and platforms for
dialogue and reconciliation.

