Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to thank the Under-Secretary-
General for Humanitarian Affairs, Mr. Mark Lowcock,
for his briefing, and once again commend his tireless
efforts, as well as those of his teams, in responding
to the urgency and gravity of the humanitarian
situation in Syria. I would also like to thank Russia
for requesting this briefing, which enables us to take
stock of the humanitarian situation in both Raqqa
and Rukban, a month and a half after the adoption of
resolution 2401 (2018).

I will say a few words on the humanitarian situation
in Syria as a whole before addressing the specific cases
of Raqqa and Rukban, and then finally reiterate our
call for true assistance to their people by guaranteeing
rapid and secure humanitarian access. That constitutes
an key element of our draft resolution on Syria, which
is still under negotiation among members of the
Security Council.

Despite the adoption of resolution 2401 (2018) and
our repeated appeals, the urgency of the humanitarian
situation in Syria is flagrant. The situation on the
ground in Syria is a nightmare that sees no relief. As we
have had the opportunity to highlight during each of the
Council's meetings on the subject, the land offensives,
sieges, indiscriminate bombings - including on
schools and hospitals - and the use of chemical
weapons against the people of Douma on 7 April have
razed Syria to the ground, with complete disregard
for international law. Resorting to terror as a tactic of
war has led, as we all know, to horrific consequences.
Moreover, since 18 February, at least 1,800 people have
been killed and thousands are suffering from often
irremediable wounds.

As Mr. Lowcock has just stated, the humanitarian
tragedy in Syria remains a daily scandal and a
permanent insult to the global conscience. Since
9 March, approximately 151,000 Syrians have been
forced to flee eastern Ghouta. Between 90,000 and
100,000 of them were compelled to join the camps
around Damascus, which have restricted access to
basic services. To date, only 45,000 people have
been authorized to leave the camps, where reception
capacities are saturated. Despite the urgent situation,
access to the camps is complicated due to the regime's
intensified administrative procedures for humanitarian
actors. Humanitarian access for people remaining in
eastern Ghouta faces similar obstructions, especially
in Douma. These are all tragedies and blatant violations
of international humanitarian law.

In Idlib, the arrival of tens of thousands of people
evacuated from eastern Ghouta has further exacerbated
the humanitarian situation in the province, which
now hosts more than 1.2 million internally displaced
persons. That means that we must be both active and
vigilant when it comes to Idlib: active, in view of the
very difficult situation that prevails there today, but
also especially vigilant with regard to the risks of
further outbursts of violence in the region. If we are not
careful, the worst is yet to come in Idlib.

With regard to the situation in Raqqa, as
Mr. Lowcock described in his briefing, the city is
faced with the challenge posed by the return of 90,000
people. The challenge is certainly a considerable one.
However, we must note some positive developments,
such as the reopening of schools and three functioning
clinics, as well as the distribution of schoolbooks, to
mention but a few examples. It is henceforth necessary
to allow humanitarian actors to channel water, food
and other responses to meet the basic needs of the
population. Given the situation left behind by Da'esh
in the city, humanitarian demining also presents a
crucial issue that all else depends on and where efforts
already undertaken must absolutely be continued and
augmented. That is an effort in which France is fully
participating. We set aside €10 million at the end of2017
and financed a dozen projects for displaced persons and
those wishing to resettle in Raqqa in particular, as well
as emergency aid, restoration of basic services, health
care and mine clearance.

In Rukban, discussions with the Syrian Arab Red
Crescent must lead to allowing the channelling and
unloading of cargo by the United Nations, all while
ensuring the safety of humanitarian personnel. As
resolution 2401 (2018) has not been implemented, I wish
to reiterate here, on behalf of France, our urgent appeal
to guarantee rapid, safe and unhindered humanitarian
access throughout Syrian territory. That is indeed the
key, along with the cessation of hostilities, to a real
improvement in the humanitarian situation in Syria.
Specifically, that means that the Syrian regime must
issue the necessary visas and letters of authorization
to the United Nations Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs and other humanitarian actors,
with three immediate operational objectives in mind.

First, a sufficient number of humanitarian convoys
must reach areas that are difficult to access or besieged,
and the safety of humanitarian personnel must be
guaranteed. Secondly, civilians that remain in eastern
Ghouta must receive urgent humanitarian assistance
and protection. Thirdly, assistance must be provided
to displaced persons, including in the camps and host
communities around Damascus, in the Idlib province
and in the Euphrates region. The regime's recovery of
eastern Ghouta, in the terrible conditions we know of,
does not change those imperatives, which fall under
international humanitarian law and resolution 2401
(2018), adopted unanimously by the Council.
It is precisely those objectives that we strongly
support in the context of the draft resolution submitted
by France, the United Kingdom and the United States
to members of the Security Council on Saturday and
which was discussed at its first reading yesterday. Our
draft resolution aims to achieve essential progress in
humanitarian terms, fully consistent with the priorities
expressed today. Given the catastrophic situation of
the population, France has launched an emergency
humanitarian programme of €50 million. The draft
resolution also aims to recreate a mechanism for the
attribution of responsibility with regard to the use of
chemical weapons and to put a definitive end to the
Syrian chemical programme. Finally, it requests that
conclusive political negotiations be held under the
auspices of the United Nations and with the support of
Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura, in accordance with
resolution 2254 (2018).

Finally, beyond the silo approach - which has
led to so many impasses - the initiative France has
taken with this draft resolution, alongside our British
and American partners, articulates, for the first time,
humanitarian, political and chemical aspects of the
Syrian equation. Through this comprehensive and
integrated approach, the draft resolution seeks to
recreate a space for negotiation, establish potential areas
of convergence and therefore - we hope - create the
conditions for a truly diplomatic dynamic on the Syrian
dossier. We all know how difficult the task is, but we
hope that this approach will help us to break free of the
impasse and open up the way to genuine negotiations.

Given the interest sparked by our draft resolution
and by the first constructive discussions it has led to,
this new approach is, in any case, broadly supported
and involves committing on this basis to deepened
negotiations that require good faith in the goal to reach
a conclusion, even though we are all aware of how
challenging that will be. We owe it to the Syrian people
who, in their diversity, await us in despair.

