Sir Emyr Jones Parry (United Kingdom):
Madam President, the presence of your Foreign
Minister underlines the importance of this subject. May
I thank the Deputy Secretary-General, and also
Mr. Wolfensohn for his excellent common sense and
the Honourable Phil Goff and Secretary of State
Michael Ambiihl for their contributions and insights.
Of course, I thank all my colleagues for what they have
said.

I align myself with the statement to be made later
by the representative of Luxembourg on behalf of the
European Union.

The international community has had mixed
results with its efforts to build peace. Mozambique has
been a conspicuous success recently. That country,
which until less than ten years ago was torn apart by
war, is now one of Africa's fastest growing and most
stable economies, and at the same it has reduced
poverty by 15 per cent. But Haiti, despite successive
peacekeeping and peacebuilding missions and more
than $1.5 billion in international aid, is firmly on the
agenda of the Security Council, not yet out of the crisis
phase.

Why is it that our collective efforts in post-
conflict countries do not always produce the result that
we want: sustainable peace? What makes the difference
between a Mozambique and a Haiti? While each
country has unique circumstances that require a
differentiated approach, there do seem to us to be
general lessons that we can learn.

I would now like to highlight some of the
challenges that we think the international community
must seriously address if we are to do better at building
more lasting peace in the future.
First, we need better strategic priority-setting and
planning at the end of the conflict, and indeed when it
looks as though the conflict is coming to an end. This
is customarily set out in a comprehensive Security
Council resolution. Increasingly, these resolutions
tackle the range of issues relevant to a comprehensive
peace-support operation - what the chair earlier
described as the full range of cross-cutting issues. This
tendency needs to be encouraged in order to reflect the
indissoluble nature of security, development and
human rights.

At the moment, realistically, the United Nations
often lacks a single strategic plan for operations in a
country that has just emerged from conflict. So all
those involved, be it the United Nations Development
Group, the Executive Committee on Humanitarian
Affairs or the Department of Peacekeeping Operations,
need to be working on the same set of comprehensive
elements. Integrated missions, where all elements of
the United Nations work together in a coherent and
coordinated way, are still not a sufficient reality.

Secondly, that integrated plan needs to be
delivered by one responsible individual. The advantage
of the post of a Special Representative of the
Secretary-General is that this person should have the
authority and resources to deliver all aspects of a
peace-support operation, including welding together
the work of the specialist agencies and giving strategic
direction to a peacekeeping operation. The question is:
do Special Representatives have the necessary training
and experience to fulfil these roles? Are they recruited
in a manner that ensures that we have the best talent
available for this vital job? Do they have a clear set of
objectives set by the United Nations Headquarters,
with desired outcomes to work towards? I fear that the
answers to those questions are invariably negative.

Thirdly, we need the right combination of
national ownership and international support, as others
have already argued. The international community has
a moral duty to help States resolve conflict and a
strong interest in seeing this succeed. But for peace to
be sustainable, it must be owned and driven forward by
the people of the country. It is therefore critical that
national/transitional Governments and local civil
society are involved from the beginning and help set
priorities for peacebuilding and reconstruction.

Fourthly, it seems to the United Kingdom that we
need better coordination and coherence within the
international community. It is inevitable and indeed
desirable, that many different international actors take
part in peacebuilding, including, often, regional
organizations. We therefore need to ensure that there is
no wasteful duplication of effort or unhealthy
competition on the ground. Instead, the different
components need to make concerted, coherent and
positive contributions. Hence the strong need for the
proposed Peacebuilding Commission to permit all
those interested in a given situation to come together,
to identify strategy and then to deliver their individual
contributions with maximum coherence of effort and
minimum gaps and overlaps. And that, of course, leads
directly into the role of what a Special Representative
of the Secretary-General should be doing in theatre.

Fifthly, we need earlier, adequate and more
predictable funding for peacebuilding, as many have
already argued. Donor pledges for reconstruction often
take six to nine months to arrive. But, as
Mr. Wolfensohn reminded us, immediately a conflict
has ended, financing is required, inter alia, to pay civil
servants, the military, police, teachers, doctors and so
on, as cash is invariably short for Governments.

Sixthly, we need to strengthen our collective
expertise and human resources. It is much more
difficult by definition to mobilize civilian experts. But
their contribution is crucial, especially in the critical
area of the rule of law, which can be the key to stability
in the early phases of peacebuilding. Therefore we
need to develop mechanisms to get the right civilian
expertise into post-conflict situations much more
quickly. The Secretary-General is working on a roster
of experts in justice and the rule of law, and the
European Union is developing similar rapid civilian
deployment capacities, as are many Members States,
including the United Kingdom. But these efforts need
to be brought together so that we have an inventory of
rapidly available capacity which can be launched as
soon as they are needed.

Seventh, we need to sustain political will and
attention until a country has made the transition to
development and sustainable peace. Peacebuilding is a
long-term effort; there are no quick fixes. The time
horizon for transition is five to ten years, if not more.
Yet studies show that post-conflict countries are most
vulnerable to a return to conflict three to five years
after the end of fighting. That is why, very simply, we
have to sustain international attention and funding
throughout that period into durable stability.

Lastly, while peacebuilding is crucial, it is only
part of the conflict spectrum. Moreover, there is no
regular sequence in which conflict ends, peace is
re-established and stability ensues. The instruments of
peacebuilding and the emphasis on rule of law and
human rights can also be directly relevant to pre-
conflict situations. Sustained effort is, therefore,
necessary throughout the spectrum from potential
conflict, to conflict to peacebuilding if we are to have
less conflict to resolve.

It is becoming increasingly accepted that a
breakdown in rule of law and increasing violations of
human rights are reliable indicators of impending
conflict. Regimes whose authority is questioned often
cut corners on fundamental freedoms. This will
generally deepen discontent and hasten conflict. If that
is true - and there is a lot of evidence out there today
that it is - the United Kingdom believes that it
follows that a society underpinned by respect for
human rights and the rule of law is essential for any
post-conflict society to achieve lasting peace and
stability. Fledgling democracies will carry the people
with them only if basic freedoms are respected and if
the Government is seen to work for the good and the
development of all the people.

In conclusion, political will is key to success. It
determines how well we react to a given crisis. Does
the international community have the determination to
resolve a particular conflict and then to make the real
effort necessary to build peace in that country? More
generally, do we have the willingness to put in place
systems and to accept our global responsibilities to
tackle the conflict spectrum as a whole and to be
prepared to help build peace where necessary?

The summit in September in New York is the
opportunity for nations to make it clear that we accept
that responsibility to help countries become peaceful,
rule-of-law abiding, democratic States, moving towards
economic prosperity. The Peacebuilding Commission is
a key aspect of that implementation. The challenge for
the summit will be for heads of State or Government to
make clear that the international community is
prepared to accept this responsibility, and therefore to
will the means to implement this commitment much
more successfully.

