Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): I would
like to thank Uruguay for convening today's meeting.
China has listened carefully to the statements by
Mr. Raisedon Zenenga, Deputy Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Somalia, and by Mr. Francisco
Caetano Jose Madeira, Special Representative of
the Chairperson of the African Union Commission
for Somalia.

At present, Somalia is entering an important period
of national reconstruction. Since the end of last year,
Somalia has successfully held federal parliamentary
and presidential elections, and a new Government was
established early this year. By doing so, it has achieved
a peaceful transfer of power, which is an important step
in national reconstruction. China welcomes all of this.

The African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM)
and the United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia
(UNSOM) have made positive contributions to these
developments, for which China wishes to express
appreciation. On the other hand, we must note that
Somalia still faces severe challenges in the political,
security, economic and humanitarian areas. At present,
there are 6.2 million people in Somalia lacking
food, approximately 3 million of whom await urgent
food assistance.

There is still a long way to go for Somalia to
achieve long-lasting peace and stability and economic
development. The international community should pay
more attention and provide stronger support to Somalia.

First, it is important to adhere to Somali-led and
Somali-owned principles, respecting the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of the country, supporting
its capacity-building in the areas of security and
governance, and making sure that they are able to
shoulder their responsibility for national security
and consolidate the positive momentum in the peace
process. At the same time, Somalia's economic
reconstruction and humanitarian situation is an area
where the international community should continue
to provide assistance and support. The relevant parties
should provide precise planning for assistance and
cooperation for Somalia in order to take the process of
national reconstruction forward in a steady manner.

Secondly, the international community should
strengthen cooperation on Somalia among the United
Nations, the African Union (AU) and regional countries
in an ongoing manner. The international community
should support addressing African problems in African
ways. It should also support the AU and regional and
subregional organizations in playing important roles in
resolving Africa's flashpoint issues. The international
community must support AMISOM. and UNSOM. as
they continue to implement their mandates. At the same
time, the Security Council should send more positive
messages and, based on developments in the situation,
continue to review the relevant provisions of resolutions
and make necessary adjustments in a timely fashion.

The international Conference on Somalia was
held recently in London. The meeting discussed
the establishment of security architecture, political
process, economic recovery and humanitarian issues.
The Chinese Government's Special Representative for
African Affairs took part in the meeting and stated
positions of the Chinese Government. As to outcome
documents, the meeting adopted a security agreement
and a new partnership agreement, which is something
that China welcomes. China hopes that the relevant
agreements will be faithfully implemented.

China has always supported the efforts in Somalia
aimed at achieving peace and development and has
taken active part in the peace process in the country.
China has played a positive role in Somalia, with a View
to finding political solutions for country's issues. China
has provided a convoy fleet for deployment in the
maritime areas around Somalia and the Gulf of Aden
in order to help the country in its fight against pirates.

To help the Government of Somalia to deal with
the current famine, China has provided food assistance
to Somalia through the World Food Programme and
has also provide emergency humanitarian material
assistance in order to help improve the living conditions
of the internally displaced persons there. China is
willing to play a constructive role in achieving peace,
stability and development in Somalia and the Horn
of Africa.
