The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea and the Republic of Korea, in which they
request to be invited to participate in the consideration
of the item on the Council's agenda. In conformity
with the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of
the Council, to invite those representatives to
participate in the consideration of the item, without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Pak Gil Yon
(Democratic People's Republic of Korea) and
Mr. Choi Young-jin (Republic ofKorea) took seats
at the Council table.

The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda.

Members of the Council also have before them
document 8/2006/805, which contains the text of a
draft resolution prepared in the course of the Council's
prior consultations.

I wish to draw the attention of members to
document 8/2006/801, which contains the text of a
letter from the Democratic People's Republic of Korea,
as well as documents 8/2006/814, S/2006/815 and
S/2006/816, dated 13 October 2006, from France,
transmitting lists of items, materials, equipment, goods
and technology related to nuclear, ballistic missile and
other weapons of mass destruction programmes.

It is my understanding that the Council is ready
to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution
(8/2006/805) before it. Unless I hear any objection, I
shall put the draft resolution to the vote now.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

A vote was taken by show of hands.
2

In favour:
Argentina, China, Congo, Denmark, France,
Ghana, Greece, Japan, Peru, Qatar, Russian
Federation, Slovakia, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of
Tanzania, United States of America.


The President: There were 15 votes in favour.
The draft resolution has been adopted unanimously as
resolution 1718 (2006).

I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements following the
voting.


