Mr. Heusgen (Germany): At the outset, and
on behalf of my fellow co-penholders, Kuwait and
Belgium, let me thank Assistant Secretary-General
Ursula Mueller for her comprehensive briefing on the
humanitarian situation in Syria. We once again reiterate
our appreciation for all the efforts of humanitarian and
medical personnel to alleviate human suffering in Syria.

We meet once again having heard from the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
(OCHA) about the dire humanitarian situation in
Syria, especially in the north-west of the country.
We condemn the recent intensification of hostilities,
in particular aerial bombardments that have killed
civilians, including women and children. While we are
preparing for the holidays, almost 3 million people in
Idlib are in desperate need of shelter, food and medicine
and do not know what tomorrow brings.

We also wish to thank the Secretary-General for
his latest report on the humanitarian dimension of the
crisis in Syria (S/20l9/949). The numbers in the report
speak for themselves. The Secretary-General calls on
the Security Council to

"ensure that the United Nations is authorized to meet
the needs of all who need humanitarian assistance",

and reiterates that

"the United Nations does not have an alternative
means of reaching people in need in the areas in
which cross-border assistance is being provided."
(S/2019/949, para. 55)

He has asked for a swift renewal of the cross-
border resolution.

That is why, later today, we plan to vote on a
draft resolution proposed by the Syria humanitarian
co-penholders. We have been negotiating that text in
an inclusive, transparent and thorough manner for the
past few weeks with all Council members, while also
consulting OCHA and neighbouring countries. The
aim of the text is to ensure life-saving cross-border
assistance for more than 4 million people. The World
Health Organization approached us today once again
about the Al-Yarubiyah border crossing - they really
need it, as 40 per cent of all medical goods pass through
there. During our negotiations, we reached out to find
compromises to ensure the Security Council speaks
with one voice. Guided by humanitarian needs, we
listened to the concerns of all Member States and did
not ignore recent developments. We went a long way
to try to get everybody and take everything on board.
The text, which was put in blue yesterday, is a result of
that inclusive process. Some members may think that
there is still room for improvement, but that is exactly
what compromise means - there will be always room
for improvement, and it is never a matter of "take it or
leave it". We ask the Council to send a strong signal of
unity at the end of this year. The world is watching us.

As the year comes to an end, five elected countries
will soon leave the Council after two years of hard and
constructive work. We thank them all. Today we are
honoured by the presence of His Excellency Mr. Khaled
Aljarallah, Deputy Foreign Minister of Kuwait. I would
like to take this opportunity to thank Kuwait for being
such a dedicated co-penholder on this difficult file.
Minister Aljarallah's colleagues here in New York did a
greatjob, and we will miss their inspiration, creativity,
efficacy, efficiency and in-depth knowledge of the
region. We thank Ambassador Alotaibi and his team.

The co-penholders, but mostly millions of people
in need in Syria, count on the support of the Council
this afternoon.

