Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank Mr. Mohamed Ibn Chambas,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
West Africa and the Sahel, for the information he has
provided. We would like to assure him once again that
Russia supports his personal efforts and the activities
of his Office in resolving regional crises and issues of
political mediation and assistance in improving State
and human rights institutions, the quest for ways to
achieve economic development and the fight against
extremism and terrorism.

It is encouraging that in the second half of 2018,
elections took place in a number of the countries in
the region in a generally calm atmosphere. We hope
that the new electoral cycle beginning this year, which
includes an even greater number of countries, will also
take place in lawful and orderly conditions.

We have to agree with Mr. Chambas that, despite
the efforts that have been made, extremism, terrorism
and organized crime, unfortunately, continue to gather
strength in the region. As an epicentre of this kind of
lawless activity, the States of the Sahel, to a significant
extent, have become victims of the rogue actions of
some countries that led to regime change in Libya. If
the situation there is not stabilized, it will not be easy
to achieve peace and stability in the Sahel, as many
regional stakeholders have rightly pointed out.

Eradicating terrorism is one of the top priorities
on the African agenda. In that regard, the efforts of
States in the region to combat the growing challenges
are extremely timely, and that is all the more important
in the current circumstances, when terrorist groups
are increasingly actively coordinating their actions.
We support the operations of the Joint Force of the
Group of Five for the Sahel and the Multinational Joint
Task Force aimed at fighting Boko Haram, and we are
providing assistance to African Governments through
bilateral channels. We do not believe in the possibility
of dialogue with terrorists, including Boko Haram.

Unfortunately, security threats affect States' ability
to deal with their socioeconomic problems, which is
why efforts to ensure security and stability efforts have
to be implemented as part ofa comprehensive approach.
Military and counter-terrorism measures must be
combined with efforts to strengthen State institutions,
undertake systemic economic and social development,
promote a culture of respect for human rights and the
rule of law and provide jobs for young people. We greatly
appreciate the activities of the United Nations Office
for West Africa and the Sahel and the Organization's
specialized agencies in providing a broad range of
assistance to the countries of the region. It is crucial to
ensure that those efforts are closely coordinated with
the African Union, the Economic Community of West
African States and other organizations.

We consider it important to increase the
effectiveness of the United Nations Integrated Strategy
for the Sahel, since we feel that its potential has not
yet been fully realized. The views of the countries
for which it was developed are crucial to achieving
that. It will also be impossible to get anything done
without properly coordinating the numerous assistance
programmes for the region. Their effectiveness also
depends on whether the entities that are present in the
region - and I particularly have in mind those that
are part of the United Nations system - are operating
within their area of responsibility and taking into
account the principle of division of labour. It seems to
us that only through purposeful collective action that is
carried out in appropriate formats and does not create
conflicting areas of competence can we achieve the
results we seek.

