Mr. Mehdiyev (Azerbaijan): At the outset, I
would like to welcome the presence at this meeting of
His Excellency Mr. Jose Ramos-Horta, President of the
Democratic Republic of Timor-Leste, and to thank him
for his statement. We are also grateful to the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Ms. Ameerah
Haq, for her briefing and presentation of the Secretary-
General's report (S/2010/43) on the United Nations
Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT).

Azerbaijan welcomes further improvements in
many aspects of the political and security situation in
Timor-Leste. We note the progress made in achieving
stability, economic growth and socio-economic
development in the country, and commend the
Government of Timor-Leste for its efforts to this end.

As the Secretary-General points out in his report,
steady progress has been made in the preparations for
the presidential and parliamentary elections this year.
Important steps have been taken to complete the legal
framework for the upcoming elections. At the same
time, it is obvious that the security situation and
stability on the ground will remain key issues in the
period leading up to the elections. It is essential that
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
continue to play her good offices role vis-a-vis all
parties to ensure a peaceful and credible political
process.

We note that the Policia Nacional de Timor-Leste
(PNTL) has made operational planning for the
elections a key priority, and that UNMIT police will
continue to stand ready to provide support to the
PNTL, if required and requested, during the electoral
period and beyond. It is encouraging to note that, since
the PNTL assumed full responsibility for law
enforcement in March 2011, the security situation in
the country has continued to be stable and calm, and
the reported crime rate has remained low. It is critical
to further strengthen the institutional development of
the PNTL and support the effective implementation of
the Joint Development Plan.

Azerbaijan welcomes the progress achieved in the
areas of rule of law, justice and human rights in Timor-
Leste and, in this regard, encourages all stakeholders to
continue their cooperation aimed at strengthening the
capacity of national institutions. We commend the
Government for its positive and constructive response
following the review of its national report through the
Human Rights Council's Periodic Review Mechanism.
We also are of the view that further efforts towards
establishing accountability for serious criminal
offences of the past would have a positive impact on
long-term peace and stability in Timor-Leste.
Against the background of many challenges, the
country still needs the continued assistance of bilateral
and multilateral partners in order to fully realize its
potential for equitable and inclusive sustainable
growth. We welcome the Dili Development Pact,
agreed between the Government of Timor-Leste and
the donor community in July 2011, and consider it
essential that UNMIT continue to cooperate and
coordinate with the United Nations agencies, funds and
programmes, as well as all relevant partners, to support
the Government of Timor-Leste.

Azerbaijan commends UNMIT and the United
Nations country team, under the leadership of Special
Representative Ameerah Haq, for their continued
efforts in helping the people of Timor-Leste to advance
peace, stability and development. We support the
extension of the UNMIT mandate until the end of this
year, and believe that it will contribute to facilitating
the transition process. The implementation of the Joint
Transition Plan will be an important task for all
stakeholders in the period ahead and, together with the
needs and preferences of the Government, will
definitely influence the final decision on the United
Nations presence and role in Timor-Leste after UNMIT
completes its mandate at the end of 2012.

