Mr. Akbaruddin (India): At the outset, I would
like to compliment you and your team, Mr. President,
for the useful concept note circulated for today's
open debate (S/2016/103, annex). We also convey our
appreciation for the briefing by the Secretary General.

The Security Council has taken the lead in
referring to the purposes and principles of the Charter
while attempting to maintain international peace and
security. However, its own actions have not always
been in the spirit of the Charter. In view ofthe need for
brevity, for illustrative purposes, I would focus on three
areas symptomatic of where the spirit that imbues the
purposes and principles that underpin the Charter is no
longer evident in the Council's day-to-day functioning

First, we are all fond of emphasizing that the United

Nations Charter was adopted in the name of "we the
peoples". Yet rarely a week goes by without an incident
being reported from some part of the world in which
we the peoples - in whose name the Charter was
adopted - are the targets of terrorist attacks. While
terrorism remains a cardinal threat to the maintenance
of international peace and security, the efforts of the
United Nations and the Security Council in taking
decisive action to combat terrorism leaves much to be
desired.

By way of example, I would refer to the requirement
of consensus for listing an individual terrorist or a
terrorist organization in a Security Council sanctions
regime. This extension of the veto to all members of
the sanctions committees has in practice resulted
in the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and
2253 (2015) concerning Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (Da'esh), Al-Qaida and associated individuals,
groups, undertakings and entities many a time being
held hostage to the whims and fancies of one Member
State or other. There is no explanation required, and
a simple statement of objection or a hold or a block
kills the listing request assiduously built against those
who have undertaken heinous activities. Who bears the
responsibility for such decisions, or, rather, indecision
when well-known terror groups and individuals whose
listings have been blocked or put on hold behind the
anonymous consensus decision-making process resort
to carnage at a subsequent date?

Furthermore, we have noticed that even brazen
public violations of the sanctions regime by listed
individuals and entities, far from attracting punitive
measures, do not elicit even the mildest censure. Yet
we, the general membership of the United Nations, are
expected to comply with the decisions of the Council's
sanctions committees, or lack thereof.

My second point relates to peacekeeping, which
is the signature activity of the Security Council in
the maintenance of international peace and security.
In this context, we would like to raise the issue of the
lack of consultation between the Security Council and
the troop-contributing countries, despite Article 44 of
the Charter, which explicitly requires the Council to
invite Member States contributing troops that are not
members of the Council to participate in the decisions
of the Council. This has seriously compromised the
objectives of peacekeeping. We the troop-contributing
countries have our troops on the ground and have
important inputs to provide the Security Council,
which is tasked with formulating the mandates of the
peacekeeping operations. This lack of consultations
comes at the cost of the efficiency of peacekeeping
operations. While we stand ready to fulfil the mandate
finalized by the Council, it is logical that we expect the
Council to consult the troop-contributing countries.

Thirdly, and finally, the Council needs to be
reminded that charity begins at home. It is ironical
that the Security Council is working towards the
establishment of democracy and the rule of law in
various parts of the world when its own house is not
in order. The current structure and methods of work
of the Security Council are divorced from reality and
represent a bygone era. To regain its legitimacy, there
is no option but for the Council to reform. We hope
that it will not require a cataclysmic crisis to foster this
fundamental change. There has never been a greater
need for reform of the Council, which is a sine qua non
for its optimal efficiency and would be a real form of
tribute to the purposes and principles of the Charter of
the United Nations.

