Mr. Hmoud (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): My
delegation extends its thanks to the Republic of
Lithuania for its initiative in convening this important
debate on the protection of civilians in armed conflict.
We would also like to commend the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2013/689), which provides a
series of important recommendations on this issue
and an analysis of effective ways to promote the
protection of civilians. We welcome the adoption of
the presidential statement (S/PRST/2014/3), including
its significant elements that will provide guidelines
for implementing such a commitment. We would also
like to thank Ms. Navi Pillay, United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees; Ms. Valerie Amos, Under-
Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Emergency Relief Coordinator; Mr. Herve' Ladsous,
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations;
and Mr. Yves Daccord, Director-General of the
International Committee of the Red Cross, for their
important participation in this meeting.

Our debate today is particularly important. Despite
of the progress made since the adoption of resolutions
1265 (1999) and 1894 (2009) - pertaining to the
commitment to international norms and instruments
on this subject, the world is still witnessing grave
violations with regard to protection that are difficult
for the human conscience to accept. The targeting
of civilians by parties to a conflict, the perpetration
of crimes against them and the indiscriminate use of
explosive devices in populated areas are some examples
that demonstrate the failure to protect, which need to be
tackled by the international community in an effective
and resolute manner. Otherwise, the debates on this
topic will remain theoretical and will not contribute to
strengthening the concept of the protection of civilians.

The culture of respect for protection must also be
promoted. That should not only be limited to national
legislation and international conventions andresolutions,
but we must also draw up a comprehensive United
Nations strategy in that regard and develop follow-
up mechanisms in order to assess the commitment of
States to such a strategy. The international community
must not give precedence to the pursuit ofpeace accords
and political considerations in conflict situations over
the principle of accountability for crimes perpetrated
by parties to a conflict. Such parties think that they
are above the law and that the international community
will grant them immunity if they give up their weapons
and put an end to the conflict. That has an even greater
impact by further aggravating aggression against
civilians and the violation of their rights. Without such
a step, civilians will remain the primary and most
vulnerable Victims of armed conflicts.

My delegation would now like to focus its statement
on the practical aspect of the concept, in particular the
implementation of the protection element in United
Nations peacekeeping operations mandated by the
Council. In that regard, Jordan stresses that all the
mandated peacekeeping tasks, and most important the
protection of civilians threatened by physical violence,
must be implemented in accordance with the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations and
the guidelines for peacekeeping operations, without
prejudice to the primary responsibility incumbent upon
the host Government to protect civilians, as well as on
all parties to armed conflict. That does not exempt the
international community from its duty to guarantee
protection and assume such a responsibility.

We would like to underscore that all States and
the relevant parties, as necessary, should give priority
to respecting their obligations under the Charter,
international law, international humanitarian and
human rights law and international refugee law. We also
stress the need to provide the necessary resources to
missions to raise awareness and promote understanding
with regard to their protection mandate, through close
interaction with host Governments, local authorities
and population.

Jordan believes that there is a number of necessary
elements to ensure the effective and full implementation
of the mandates for the protection of civilians, in
particular close and continuous cooperation among
the Security Council, troop-contributing countries
and the Secretariat, so as to ensure clearly defined
protection-of-civilians mandates for peacekeeping
operations, as well as their possible completion. We
also believe it is important to provide peacekeeping
operations with logistical support and all the necessary
resources, including training, taking into account the
specific characteristics of each mission's mandate and
on the basis of lessons learned and best pratices from
United Nations peacekeeping operations and Member
States.

We agree with the concept note presented by
the presidency (S/2014/74, annex) with regard to the
importance of protection of civilian training at all
levels of mission staff in the field, including senior
leadership, before and during deployment, and on the
basis of lessons learned from previous and current
peacekeeping operations. Since the beginning of its
participation in peacekeeping operations, Jordan has
prioritized the concept ofthe protection of civilians and
continues, within the framework of training its cadres,
to focus on raising the necessary awareness on this
concept. International humanitarian law and provisions
for the protection of civilians have been incorporated
in the Jordanian armed forces training programmes,
including for peacekeeping operations.

Jordan notes the importance of conducting a
clear assessement in order to align the human and
material resources available for the missions with the
requirements for the protection of civilians and the
capacity of missions to fully implement their mandates
Moreover, further proposals are required to improve
the capacity of existing peacekeeping operations to
respond to situations that have a negative impact on
civilians.

Successfully assuming the tasts related to the
protection of civilians in the event of a Security Council
mandate requires coordinated action by all elements of
the relevant mission, within the areas of its deployment.
We believe that it is important for all peacekeeping
operations mandated to protect civilians to formulate
and carry out a comprehensive protection strategy,
which should be included in the mission's executive and
general emergency plans and be subject to regular and
effective evaluation.

In conclusion, Jordan emphasizes the importance of
close coordination between Headquarters and the
leadership in the field when it comes to the protection
of civilians in peacekeeping operations, especially
with regard to emergency situations, as well as the
importance of coordination between the United Nations
and regional arrangements, including country teams
as necessary, on matters relating to the protection of
civilians in peacekeeping operations.

