The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of Timor-Leste, in which he requests to
be invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
consideration without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Santos
(Timor-Leste) took a seat at the Council table.

The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2007/50, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Integrated
2

Mission in Timor-Leste, and document S/2006/1022,
which contains the text of a letter dated 21 December
2006 from the Charge d'affaires ad interim of the
Permanent Mission of Timor-Leste to the United
Nations.

Members of the Council also have before them
document S/2007/98, which contains the text of a draft
resolution prepared in the course of the Council's prior
consultations.

It is my understanding that the Council is ready
to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it.
Unless I hear any objection, I shall put the draft
resolution to the vote now.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
A vote was taken by show of hands.

In favour:
Belgium, China, Congo, France, Ghana,
Indonesia, Italy, Panama, Peru, Qatar, Russian
Federation, Slovakia, South Africa, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America


The President: There were 15 votes in favour.
The draft resolution has been adopted unanimously as
resolution 1745 (2007).

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 10.45 am.
07-2470]

