Mrs. Furman (Israel): I would like to congratulate
both the Security Council and the Secretary-General
on the twentieth anniversary of the establishment of
the protection of-civilians in armed conflict agenda by
the Council.

As a nation whose civilians have faced decades
of threats from hostile forces, Israel supports this
critical issue. If we seek to protect civilians, we must
identify, target and act swiftly against those who
choose civilians as their primary targets - namely,
terrorists. Terrorism, by definition, refers to the
deliberate targeting of civilians through violent means.
Its purpose is to kill - for ideological, political or
religious reasons - and innocent people pay the price.

Israeli civilians understand that price. For 12 years,
since 2007, Hamas has fired over 15,000 rockets and
mortars into Israeli towns. That is at least 1,000 rockets
and mortars per year, launched from civilian areas into
civilian areas. Rockets, sirens, screams and running for
shelter are, tragically, common occurrences for Israelis.
Just two weeks ago, Hamas and the Islamic Jihad fired
700 rockets and mortars into Israel over the span of
just two days. The rockets hit Israeli homes, hospitals,
schools and kindergartens in towns and major civilian
population centres, including Ashkelon, Ashdod and
Beit Shemesh. Israel's Iron Dome air defence system
intercepted tens of rockets successfully, saving
countless lives, but some of the rockets managed to hit
civilian areas. Four Israeli civilians were killed in those
acts of terror, and more than 100 others were injured.
Hamas exploits the people of Gaza, its own
Palestinian brothers and sisters, as human shields - an
activity that is both illegal and deplorable. By blatantly
targeting Israeli civilians and hiding and operating from
within the Palestinian population, those Palestinian
terrorist organizations are committing a double
war crime.

In Lebanon, Hizbullah has transformed southern
Lebanon's Shiite villages into terror outposts with
the goal of harming Israel. Rocket launchers sit
by schools and hospitals, and civilian homes store
missiles. Hizbullah has recruited a third of the civilian
population within those villages, strengthening its
terror network. By launching attacks on Israel from
Lebanese population centres, Hizbullah, like Hamas, is
committing a double war crime.

As the Secretary-General states in his report
(S/2019/373), the vast proliferation of non-State armed
groups has contributed to the increasingly asymmetric
nature of conflict. To those groups, international law
does not exist and civilians are to be exploited as human
shields in their efforts to harm civilians. For countries
like Israel that seek to protect their citizens, the result
is a never-ending battle against terrorists with little or
no respect for life.

To make real change is to acknowledge the real
problem and act. Our words are meaningless if they
are not followed up by clear condemnations of terrorist
organizations. If we are here to protect civilians, the
Security Council should designate Hamas, Hizbullah
and Islamic Jihad as terrorist organizations, a
designation that is long overdue.

