Mr. Sveinsson (Iceland): First of all allow, me to
thank Chile for convening this open debate. We are
seeing a period of exceptional instability in the Middle
East. The vicious conflict in Syria has become the
epicentre, and the intractability of certain conflicts in
the region makes it all the more important to look for
places where progress can be made.

The long-standing conflict between the Palestinian
people and Israel should be possible to solve. Indeed,
a solution has been on the table for many years - the
two-State solution. There are viable parties on both
sides who can make the deal, but both sides need to
commit in word and deed to the two-State solution and
they must refrain from actions which undermine the
viability ofthe only solution which will bring peace. The
expansion of Israeli settlements and the expropriation
of land in Palestine continue. This is a clear breach of
international law. We join others in calling on Israel to
stop all settlement activity. In particular, we urge Israel
to reverse the decision on the forced resettlement of
Bedouins in the West Bank.

The humanitarian situation in Gaza remains dire,
with recent news of people dying from exposure.
The situation must be urgently improved through
constructive cooperation between the Israeli authorities
and the Palestinian authorities. The blockade must
be lifted immediately and Gaza needs to be allowed
to function as a normal economy. At the same time,
security concerns on both sides must be addressed. It
is important that the Palestinian authorities take on real
governmental responsibility for Gaza. Militant action
from Gaza is unacceptable and will lead to further
suffering and away from a negotiated solution.

Iceland recognized the State of Palestine in 2011.
We welcome the recent recognition by our fellow Nordic
State, Sweden. That signal, added to that of many other
States Members of the United Nations, encompasses
the vision of a State based on the 1967 borders. Iceland
is pleased to see that the State of Palestine has ratified
several international agreements. In particular, the
decision of the State of Palestine to accede to the Rome
Statute should be applauded. As a long-time supporter
of the International Criminal Court, Iceland encourages
all United Nations Member States to put themselves
under the jurisdiction of the Court, whose purpose is to
help end impunity for crimes deemed especially serious
by the international community. Iceland also welcomes
the State of Palestine to the United Nations Convention
on the Law of the Sea, which continues to be of utmost
importance to Iceland and will undoubtedly come to
benefit Palestine as a coastal State.

The time to negotiate all final status issues is long
overdue. The failure of the Security Council to provide a
timeline that might assist in bringing about a solution is
disappointing. There is consensus on the urgency. This
is a conflict that can be resolved, but ifthat is to happen
the Security Council needs to be more proactive.

