Mr. Shen B0 (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
thanks Secretary-General Guterres for his briefing.
Since the beginning of this year, some countries and
regions in Africa and West Asia have been suffering
severe food shortages and even famine as a result
of drought and climate change. Secretary-General
Guterres has issued an emergency humanitarian-
assistance appeal urging the international community
to provide relief to the affected countries. China
highly appreciates his initiative and the efforts of the
relevant United Nations agencies to alleviate their pain
and risk. The Chinese Government is sympathetic to
the plight of these countries and their peoples, and
has been delivering rapid emergency food assistance
through bilateral and multilateral channels to Nigeria,
South Sudan, Somalia and Yemen in the amount of
¥190 million, or about $27 million.

The famine and serious humanitarian situations
in the countries and regions concerned have improved
considerably thanks to the energetic efforts of the
international community, but the risks remain, and
there is still a considerable shortfall in humanitarian
resources. The international community should
continue to provide them with the necessary help. First
of all, China would like to stress that attention should
be given to helping the countries concerned achieve
development. Because of inadequate economic and
social development, many developing countries are
vulnerable in the face of natural disasters such as drought
and famine, which in turn have a negative impact on
their domestic peace and security. The United Nations
should continue to increase its contribution to these
countries' development, advance the implementation
of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and
help the countries concerned accelerate their economic
and social development. That will help to eliminate
the causes of conflicts and promote sustainable peace
through sustainable development.

Secondly, the various United Nations entities should
conduct their work according to their mandates and
improve their division of labour and cooperation. As
the organ with primary responsibility for maintaining
international peace and security, the Security Council
should focus on helping the countries and regions
concerned address issues of peace and security. On that
basis, it should play an active role in coordinating and
enhancing communication and cooperation with other
United Nations agencies and relevant international
organizations working in areas such as development,
humanitarian relief and children's issues. Particular
attention should be paid to fully leveraging the positive
role of regional and subregional organizations and
thereby forging synergies within the international
community in addressing various problems.
Thirdly, we call on the international community
to uphold the concept of community and the common
destiny of mankind by continuing to respond to the
Secretary-General's appeal to provide humanitarian
assistance to the countries and regions concerned. At
the same time, we must uphold the principle of country
ownership, taking into consideration the practical needs,
level of development and priorities of the countries in
question. Formulating targeted assistance programmes
with a focus on helping the affected countries improve
their capacities with regard to food production, storage,
transportation and reprocessing, as well as ensuring
better nutrition for children, will enhance the countries'
capacity to generate their own food while we support
them with emergency sustenance.

China stands ready to work jointly with the rest
of the international community to help the affected
countries and peoples surmount this difficult time
and contribute to achieving world peace, security and
sustainable development.

