Portugal aligns itself with the statement presented by the European Union and, in its national capacity, would like to add the following points. The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic is having a devastating impact on communities and economies. Yet again, those who are in the most vulnerable situations are the ones who suffer the most. Furthermore, the indirect effects of COVID-19 and some of the actions taken in response can contribute to increasing tensions, violence and hate speech and may exacerbate existing drivers of conflict and undermine social and economic resilience, while violence against women and girls continues to escalate. Health crises worsen already precarious situations: fragile health systems become unable to cope and Governments fail to provide basic needs and services, such as health care, justice, public safety and food security. The erosion of trust in local institutions leads to increasing instability and unrest. The reallocation of both financial and human resources to support prevention and containment measures during the pandemic has had an impact on States' ability to deal with insurgencies and terrorist groups, but also on States' capacity to respond to the needs of their population and communities. The further weakening of State institutions and their capacity to deliver on public goods could endanger the medium- and long-term sustainability of hard-fought gains in theatres, such as the Sahel, the Central African Republic and Somalia. Only a ceasefire, as called for by the Secretary-General and stressed in resolution 2532 (2020), can fully ensure the delivery of humanitarian aid and the adoption of protective measures. Given the transnational reach of pandemics and the increasing interdependence of States, the greater part of the solution lies in international cooperation. International support, during and in the aftermath of the pandemic, in countries and regions affected by conflict must not neglect the importance of State and institution- building. Such support will be decisive in preventing the expansion of terrorist and armed groups, as well as their recruitment capacities. The economic recovery phase following the pandemic will also present an opportunity to boost resilience through focused reforms in key areas, such as health, education, social protection, climate change, good governance, human rights and the fight against corruption and impunity, thereby achieving a more sustainable response to instability-inducing factors. There is a risk that the pandemic could be used as a pretext to restrict the political and civic space, weaken commitments to peace processes, ongoing post- conflict efforts, such as reconciliation and reintegration mechanisms, or transitional justice mechanisms, under the guise of sanitary requirements. In that context, careful attention should be given to the possible negative impact of the pandemic on previously agreed political road maps and electoral processes. A balance must be found between effective and adequate implementation of health measures and the preservation of important peacebuilding processes. We should also advocate for the pursuit of global health security. Previous health crises have highlighted how coordination among actors across the development-humanitarian-peace nexus and a whole-of-United Nations approach - both at Headquarters and in the field - is key to ensuring a coordinated and effective response. The international human rights framework also provides a critical foundation for sustaining peace. We welcome the steps taken thus far and encourage further use of human rights mechanisms - special procedures, treaty bodies and the universal periodic review - by the United Nations peace and security and development pillars. Building inclusive societies, based on the protection and promotion of human rights and gender equality, remains the best defence against conflict, poverty, inequality and exclusion. We need to keep focusing our collective efforts on conflict prevention. The costs - human and financial - of responding to crises instead of preventing them are evident. Comprehensive cross-pillar approaches are, therefore, fundamental to sustaining peace. Peacekeeping operations play a major role also in this regard, alongside their intensive technical and logistical support to national Governments and their deterrence effect against actors aimed at destabilizing the political processes. The Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) continues to play a unique role in bringing together development and security. This linkage is of crucial importance to ensure that the United Nations, its Member States and other relevant stakeholders act together in preventing the recurrence of conflicts. The country-specific configurations are instrumental to implementing the PBC mandate. Their concrete focus on the field is one of the main reasons. We need this permanent feedback loop between headquarters and the actors on the ground. It enables the promotion of local appropriation and a better integration and coordination of regional and international efforts. Sustaining peace can only be achieved if peacebuilding is implemented in partnership with local communities, including women and youth. Therefore, we call for global solidarity and a unified collective effort to cooperate and deal decisively with the challenges of this pandemic. It is important to pool resources efficiently, collaborating through pre-existing mechanisms for emergency humanitarian action and adapting them to the new COVID-19 pandemic. This threat knows no borders, which means that individualized answers will inevitably fall short of addressing the challenges we are faced with. We therefore reiterate the call for global solidarity and a unified collective effort.
