Mr. Kamanzi (Rwanda): On behalf of my
delegation, let me extend to you, Madame, my
appreciation for taking the commendable initiative of
calling a meeting to discuss the very important issue of
the role of the United Nations in post-conflict national
reconciliation. This debate is timely and addresses an
issue that is at the very heart of our Organization, as
enshrined in Article 1 of the Charter of the United
Nations.

Members of the Security Council will be aware
that countries like Rwanda have faced considerable
difficulties in dealing with the myriad challenges
facing post-conflict communities - or, in our case,
post-genocide communities - in terms not only of
reconciliation and confidence-building measures
between communities, but also of establishing a
climate of peace and security, rebuilding governance
structures and promoting economic and social revival
or renewal.

While it is clear that the United Nations has a
crucial role to play in post-conflict national
reconciliation, it should also be clear that there cannot
be a one-size-fits-all response, as has been mentioned
by many speakers before me. Post-conflict situations
vary, as do reconciliation challenges and the capacity
of States to meet those challenges. The role of the
United Nations must therefore also vary from one
situation to another, but it should always be
commensurate with our expectations and the
obligations outlined in the Charter.

The challenges Rwanda faced in the aftermath of
the genocide were particularly grave. By July 1994, of
a population of 8 million people, over 1 million had
been killed, two and a half million had fled to
neighbouring countries and almost everyone else was
internally displaced. All economic and social activity
had ground to a complete standstill. The security
situation in the country was, at best, fragile. Food
production, as well as medical and other humanitarian
services, were severely disrupted. This was the difficult
environment in which Rwanda began the process of
national reconciliation.

As the Security Council debates what the role of
the United Nations in national reconciliation should be,
we would like to draw attention to several aspects of
our particular experience.

First of all, we learned that national reconciliation
is a process that may last for many years, even
generations. It is not an event that can be completed in
weeks, months or a few years. For us, the
reconciliation process began by creating an enabling
environment in which reconciliation could take place in
earnest. Creating an enabling environment involved
such things as ensuring peace and security, the return
of refugees and internally displaced persons to their
homes, kick-starting normal economic and social
activity, and improving access to medical and other
humanitarian services. Crucially, we have also learnt
that rebuilding local and national governance structures
is an essential prerequisite for the success of the post-
conflict reconciliation process. The United Nations has
a wealth of experience in these activities. It can and
should therefore play a key role.

Secondly, after creating the enabling
environment, the Rwandan Government established a
National Unity and Reconciliation Commission and
charged it with the responsibility of organizing a series
of open discussions focusing on what went so badly
wrong with the politics and governance of our country.
These discussions involved everyone in and out of the
country, including civic and community leaders and
elders, genocide survivor groups, professionals,
farmers, students and even genocide suspects. We
believe that these discussions triggered national soul-
searching and enabled us to identify what went wrong
and what we must do to ensure that the mistakes of the
past are never repeated.

We believe that the United Nations could play a
crucial supportive role here. Our experience has taught
us, however, that national stakeholders must take
ownership of the process, while the international
community and the United Nations play a supportive
role.

Thirdly, Rwanda has faced the particularly
difficult challenge of promoting unity and
reconciliation, while at the same time ensuring that
those who committed crimes during the genocide are
brought to justice. An important lesson that we have
learned in this respect is that justice is crucial for the
reconciliation of the perpetrator and the victim.
Reconciliation is not always best realized by amnesty
or forgiveness. In our case, justice was also important
in order to eradicate the culture of impunity that had
for so long been a feature of Rwandan life. Justice is
also aimed at the rehabilitation of the offenders,
thereby making reconciliation between them and the
victims possible.

In this regard, our conviction is that the United
Nations should play a vital role in ensuring that
appropriate assistance, in terms of resources and
expertise, is provided for national efforts to achieve
effective reconciliation and justice.

The United Nations also has a clear role to play in
ensuring that the international justice institutions
mandated to handle post-conflict cases are efficient,
cost-effective and morally and ethically based.

We fully agree with the representative of Peru in
emphasizing the role the United Nations should play
with regard to compensating innocent victims as a
matter of socialjustice.

Fourthly, genocide took place in Rwanda
following decades of deficient politics and deficient
governance. We felt that, in order for reconciliation to
take place, there needed to be a sense that measures
were being put in place to ensure that genocide would
not occur again in the country. Governance reform
therefore became a vital component of the
reconciliation process. A new political dispensation,
with transparent, democratic, decentralized and
empowered governance structures was put in place to
ensure that genocide and systematic State-inspired
terror would never happen again. The United Nations
can play an important supportive role here, too, but
again it is critical that national stakeholders take the
lead.

Fifthly, economic recovery and development are
also important for reconciliation. The United Nations
can play a leading role in mobilizing international
financial and technical support to ensure that there is a
peace and reconciliation dividend in terms of economic
growth, jobs and an improved quality of life.

Finally, I would like to underline the importance
of leadership in the process of reconciliation. The
reconciliation process is possible in Rwanda because
we have leadership with vision - leadership that does
not necessarily seek short-term, popular solutions to
complex problems. National reconciliation should be
seen as primarily the responsibility of the particular
country. Ownership of the reconciliation process by
national stakeholders is crucial to the success of the
process. There is clearly an important supportive role
for the United Nations, particularly in creating an
enabling environment for reconciliation and in
mobilizing international support for post-conflict
economic recovery. Although the role of the United
Nations was not equal to the challenge in the case of
Rwanda, it is our hope and expectation that this will
not be the case in other situations of conflict around the
globe.

