The President (spoke in Russian): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of the
Russian Federation.

We are submitting a draft resolution on Idlib
(S/2019/757) as part of the effort to rectify the
humanitarian situation in Syria. Unlike the other draft
resolution (S/2019/756) - I have already spoken about
our reason for vetoing it - our text is characterized
by an exclusively humanitarian approach and does not
contain any politicized or controversial passages. It is
aimed at maintaining the ceasefire that was entered
into on 31 August in order to continue the fight against
terrorism and to guarantee humanitarian access to Idlib.

The representative of the United States, when
speaking in explanation of vote on this draft, said
that the Council could not reach an agreement on the
ceasefire. But we do not need to, because the ceasefire
has been in effect in Idlib since 31 August. It is ironic
that the first party to violate the ceasefire was the
United States Air Force, on the very day the ceasefire
entered into force, on 31 August.

We have also been urged to stop the brutal attacks
in Syria. I think the United States should direct such
appeals to itself. We remember well how the United
States Air Force fought terrorists in Iraq, Mosul and
other areas. We remember how it abided by international
humanitarian law there. Our Russian Aerospace Forces
do not raze whole cities to the ground; they only make
strikes against targets where terrorists are located
if there is reliable and verified intelligence, while
avoiding any attacks that might put the civilians at risk.

I certainly do not believe that any member of the
Security Council can speak against any of the points
in our draft resolution. Today we have an opportunity
to reach an agreement on the humanitarian situation
in Syria. But if there are such objections, then we and
the entire international community would be very
interested in hearing them.

We encourage colleagues to take the following into
account in voting on the Russian draft.

The armed-combat phase in the Syrian conflict has
essentially come to an end. Those who are genuinely
interested in a political settlement have joined in the
process. A lot of work has already been done, and
we must support this concerted effort, including by
the United Nations, instead of using humanitarian
issues to achieve political aims. The only ones who
are prolonging the war, with a view to destroying the
Syrian State and causing suffering to civilians, are the
terrorists. Attempts to shield them or present them as
deradicalized opposition are unacceptable.

In addition, as our draft stipulates, the international
community should take all of the measures necessary
to improve the humanitarian situation in Idlib. We
hope that a constructive approach will be taken by
the members of the Security Council in supporting
our draft.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I now put to the vote the draft resolution contained
in document S/20l9/757, submitted by China and the
Russian Federation.

A vote was taken by a show ofhands.
In favour:
China, Russian Federation
Against:
Belgium, Dominican Republic, France, Germany,
Kuwait, Peru, Poland, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of
America

Abstaining:
Cote d'Ivoire, Equatorial Guinea, Indonesia, South
Africa

The President (spoke in Russian): The draft
resolution received two votes in favour, nine against
and four abstentions. The draft resolution has not been
adopted, having failed to obtain the required number
of votes.

I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.


