Mr. Bartho (Slovakia): We are grateful to Judge
Fausto Pocar, President of the International Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY), and to Judge Erik
Mose, President of the International Criminal Tribunal
for Rwanda (ICTR), as well as to the Prosecutors of
both Tribunals, for their assessment reports concerning
the progress made towards the implementation of the
completion strategies set out in Security Council
resolutions.

Slovakia welcomes the progress made in recent
months and wishes to express its full support for the
Tribunals' undertaking their tasks under the mandates
given by the Security Council. We consider the
completion strategies to be crucial documents for
streamlining the final phase of the functioning of both
Tribunals. In that regard, we appreciate all measures
taken by the Tribunals to meet the time frames and
deadlines for the completion of their work, as
determined in the Security Council's resolutions.

We commend the cooperation of the Tribunals
with respective national authorities, in particular with
the domestic courts of Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Croatia, Serbia and Rwanda. We highly appreciate the
increasing number of referrals by the ICTY of cases
involving intermediate and lower-ranking accused to
national courts, and the intention of the Prosecutor of
the ICTR to request the transfer of some persons and
cases to competent national jurisdictions for trial.
Those measures will enable both Tribunals to
concentrate on the prosecution and trials of the most
senior leaders suspected of being most responsible for
crimes under international law.

Slovakia insists on the strict compliance of trials
at the national level with international standards of fair
trial. We reiterate the appeal to States to cooperate
fully with the Tribunals, in particular in the tracking,
arrest and transfer of remaining fugitives to the
Tribunals. We praise the effective assistance of States
in the area of witness and victim protection and the
enforcement of the sentences imposed by the Tribunals.
The conclusion of respective legal instruments for that
purpose is essential to the full implementation of the
completion strategies.

Noting the serious problems and obstacles that
both Tribunals have to address on a daily basis,
Slovakia welcomes and strongly supports their ongoing
commitment to making every effort within their power,
including exploring new measures, to fully discharge
their mandates to meet the target dates of the
completion strategies.

We believe that the Security Council should
maintain its strong support and close attention to the
implementation of the completion strategies of the
Tribunals. If necessary, it should be ready to take the
appropriate measures required for a successful
completion of the work of both Tribunals.

