The Secretary-General: I would like to thank
you, Mr. President, for having organized this important
debate in the Security Council. It is also good to
welcome you to New York. It is not every day that we
have a Prime Minister presiding over a Security
Council meeting.

In April 2003, when the Council last met to
discuss the role of regional organizations in facing new
challenges to international peace and security, I argued
that we needed to move towards creating a network of
effective and mutually reinforcing mechanisms -
regional and global - that would be both flexible and
responsive to the complex reality we live in today.

On that occasion, many participants suggested
measures to enhance cooperation to help build such a
network. These included proposals to carry out, on a
regular basis, a high-level dialogue between the
Council and regional organizations, to improve the
exchange of information and to promote early
coordination. This meeting is, I believe, evidence that
we are serious about implementing those proposals.

Today, the United Nations is cooperating with
regional organizations in stabilization processes in
many countries. In Liberia and C6te d'Ivoire, the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) played a key role on the ground before
handing over to the United Nations. The United
Nations Office for West Africa and the ECOWAS
secretariat have agreed to improve cooperation in
efforts to promote peace and stability in West Africa
and to develop regional conflict prevention strategies,
as called for by the Security Council.

In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the
European Union (EU)provided critical support through
Operation Artemis. In Burundi, the African Union
(AU) deployed a mission to monitor and help
consolidate the December 2003 ceasefire agreement,
enhance stability and facilitate the overall
implementation of the Arusha Peace and Reconciliation
Agreement. In May of this year, the Council authorized
the United Nations Operation in Burundi and the
immediate "re-batting" of the African Mission in
Burundi.

In Sudan, we have worked with both the African
Union and the Inter-Governmental Authority on
Development to broker a peace agreement and support
the deployment of ceasefire monitors by the AU.

In Haiti, the Security Council has stressed the
importance of cooperation between the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti and the Organization of
American States and the Caribbean Community. The
United Nations is working closely with those regional
organizations, especially on planning for elections in
2005.

In Kosovo, the United Nations, the EU and the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
have continued to work together, cooperating with the
international security force led by NATO.

In Afghanistan, the United Nations mission is
working with the coalition forces, as well as the
International Security Assistance Force, to support the
extension of the Government's authority throughout the
country and to further the Bonn process, including
national elections.

We have seen that, in many instances, regional
organizations can be on the ground much faster than
the United Nations. Indeed, NATO, the EU and the AU
have either established or are developing rapid
response capabilities for peacekeeping operations. The
United Nations welcomes, and indeed contributes to,
those efforts. However, not all regional organizations
can sustain their deployments over a long period, and
the legitimacy that flows from United Nations
operations is often needed for longer-term
sustainability.

Not all of our cooperative efforts with regional
organizations have proceeded without problems. In
Kosovo, for instance, after unexpected violence flared
up earlier this year, we are looking at how we can do a
better job. Clearly, the involvement of many
organizations can be both a source of strength and a
point of weakness in managing complex situations. Full
integration is not always easy, due to different
mandates, organizational cultures and leadership roles.

So while our cooperation is being enhanced, we
have to consider more thoroughly the comparative
strengths of different organizations - whether global,
regional or subregional - and move towards the
creation of strategic partnerships that meet today's and
tomorrow's challenges.

Our cooperation with regional organizations is
established across a wide range of activities, but it has
often been ad hoc. I believe that more institutionalized
channels of cooperation would help ensure greater
efficiency and effectiveness and, perhaps, even
economies of scale.

To that end, my predecessor and I have engaged
the heads of regional organizations in regular
exchanges of views on issues of common concern,
from conflict prevention, to peace-building, to
international terrorism. We are also working with a
wide range of regional organizations on electoral
matters.

The two most recent meetings between the United
Nations and regional organizations established
important frameworks for cooperation. The fourth
meeting, on peace-building, in February 2001, together
with the presidential statement of the Security Council
at that time (S/PRST/2001/5), established a useful
precedent for better interaction and cooperation. At the
fifth meeting, in July 2003, participants agreed on a
framework for cooperation to confront new challenges
to international peace and security, including
international terrorism.

We will soon discuss with our regional
counterparts cooperation mechanisms for monitoring
the effective protection of civilians in armed conflict,
practical measures to build tolerance and to promote a
dialogue among civilizations and lessons learned from
field experiences such as military-civilian cooperation,
policing, institution-building and confidence-building
measures. I will keep the Security Council fully
apprised of the progress achieved.

I am committed to implementing the specific
points contained in the frameworks that have been laid
down. The next high-level meeting is scheduled for mid-
2005 and, of course, the President of the Security
Council will participate, as in the past. That will provide
an important opportunity to see how far we have come
in implementing the decisions taken in previous
meetings. We are also considering making the high-level
meetings more frequent - perhaps even annual - so
that we can focus on practical cooperation on key issues
and can follow up more effectively. I believe that this
would help strengthen the cooperation between the
United Nations and regional organizations - not to
mention between the Secretariat and the Security
Council.

In stabilizing war-torn nations, as in many other
areas of peace and security, the United Nations needs
the vital contribution of regional organizations. I
therefore wish participants a fruitful discussion, and I
hope that the Council will remain engaged in this
crucial subject.

