Mr. Petrella (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): We
wish to express our special gratitude to you,
Mr. President, for convening this open debate on the
situation in Burundi. We believe it is necessary to raise

 

the awareness of the international community regarding the
problems in that country. Our comments reflect a sincere
wish to encourage all the parties to find a peaceful,
negotiated and inclusive solution that gives real protection
to the rights, interests and legitimate aspirations of the
people of Burundi in its entirety. In this context, we wish
to express thanks for, and associate ourselves with, the
comments made by Mr. Ibrahima Fall at the beginning of
the meeting.

The first step towards peace is the immediate cessation
of attacks on the civilian population by the armed groups.
These attacks are a clear violation of international law. At
the same time, we must express our concern at forced
displacements of the rural population carried out by the
Government. Once again, Mr. Fall's words describe a
situation that is particularly delicate, above all in the light
of the interruption of humanitarian and food assistance in
the regroupement camps.

We believe that both the internal partnership between
the Government and the National Assembly and the Arusha
process are structures of negotiation and dialogue that must
be preserved and extended in spite of all the challenges.
Otherwise, the political space would be taken over by the
extremists, and the moderate forces, Hutu and Tutsi alike,
would be marginalized.

A part of the work has already been accomplished.
The Arusha process, under the leadership of Julius Nyerere
until his recent death, had begun to yield its first fruits. We
consider it to be of priority that the States of the region,
with the cooperation of the United Nations, choose a new
mediator - an African personality of prestige and
acceptable to all the parties. In order to be effective, the
Arusha process must be open to those parties that have
shown, or are prepared to show, their commitment to a
peaceful solution to the conflict without unjustified
exclusions or deliberate self-exclusion. In this context, we
value the renewed commitment of the Government of
Burundi to achieve a negotiated and comprehensive
solution.

The humanitarian situation is a subject of utmost
concern to us. The statistics on malnutrition, infant
mortality, access to basic services and health services for a
large part of the population, the difficulties of daily life in
the regroupement camps and the large number of refugees
require no further comment on our part. The international
community cannot remain indifferent and must act
generously.

At the same time, another subject of constant
concern to us is the situation of United Nations and
humanitarian personnel working in Burundi. Their safety,
freedom of movement and status must be guaranteed by
all the parties. In this context, we reiterate our
condemnation of the attacks against United Nations
personnel committed in Rutana on 12 October. We trust
that the investigation ordered by the Government of
Burundi will make it possible to bring those responsible
to justice.

The causes of the conflict in Burundi are complex;
they are not related solely to ethnic tension, and they
transcend the political issue. The economic crisis is also
at the heart of the problem, and cannot be ignored. We
must find the appropriate mechanisms to resume
economic assistance to the people of Burundi and to
maintain their faith in the peace process.

The question of Burundi cannot be separated from
the regional context. Peace and democratic institutions in
Burundi will be strengthened by the consolidation of the
rule of law in all the countries of the Great Lakes region.
We also do not believe that the problems affecting the
region are exclusively political or security-related, or that
they can be resolved in isolation. We therefore agree with
the idea of France to convene an international conference
on the Great Lakes region, when the appropriate
circumstances exist and under the auspices of the
Organization of African Unity and the United Nations. In
this regard, the information to be given to us by
Ambassador Prendergast upon his return from the region
will be extremely useful.

I would like to conclude by paying tribute to one of
the great men of Africa and of contemporary political
history - former President Nyerere of Tanzania, who to
his last breath fought for the cause of freedom, tolerance
and respect for human dignity in Africa and throughout
the world. We trust that his example will enlighten his
successor in the Arusha process, a process which
Mr. Nyerere helped to build with such dedication and
effort.

