Mr. Al-Shamsi (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in Arabic): I thank you, Mr. President, for convening this
important meeting to consider once again ways of
dealing with the serious war of occupation and
genocide, which continues unabated, perpetrated by the
Israeli occupying force in the occupied Palestinian
territories.

Despite the frequent emergency meetings
convened by the Security Council during the past few
weeks and despite the important resolutions adopted,
the wording of which was guided by the British and
United States delegations, and notwithstanding the
appeals and statements of international and regional
bodies, including the recent Madrid statement by the
"quartet", which have unanimously called upon Israel
to cease its military hostilities and to withdraw without
delay from all Palestinian towns, villages and camps
which it had reoccupied, we have regrettably continued
to witness the flagrant Israeli defiance of all those
resolutions, efforts and appeals. Still worse, that
defiance grew even worse when Israeli Prime Minister
Ariel Sharon, his Defence Minister and his generals
ordered the Israeli army to continue the siege of the
Church of the Nativity and of the Palestinian Authority
headquarters and to continue the persecution, detention
or killing of most of the Palestinian people's iconic
leaders and representatives. They also ordered
horrendous massacres against Palestinians, regardless
of sex, age or religion.

The Israeli occupying forces' killings,
premeditated and brutal executions and destruction of
houses, with women and children inside, in the camps
of Jenin and Nablus constitute but one of the many
chapters in the history of the criminal acts perpetrated
by the Zionist war criminal, Ariel Sharon, which began
with the massacres he committed before and after the
1967 war, and continued with the carnage at Sabra and
Shatila in Lebanon in 1982 and the more recent
carnage committed in Palestinian cities and villages
before the eyes of the Security Council and the world
public, in flagrant violation of international
humanitarian law and human rights, in particular the
Fourth Geneva Convention, of 1949, relative to the
Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War.

The United Arab Emirates had placed great hope
on the success of the mission of the United States
Secretary of State, Mr. Colin Powell, to the region to
deter the Sharon Government from committing further
human rights violations, to bring the Israelis back to
the negotiating table and to compel them to implement
resolutions 1402 (2002) and 1403 (2002). We were
distressed at the disappointing failure of the mission,
which was due to Israeli intransigence, to the Israeli
refusal to implement the Council's resolutions or to
withdraw, and to its ignoring of the statements by the
"quartet" and, especially, by President Bush, whose
country is the principal co-sponsor of the Middle East
peace process. We believe that constitutes the most
serious blow ever dealt to efforts to solve the
Palestinian issue and to establish an independent
Palestinian State, without which there can be no
lasting, fair and comprehensive peace in the Middle
East.

We strongly condemn the policy of double
standards employed by some members of the Security
Council, in particular the United States, with respect to
the acts committed by the Israeli Government, which
have constituted a serious and systematic violation of
the national and human rights of the Palestinian people
and of their holy places and their cultural, historical
and economic institutions since the brave Palestinian
uprising began in October 2000. We consider that it is
time for those influential Council members to reread
their resolutions. That would help the Security Council
truly to fulfil its role and would enable the Council to
take measures under Chapter VII of the Charter to
ensure Israel's compliance with international
resolutions, to ensure its immediate and unconditional
withdrawal from all the Palestinian territories that it
has reoccupied, including Ramallah and Bethlehem,
and to remove the harsh and humiliating siege of the
headquarters and institutions of the Palestinian
Authority and of all Palestinian towns and cities. It
should also stop blocking access by relief agencies,
ambulances and international supplies of food and
medicines, which are not reaching thousands of
victims.

We would welcome a Security Council initiative
to establish a multinational force to be dispatched to
the Palestinian territories. It is of great importance that
the United Nations shoulder its responsibility to
establish and dispatch such a force immediately to
protect the Palestinian leadership and the Palestinian
people from the genocide which the Israeli army has
been conducting against them. The United Nations
should also demand the implementation of international
instruments such as the Fourth Geneva Convention, of
1949.

We call on the Security Council to send a fact-
finding mission to investigate the crimes committed by
Israeli forces, especially in Jenin and Nablus. Some of
these brutal crimes have recently been disclosed in
reports and declarations of Mrs. Mary Robinson, the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights,
of Mr. Richard Cook, the Director of Operations for the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East, and of representatives of the
International Committee of the Red Cross, relief
organizations and the world media, despite Israeli
Government efforts to hide the facts by burying
hundreds of corpses of Palestinians killed, maimed and
burned by the Israeli army.

In these extraordinary circumstances, the United
Arab Emirates renews its full support for all forms of
struggle by the Palestinian people, who have suffered
continuously since the Zionist occupation of their
territories in 1948. We call on the international
community, particularly the Security Council and
members of the "quartet", to increase political,
economic and financial support for the Palestinian
people, to secure the withdrawal of the unjust Israeli
occupation and to enable the Palestinian people to
exercise its inalienable rights, foremost of which its
right to self-determination and to the establishment of
an independent State with Jerusalem as its capital.

We renew our call for transparency in positions
on the Palestinian issue that are consistent with
equality and justice among nations and peoples. We
should make a clear distinction between the legitimate
right of the Palestinian people to resist Israeli
occupation and the policy of State terrorism carried out
by the Israeli Government.

