Mr. Kolga (Estonia): At the outset, I would like
to thank the United States presidency for organizing
this open debate on this important subject. I also
thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Zerrougui, Under-Secretary-General Ladsous, Deputy
Executive Director Brandt and Special Envoy Whitaker
for their interesting and thought-provoking statements.

Special thanks goes to Ms. Sandra Uwiringiyimana for
her emotional and heartbreaking story.

Estonia fully aligns itself with the statement
delivered by observer of the European Union.

Estonia welcomes the Secretary-General's report
(S/2014/339) and shares the deep concern on the grave
violations outlined in it. We must take all measures
to prevent violations against children, as well as to
make violators accountable. We call on all States that
have not yet done so to sign the Optional Protocol
to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the
involvement of children in armed conflict, and to join
the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court.
Let me stress some key topics from our perspective.

First, education is one of the key elements for
prevention. It is also crucial in preventing situations
where progress is reversed and the rerecruitment of child
militants may occur. We share the Secretary-General's
concern over the use of schools for military purposes,
as seen - among many other places - in Syria, Gaza
and Boko Haram's attacks in Nigeria, among many
other countries. Moreover, military conflicts create
cross-border situations where neighbours need to find
ways to guarantee education to children in refugee
camps as well.

We are deeply concerned about the fact that
thousands of children remain without basic education.
Therefore, let me stress that schools should be for
children and should never and under no condition be
used for military purposes. In that regard, we welcome
the draft Lucens Guidelines for Protecting Schools and
Universities from Military Use during Armed Conflict.
In that connection, I would like to mention that Estonia
highly appreciates UNICEF's work to provide quality
education to children in humanitarian crises, and has
recently supported UNICEF's work in South Sudan, the
Central African Republic, Gaza, Syria and Somalia.

Secondly, educating and training the peacekeepers
is another important aspect. We believe that the
predeployment training should be a rule rather than
an exception and, in that respect, welcome the child-
protection training launched in April. Let me also
reiterate the crucial role of child protection advisers,
who have to be deployed in peacekeeping operations,
peacebuilding missions and special political missions.

Third is accountability. With regard to the
Secretary-General's report, Estonia would have liked to
see more focus on the accountability dimension, since

we clearly see impunity as one of the main reasons
for the recurrence of these grave violations against
children. It is only by consistent prosecution, either
domestically or internationally, that we can deter the
commission of these crimes by sending out a strong
signal that people who commit such atrocities will be
held accountable for their action.

To achieve this, we reiterate the important role of
the International Criminal Court (ICC) where States
are unable or unwilling to bring perpetrators to justice
domestically, and emphasize the necessity for all States,
the Council and international and regional organizations
to cooperate with the ICC. Furthermore, we also
believe that the international community should assist
in strengthening national judicial capacities to ensure
accountability, including through the development of
legislation that criminalizes violations against children.

My delegation welcomes the positive progress
made with the Children, Not Soldiers campaign, and
the ongoing cooperation with the States mentioned in
the annexes of the report. However, a lot still remains to
be done, and it is important to find more ways to reach
out and to cooperate with non-State armed groups.

In conclusion, let me stress that Estonia highly
values the work of the Security Council, its Working
Group on Children and Armed Conflict, and its open
debates on this issue. We appreciate the work of the
Secretary-General's Special Representative, UNICEF
and all other United Nations structures involved,
as well as the utmost important contribution of civil
society organizations. There is never too much we can
do for children. In short, by protecting children we
protect our future.

