Ms. DiCarlo: Earlier this month, the Syrian
conflict entered its ninth year. There have been eight
long, horrendous years of suffering by the Syrian
people, and it seems far from over.

The Secretary-General has watched with great
concern the deterioration of the situation in Idlib in
recent weeks amid escalating violence. We have seen
reports of exchanges of artillery and mortars and of
air strikes, some reported to have hit civilian targets,
causing civilian casualties and further displacement of
tens of thousands. There are reports of rocket attacks
in cross-line raids by Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham, which
have resulted in casualties among Government soldiers
and civilians.

The United Nations is worried about the strain
this escalation has placed on the memorandum of
understanding between Russia and Turkey, which,
since September 2018, has largely contained the scope
of military operations in the area. We hope that the
recently announced coordinated patrols by Russia and
Turkey will help avoid further escalation in the north-
west, urge them to uphold their agreed arrangements
for Idlib, and press all concerned to halt violence and
stabilize a dangerous situation.

We also call on the guarantors to work together
to address the issue of Security Council-listed
terrorist groups in full compliance with international
humanitarian law, which is essential to avoid mass
displacement and yet another humanitarian catastrophe
from unfolding. Last week, the Syrian Democratic
Forces, backed by the United States-led international
coalition, proclaimed the capture of Baghouz, the last
remaining territory in Syria held by the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), which is an important
advance in combating terrorist groups that have inflicted
untold misery on countless victims. However, much
work remains to be done to fully address ISIL's threat.

Meanwhile, thousands, mostly women and children,
are fleeing counter-ISIL operations in Deir ez-Zor and
have found their way to the Al-Hol camp, in Hasakah
governorate. More than 140 children have died on the
road or shortly after arriving at Al-Hol camp. There is
a desperate need to maintain and ramp up the response
to meet the humanitarian and protection needs of some
72,000 people there, with thousands more expected
to arrive.

In the north-east, the United Nations is strongly
encouraging international diplomatic efforts to
ensure military escalation is avoided at all costs. Any
escalation in the north-east could lead to devastating
consequences for civilians and create conditions
conducive to ISIL's re-emergence. I reiterate the
Secretary-General's reminder to the international
community: counter-terrorism operations cannot
override the responsibilities to protect civilians.

The Council will soon hear from my colleague from
the Office for the Coordination ofHumanitarian Affairs,
but I add my own call for sustained and unimpeded
delivery of humanitarian relief to civilians throughout
Syria, but in particular to Rukban, where the United
Nations last delivered assistance in mid-February. We
have had reports that other commercial routes have
been cut, leaving the settlements' inhabitants in an
even more vulnerable position. The United Nations
is working with all parties to find a durable solution,
including relocation of the settlements' residents to
their areas of origin or of their choosing.

A durable solution can succeed only through a
carefully planned principled approach that ensures
respect for core protection standards. It requires
constructive engagement and coordination by all
parties involved: the Syrian Government, the armed
opposition group present in the settlement, Russia,
the United States and Jordan. Meanwhile, the United
Nations is awaiting approval from the Government for
humanitarian access for a third convoy of life-saving
assistance. I encourage all parties to cooperate with the
sense ofurgency that these humanitarian issues deserve.

Sustained de-escalation towards an eventual
nationwide ceasefire and tangible improvements for
Syrian lives are essential for a credible political process
that can achieve the full implementation of resolution
2254 (2015).

In that regard, Special Envoy Pedersen has been
seeking to advance the five goals outlined to the
Council on 28 February (see S/PV.8475). The goals
are, first, to begin and deepen a sustained dialogue
with the Syrian Government and the opposition on
building trust and confidence towards a safe, calm and
neutral environment; secondly, to see more concrete
action on detainees, abductees and missing persons;
thirdly, to engage and involve a wide range of Syrians
in the political process; fourthly, to convene a credible,
balanced and inclusive constitutional committee as soon
as possible; and, fifthly, to help the international parties
deepen their own dialogue towards the common purpose
of a credible and sustainable political settlement of the
Syrian conflict that can enjoy international legitimacy.

On the first goal, the Special Envoy held a second
meeting with the Government of Syria in Damascus
and a second meeting with the opposition Syrian
Negotiation Commission in Riyadh. Both consultations
have gone into depth on the issues covered in resolution
2254 (2015). No subject has been off limits and both
parties welcome a broad-ranging dialogue. That regular
and deep engagement is necessary to identify concrete
steps to build trust and confidence towards a safe, calm
and neutral environment.

Our second goal - concrete action on the release
of detainees, abductees and the clarification of the fate
of missing persons - was also raised in depth with
the Government and the opposition. On 18 March in
Moscow, the Office of the Special Envoy put forth a
number of concrete suggestions to the Working Group
on the release of detainees/abductees and handover
of the bodies as well as the identification of missing
persons, ofwhich the United Nations is a member, along
with Iran, Russia and Turkey. A key United Nations
request was to move beyond one-for-one exchanges and
focus on the simultaneous release of unequal numbers,
which was met with no objection from other members
of the Working Group. However, details about the next
release operation, including the numbers of those to be
released and the timing and monitoring of the release,
still need to be worked out, in close cooperation with
the Syrian parties. Furthermore, the United Nations has
proposed that the Working Group meet in Geneva in the
near future.

Ultimately, the Secretary-General wants these
discussions to move from good words to good deeds,
see the release of as many detained persons as possible
and clarify the fate of missing persons. Progress on that
file could build confidence that a new Syria is possible,
especially for those who want to return. So many Syrian
families have been affected, and they yearn to see the
issue meaningfully addressed.

On the third goal, engagement continues to
ensure that the priorities and voices of a broad range
of Syrians, within Syria and across the diaspora, are
included in the political process. Most recently, the
United Nations heard the diverse voices of the Syrian
Women's Advisory Board and Syrian civil society
during the third Brussels Conference on Supporting the
Future of Syria. We heard about how the conflict has
impacted their lives, but also about their strength and
resilience in responding to the terrible needs created by
the conflict. Such broad-based engagement with all the
dimensions of Syrian society helps to strengthen Syrian
ownership in shaping its future. Those necessary but
difficult discussions are a microcosm of the meaningful
engagement required from both of the negotiating
parties. The issues affecting Syrians, including
obstacles preventing voluntary, safe and dignified
returns, must be addressed. A political settlement that
meets their needs and legitimate aspirations would help
to advance that.

On the constitutional committee, the fourth goal
aimed at opening the door to a broader political process,
the discussions so far, including with the Government
and the opposition, have led to an agreement in principle
that a viable launch of a constitutional committee would
require a set of understandings to regulate its work.
That would need to include understandings regarding
the committee's mandate, structure, voting and sharing
arrangements; the United Nations facilitation role and
assurances regarding the safety and security of all
constitutional committee participants. Discussions
are also continuing to facilitate the finalization of the
middle third list of committee members. There are no
artificial deadlines, but the Special Envoy hopes now to
be able to move forward as soon as possible to convene
a credible, balanced, inclusive and viable constitutional
committee under United Nations auspices in Geneva.
We must remain committed to seeking a minimum of
30 per cent women's representation on the committee.

The fifth goal is to improve international dialogue
and cooperation on Syria. The situations in Idlib,
Rukban and Al-Hol, the uncertainty over the north-east
and the potential for regional escalation all underscore
the need for such continuous cooperation. We must
avoid misunderstandings and actions that could
escalate matters.

In that regard, Secretary-General has taken note
of the developments regarding the occupied Syrian
Golan. The United Nations position is determined by
the Security Council and General Assembly resolutions
on that issue. The efforts of the United Nations to
facilitate a political process in Syria, in accordance with
resolution 2254 (2015), will continue to fully uphold the
principles of Syria's sovereignty, unity, independence
and territorial integrity.

Finally, we welcome the generosity expressed by
the donors at the Brussels Conference and their record
pledges to support the Syrian people and the wide
expressions of support by all attendees for a political
settlement for Syria under United Nations auspices.
As the Secretary-General reminded us on the grim
anniversary of the conflict, it is a moral obligation and
a political imperative for the international community
to support Syrians in uniting around a vision that
addresses the root causes of the conflict and forges
a negotiated political solution in accordance with the
Council's own resolution 2254 (2015).

