In my capacity as the representative of the Republic of Armenia, which is currently presiding over the summit of la Francophonie, I would like to thank you very much, Mr. President, for taking the initiative to include the topic of cooperation between the United Nations and the Organization of la Francophonie on the Security Council's agenda today. I would also like to thank the briefers who preceded me, the Assistant Secretary-General for Africa and the Secretary-General of the Organization of la Francophonie, for their insightful briefings. Mr. President, it is to the credit of your country, the Niger, and its capital, Niamey, where the Agency for Cultural and Technical Cooperation was established in March 1970, marking the birth of institutional Francophonie, that you have initiated this debate, which is so timely in this year in which we celebrate the fiftieth anniversary of la Francophonie. Fifty years after its creation, la Francophonie is an important platform for multilateral cooperation, united around the French language and the shared fundamental values of peace, democracy, respect for human rights and equality between women and men. The relationship between the United Nations and la Francophonie is nourished by numerous partnerships based on shared values, a common will to work to strengthen international peace and security, and a joint determination to fight against the scourge of terrorism and in favour of the prevention of genocide and crimes against humanity. It is also based on a strong and unwavering commitment to achieving the objectives of sustainable development. The relationship is rich in this fruitful cooperation, which has led to the adoption of a biennial resolution by the General Assembly. Resolution 73/290, the most recent version of the biennial resolution, was adopted by consensus by the General Assembly last year and addresses the commitments made at the seventeenth summit of la Francophonie, as set forth in the Yerevan Declaration and other documents adopted at that time Today's debate is taking place in the specific context of a serious global health, humanitarian and economic crisis caused by the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, which is threatening to undermine the cohesion of our societies everywhere and is making international cooperation - and the affirmation of effective multilateralism - more necessary than ever. Today's debate is also an opportunity to reflect on our vulnerabilities and on the shrinking of civic, democratic and humanitarian spaces, global solidarity and trust in multilateral institutions. It is a kind of call to action; it is a test of our resilience and our collective capacity. At a time when the negative consequences of the COVID-19 crisis are likely to weigh particularly heavily on developing countries and on the most vulnerable in our populations, the United Nations and la Francophonie must strongly affirm their willingness to promote peace, cooperation, solidarity and the values of living together in harmony. This is a challenge that both of our organizations must take up, as we both have an obligation to take action for improved global governance. In that regard, we strongly supported the Secretary-General's call for a global ceasefire and resolution 2532 (2020), which demands a cessation of hostilities during this crisis. There can be no place for the use or threat of use of force in resolving conflicts. We are also concerned by the increase in hate speech, which has particularly marked this period of health crisis. It is now more essential than ever to demonstrate our commitment to the values of tolerance, respect for human rights and cultural diversity. Despite the considerable efforts of the multilateral system, we continue to face armed conflicts, destabilizing military escalations and hate speech at the highest political level, including in our immediate neighbourhood. Today I am fully aware of the relevance of the Yerevan Summit's theme of promoting the values of living together and the importance of the Yerevan Francophone Appeal for Living Together, launched by the Heads of State and Government of la Francophonie. As the Prime Minister of Armenia, Nikol Pashinyan, stated at the Summit of la Francophonie, the values of peace, solidarity and integral humanity that define the ideology of living together in the French-speaking world are acommon good, a wealth that it is important for us to preserve at all costs. That is clearly an important dimension of cooperation between the United Nations and la Francophonie on which our visions and objectives converge. I cannot conclude my remarks without expressing our firm commitment to the promotion of cooperation between the two organizations and its multidimensional nature. I am convinced that today's debate will help to enrich that relationship and will also give full visibility to that fruitful partnership. I have no doubt that, under the joint impetus of the Secretary-General of la Francophonie and the Secretary- General of the United Nations, cooperation will be strengthened in the future and new and equally promising prospects for collaboration will open up.
