Mr. Sarki (Nigeria): We thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this very important open debate and for
the excellent concept note that preceded this meeting
(S/2014/572, annex). We commend your delegation for
the initiative that resulted in the unanimous adoption
of resolution 2171 (2014) this morning. We thank His
Excellency the Secretary-General for his sobering
remarks on conflicts and their consequences all over the
world. We pay tribute to the outgoing United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights, Ms. Navi
Pillay, the highly respected African judge, whom we
are very proud of and indeed fortunate to have had in
that office for the past six years. We salute her courage,
her sense of justice and her dedication and commitment
in protecting human decency. We wish her well in her
future endeavours.

Edmund Burke, your countryman, Mr. President,
in his study on the causes of discontents, recommended
that in order to understand tumult and disorder, we must
study the temper of the times. In our world today, the
temper that is clearly discernible is one of foreboding
and despair. Conflicts and disturbances to general
peace and tranquillity are causing apprehension and
unease everywhere. People are wondering if indeed
the end of time and doomsday are at hand. A no-less
respected authority than the Carnegie Endowment for
International Peace echoed that sentiment in a recent
article entitled "Is the World Falling Apart?", in which
an assessment ofinstability around the world was made.

Conflicts nowadays seem to have a life oftheir own.
They seem to have an automacity about them that gives
them the character of an instantaneous eruption, thereby
giving little room or time for intervention, mediation
and reconciliation to happen. Conflict-prevention has
therefore become a recurring topic in Security Council
deliberations. Regional and subregional organizations
like the African Union (AU), the Economic Community
of West African States and the Southern African
Development Commmunity are constantly engaged in
conflict-prevention and resolution and post-conflict
management activities. The AU Peace and Security
Council and the United Nations Security Council
regularly meet to address conflict situations in Africa.
Other mechanisms, such as the use of the good offices
of eminent persons, and institutional frameworks like
the Intergovernmental Authority for Development
are also deployed to address conflicts in Africa. The
responsibility to protect was initially an African idea
that has now become an integral part of conflict-
prevention and mitigation in the United Nations. The
observance of the rule of law and the opposition to
unconstitutional changes of Governments are also
some of the measures put in place by the African Union
to prevent conflict in our region.

The Secretary-General and the High Commissioner
for Human Rights have enumerated the various natures
of conflicts and their consequences. Various factors,
including fragile constitutional frameworks, the
absence of good governance, competition over limited
natural resources and economic disparities, can come
together and make a State vulnerable to conflict, and
conflicts incur great human suffering and economic
loss. Conflicts impede development and, in some cases,
even reverse it. Professor Michael Chalmers, in his
analysis of the cost of conflict-prevention, determined
that $1 in preventive action saved $10 in the recovery
costs borne by the international community, the nation
concerned and the neighbouring States. That clearly
makes a case for preventive action to forestall conflicts.

Another important dimension in the effort to
prevent conflicts is restricting access to arms by
non-State actors, terrorist groups and criminal gangs,
who generally show no hesitation in engaging in
hostile acts against States and communities, or in rival
groups. The proliferation of illicit small arms and light
weapons is making that a very difficult task. We call
on the Council to pay heed to the adoption of the Arms
Trade Treaty and the Programme of Action to Prevent,
Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms
and Light Weapons and to ensure that the provisions of
those treaties are scrupulously observed by all actors.

Horizon scanning and early warning are tools that
are available to the Council for conflict prevention.
They allow the Council to take a long-term view
of situations in order to facilitate detection and
assessment of issues that may emerge in the future with
the potential of causing conflict or crisis. The tools
provided in Article 1 of Chapter I and in Chapter VI
of the Charter of the United Nations on the Council's
disposal for the provision of conflict do not function
in isolation, and the means of their application is
obviously highly context specific. The strategies are by
nature anticipatory, relying upon early warning to be
effective. Efforts must therefore be made to establish
trust with key local, national and regional actors well
before a crisis reaches the tipping point.
Various parts of the United Nations system have
a role to play in conflict prevention. It is essential
that those offices function in a coherent manner and
do not provide varying analyses of a potential conflict
situation. The Council committed itself to a preventive
approach to conflict management in resolution 1626
(2005). The Council has the potential to be a pivot
in the process of generating political will, securing
pre-position funding, building capacities on the ground
and promoting the use of the full range of preventive
diplomacy tools. We should also not forget the important
role that the Office of the Secretary-General could play
in the prevention of conflicts and in mitigating their
impact.

That is why we believe that the time has now
come for the United Nations to use its resources, all
of it, to act in anticipation towards the maintenance of
international peace and security.

