Ms. van der Merwe (South Africa): We thank the
United Kingdom for organizing this open briefing on
security sector reform (SSR) and welcome the report of
the Secretary-General entitled "Securing peace and
development: the role of the United Nations in
supporting security sector reform" (S/2008/39). My
delegation wishes to welcome the efforts of the
Secretary-General in promoting security sector reform
and expresses appreciation for his recommendations on
the way forward. May I also join others in welcoming
the participation of the Secretary-General and, of
course, the presence of Minister Kubis and of the Chair
of the Peacebuilding Commission.

As the Council is aware, Africa has been involved
in practicing security sector reform in a number of
countries. Our experiences point to the fact that this is
not an event, but a process that requires continuous
attention and political will. It is a process that is
politically sensitive and that must be nationally owned.
Thus, security sector reform cannot be imposed on any
country or on any institution. National ownership
ensures that the process is rooted in the needs and
conditions of the country, because each country faces
its own unique challenges.

Yet, national ownership, as one of the non-
negotiable principles of SSR, is definitely not
antithetical to external support. So whatever approach
is adopted must be in context and must be country-
specific. That is important because our continent has
long suffered from many attempts to impose one-size-
fits all solutions to security sector reform that have
produced more problems than solutions. Until now,
there has been a limited understanding of security
sector reform that goes beyond traditional military
elements and is not State-centric, but rather involves a
much wider range of national actors and institutions.
That, however, does not negate the fact that Member
States are the primary providers of security as both a
sovereign right and a responsibility.
08-33544
Last year, we were very pleased and honoured to
join with the Slovak delegation in hosting a seminar in
Cape Town attended by many countries. At that
seminar, it was made quite clear that security sector
reform must of necessity meet the new concept of
security that transcends the reductionist perspective
that has historically and one-dimensionally equated
security with the military aspect and excluded the
political, cultural and socio-economic dimensions. In
other words, security sector reform is an important
pillar for both security and sustainable development.

The new concept of security sector reform
implies an all-inclusive process that must address the
needs of the people, including the needs of
marginalized groups in society, in particular women.
The inclusion of their perspectives and concerns in the
design and delivery of security is critical. In that way,
the people are responsible for making sure that the
security sector is a guarantor of security and freedom
rather than a threat to it.

However, those experiences from Africa should
not be construed to imply that the need for security
sector reform is specific to Africa. Indeed, other
countries outside the continent have also embarked on
the reform of their respective security sectors.
However, Africa has some unique challenges that
include the general low level of economic
development, the fragility and weakness of several
African States and the complexities arising from
simultaneous interventions of external actors.

South Africa recognizes the importance of close
partnerships with the United Nations and non-United
Nations actors, in particular regional, subregional and
other intergovernmental organizations, including
international financial institutions and non-
governmental organizations. Security sector reform is a
long-term process that requires resources, energies and
political will.

The case of Sierra Leone highlights the
importance of clear political commitment and leadership
to security sector reform from within the country and
the crucial long-term support and benefits of a wide-
consultative process, while the case of Guinea-Bissau
highlights the challenges associated with implementing
security sector reform with severe resource constraints.
Therefore, effective support that will lead to successful
reform of the sector requires capacity, knowledge and
08-33544
sensitivity and no tension between external support and
national ownership in the process.

In fact, there is political will on the part of the
partners, but the lack of coordination has undermined
the effects of that political will on the ground. In the
current atmosphere of a lack of coherent and
coordinated approach, international partners are
virtually free to determine the elements and directions
of their individualized interventions and support to
security sector reform. The experience of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo highlights the
complexities of the problems that flow from
uncoordinated external support to security sector
reform.

That is precisely because there is no code of
ethics or conduct and policy guidelines that are
universally acceptable to international partners and
agreeable to States undertaking security sector reform.
It was that observation of the negative consequences of
an uncoordinated approach and a lack of guiding
principles that informed our partnership with Slovakia
to advocate for an enhanced United Nations role in
security sector reform.

The legitimacy and global character of the United
Nations give it a particular responsibility to facilitate a
coordinated approach. We appreciate that the United
Nations has been doing some work on security sector
reform, but most of its activities in that regard have
been ad hoc and without a framework to provide
guidance. Fundamental to the assistance and expertise
that the United Nations provides are the cooperation
and consent of the State involved. We hope that the
discussion here today will move us a step closer to a
more coordinated approach to security sector reform.

