Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): The Russian Federation will vote in favour
of the draft resolution (S/2018/989) extending the
mandate of the European Union-led Operation Althea
for peacebuilding in Bosnia and Herzegovina. That is
because the sponsors took into account our principled
considerations, if only at the very last moment.

We are exceedingly disappointed with the working
methods that the penholders for the draft resolution
chose this year. Instead of taking the logical course of
adopting a technical resolution extending Operation
Althea's mandate, which in itself raises no doubts,
the sponsors took the dangerous path of introducing a
highly politicized document. And yet our reaction was
easy to predict ahead of time. After all, we already had
one sad experience in 2014, when the Russian delegation
abstained in the voting and for exactly the same
reasons that this time very nearly produced negative
consequences for Althea in its current form. At the time,
four years ago, we made it clear to colleagues that it had
better not happen again (see S/PV.7307). It seemed as if
it had worked and over the course of the next few years
we had a more or less satisfactory document. And yet this
year, for some reason, the sponsors decided to introduce
complications into the draft text by imposing their own
foreign-policy approaches and thereby manufacturing
a crisis. Happily, common sense prevailed. We have to
note that in recent years we have seen a trend among
some of our Western partners during the process of
arriving at agreements on United Nations decisions
in which the culture of negotiation has been seriously
devalued. That should be rectified immediately.

We want to stress that no Security Council
document should predetermine the domestic or foreign-
policy priorities of any State Member of the United
Nations, and Bosnia and Herzegovina is no exception.
In the Council's relevant resolutions and decisions, we
need to do everything possible to avoid wording that
might be interpreted as supporting the non-consensus-
based Euro-Atlantic aspirations ofa number of Bosnian
forces. If the Security Council approved such provisions,
they could undermine the already fragile situation in
the country and put pressure on certain ethnic groups.

