Ms. Mogashoa (South Africa): I thank you, Mr. President, for convening this very important meeting to enable Council members to interact, for the first time, on the activities of the United Nations Integrated Office in Haiti (BINUH) since its establishment in October 2019.The delegation of South Africa aligns itself with the statement delivered earlier by the representative of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. My delegation wishes to express its appreciation for the informative and detailed briefings of Ms. Yolene Gilles, Executive Director of the Fondasyon Je Klere, and Ms. La Lime, Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Haiti and Head of BINUH. We also wish to thank Ms. La Lime for her tireless work and efforts in the region. Finally, we welcome the delegation of Haiti to the Chamber. Given recent developments in Haiti, I wish to focus my statement on the political situation there, the humanitarian conditions and the work of BINUH since its establishment. On the political situation, we welcome the efforts of the various parties in Haiti, including consultations with civil society, to come up with solutions to the political impasse and to address the unrest across some parts of Haiti. The efforts to appoint a new Prime Minister and the plans to hold parliamentary elections before the end of 2020 and presidential elections in 2021 signal political will to resolve the crisis. Furthermore, we hope that ongoing efforts to increase the participation and role of women in decision-making processes will soon bear fruit, resulting in a more inclusive Government for Haiti. We welcome the support of regional bodies and configurations such as the Caribbean Community, the Organization of American States and the Haitian Conference of Catholic Bishops, as well as the role of the Holy See and the European Union, and the ongoing role of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General and the United Nations Development Programme in facilitating dialogue alongside all Haitian stakeholders. Despite some progress in overcoming the political stalemate, serious challenges remain. The inability to appoint a Parliament is having a negative impact on the situation on the ground. We also take note with concern of the Secretary-General's assessment that polarizing messages broadcast nationally over radio by both opposition and Government supporters, including incitement to violence, had most likely exacerbated political tensions. In that regard, we urge parties to refrain from actions and rhetoric of a divisive nature that will prolong and further deteriorate any prospect for constructive dialogue and negotiation. South Africa is concerned about the rising levels of violence, including kidnapping and sexual and gender- based violence against women and children. In addition, the impact of the crisis on the justice system and its institutions continue to hamper much-needed judicial and legal reforms, thereby impacting the monitoring of human rights and the maintenance of international law and human rights standards. We welcome the efforts of the Haitian National Police and the support of BINUH in combating that violence. In particular, we commend the efforts of the Haitian National Police to develop a database of sexual assault complaints in order to accelerate case processing. That is an affirmation that the situation is urgent. Regarding the humanitarian situation, my delegation remains concerned about the negative impact that the political crisis is having on the economy. Although there have been efforts to address food insecurity, they remain insufficient, especially as the situation on the ground continues to worsen. In particular, the limited access to essential services such as clean drinking water, basic health care and medical services, education and training for children and young adults negatively impacts the population and undermines their right to a decent life. The crises in Haiti are inextricably interlinked. We therefore urge all parties to continue to engage to agree on a new constitution that reflects the aspirations of all Haitians and will contribute to reforms to address the humanitarian situation. Let me conclude by highlighting my third and final point on the significant contribution of BINUH. We commend the efforts of BINUH in implementing its mandate, particularly in terms of combating community violence as well as sexual and gender-based violence. We urge the United Nations and all Haitian stakeholders to support BINUH, especially in its advisory capacity in working with local authorities. South Africa will continue to support the presence of BINUH in Haiti as a contribution to the country's stabilization efforts to overcome the current challenges through an inclusive national dialogue in support of national consensus on the country's priorities. The critical role played by the entire United Nations system in addressing the challenges faced by Haiti, including building the capacity of its various institutions, is essential to Haiti's stability and democratization in the long term.
