Mr. Vilovic' (Croatia): Mr. President, I wish to
thank you and your country for this valuable initiative,
which for the first time has presented this body with
the opportunity to focus specifically on the complex
issue of drug trafficking and its devastating
consequences, including threats to national,
subregional and regional stability and its impact on
international security. We are happy to see you, Sir,
chairing this open debate. I also wish to thank the
Secretary-General for his thoughtful remarks and
persuasive comments on this important subject, and
Mr. Antonio Maria Costa, Executive Director of the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC),
for his extremely interesting and thought-provoking
remarks and briefing.

My country has aligned itself with the statement
to be delivered by the representative of Sweden on
behalf of the European Union.

The fact that the Council has, in more than 200
debates the past twenty years or so, touched on this

issue - though mainly in connection with various
country-specific situations and in the context of other,
more imminent threats - surely testifies to its wide

prevalence and seriousness. With that in mind, and
equally mindful of the extremely worrisome
developments that this Council was recently informed
about, particularly in West Africa, we wholeheartedly
welcome this timely and comprehensive debate.

As demonstrated by numerous examples, drug
production, trafficking, distribution and use is certainly
not a stand-alone phenomenon but rather is part of a set
of activities closely linked to a whole range of other
illegal practices, such as trafficking in persons, arms
smuggling and money laundering, that are carried out
almost with impunity in countries with a fragile
political and social environment. That explosive
cocktail represents a serious danger not only for the
affected States that have recently emerged from
conflict and are still pursuing delicate internal
balances, but also for neighbouring countries, which
can and often do become entangled in those activities.

At the same time, and in order to further expand
their businesses, drug cartels often use resources from
illegal drug trafficking to corrupt personnel from largely
undeveloped and seriously underpaying State
institutions. Those resources are also often used to
finance conflict-related activities, including terrorism -
as we have witnessed in a number of countries.

The most evident link between security threats
and drug cultivation and trafficking is undoubtedly in
Afghanistan, where, as many will agree, drugs and
drug trafficking are used to support and fuel the
insurgency. However, there are many other places, such
as Haiti or West African States, where drug trafficking
and cultivation not only have affected, or are affecting,
national stability but also pose significant potential
threats to regional and international security as well.
Croatia expresses its deep concern with regard to
recent reports about the increasing amount of drugs
coming into West Africa and being consumed locally,
not only because of the additional strain posed by the
increased number of drug addicts to generally weak
societies, but primarily because of the destruction and
havoc it causes among young people - the main
treasure of developing countries - who are already
suffering from poverty and unemployment.

It is self-evident that illegal drug and other
criminal organizations are successfully infiltrating and
contaminating many vital segments of those struggling
societies, including - as this Council has already
heard - even the army.

Furthermore, Croatia shares the shock and
surprise expressed by the UNODC Executive Director
during his recent briefing of the Council at the
revelation that West Africa is slowly being transformed
from an important drug transit point to a source of the
drug trade, as corroborated by large amounts of
chemicals used in drug processing recently discovered
in some West African locations. We urge the Council
not to ignore the warning signs. For our part, we would
strongly support immediate, coordinated action aimed
at combating this scourge.

One thing is absolutely clear. Only strong
national action, bolstered by transregional and
international cooperation, has the potential to
effectively counter this phenomenon. Common and
shared responsibility, as we have heard many times
today, and an integrated, multidisciplinary and
balanced approach in full conformity with the
principles of the United Nations Charter and
international law, should represent the basis for our
resolute action. Croatia calls on all States to accede
without delay to all relevant international instruments
in this field, especially the three United Nations
international drug control conventions and the
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime,
and faithfully implement their provisions.

Croatia fully supports the important endeavours
undertaken by main United Nations bodies, especially
the General Assembly and the Economic and Social
Council, in the fight against the illicit drug trade, as
well as the activities of relevant United Nations
agencies or bodies and other entities, in particular, the
United Nations Commission on Narcotic Drugs,
UNODC, and the International Narcotics Control
Board. Similarly, we sincerely hope that this debate
will help to clarify and further shape relations and
coordination among United Nations actors and
determine how this Council can add its weight and
value to this issue.

We share the view that in order to effectively
fight illicit drug trafficking and related criminal
activities, it is necessary to provide assistance to
affected Governments in certain key areas, including
the development of alternative livelihoods and markets,
enhancing national institutional capacities, enforcing
prohibition of the illicit cultivation, manufacture and
trafficking of drugs, and building up the effective use
of intelligence.

Croatia encourages cooperation among affected
countries, specifically in strengthening border controls
and assisting in the flow and coordination of
information between and among appropriate security
and law enforcement agencies in order to maximize the
effectiveness of all measures taken inside those
countries. Conversely, we are also of the View that
more efforts should be undertaken by Governments of
illicit drug destination countries to reduce the demand
for such drugs.

09-6381]
The efficient implementation of a comprehensive
approach calls for integrated action within the wider
context of efforts in the areas of security, governance,
the rule of law, human rights and economic and social
reconstruction and development. We strongly support
security sector reform processes in affected States, as
well as the emerging practice of including drug
trafficking as an important part of country-specific
analysis, mission assessments, operations planning and
mandate renewals. We particularly welcome the
growing prominence of drug-related issues in the
mandates of newly established integrated offices.

We would like to emphasize the important role
that subregional, regional and international
organizations, in particular the Economic Community
of West African States and INTERPOL, and civil
society are playing in the common fight against the
illegal drug trade and related organized criminal
activities. We encourage their further mutual
cooperation, and cooperation with all of those who are
involved in this complex exercise.

Finally, we welcome and support the presidential
statement adopted today and thank the delegation of
Burkina Faso for its leadership and all delegations for
the work they invested.

