Mr. Garcia Moritan (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I am grateful for the convening of this
meeting to address the tragic situation in Venezuela,
which is of particular interest to my country, the Latin
American and Caribbean region and the rest of the
international community. I would also like to thank
Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs and
Peacebuilding Rosemary DiCarlo.

Argentina believes that the serious political,
economic and humanitarian crisis in Venezuela requires
urgent and concerted international action and that the
Council has an important role to play, in accordance
with the Charter of the United Nations, in order to
prevent the further deterioration of the situation and
an increase in the terrible suffering of the Venezuelan
population. The crisis in Venezuela has deteriorated
at an alarming rate, as evidence by the recent events
beginning on 23 February on the border with Colombia.

Maduro's dictatorial regime used force to block the
multilateral, peaceful humanitarian initiative to deliver
food and medicine to alleviate the desperate situation in
which millions of Venezuelans find themselves. It did
so by stifling with unacceptable violence the innocent
and unarmed civilian population that was trying to
help the entry and distribution of such assistance. That
deliberate action taken by the Maduro regime, which
violated human rights and international law, left at least
four dead and hundreds injured.

Argentina strongly condemns the fact that the
Maduro regime has prevented the entry of humanitarian
aid into Venezuela and firmly repudiates once again the
repressive and violent actions of the regime against the
Venezuelan people. In view of the recent serious and
deplorable events of 23 February, on the understanding
that indiscriminate violence against civilian populations
and the denial of access to humanitarian aid constitute
crimes against humanity, the Lima Group, of which
Argentina is a member, decided on 25 February to
ask the International Criminal Court to open an
investigation into those events, within the framework
of the proceedings brought by Argentina and other
countries before the Court in September 2018.

For all these reasons, Argentina and the other
countries of the Lima Group have come to the unanimous
and resounding conclusion that the continuity of
Maduro and his illegitimate regime in power represents
an unprecedented threat to the security and peace of the
whole region.

That grave situation has created a regional
and global migration and refugee crisis. More
than 3 million Venezuelans have had to seek
refuge in other countries, particularly in Latin
America and the Caribbean. Argentina has received
more than 130,000 Venezuelan migrants and refugees,
while continuing to provide humanitarian assistance to
the Venezuelan people through various missions carried
out by the White Helmets Commission of Argentina.

The United Nations cannot remain indifferent to
the crisis in Venezuela, given its gravity, depth and
manifold impacts. We recall that the Lima Group, as
early as October 2017, asked the Secretary-General
to contribute to resolving that serious crisis and the
ongoing human rights violations in Venezuela. We
reiterate that call on this occasion.

It should also be recalled that, in September 2018,
the Human Rights Council adopted resolution 39/1
on the promotion and protection of human rights in
Venezuela, sponsored by Argentina and other countries,
which expresses deep concern about human rights
violations in that country and urges the Government
of Venezuela to accept humanitarian aid to alleviate
the shortage of food and medicine. In that regard, the
Lima Group also decided to promote the appointment
of an independent expert or commission of inquiry on
the situation in Venezuela, in addition to reiterating
its call on the High Commissioner for Human Rights
to take the actions she deems appropriate in fulfilling
her mandate.

Argentina renews its support for the interim
President of Venezuela, Juan Guaido, and reiterates
its support for the efforts he is making, together with
the National Assembly, to allow the entry of food
and medicine in order to alleviate the suffering that
the policies of the illegitimate Maduro regime have
imposed on the entire Venezuelan population, and to
achieve the restoration of democracy.

Argentina believes that the United Nations system,
in addition to providing support for the opening of a
humanitarian channel, should contribute to facilitating
a peaceful transition to democracy in Venezuela,
without the use of force, led by Venezuelans themselves
through free, democratic, transparent and fully
guaranteed presidential elections as soon as possible.
For my country, that is the only way to solve the
serious crisis that has gripped Venezuela for too long.
A true and lasting peace cannot be achieved through
oppression and at the expense of democracy and civil
and political liberties. Therefore, we make call for the
urgent restoration of the rule of law and full respect for
human rights in Venezuela.

