Miss Durrant (Jamaica): My delegation thanks
Assistant Secretary-General Hedi Annabi for
introducing the comprehensive report of the Secretary-
General and for updating the Council on recent
developments in regard to political and economic
issues, the status of refugees, and security.

My delegation welcomes the presence at our
meeting of Mr. Gusmao, President of the National
Council of Timorese Resistance, and Mr. Ramos-Horta,
member of the transitional Cabinet of East Timor
responsible for foreign affairs. Their contribution to the
long struggle of the East Timorese people for
independence is a matter of historical record. We salute
them today, and through them all the people of East
Timor as they seek to chart their own destiny.

The United Nations Transitional Administration
in East Timor (UNTAET) has developed an impressive
record in establishing an effective administration,
assisting in the development of civil and social services
and supporting capacity-building for self-government.
In its efforts to assist with constitutional development
and the rule of law, UNTAET has thus made a
considerable contribution towards the establishment of
an independent East Timor.

However, the primary challenges facing East
Timor remain, first, preparing for elections and
independence, and secondly, determining a
constructive and supportive post-independence role for
the United Nations.

We welcome the promulgation on 16 March of
the regulation on the election of the Constituent
Assembly. The national civic education framework that
has been developed provides for the flow of
information to the public about the constitutional
process. However, we would encourage the early
establishment of the district constitutional mechanism
to allow the people of East Timor to provide their own
inputs and feedback on the drafting of their
constitution. We are aware of the importance this will
have for building the confidence of the Timorese
people in their future legislation.

We also welcome the UNTAET policy of
encouraging gender balance in the new Timorese
administration. The regulation on elections encourages
equal participation of women in the electoral and
constitutional processes. We hope that the training of
women in political participation, decision-making and
the basic knowledge of running for office will result in
a substantial number of women participating in the
elections and being elected to the Constituent
Assembly.

The return and registration of refugees in West
Timor still demand our attention, as we draw closer to
the elections. According to the Secretary-General's
report, the registration process scheduled for
completion by 20 June is off to a slow start, and we are
still plagued with difficulties associated with the
registration of refugees. The report advised that the
number of refugees returning to East Timor has
declined from nearly 3,000 in March to fewer than 400
in April. It would be useful to hear from Mr. Annabi
whether the reasons for the dramatic decline in returns
have been identified.

My delegation believes that the prosecution of
those responsible for war crimes and heinous acts is
essential to the maintenance of and respect for law and
order and can have a positive impact on reconciliation.
Mr. Ramos-Horta has spoken feelingly about the
reaction to the verdicts handed down in connection
with the Vicious murders of United Nations relief
workers in West Timor last year. My delegation said
than, and we say again, that justice must not only be
done, but must be seen to be done. The fact that the
prosecutor has appealed the sentences must, therefore,
be viewed as a positive development.

These decisions have a direct bearing not only on
the situation within East Timor, but also on future
good-neighbourly relations between East Timor and
Indonesia. We know that both parties aspire to this. We
would also appeal to the Indonesian authorities to find
a way of dealing with crimes committed before the
August 1999 referendum.

We note that the Office of the United Nations
Security Coordinator has decided to lead a security
assessment mission to West Timor this month. Mr.
Gusmao has drawn a distinction between the internal
situation in East Timor, which is under control, and the
situation on the border, where the militia groups reign,
as he said, with impunity. We encourage the
Government of Indonesia to implement all the
measures called for in resolution 1319 (2000) in order
to create a more secure environment for the return of
United Nations staff to West Timor and in order to
facilitate the reclassification of West Timor's security
status. In this regard, we would support the
maintenance of the military component of UNTAET at
its present levels.

Even after independence, the assistance of the
international community will remain critical for East
Timor. We must help the East Timorese to achieve their
post-independence aspirations, including economic
progress and the consolidation of democracy. It is
imperative that the international community continue
to provide technical and financial assistance and to
assist the people of East Timor in creating an enabling
environment for sustained economic growth and
sustainable development.

The international civilian police will need to
continue to provide law enforcement functions and
training for the East Timorese officers. The
development of basic infrastructure and social services
will also need considerable support, as will the
establishment of a credible and effective judicial
system.

The success of the United Nations in East Timor
will be judged not only on what was achieved prior to
independence, but also on the capacity of the East
Timorese to deal with their post-independence
challenges. In this regard, we support the establishment
of an integrated mission task force, as we believe this
will provide the basis for determining the assistance
which the United Nations can provide.

In conclusion, my delegation wishes to express its
support for and solidarity with the people of East
Timor. We look forward to welcoming them very soon
into the family of nations when they achieve their
independence.

