Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): We thank Mr. Kafando,
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Burundi,
and Ambassador Lauber, in his capacity as Chair
of the Burundi configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission, for their insightful briefings. We express
our deep appreciation for the tireless work of the
Special Envoy in leading a series of important meetings
with Government officials, high-level representatives
of international and regional organizations and other
stakeholders to seek ways to advance the negotiation
process in close cooperation with the facilitator.
Despite progress made in inter-Burundian dialogue,
we remain concerned that direct and constructive talks
between the Government and the opposition have yet
to be established. In that regard, we urge all sides to
engage in dialogue to end the crisis according to the
spirit and letter of the Arusha Peace and Reconciliation
Agreement for Burundi. We also call on the leadership
of the subregion and guarantors of the Arusha
Agreement to redouble their efforts with regard to
the revitalization of the East African Community-led
mediation. We commend the East African Community
mediator, President Museveni, and the facilitator,
former President Mkapa, for their steadfast commitment
to uniting the region and finding a peaceful solution
to the crisis. Although constitutional amendments are
the sovereign right of Burundi, we strongly believe that
that national process should be held in an environment
of confidence and broad consensus and include all key
political stakeholders to ensure lasting peace.

The worsening social and economic situation
in Burundi warrants the immediate attention of the
international community and development partners to
provide food security, health care, education and energy.
There have been noteworthy results in containing the
spread of malaria, with the support of UNICEF, and
in training community health workers. That positive
dynamic should continue.

The low level of humanitarian aid is still very
worrying. With more than 3 million people in need of
assistance across the country, it will be important to
ensure that the international community supports the
humanitarian response plan for Burundi for 2018. The
United Nations Refugee Agency appeal for funding to
support Burundian refugees in 2018 continues to be
the lowest-funded refugee response plan in the world.
We commend Burundi's neighbours for hosting large
numbers ofits refugees, and would like to remind States
that their repatriation must be voluntary and conducted
in accordance with the principles of respect and dignity
outlined in the 1951 Convention Relating to the Status
of Refugees.

Sustainable security and stability in Burundi should
be the main considerations, and international support to
that process is vital. We commend the active engagement
of the team from the Office of the Special Envoy in
assisting the facilitator of the fourth dialogue session,
encouraging the participants to engage in an inclusive
dialogue. The expedited finalization of the status-of-
mission agreement will promote the commitment of the
United Nations and enhance cooperation with Burundi.
In conclusion, we reiterate the importance of a
regional approach in addressing the underlying causes
of Burundi's issues, linking security and development,
and we also call for a more coordinated conduct of
operations on the ground by the United Nations in
this part of Africa. Full implementation of the Arusha
Agreement is vital to preventing a further escalation of
violence and maintaining peace and security in Burundi.

