Mr. De Aguiar Patriota (Brazil): Let me start by
thanking you, Sir, for inviting me today and giving me
the opportunity to address the Council in my capacity
as Chair of the Guinea-Bissau configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC), in the presence of
Mr. Miguel Trovoada, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau
(UNIOGBIS), whose timely briefing is welcome and
useful to the future deliberations and decisions of this
Council.

The current political impasse in Guinea-Bissau is
riddled with institutional challenges that continue to
affect the lives of Bissau-Guineans while preventing
them from reaping the fruits of progress and a better
life. Since the last time I briefed the Council, on
28 August 2015 (see S/PV.7514, p. 3), the Peacebuilding
Commission has remained actively engaged with the
relevant stakeholders. We have issued three statements
expressing support for finding a lasting solution to the
crisis while signalling the responsibility of the political
actors to swiftly step up their efforts to enable the
country to move forward with its peacebuilding agenda.

I have personally engaged with a large number
of key stakeholders, including the Department of
Political Affairs in the United Nations Secretariat, as
well as the leadership of UNIOGBIS and countries
in the region. In that regard, I would like to take this
opportunity to pay tribute to Mr. Trovoada's ongoing
efforts to exercise his good offices and to welcome the
recent visit by Mr. Olusegun Obasanjo, Special Envoy
of the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), and representatives of the Community
of Portuguese-speaking Countries. We greatly value
their cooperation with the PBC in working to link
the peacebuilding agenda for Guinea-Bissau to the
country's long-term priorities.

With regard to the situation unfolding before us, the
PBC believes that the political class's failure to reach
the consensus on decisive issues that could put Guinea-
Bissau back on the path to stability has generated an
unfortunate and prolonged period of uncertainty. It is
equally disappointing and regrettable considering that
the lack of conditions for stability in the country has
forced international partners to delay the disbursement
of the considerable financial resources pledged last
March in Brussels at a donor conference for funding the
national peacebuilding programme. It is disheartening
that the momentum gained last year in the wake of
the donor conference is losing steam, and the fact that
disbursement has taken so long may only worsen the
current situation in Guinea-Bissau.

However, amid the political turbulence, we continue
to see reassuring signs, such as the fact that the divisions
among politicians have not translated into violence in
the streets or regions of the country. We would also
like to highlight the stance of the armed forces and the
independence of the justice system, both of which have
been respecting and upholding the constitutional order,
as well as the role of the ECOWAS Mission in Guinea-
Bissau (ECOMIB) in defusing potential flare-ups of
Violence during the tense times the country has been
dealing with. In that regard, the PBC believes it is crucial
that the Security Council endorse the continuation of
the ECOWAS Mission beyond its mandate's expiration
in June. I urge Council members and other countries
to provide the political and financial support necessary
for ECOMIB'S extension. Our support for the people of
Guinea-Bissau should emphasize these signs, as well
as empowering civil society actors, especially women
and young people, who are among those continuing to
demand that their elected representatives be sensitive to
their grievances and show civic responsibility.

The PBC is committed to working with the
Council to support and strengthen the role of the
United Nations and of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and Head of UNIOGBIS, along
with the mission's continued presence in Guinea-
Bissau. Today more than ever, it is crucial to ensure
a solid and effective United Nations presence in
Guinea-Bissau that coordinates and promotes the
international community's efforts to assist the country
and its authorities and people. We also encourage the
efforts of regional actors such as the African Union
and ECOWAS, which have been coherently articulating
the urgent need to overcome the current impasse. Our
joint efforts should continue to aim at preventing the
political crisis from undermining the progress achieved
so far.

Because the solutions to Guinea-Bissau's endemic
problems must be initiated and carried out by the
Bissau-Guineans themselves, the importance of
national leadership and ownership as catalysts for
political change cannot be overemphasized. Political
will and constructive and consensual dialogue, coupled
with courageous leadership, such as we know Bissau-
Guineans are capable of, are needed more than ever,
and should be transformed into a powerful force that
can outweigh the actions of spoilers.
The seeds of economic and social growth have been
sown in Guinea-Bissau by the Bissau-Guineans through
their adoption of a long-term vision for peacebuilding
and institutional reform. Their motivation is clear - to
leave behind the dark days of Widespread poverty and
political instability. The popular cry in favour of a
sovereign choice to return to democracy must not be
ignored or silenced. It should be upheld, and we are
therefore called on to act with determination. The
international community has the important task of
helping to make that vision become a reality. To achieve
it, we must be coherent and consistent in our messages
and deeds. It is therefore incumbent on the international
partners to work together and remain engaged long
after the end of the current crisis.

The difficulties in improving governance in
Guinea-Bissau should not prevent the country from
moving forward on key development opportunities.
The PBC believes it is important to deliver consistent
messages to the national authorities and stakeholders
in which the emphasis is on confidence-building and
on realizing the magnitude of the opportunity to move
forward with reforms. The PBC would encourage
the holding of a meeting of the International Contact
Group on Guinea-Bissau as an opportunity to deepen
the dialogue and cooperation between the international
community and the Government of Guinea-Bissau.

I would like to conclude by saying that the PBC
considers it extremely important to develop and nurture
its cooperation and relationship with the Council.
We value the complementarity that the PBC and the
Security Council can bring to addressing politically
charged situations. In the specific context of Guinea-
Bissau, we see an opportunity to apply joint positive
leverage to find a solution to the current impasse and
work towards an outcome that will benefit a country in
dire need.

