Mr. Rioux (spoke in French): I am deeply honoured
to address the Security Council. I thank Ibrahim Thiaw
for having invited me to speak to the Council on
behalf of the Sahel Alliance. The Coordination Unit of
the Sahel Alliance is currently hosted by the Agence
Francaise de Developpement, which I am head.

The Sahel Alliance was jointly launched on 13 July
2017 in Paris by the German Chancellor, the President
of the French Republic and the High Representative
of the European Union. The initiative immediately
garnered the resounding support of the World Bank,
which I commend; the African Development Bank
and the United Nations Development Programme
(UNDP). In 2018, the Alliance grew to include Spain,
Italy, the United Kingdom, Luxembourg, Denmark and
the Netherlands. Observer members have also joined
the Alliance.

The goal of the Alliance is to contribute to
the development of the Sahel and to reduce its
social, economic, environmental and institutional
vulnerability. The battle against violent extremism can
be won only if development is pursued at the same time
and with the same rigour. The Alliance is fully aligned
with the priorities of the United Nations Secretary-
General, namely, conflict prevention and strengthening
the resilience of the most vulnerable societies. It stands
in full harmony with the framework established by the
United Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel.

To tackle the deep-rooted or immediate causes
of crises, the Alliance prioritizes in all its activities
economic, social, political and cultural inclusion and
respect for rights to strengthen social bonds, which are
eroded by mistrust and exclusion. It seeks to include
young people, women and marginalized populations
and to implement a participatory approach at all levels.

The Sahel Alliance coordinates the endeavours
of its 12 members to expedite the implementation of
development projects in the Sahel countries that are in
the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-S Sahel), namely,
Burkina Faso, Mali, Mauritania, the Niger and Chad. A
partnership agreement was signed with its permanent
secretariat on 30 October.

The members of the Sahel Alliance have decided
to focus on and enhance their action in six priority
areas, which do not include all their respective action
in the Sahel area: education and youth employment,
agriculture and food security, energy and climate
change, local infrastructure and decentralization,
governance and domestic security. While working on
these six areas, the Sahel Alliance has brought all the
projects of its members under one common umbrella.
This portfolio currently amounts to over €9 billion,
which will be disbursed across more than 600 projects
between 2019 and 2023. Some projects amounting to
€4 billion have just been launched and a great many
new projects totalling €5 billion have been identified.
All of these programmes have been designed in line
with existing national or regional strategies. In 2018
alone, a total of €l billion has been disbursed in the
Sahel region.

In order to make the assistance provided to
the Sahel more effective and in harmony with the
approaches championed in the 2005 Paris Declaration,
the members of the Sahel Alliance pool their resources
and their modes of operation. The countries of the G-5
Sahel and the Alliance work, inter alia, on facilities
dedicated to crisis regions, using adapted procedures;
the allocation of budgetary support resources to
address security shocks; multisectoral approaches in
hotbeds of tensions; strengthening local stakeholders
and recruiting the best actors to work on the ground.

At the request of Heads of State of the G-5 Sahel,
focus has been placed in recent months on projects in the
most vulnerable areas. The G-5 permanent secretariat
decided to launch, as a matter of urgency, rapid-impact
projects as part of the emergency programme for the
stabilization of the G-5 Sahel in the three border areas
in the west, centre and east where the G-5 Sahel Joint
Force intervenes. These priority projects meet the
following three criteria. They are located in sensitive
cross-border areas, as identified by the G-5; they address
specific sectoral issues, including water, the resilience
of populations affected by crises and the rebuilding
of social fabric; and they seek to record genuine
achievements by the end of 2018. The European Union
and its member States have played a driving role in
conducting the emergency development programmes.
At the Nouakchott conference, on 6 December, the
members ofthe Sahel Alliance contributed €266 million
to these emergency development projects.
In sum and in conclusion, the Sahel Alliance plays
a powerful, operational and integrated role by fostering
synergies between its each of its members in the
framework of a close partnership with the G-5 Sahel
permanent secretariat. We are seeking to demonstrate
our collective capacity by implementing projects with
tangible results that are achieved quickly in areas that
are very unstable with the aim of benefiting the most
vulnerable populations.

We are especially proud to have worked with the
UNDP since the launching of the Alliance, which
steers the sectoral governance group, which is key
to the success of all of our work in the Sahel. More
recently, the Alliance was honoured to host the Special
Adviser of the Secretary-General for the Sahel. The
members of the Sahel Alliance have worked closely
with the G-5 Sahel countries to actively contribute to
the implementation of the United Nations Integrated
Strategy for the Sahel. The links with peacebuilding
and the work of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali and the
Department of Political Affairs of the United Nations
are crucial to the Alliance. Our goals are closely linked
and dialogue has been established at the highest possible
level. We must work together on the priority interests of
the Sahel, its security and its development.

