Mr. Fall: I thank you, Mr. President, for this
opportunity to brief the Security Council on the
situation in Central Africa and the activities of the
United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa
(UNOCA).

Since my last briefing (see S/PV.8421), the
Economic Community of Central African States
(ECCAS) has made noticeable progress with regard to
the reform process. Following the finalization of the
reform documents in January, the ECCAS Council of
Ministers is expected to convene on 21 June to validate
these documents. It is our hope that the Assembly of
ECCAS Heads of State and Government will endorse
the documents before the end of this year. This reform
process should contribute to the transformation of
ECCAS into a more effective organization for regional
integration, conflict prevention and resolution, as
well as peacebuilding. UNOCA remains committed
to helping to enhance these capacities, building on the
valuable expertise already available. The reform should
also provide the organization with a more adequate
mandate and tools, as well as the means to carry out
such a mandate. I appeal to ECCAS member States to
enhance their support to this process so as to ensure
its timely completion and the launch of a reformed
ECCAS for the benefit of regional peace, stability
and integration.

To date, the United Nations Standing Advisory
Committee on Security Questions in Central Africa
(UNSAC) remains the primary platform where ECCAS
member States meet regularly to discuss peace and
security in Central Africa and recommend actions to
address threats to regional stability. I have just arrived
from Kinshasa, where the Committee held its forty-
eighth ministerial meeting on 31 May, which focused
on the political and security situation in Central
Africa. Members of UNSAC took note of the holding
of elections in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
on 30 December 2018, which enabled the country to
experience a peaceful alternation of power. They also
welcomed the signing of the Political Agreement for
Peace and Reconciliation in the Central African Republic
and expressed their support for efforts to advocate the
complete lifting of the arms embargo. They took note
of the efforts of the Government of Cameroon to find
a lasting solution to the crisis in the North-West and
South-West regions, and encouraged the Government
to pursue dialogue to that end. Following a closed
session on the financing of regional institutions and
cross-border transhumance, the members of UNSAC,
inter alia, first, invited the ECCAS general secretariat
to conclude the process of drafting a community
regulation on pastoralism and transhumance; secondly,
called for the holding of a high-level conference on this
issue; thirdly, encouraged ECCAS member States to
participate in meetings dedicated to the reform of the
organization; and fourthly, emphasized the importance
of setting up mechanisms to ensure the regular payment
of financial contributions.

Recurrent and often deadly clashes between
pastoralists and farmers in several countries continue
to be a source of serious concern and a threat to regional
security and integration. Recent intercommunal
tensions in eastern Chad, opposing nomadic herders
and sedentary farmers, as well as the attacks against
villages in the Central African Republic on 21 May,
remind us of the urgent need to address the issue of
pastoralism and transhumance. I am pleased that this
is receiving increasing attention in Central Africa, and
I welcome the conclusions of the workshop organized
on 27 and 28 May in Kinshasa, which finalized a draft
regulation instrument on pastoralism and transhumance.
UNOCA will continue to support the efforts of ECCAS
in this area and to promote, together with UNOWAS,
cooperation and the exchange of good practices between
Central, East and West Africa on the issue, given the
interregional dimension of the phenomenon.

(spoke in French)

Boko Haram has intensified its attacks on Cameroon
and Chad since late 2018, killing nearly 100 civilians
and members of the defence and security forces. Despite
the commendable efforts of the affected countries and
the Lake Chad Basin Commission, the terrorist group
continues to pose a security threat to Central Africa and
beyond. This situation calls for enhanced cooperation
and better sharing of experiences and lessons learned
between the affected countries and the Multinational
Joint Task Force, as well as greater and more sustained
international assistance to defeat Boko Haram, address
the humanitarian needs of the affected populations and
tackle the root causes of the conflict.

The regional strategy for the stabilization, recovery
and resilience of the areas of the Lake Chad Basin
affected by Boko Haram activities, adopted in August
2018, therefore represents a source of hope for the
people living in those zones. I continue to work hand
in hand with Mr. Chambas, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and Head of UNOWAS to
raise awareness among partners of the need to remain
committed to the fight against Boko Haram. I take this
opportunity to call once again on the States concerned
to intensify their efforts for the implementation of the
regional strategy at the national level, and I call on
international partners to support these efforts.

I note that the Lord's Resistance Army (LRA)
continues to pose a threat to peace and security in
Central Africa, particularly in the Central African
Republic and the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
I encourage the Governments of the subregion and
the members of the Security Council to support the
efforts of the African Union Commission to establish
alternative security mechanisms for the elimination of
the LRA, in the framework of regional cooperation and
the African Standby Force.

Regarding the situation in the North-West and
South-West regions of Cameroon, we note several
high-level visits to the country and a series of public
statements from key partners, who all expressed their
concerns on the issues of protection and called for
an inclusive and sincere dialogue. On 9 May, Prime
Minister Joseph Dion Ngute announced that President
Paul Biya was ready to engage in dialogue on all issues,
except those relating to separation and secession, in
order to find a lasting solution to the crisis. This is an
encouraging step in the right direction. In a statement
on the sociopolitical situation in Cameroon, published
on 28 May, the Government recalled the efforts made to
date to manage the humanitarian situation and engage
in dialogue with all stakeholders. He also underscored
his commitment to cooperating with members of the
Human Rights Council, other Member States, United
Nations agencies and other bilateral actors.

I recall the statement made by the Secretary-General
on the importance of upholding the unity and territorial
integrity of Cameroon. It is also important to stress that
the search for solutions to the crisis must be guided by
the Government. Conducting inclusive dialogue is the
best way to preserve the stability of the country, which
is vital to the entire subregion. I therefore encourage
the Cameroonian authorities to continue their dialogue
efforts and to advance the process of decentralization.
I reiterate the availability of the United Nations to
work with Cameroon in this and other key tasks, such
as disarmament, demobilization and reintegration and
peacebuilding, through the Peacebuilding Fund, among
other sources of funding.

Despite these positive developments, the situation
on the ground continues to deteriorate, with frequent
clashes between secessionist armed groups and
national defence and security forces. Civilians remain
the main victims of the conflict. Many have lost their
lives, while about 530,000 are internally displaced
in the North-West, South-West and Littoral regions,
and more than 30,000 have taken refuge in Nigeria.
Affected populations are in urgent need of assistance,
while humanitarian access in the North-West and
South-West regions remains a challenge due to security
concerns. In addition, Cameroon is hosting 278,000
refugees from the Central African Republic and
104,000 Nigerian refugees in the far northern region.
I commend the provision of humanitarian assistance
by the Government and note that only 13 per cent of
the United Nations humanitarian response plan has
been funded to date. I call on international partners to
consider financial assistance to enable the provision
of all the humanitarian assistance that vulnerable
populations greatly need.

While the implementation of the Political
Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in the
Central African Republic raises several challenges, it
remains an effective instrument for contributing to the
achievement of lasting peace in the country. It is crucial
that the subregion and the States members of ECCAS
play their part in the success of the agreement. To this
end, I welcome the reactivation of the joint commission
between Cameroon and the Central African Republic
in Bangui last month. I encourage the Central African
Republic and other neighbouring States to reactivate
their bilateral joint commissions, which should
facilitate discussions on border management and
common security challenges.

I welcome the announcement of the International
Monetary Fund (IMF) on 9 May that its mission had
completed discussions with the Republic of the Congo
and had reached an agreement, ad referendum, that
could be supported by a programme under the Extended
Credit Facility. This favourable development comes
after two years of negotiations.

In Gabon, the IMF recently noted the stabilization
of the macroeconomic situation. In the meantime,
President Ali Bongo Ondimba is recovering in Libreville
from his health problems. Since May, he has received
visits from Presidents Faure Essozimna Gnassingbe' of
Togo, Alassane Ouattara of Cote d'Ivoire and Macky
Sall of Senegal, as well as the Secretary General of the
International Organization of la Francophonie, Louise
Mushikiwabo. Other Heads of State are expected in the
coming days.

I note the efforts of the Chadian authorities to hold
parliamentary elections before end of the year, and I
call on all national and international actors to contribute
to the organization of credible, inclusive and peaceful
elections within the envisaged deadlines.

In the face of all these challenges, UNOCA remains
firmly committed to regional capacity-building in
the areas of crisis prevention and crisis and conflict
management, including support for ECCAS and its
member States. We are confident that the findings of
the ongoing UNOCA strategic review will contribute to
enhancing the effectiveness of the Office and its role as
a key United Nations tool for preventive diplomacy and
peacebuilding, in close cooperation with the relevant
United Nations entities. We will continue to make
every effort to improve coherence and coordination
between these entities, in particular in matters of peace
and security. I thank the Council for its attention and
continued support.

