Mr. Salam (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): I wish to
welcome Angola, Malaysia, New Zealand, Spain and
Venezuela.

I would like to focus on the heinous terrorist
attacks that took place in Paris last week. I wish to pay
a triple tribute, a Lebanese, Arab and Muslim tribute,
to that glorious city, which has proven the extent to
which it deserves its title as the capitol of freedom and
of light. Muslims will recall that it was in Paris that
the two pioneers of Islamic reform - the two great
sheiks Jamal Al-Din Al-Afghani and Mohammed
Abduh ~ took refuge during their fight against
oppression and colonization. It was from Paris that they
published, in 1884, their famous journal, The Firmest
Bond, in order to spread their thought on renewal.
Arabs will also recall that it was in Paris that what has
since been called the first Arab conference took place in
1913, because of the freedom and security that unique
city offered to the conference's participants.

Lebanese, for their part, who were pioneers of the
modern Arab renaissance, will also recall that the first
Arabic newspaper, Birgys-Barys, was published from
Paris in 1859 by a Lebanese national, Rochaid Ed-
Dahdah. How can we forget that the neighbourhoods,
the streets, the squares and the universities of Paris
throughout the past century have been the forum for
meetings, protests and conferences that called for the

granting of freedom to colonized people, including
those colonized by France, in particular Algeria. How
can we forget that Paris, over the past decades, has once
again become a haven of peace for Arab politicians,
writers andjournalists, including Lebanesejournalists,
who went there in search of the freedom of expression
and safety they did not find in their own countries. We
once again pay tribute to Paris, city of lights, city of
freedom.

There is no doubt that success in combating
terrorist acts, the most recent of which took place in
Paris, requires us to deal with their deep-rooted causes.
Purely military or security measures, while essential
and possibly inevitable, will alone not be enough to
put an end to that threat, contrary to popular opinion.
This is in no way a justification for terrorism, quite
the contrary. It is the most certain - and possibly
only - way to deal with the root causes ofthat scourge.

The reasons for terrorism are many, complex and
overlapping. They include the frustration, alienation,
humiliation and despair that arise from oppression,
marginalization, poverty and persecution. They are
the same feelings engendered in our own region by the
continuing Israeli occupation of Palestinian territories,
with all that it entails in terms of ongoing oppression
and shattered dreams. They are also due to the failure of
all attempts at a settlement, one after another, including
the most recent American efforts, which have all come
up against the political intransigence of the Israeli
authorities, who continue to build settlements, defying
the resolutions of the Organization and the principles
of the Charter of the United Nations. All of that should
be enough to encourage the Council to shake off its
lethargy, finally decide to adopt clear guidelines for the
peace process and establish a mechanism that would
make it possible to put an end to the occupation.

For our part, we as the Arab parties would like to

inform the Council that the Council of Foreign Ministers
of the League of Arab States met in Cairo today and
reiterated their attachment to the Arab Peace Initiative,
initially proposed by the former Saudi Crown Prince
Abdullah Bin Abdulaziz Al-Saud, and endorsed by the
Beirut summit of 2002. I would recall that the Initiative
called on Israel to do the following: first, to withdraw
from all occupied Arab territories, including the Syrian
Golan, to the lines of 4 June 1967, and the territories
occupied in south Lebanon; secondly, to find a just
solution to the problem of Palestinian refugees that is
agreed upon and in accordance with General Assembly
resolution 194 (III); thirdly, to accept the emergence of
an independent and sovereign Palestinian State within
the Palestinian territories occupied since 4 June 1967
in the West Bank and Gaza, with East Jerusalem as its
capital.

In exchange, the Arab States would then consider
the Arab/Israeli conflict as having come to an end,
conclude a peace agreement with Israel that would
offer a path to peace for all countries of the region
and establish normal relations with Israel within the
framework of that comprehensive peace. The Initiative
also stipulated, with respect to refugees, that it was
essential to refuse any plan to integrate Palestinians
that was contrary to their special status in the Arab
host countries. Furthermore, the Chair of the Arab
Ministerial Committee for the Arab Peace Initiative,
who visited Washington, D. C., in April 2013, stated,
after his meeting with the American authorities that the
1967 borders, if adopted as the basis for a two-State
solution, could include certain agreed exchanges of
similar territories.

It is important to underscore that the Arab States
have reiterated their commitment to the Arab Peace
Initiative at all the Arab summits that have taken place
since the Beirut summit, including the summits held
in Sharm el-Sheikh, Egypt, in 2003; Tunis in 2004;
Algiers in 2005; Khartoum in 2006; Riyadh in 2007;
Damascus in 2008; Doha in 2009; Sirte, Libya, in 2010;
Baghdad in 2012; Doha in 2013; and Kuwait in 2014.

Furthermore, the Arab Ministers for Foreign Affairs
have reiterated their commitment to the Initiative in
every meeting that has been held here in New York and
in Cairo and in their extraordinary meetings. Following
the Riyadh summit of 2007, two Arab Ministers for
Foreign Affairs, specifically those ongypt and Jordan,
visited Israel and met with Israeli officials with a view to
implementing the Arab Peace Initiative and facilitating
the start of direct negotiations. After the adoption by
the Beirut summit in 2002 of the Arab Peace Initiative,
the States of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation
have held five regular and extraordinary summits: in
Putrajaya, Malaysia, in 2003; in Mecca, Saudi Arabia,
in 2005; in Dakar in 2008; in Mecca, Saudi Arabia,
in 2012; and in Cairo in 2013. All of those summits
underscored the importance of the Arab Peace Initiative
as the basis on which the peace process should be built.

All of those facts clearly demonstrate that, since
the Beirut summit of 2002, the Arab approach has been
the path ofpeace. It is a collective, unanimous, strategic
and constant approach. It has become the approach
adopted by 57 Islamic States. However, that approach,
which is based on the land-for-peace principle, has not
had a partner on the Israeli side. Such a peace would
be a real peace, and not merely a slogan used by Israel
to prevaricate and impose a new reality on the ground.
Indeed, that might explain the failure of all the peace
negotiations over the years. The question is: when will
the Israelis realize that occupation is the antithesis of
peace?

