The President (spoke in French): After consultations
among Council members, I have been authorized to
make the following statement on their behalf.

(spoke in English)

"As the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding
Mission in Sierra Leone (UNIPSIL) completes its
mandate on 31 March 2014, the Security Council
commends the remarkable achievements made
by Sierra Leone over the past decade as well
as its contribution to important regional and
global initiatives. The Security Council further
commends the effectiveness of the approach of the
United Nations, international financial institutions,
regional and subregional bodies and the broader
international community to peacebuilding in Sierra
Leone.

"The Security Council welcomes the considerable
progress that has been made by Sierra Leone in
strengthening institutional and human resources
capacities of State institutions, including in the
security, justice and governance sectors, which
play crucial roles in safeguarding stability and
promoting democracy.

"The Security Council also welcomes the
successful presidential and parliamentary elections
conducted in 2012, which have helped to consolidate
Sierra Leone's democratic institutions.
"The Security Council recognises the important
contribution of UNIPSIL in promoting peace,
stability and development in Sierra Leone,
particularly during the 2012 electoral process. The
Security Council expresses its appreciation for
the efforts of the Mission and the United Nations
country team, under the leadership of the Executive
Representatives of the Secretary-General.

"The Security Council underscores the
importance of continued support to Sierra Leone
as it embarks on the next stage of its development,
beyond UNIPSIL, including the constitutional
review process, and notes the willingness of the
United Nations and bilateral and multilateral
partners to continue, as requested by the Sierra
Leonean authorities, to play a significant role in this
regard. In addition, the Security Council urges the
international community and development partners
to continue to provide coordinated and coherent
support to Sierra Leone to meet its peacebuilding
and development priorities.

"The Security Council stresses that there is
important work ahead to further embed peace and
secure equitable prosperity for the benefit of all
Sierra Leoneans. The Security Council welcomes
the adoption by the Government of Sierra Leone
of the Agenda for Prosperity, covering the period
from 2013 to 2018, and notes the importance of the
implementation of this programme in accordance
with the mutual accountability framework agreed
between the Government of Sierra Leone and
Sierra Leone's Development Partners Committee
in March 2013.

"The Security Council reaffirms the important
potential role of extractive industries in Sierra
Leone's economic development, and encourages
the Government of Sierra Leone and international
partners to strengthen protection of workers' rights
and national capacities for transparent regulation,
oversight, and revenue collection from such
industries, as well as to address issues of land
ownership with a view to establishing mutually
beneficial arrangements for local communities and
the private sector, and calls upon the Government
to tackle corruption.

"The Security Council stresses the importance
for Sierra Leone's long-term stability of ensuring a
peaceful, credible and transparent electoral process
in 2017.

"The Security Council reiterates its request
in resolution 2097 (2013) that the United Nations
Office for West Africa make available its good
offices to support the Government of Sierra Leone
and the new United Nations Resident Coordinator
as necessary.

"The Security Council welcomes the work
of the Sierra Leone Configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission. The Security Council
recalls its request in resolution 2097 (2013) for
the Peacebuilding Commission to review its
engagement with a view to scaling down its role
and welcomes the Commission's shift to a lighter
form of engagement for a transitional period
over next 12 months, as outlined in its report to
the Council (S/2014/211). The Security Council
requests that Sierra Leone contribute to the work
of the Peacebuilding Commission to gather lessons
learnt and best practices.

"The Security Council congratulates the Special
Court for Sierra Leone on the completion of its
mandate, recalls the strong support it expressed for
the Residual Special Court for Sierra Leone as it
commences its functioning, and reiterates its call
in resolution 2097 (2013) for Member States to
contribute generously."

(spoke in French)

This statement will be issued as a document of the

Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2014/6.

There are no more names inscribed on the list of

speakers. The Security Council has thus concluded
the present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at12.10p.m.
