Mr. Levitte (France) (spoke in French): I too wish to
welcome Mr. Carlsson and to thank him for the report
before the Council today, which describes the horror of the
genocide committed between April and July 1994:

"Rwandans killed Rwandans, brutally decimating the
Tutsi population of the country, but also targetting
moderate Hutus. Appalling atrocities were committed,
by militia and the armed forces, but also by civilians
against other civilians.

"The international community did not prevent the
genocide, nor did it stop the killing once the genocide
had begun". (S/1999/1257, annex, p. 3)

The debate that you have organized, Mr. President,
provides an opportunity for us to think about the lessons to
be learned. More than ever before, we need to ensure that
the United Nations will no longer remain inactive or
powerless in the face of such tragedies.

But I wish first to welcome the initiative taken by
the Secretary-General, who had the courage to task the
Independent Inquiry with investigating the actions of the
United Nations during the 1994 genocide. We support that
initiative. When the French Minister for Foreign Affairs,
Mr. Hubert Vedrine, received the Independent Inquiry last
November, he said that France shared this determination
to achieve transparency and effectiveness. In France, that
determination was reflected in the 1998 establishment of
a parliamentary fact-finding mission on Rwanda. Let us
in turn have the courage together to look the truth in the
face.

The United Nations seriously failed in its mission.
The report of the Independent Inquiry provides a thorough
analysis of the mistakes that led to the failure of the
United Nations in Rwanda. The report highlights the
shortcomings of decisions taken before the outbreak of
genocide: the inadequate mandate of the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Rwanda (UNAMIR), the lack of
resources provided for the Mission, poor use of
information, and an inability to adapt the mandate of the
Mission to the requirements of the situation on the
ground.

The report also highlights the serious mistakes that
resulted in a "Failure to respond to the genocide" (ibid., p. 35), a lack of determination to strengthen UNAMIR,
inability to understand the real nature of events and to
decide on what action should be taken.

Of course, as the investigators say, the situation in
1994 was particularly tense. The United Nations had
deployed about 70,000 Blue Helmets throughout the
world, and several missions were facing difficulties.
These elements certainly affected decision-making. We
should also pay tribute to the troops of UNAMIR, those
of Belgium, and particularly of Ghana and Tunisia, who
remained there on the ground and, as well as they could,
protected the threatened civilians.

However, the overall picture is one of failure. The
United Nations was not able to assist the Rwandans and,
as the Inquiry stresses, all of us - Security Council
members, the Secretariat, States Members of the
Organization - bear the heavy responsibility for this.

Before the United Nations undertook its own inquiry
into actions in Rwanda, the French National Assembly set
up a parliamentary fact-finding mission on Rwanda. The
mission, which was presided over by Mr. Quiles,
throughout 1998 gathered testimony from many
participants in and witnesses to the tragedy. All of this

 

information, in the spirit of transparency, was made public.
This work made it possible to better understand several
aspects of the Rwandan tragedy. Mr. Carlsson's Inquiry
supplements those analyses.

From the report of the French Parliament, I note that
France, before the events of 1994, had made an effort to
avoid a military solution and to encourage the parties to
share power in Rwanda. We need to place this tragedy in
its historical context, which goes beyond the offensive by
the Rwandese Patriotic Front in 1990, all the way back to
events of 1959, the time of decolonization. The active
support of France for the negotiations concluded in August
1993 in Arusha illustrated this policy. The accords reached
were the framework in which lasting peace could have been
established with mutual respect for all.

The parliamentary report also demonstrated that
France, while aware of the risk of confrontation,
underestimated the upsurge of extremism. Nevertheless, it
tried to mobilize the international community, through the
United Nations, to prevent a massacre. Mr. Carlsson's
analysis shows that neither the other Member States present
at the time nor the Secretariat used any better the
information that, subsequently, was to prove crucial. This
attitude goes a long way in explaining the inability of the
United Nations to prevent the 1994 genocide. This tragedy
still has one unclear area regarding elements that triggered
the genocide, though this will no doubt be clarified one
day.

In the face of the spring 1994 genocide and in the
light of the delays and difficulties encountered in
strengthening UNAMIR, France, in June, with the support
of the troops of African countries, assisted the people who
were under threat, and it did so in transparency and with
the authorization of the Security Council. We are aware of
the criticism, which we think unjustified, that Operation
Turquoise elicited. But should we once again have stood
by passively? The report submitted by Mr. Carlsson reflects
some of this criticism, but it also says "many
interlocutors have credited Operation Turquoise with saving
a number of lives in a situation where few other initiatives
were being taken" (ibid., p. 49). This is the point we wish
to retain from that intervention.

Now we need to learn the lessons of this tragedy.
Several comments could be made concerning the Great
Lakes region, as well as the work of the Council and
peacekeeping operations in general.

The Rwandan tragedy occurred in a particularly
unstable environment. We recall in particular the
massacres committed in Burundi in October of 1993 in an
atmosphere of general passivity. Since 1994, this
instability in the Great Lakes region has increased. After
the failure to deal with the Rwandan genocide, the United
Nations was not able to face up to subsequent crises.

In the months following 1994, the Council did not
react in time to the problems caused by the presence of
armed elements in the refugee camps in eastern Zaire.

In autumn of 1996, the Kivu crisis prompted the
Council, at the urging, inter alia, of France, to authorize
the dispatch of a multinational humanitarian force. Canada
announced that it was prepared to head that operation.
France said that it was willing to participate. The
disagreement in the Council finally meant that the
operation had to be abandoned. The international
community once again remained inactive in the face of
new massacres, the magnitude of which has not fully
been measured.
As of August 1998, the Council was faced with a
war in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The
information that reached us reported violence against
civilian populations, particularly in the east of the country
and attested to the seriousness of the situation. This time,
will we be able to take the necessary action?

The events that occurred starting in 1994 are part of
the context created by the Rwandan genocide. As we now
consider Mr. Carlsson's report, we must draw conclusions
for the work of the United Nations in the Great Lakes
region.

Let us turn first to Rwanda. Mr. Carlsson's report
calls upon the international community to help in
reconstruction, reconciliation and observance of human
rights. And we should add, to help in the matter of
justice, which is essential to attain these goals. France
supports this appeal. We participate in this effort together
with our European Union partners. The Secretary-General
has proposed to Rwanda a new partnership with the
United Nations, and we hope that efforts on both sides
will make it possible to make headway in this regard and
that, in exchange for serious security guarantees, Rwanda
will move towards peaceful democracy, allowing a return
to regional stability. This is definitely a source of concern
for the international community.

 

Indeed, United Nations action with respect to the
Great Lakes region as a whole must be more sustained. The
Council has authorized the deployment of the second phase
of the United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC). We must
ensure that this operation receives the necessary means, in
particular the necessary funding. Impartial action by
Council members vis-a-vis each of the belligerents, with a
view to inducing them to fulfil their commitments, is also
essential to buttress the July 1999 Lusaka Agreement, all of
whose elements must be implemented.

The next mission of the Council to the territory will be
an opportunity to get all of our messages through. But it is
the effective deployment of the second phase of MONUC
that will attest to the will of the international community to
contribute fully to bringing about peace in the country and
in the Great Lakes region.

Here it might be useful to recall the situation in
Burundi. The Council lent its support to the facilitation
process led by President Mandela and to the efforts of the
Burundian parties. This process is a difficult one. In order
to strengthen it, the international community must, now that
sanctions against the country have been lifted, assist it by
speedily resuming economic assistance, which is so
necessary to the people.

Beyond the Great Lakes region, we must consider
ways of stepping up United Nations action in crisis
situations.

The report of the Inquiry makes some
recommendations in this respect: a plan of action against
genocide, improved deployment capacities of the United
Nations, protection of civilians, and so on. We welcome
this trend, which is conducive to better circulation of
information in the United Nations and to a greater capacity
to react to events. The report that the Secretary-General
requested from the panel chaired by Mr. Brahimi will make
it possible to conduct a deeper analysis of this situation.

Turning now to the work of the Council, two points
need to be made.

First, in the setting up of new operations, decisions of
the Council must be better prepared. The information
provided by the Secretariat needs to be supplemented,
according to modalities to be defined, by other data -
particularly historical data - so that we can better
understand the situations at hand.

We must also improve the Council's follow-up of
United Nations missions. Experience has shown that once
missions have been deployed in the field, implementation
of their mandate is not always followed up carefully
enough by the Council. We need greater regularity in this
area. This means that we need to refocus our work on
crisis situations and United Nations operations. We should
spend more time considering these situations and less
time on the so-called thematic subjects.

Our goal should be to place the Council in a better
position to assess the risks faced by missions in the field
and to adapt their mandate and their means accordingly.

In the face of violence and the massacre of civilians,
the decisions of the Council, and, beyond that, those of
the troop contributors will always be particularly difficult.
When the time comes to commit the United Nations, will
we be sufficiently mindful of the lessons drawn by the
Inquiry into events in 1994 in Rwanda? We certainly
hope so; otherwise, we would be betraying the memory
of the victims.

The attitude of the Council to the violence
committed in East Timor last September is an
encouraging sign. The deployment of the multinational
Force led by Australia made it possible to stop the
violence. The Council made that decision in a very short
space of time.
But we can also think of other situations where the
Council did not take the necessary decisions to put an end
to massive violations of human rights. Can the Council,
duly informed, remain divided and do nothing? We do not
think so.

At the opening of the most recent session of the
General Assembly last September, the Secretary-General
appealed to the international community to consider how
the United Nations could intervene quickly and more
effectively in these situations. A debate was launched,
which we need to continue in order to enable the Council
fully to play the role entrusted to it by the Charter and to
avert in future humanitarian tragedies such as the ones
our world has witnessed in recent decades.

