Mr. Nebie (spoke in French): It is always an honour
for me to address the members ofthe Security Council,
whom I thank for the invitation to update them on
the situation in the Central African Republic, as well
as for their ongoing interest in the country. It will be
difficult to describe everything that is going on and that
we are doing in the Central African Republic in five
minutes, but I will strive to do so while doingjustice to
the issue. Without further delay, allow me to make the
following points.

Since my previous briefing, on 21 June (see S/PV.8291), it should be noted that there have been
significant developments pertaining to the African
Union Initiative, designed to lead to the signing of
a peace and reconciliation agreement between the
armed groups and the Government. In accordance with
its agenda, the panel of facilitators has continued its
activities at an accelerated pace.

The progress that has been made on convening the
dialogue includes, first, the designation of the members
of the Government delegation by the President of
the Central African Republic, which demonstrates
his determination and commitment to the African
Initiative; second, the preparation of 14 armed groups
for the dialogue by holding workshops on modules for
negotiations and the peaceful resolution of crises; third,
dialogue preparations for the Government delegation
through similar modules; fourth, preparations for civil-
society actors, including women leaders and young
people, to monitor the implementation of the agreement
that will emerge from the dialogue; fifth, a visit by two
former Heads of State of the Central African Republic,
Mr. Michel Djotodia and Mr. Francois Bozize, who
have taken on board the message from the Chair of the
African Union Commission, Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat,
expressed their commitment without reservation to the
African Initiative road map and told the panel that they
would spare no effort in helping to stabilize and restore
peace in their country; sixth, a working trip by the
panel to the subregion in July, during which it visited
N'Djamena to meet with President Deby Itno to ask
for his political support for the Initiative, to which the
President responded by assuring the panel of his total
willingness in that regard and urged Central Africans
to use the dialogue as a path to settling the crisis and
achieving peace and national reconciliation within
the framework of the African Initiative; seventh, the
panel's holding from 28 to 30 August ofa workshop on
harmonizing the claims of armed groups; eighth, the
panel's formal submission on 31 August to President
Faustin Archange Touadera of a consolidated claims
document; ninth, the Government's prompt response by
way of a document entitled "Draft political agreement
for peace and reconciliation in the Central African
Republic"; and, tenth, the next and final step, the
convening of the dialogue.

We should welcome that progress as a sign
that new prospects are opening up for peace and
reconciliation. The parties concerned now know what
the dialogue will focus on, and that is important. In
that regard, I would note the joint efforts led by the
international community in Bangui, including the
members of the G5+ - the United Nations, the African
Union, the Economic Community of Central African
States, the European Union, France and the United
States - which continue to demonstrate their shared
determination to work for peace and stability in the
Central African Republic.

I can inform the Council that the consultations
and exchanges with stakeholders are forward-looking
and that the dialogue could be convened in the next
few weeks. However, I should remind members that
in my previous briefing here I emphasized the panel's
financial difficulties. I repeat that message today, and
I want to stress that failure is not an option. The one
and only option is the success of the dialogue and
the restoration of peace for the people of the Central
African Republic. To achieve this significant aspect
of the Security Council's task of maintaining and
restoring international peace and security, it now
falls to the Council to take specific, robust measures
and action in support of the stakeholders of the
international community on the ground, to foster and
speed up the restoration of peace for the people of the
Central African Republic, who have been imploring the
Council to do everything possible to ensure peace and
freedom of movement in their country.

As I said the last time I spoke to the Council, if
its members consent to this effort and give the panel
concrete support, I will be very happy to announce at the
Council's next meeting on the subject that the dialogue
has indeed been held, a consensus agreement reached,
a monitoring mechanism put in place, that peace is no
longer an empty word and that the implementation of
the activities under the agreement is under way.

I should not conclude my statement without
mentioning our cooperation with my brother Parfait
Onanga-Anyanga, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, and all his colleagues at the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic, with whom
we continue to work tirelessly to explore ways and
means to support dialogue and mediation efforts for a
resolution of the crisis in the country. I can emphasize
that since the holding ofthe special meeting here in New
York on 27 September, the Special Representative is
now participating actively in all of the panel's meetings
and its consultations with the Government delegation.

Allow me to say that all that those of us on the
ground simply hope that some means can be put at our
disposal and that we can make a difference after all that
has happened in the past several decades. The Central
African people have suffered enough from the crisis.
With the Council's support, we want to make a decisive
contribution so that peace can return to a country that
all of us hold so dear.

