Mr. Daou (Mali) (spoke in French): Allow me to
begin, Sir, by asking you to relay to the President of
the Togolese Republic, Mr. Faure Essozimna
Gnassingbe, the warm greetings of his brother and
friend, the President of the Republic of Mali, His
Excellency Mr. Amadou Toumani Toure, and his
heartfelt congratulations on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council. The delegation of
Mali especially welcomes Togo's initiative to convene
this meeting on peace and security in Africa, and in
particular the impact of transnational organized crime
on peace, security and stability in West Africa and the
Sahel region.

My delegation also thanks Secretary-General Ban
Ki-Moon for having dispatched in December 2011,
together with the African Union, a joint assessment
mission on the impact of the Libyan crisis in the Sahel
region.

All of these initiatives, which Mali welcomes,
illustrate the growing interest of the Security Council
in the Sahel region, which, as we know, is facing
growing insecurity due to the activities of the Al-Qaida
in the Islamic Maghreb terrorist group and criminal
networks engaged in the trafficking of weapons, drugs
and human beings.

Transnational organized crime, terrorism and the
activities of rebel groups undermine peace, security
and stability in the Sahel. As President Gnassingbe so
eloquently expressed in his statement this morning:

"[T]he actions of rebel groups, which are already
endangering the stability and territorial integrity
of several countries, have unfortunately
intensified following the Libyan crisis, which has
led to a significant flow into the region of
weapons of every calibre." (S/PV.67] 7)

My delegation shares this assessment, which is in
line with the situation in northern Mali. Indeed, since
17 January, a number security and armed forces units
from villages and cities in Mali have been the targets
of armed attacks perpetrated by the so-called
Movement for the National Liberation of Azawad,
which claims to be fighting for the independence of
Azawad through the division of our national territory.
These attacks are directly linked to the crisis in Libya,
as the arrival in our country of hundreds of Libyan
troops with extensive arsenals of weapons of all sorts
and vehicles has radically changed the nature and
objective of the aforesaid Movement.

Indeed, although a national movement of
Azawad- which simply called for recognition as a
national political organization guided by the principles
of national unity and a peaceful approach - existed as
early as November 2010, by the second half of 2011
that group had developed into a liberation movement
that resorted to armed struggle. At the same time, its
leaders, recently returned from Libya, claimed to have
left that country to wage war - a war which today
they hope to paradoxically impose upon the
Government and people of Mali.

For us, the aggression we face today, coupled
with the increased proliferation of weapons and other
military equipment, is a collateral consequence of the
crisis in Libya, as demonstrated by the report of the
joint assessment mission of the United Nations and the
African Union on the impact of the Libyan crisis in the
Sahel region (see S/2012/42). The situation that
prevails in northern Mali as a result of the rebellion has
also led to a deterioration in the humanitarian situation.
There are IDPs, and refugees have fled to neighbouring
countries.

The attacks perpetrated since 17 January 2012 by
the so-called Azawad National Liberation Movement,
with Al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb (AQIM)
elements and other terrorist groups, were followed by
massacres and atrocities against civilians and
Government forces. By way of example, I would cite
the massacre committed on 24 January in the village of
Aguelhok and the recent assassination in Homburi on
18 February last. In Aguelhok, the so-called Azawad
National Liberation Movement and AQIM. summarily
executed dozens of Government soldiers who had been
taken prisoner and tied up with their hands behind their
backs. Some were shot in the head, others had their
throats slit and yet others were dismembered. In
Homburi, those bandits, in a bid to provoke conflict
within and among communities, shot a tribal chief on
18 February last - only a few days ago.

We call on the Security Council and the
international community to firmly condemn the almost
incessant attacks perpetrated by the so-called Azawad
National Liberation Movement rebels and AQIM
terrorists, who hope to tarnish the reputation of Mali,
which is a democratic and stable country, and to create
uncertainty in connection with our ongoing electoral
process.

The attacks also undermine the efforts made by
the Government of Mali and its technical and financial
partners for economic and social development in the
northern part of the country, such as the special
programme for peace, security and development of the
north, which has already allocated $31 billion CFA
francs, or more than $62 million, to that end.

Before concluding, I should like to thank those
States and international organizations that reiterated
their support for respect for the territorial integrity and
the national unity of Mali. I would also take this
opportunity to thank neighbouring countries,
development partners, the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees and the International
Committee of the Red Cross, as well as all
governmental and non-governmental organizations
providing humanitarian assistance to refugees and
displaced persons.

In conclusion, I would underscore the intention of
the Government of Mali to resolve peacefully the
situation in the northern part of the country by means
of dialogue, which we have always made a priority, in
the framework of respect for the territorial integrity
and sovereignty of my country.

