Mr. Lasso Mendoza (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish):
Before beginning my statement, I would like express to
you, Mr. President, my best wishes on the occasion of
the lunar new year. I also wish to extend my best wishes
to all who are celebrating that holiday. I also wish to
congratulate China for having proposed a subject for
today's open debate that is particularly relevant as we
prepare to celebrate the seventieth anniversary of the
founding of the United Nations.

The United Nations emerged as a response of the
international community to the horrors of a war whose
fronts spanned almost two thirds of the planet and
which killed about 75 million people. Approximately
40 million of them were civilians - many victims of
genocide, mass bombings, disease and famine. The end
of that war also saw the first military use of an atomic
weapon, which, in the hands ofa few Powers today, has
the ability to wipe out all of humankind.

The world's people, through their Governments, in
order to save succeeding generations from the scourge
of war - as the Preamble of the Charter of the United
Nations puts it - created this Organization based
on several fundamental principles of international
relations and endowed its bodies with different
functions, including the General Assembly, where all
Member States of the Organization participate, and
the Security Council, to which the States assigned
the main function of maintaining international peace
and security. Effective action by the Security Council
requires that its actions be based on respect for the
principles on which the United Nations was created and
framed in the functions and powers that the Charter
gives it. The purposes and principles are the measuring
rod against which the actions of the Council are to be
judged.

Among the primary purposes set forth in the Charter
of the Organization are the maintenance of international
peace and security and the peaceful settlement of
disputes. Efforts to achieve those purposes must be
carried out in conformity with the principles set out in
Article 2, the first of which is the sovereign equality
of States. That principle, together with the principle of
non-intervention in the internal affairs of States, is a
guarantee for the independence of all our countries and
protection against the ambitions of States that, given
their economic or military might, aim to impose social
systems and their recipes for development on other
nations.

The first concern of the Council, as guarantor
of international peace and security, must be that the
principles of sovereign equality and non-interference
in the internal affairs of other States are respected.
There is no shortage of examples in the recent history
of the world where lack of respect for those principles,
even in some cases under authorization of the Security
Council, has led to situations of greater political,
military and economic insecurity,as compared to what
existed prior to foreign interventions, as in certain
cases - I reiterate - when the Council itself was
unable to prevent unilateral military interventions.

Although the Charter of the United Nations, with
the aim of preserving international peace and security,
envisioned a series of mechanisms that should be
used, we find an increase in the number of resolutions

adopted by the Security Council under the provisions of
Chapter VII of the Charter. We would like to make an
appeal that in circumstances of conflict and potential
threats to international peace and security what should
be used, with a sufficiently gradual approach and based
on subsidiarity, are the provisions of Chapter VI on the
peaceful settlement of disputes and the principles of
Chapter VIII on regional agreements.

I would like to recall that Ecuador is part of
an area of peace declared by the Heads of State and
Government of the Community of Latin America and
Caribbean States. By the same token, the Secretary-
General has the prestige of his Office at his disposal to
exercise preventive diplomacy with the aim of avoiding
the deteriorating conditions of instability wherever
they arise.

