Mr. Inzko: I should like to express my pleasure
that good people such as Ambassador Rycroft - who
was present in Dayton 20 years ago - remain engaged
in our common effort to take Bosnia and Herzegovina
from war to lasting peace.

On 21 November, we will mark the twentieth
anniversary of the Dayton Peace Accords, the peace
treaty that brought Europe's most brutal war since the
Second World War, to an end. As a seemingly endless
column of migrants and refugees makes it way through
the Western Balkans, we are reminded of the human
tragedy of war and ofjust how priceless peace is. The
peace that Dayton brought was hard won, and it must
never be taken for granted, but instead cherished and
consolidated.

Anniversaries provide us with an opportunity to
reflect on what has been achieved and to take stock
of what remains to be done. So allow me to briefly
recap what was achieved, primarily during the first
10 years after the war, when Bosnia and Herzegovina
was the shining star of post-conflict peacebuilding and
reintegration. Freedom of movement was established; a
million refugees reclaimed their homes, for the first time
ever after such a brutal conflict; the State Government
was reinforced; the economy was stabilized; and the
State judiciary was established. Three armies and
three Ministries of Defence that had fought each other
were brought together under State control and a single
Ministry of Defence; a single intelligence service was
created to the highest European standards; a unified
customs service was created and is working effectively;
a single currency and a single indirect taxation system
were established, which underpin the State's finances;
and free, generally fair and peaceful elections had
become the norm.

In 2005, Bosnia and Herzegovina stood as perhaps
the best example of what the wider international
community can achieve when it is united in its
commitment to a peace effort. There may be a need to
do this again elsewhere in the world, and it is worth
remembering how successful we were in Bosnia and
Herzegovina when we were truly united and committed.

However, over the past 10 years, the country
has not been moving in the right direction. This has
been a disappointment not only for the international
community, but most of all for the citizens of Bosnia
and Herzegovina. As we enter the third decade of the
peace process, we need to raise our expectations and
once again see concrete results and positive momentum.
I believe that major progress will be possible in the
next 10 years if we see two basic ingredients: first,
the political will to deliver substantial reforms to take
the country forward, and secondly, an unwavering
commitment to fully respect the Peace Agreement.

This will not be easy, but it is absolutely necessary
because the problems Bosnia and Herzegovina faces
today are deep-rooted and systemic, reflecting
the complex bureaucracy, the weaknesses in the
economy and, to be frank, the vested interests some
political leaders and State-run enterprises have in
a dysfunctional status quo. What is necessary is to
implement a programme of serious political, social
and economic reforms that will improve functionality,
attract investment and create jobs. If this is done, the
international community - through the International
Monetary Fund, the World Bank and others - stands
ready to provide generous assistance to help the country
get through a challenging period.

The period since my last briefing (see S/PV.7440)
has seen some decidedly positive developments,
as members will have seen from my latest report
(8/2015/841, annex), as well as some serious difficulties,
including those highlighted in the special report I
submitted on 4 September. First, let me stress the
positives, of which there have been several.

A written commitment with the European Union
(EU) was signed and adopted by the Bosnia and
Herzegovina authorities in February, opening the way
for the Stabilization and Association Agreement with
the EU to enter into force on 1 June. State and Entity
authorities adopted ambitious and coordinated reform
agendas in the social and economic spheres, which was
a major step forward. Under the astute guidance of
EU Special Representative Ambassador Lars-Gunnar
Wigemark, we have also seen some more concrete
initial results to implement the reform agenda, the most
notable of which was the adoption of a new labour law
by the Federation authorities. A border treaty has been
signed with Montenegro, which is an achievement of
genuine regional significance. I very much hope that
similar treaties can finally be signed with Bosnia and
Herzegovina's other neighbours. And just last week,
we saw a long-awaited joint session in Sarajevo of the
Governments of the Republic of Serbia, under Prime
Minister Vucic', and Bosnia and Herzegovina, under
the Chairman of the Council of Ministers, Mr. Zvizdic'.
This was a first common between the two Governments
of Serbia and Bosnia and Herzegovina.

Given these positive developments, reflecting a
genuine commitment to getting the country back on
track, it is difficult to understand how, in parallel, we
have seen some politicians determined to challenge the
Peace Agreement and destabilize the situation in the
country. In my last statement to the Security Council,
I raised my concern about the adoption by the ruling
party of the Republika Srpska of a declaration that
threatened to hold an independence referendum in 2018.
While it is only a party document that has no official
value, I am nevertheless concerned by its threat to hold
an independence referendum by a specified time. As
I have made clear repeatedly, the Peace Agreement
does not grant the Entities the right to secede, and any
attempt to change the Peace Agreement requires the
agreement of all three parties.

Since then we have been confronted with a more
immediate and official challenge to the Peace Agreement
and the long-term progress we are all so eager see. I
am referring to the decision by the Republika Srpska
Parliament in July to organize a referendum on whether
the Republika Srpska authorities need to respect
the authority and decisions of the country's central
judicial institutions, as well as decisions taken by High
Representatives to implement the Peace Agreement.
The 28 members of the European Council said clearly
in their 12 October conclusions that:

"The holding of such a referendum would
challenge the cohesion, sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina. It would also
risk undermining the efforts to improve the socio-
economic situation of all Bosnia and Herzegovina
citizens and to make further progress in EU
integration."

The decision of the Republika Srpska National
Assembly has yet to be published and to enter into
force. There is still an opportunity to rectify this breach
of the Peace Agreement, and I expect the Republika
Srpska authorities to step back from the brink and put
the referendum aside.

So where does the reform effort in Bosnia and
Herzegovina stand right now, just over a year after the
latest general elections? The fairest description is to
say that that this is the end of the beginning. The next
few months will be critical because they will reveal
whether the authorities are committed to delivering on
their own reform agendas. Some of the reforms will be
difficult, but they will deliver new opportunities for the
country and its people. The challenge for Bosnia and
Herzegovina is not just one of what needs to be done;
it is also a challenge of how things are done. Twenty
years after Dayton, there is no denying the fact that
the country all too often suffers from division. This
is why it is so important that the country get back to
advancing reforms in a way that fosters reconciliation
and reintegration.
Bosnia and Herzegovina desperately needs to come
together and to work for a common purpose. In this
respect, I would like to commend some of the gesture
politics displayed by the State Presidency and Council
of Ministers, which have been so warmly welcomed by
ordinary people. This is the positive leadership citizens
want to see and we need to see much more of it. In
this regard, I would like to commend the unprecedented
moves made by Serbian Prime Minister Aleksandar
Vueic' in pursuit of genuine regional and ethnic
reconciliation. Indeed, tomorrow Prime Minister Vucie
will, in a welcome development, visit Srebrenica for the
second time this year.

Twenty years after our mission to bring lasting
peace to Bosnia and Herzegovina began, there is no
doubt we have come a very long way. Huge progress
has been made. However, we can conclude with equal
certainty that we have not yet completed the job. The
future for Bosnia and Herzegovina is the European
Union - not because 1 say so, but because this is
what the democratically elected authorities of Bosnia
and Herzegovina have consistently set out as their
primary objective. Unlike what some suggested the
last time I was here, this has not been forced on the
people of Bosnia and Herzegovina. It is a choice they
have made themselves. To the authorities in Bosnia
and Herzegovina, my message is this - a sincere and
genuine offer is on the table from the European Union
that provides a chance for a secure, prosperous and
dignified life for current and future generations. This
offer of the European Union must be seized with both
hands.

For international policymakers, I would highlight
two things we need to do in order to ensure success
in Bosnia and Herzegovina. The first is to continue to
assist the country in maintaining and accelerating the
positive momentum that the initiative of Minister for
Foreign Affairs Steinmeier of Germany and Secretary
of State Hammond of the United Kingdom - which
is now an EU initiative - has been helping the local
authorities to build in recent months. That momentum
has to be maintained. The second is that we must stand
up together to real challenges to the peace agreement,
such as the referendum initiative. The drawing of
borders in Bosnia and Herzegovina is behind us. No
matter how hard some may try, division and secession
are failed strategies that were defeated 20 years ago.

The twentieth anniversary of the Dayton Peace
Agreement should remind the international community
and the leaders of Bosnia and Herzegovina ofjust how
far the country has come, and how much more can
be achieved if we reinvigorate our commitment to a
peaceful and prosperous Bosnia and Herzegovina in
the interest of all of its peoples, its neighbours and the
whole of Europe.

