Mr. Zerihoun: I thank you, Mr. President, and the
members of the Security Council for the opportunity to
brief the Council today on the current situation in the
Middle East, which unfortunately remains extremely
concerning.

Today we witnessed yet another example of the
escalating violence when a large group of Palestinians
set fire to the compound containing the holy site
of Joseph's Tomb in the West Bank city of Nablus.
Fortunately, there were no reported injuries, but the
site sustained major damage. As with the many deadly
incidents over the past weeks, the Secretary-General
strongly condemns this reprehensible act and calls
on those responsible to be swiftly brought to justice.
The United Nations welcomes President Abbas'
condemnation of the arson attack and his announcement
that a committee has been established to conduct a full
investigation into the crime.

This incident represents a particularly troubling
development in the light of its religious dimension. We
call on all sides to respect the sanctity of all holy sites
and reject the extremist elements that are pursuing a
political agenda and seeking to transform the current
situation from a national into a religious struggle. If
they are successful in those efforts, the consequences
could be catastrophic for Palestinians and Israelis alike,
with serious reverberations throughout the region.

This latest incident comes on the heels of a deadly
week in the West Bank, Jerusalem and East Jerusalem.
There were 11 reported attacks against Israelis
and Israeli security forces, leaving 4 Israelis and
9 Palestinians dead and 16 Israelis and 4 Palestinians
wounded. There were also three reported stabbings and
ramming attacks on Israelis in Israel, leaving 10 Israelis
injured and 3 Palestinian suspects wounded. In Gaza,
a seventh Palestinian succumbed to his wounds on
10 October, after clashing with the Israeli Defence
Forces (IDF) near the security barrier the previous
day. On 11 October, and a Palestinian woman and her
4-year-old child died in Gaza after Israeli air strikes
on Hamas sites caused a building to collapse. The air
strikes were in response to rocket-fire on southern
Israel the day before, 10 October.

Palestinian militants fired at least eight rockets
towards Israel during the past week alone, with most
having fallen short and landed within Gazan territory,
and one having been intercepted by Iron Dome. Another
rocket was test-fired at the sea, to which the Israeli
Defence Forces responded with warning shots, injuring
one Palestinian. As of yesterday, a total of 7 Israelis
and 32 Palestinians, including those who allegedly
conducted or attempted attacks, were killed. Some 124
Israelis, including Israeli security force personnel, and
over 1,118 Palestinians have reportedly been injured
since 1 October.

Since those latest attacks, Israel's Security Cabinet
has passed a broad range of new security measures,
which are already being implemented. The Israeli
Defence Forces have already significantly bolstered
their presence in Israeli city centres, while many
Arab neighbourhoods in East Jerusalem have been
surrounded by security forces, with access roads
having been blocked and checkpoints established.
Following the deterioration that began on 1 October,
the Israeli authorities have also reinstated a number of
movement restrictions in the West Bank, in particular
by restaffing 16 checkpoints that had previously been
left unstaffed. Ad hoc checkpoints have been erected at
over 100 West Bank sites for varying periods of time.

Additional measures are being introduced with the
goal of deterring would-be terrorists from carrying
out attacks. The homes of those accused of carrying
out terror attacks will be demolished within days of
any attack, and their families - if residents of East
Jerusalem and not Israeli citizens - will have their
permanent residency status revoked. Already this
month, two structures have been blown up and a
third one partially sealed. However, those actions
followed attacks that took place in 2014. A total of
30 Palestinians, including 20 children, were displaced
as a result of those demolitions.

The United Nations has maintained a consistent
position on those issues. Collective punishment,
including house demolitions, is counterproductive and
contravenes international law, and we have urged Israel
to cease that damaging practice. What is clear is that
the current crisis cannot be resolved through security
measures alone. The persistence of the occupation
and diminishing prospects for achieving Palestinian
aspirations to statehood have transformed long-
simmering Palestinian anger into outright rage. That
stark reality has been compounded by the increasingly
dire economic situation and circumstances, including
the bleak prospects for youth employment. The
continued and expanding settlement activities further
diminish the hope and potential for creating a viable
Palestinian State. Such loss of political perspective is
the single-most damaging factor that contributes to the
anger and frustration driving the violence that we are
seeing today.

Against this backdrop, there are a number of
factors that sparked the current crisis. Tensions at
the holy sites in Jerusalem were the main instigators.
Reckless statements made by Palestinian and Israeli
extremist elements, reinforced by some mainstream
voices as well, have insinuated that Israel is aiming to
change the status quo at the holy sites. This fear has
reverberated widely across the Arab world. Prime
Minister Netanyahu's repeated assurances that Israel
has no intention of changing the historic status quo
at the holy sites have been welcome, but perceptions
will change only when concrete actions, based on the
agreements between Israel and Jordan, follow those
words.

A second factor feeding the escalation has been
the apparent heavy-handed approach taken by Israeli
security services. Wide dissemination of video footage
of several incidents fueled more attacks and has raised
serious questions as to the appropriate level of force
used by the IDF and police. The Secretary-General has
called for a thorough investigation of all such cases.
It is clear that such incidents serve only to exacerbate
the situation, leading to a vicious cycle of needless
bloodshed. We appreciate Israeli efforts to reduce the
lethality of response, particularly in Gaza after the
indefensible killings ofprotesters behind the separation
fence, and we encourage greater restraint whenever
there is no imminent threat to life or of serious injury.

Finally, we have seen that the impact of social
media and irresponsible rhetoric has played a dramatic
role in the escalation. On this count, both sides have
much to be blamed for, but we welcome the efforts of
leaders in recent days to tone down their statements.
We call on community, religious and political leaders
on all sides to calm the language they use in this regard
and to work together to de-escalate the situation.

