Mr. Menan (Togo) (spoke in French): I wish to
begin by thanking the United Kingdom for having
organized today's debate, which provides us with a
special opportunity to consider the situation in the
Middle East through the prism of the demands of the
people and the changes taking place there. I should like
to thank the Secretary-General for his briefing and
welcome the presence of Ministers who, by travelling
here today, have demonstrated the importance they
attribute to the matter before us.

A little more than a year ago, reacting to a police
officer's action that could be described as
unremarkable, a young Tunisian chose to set himself
on fire in order to express his anger, or rather his
despair, at continuing to live in a society where
inequality was increasingly prevalent and where
shameless displays of wealth existed side by side with
rampant poverty.

That act was the trigger for the far-reaching
change that is shaking several Arab States. In fact, it
was a revolution comparable to the French Revolution
of 1789, which Hegel described as a splendid dawn.
From Tunisia to Bahrain, from Egypt to Libya to
Yemen and Syria, young people rose up with a single
voice to demand more justice, more equality and a
better distribution of the wealth of their countries.
They were asking, in a word, for democracy.

Surprised by the scope of the unprecedented
rebellion, some Heads of State were forced out of
power. However, that was not enough to re-establish
calm because, in reality, the aim of the youth
movement was the establishment of a new democratic
society. While a leader may be ousted in a few months,
establishing such a democratic society requires more
time and greater sacrifices.

The challenges of the current situation in the
Middle East are legion, but they also provide major
opportunities for the peoples of the region. The
challenges involve rebuilding countries where justice,
equality and human rights will now be the
cornerstones. From that point of view, re-establishing
peace, security and national unity are the first
challenges to be met. The situation is complicated
further by the uncontrolled movement of weapons, the
emergence of armed militias, acts of vengeance and the
settlement of accounts, refusal to disarm - all of
which exacerbate insecurity and the lack of stability in
the countries and regions involved.

Another challenge to be met is the humanitarian.
In countries where revolution has taken place,
thousands of people have had to flee their homes and
seek refuge in the interior of their countries or in
neighbouring countries. The situation calls for
emergency humanitarian aid, which is not always easy
to mobilize or deploy in isolated areas where access is
difficult. This is where the concept of the responsibility
to protect comes in. The concept must be clearly
defined so that it may be implemented in situations
where human rights are violated on a massive scale.

Beyond those challenges, it must be said that the
convulsions in the Arab world offer opportunities.
These include, most importantly, freedom of
expression, the ability of people to choose their
leaders, and the participation of all stakeholders in
society in the management of public affairs. The
revolutions in the Middle East remind us of the
importance of establishing good economic and political
governance to foster development.

Because such revolutions arise from
unemployment among highly educated and trained
young people, uncontrolled poverty, soaring
commodity prices, the failures of systems of justice,
the abuse of power and corruption, they offer
opportunities to the new leaders of the countries in
question and elsewhere to position the human being at
the heart of development. They must work in a spirit of
openness and complementarity in order to create
conditions conducive to development.

However, new democratic countries and those on
the way to becoming democratic cannot rebuild alone.
They must be assisted with substantial economic aid
that can help them to offer their societies a new way of
life in which young people no longer have to resort to
acts of despair. Indeed, building democratic societies
must go hand in hand with better living conditions for
people. The claims of the people of the Arab world
have now become part of history. Like any impetus for
freedom, they are a wager, and like any wager, they
must be well supported.

