The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of Ghana.

At the outset, let me welcome to the Council my
friend and former colleague Ambassador Jose Luis
Guterres, as well as to wish him well in his new
assignment as the Foreign Minister of his country. Let
me also reiterate our appreciation for the invaluable
contributions of Special Representative Sukehiro
Hasegawa and Special Envoy Ian Martin with regard to
putting Timor-Leste back on track after the unfortunate
disturbances of April 2006. They have not only
highlighted the challenges facing the country, but have
also provided very useful insights and suggestions
concerning the way forward.

Among the priority areas deserving close
attention are the consolidation of democratic
institutions, electoral support, national reconciliation,
law and order, the promotion and protection of human
rights, humanitarian assistance, rehabilitation, poverty
alleviation and the provision of basic services. Meeting
those challenges effectively will require a combination
of local initiative and international support, with the
United Nations in the vanguard. More important, they
also serve to remind us forcefully that six years are not
enough to transform this newly independent country
into a stable and prosperous democracy. As stated in
the Secretary-General's report (S/2006/628), nation-
building and peacebuilding are long-term tasks.
Therefore, in trying to prune down the partnership
between the international community and Timor-Leste,
with the aim of making it more focused, we must also
be careful to strike the right balance, taking into
account the vital lessons we have learned from the
disturbances that broke out in Dili on 28 April 2006.

At the same time, we recognize that the support
of the international community cannot be a substitute
for the determination and commitment of the
Government and the people of Timor-Leste to build a
united, democratic and prosperous nation of their own.
Therefore, we urge that maximum effort be exerted to
develop local capacity as quickly as possible.

On the future role of the United Nations, we
recognize that it is clearly well-placed to define and
manage the role of the international community during
Timor-Leste's transition into a more stable and capable
State. We support the call for a robust United Nations
police, military and civilian mission that would
guarantee law and order pending the reorganization and
restructuring of the Timorese police and armed forces
in order to raise their level of professionalism.

Obviously, no meaningful development can take
place in a climate of lawlessness and impunity. On the
other hand, there can be no lasting security where the
basic needs of the people are not met. In Timor-Leste,
as in other countries in similar circumstances, the link
between poverty and insecurity cannot be denied. Nor
is it easy to reconcile a society in which people find
themselves scrambling for the little that is available.
Inevitably, poverty tends to breed a privileged
minority, and to reinforce a sense of discrimination
among the most deprived. Consequently, in addition to
security-sector reform and institutional capacity-
building, the highest priority must be accorded to the
delivery of basic services such as health, education,
water and sanitation, as well as the creation of
meaningful livelihood opportunities, especially for
young people.

In the short term, however, the humanitarian
consequences of the recent disturbances must be
urgently addressed, in order to prevent internally
displaced persons from aggravating the discontent in
society. Every able-bodied person must be actively and
productively involved in the nation's development.

Not only have recent events exposed the
inadequacies of the governance structures of Timor-
Leste; more important, they underscore the urgency of
alleviating youth unemployment and its attendant
poverty and deprivation. Consequently, the idea of a
Timorese-led "compact" based on the national
development plan should define the depth of
engagement between the international community and
Timor-Leste. Hopefully, next year's elections will
serve as an opportunity for the people of Timor-Leste
to begin afresh with renewed determination to forge
ahead.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I give the floor to Mr. Jose Luis Guterres,
Minister for Foreign Affairs and Cooperation of Timor-
Leste.

