Ms. Menendez (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation associates itself with the condemnation that
you, Mr. President, made on behalf of the Security
Council with respect to the brutal terrorist attack in
Moscow and with the condolences conveyed to the
Government and the people of Russia.
We congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of
the presidency of the Council, and we congratulate
Chile on its endeavours in the presidency last month.

My delegation fully associates itself with the
statement to be made by Ireland on behalf of the
European Union.

Our thanks go to Mr. Holkeri. Spain joins in his
appeal to all leaders and communities of Kosovo to
participate in the process and to achieve the full
attainment of the standards. It associates itself with
others in urging all actors to participate fully in that
process.

Mr. Holkeri's briefing reveals a mixed reality of
bright and dark patches. It revealed that there has been
progress in some areas and worrisome stagnation in
others. For example, there have been improvements in
the security situation, on property rights and on some
legislative and economic issues. But it is very clear that
much remains to be done on privatization, refugee
returns, the direct dialogue and the treatment of
minorities, which are crucial elements of the standards.

The publication on 10 December 2003 of the
"Standards for Kosovo" document was a milestone for
the region. It sets forth on paper, clearly and precisely,
the political objectives that the international
community desires for Kosovo. At the same time, it
reaffirms the principles of "standards before status",
which underpins the entire philosophy. The document
also revives a process that had been somewhat dormant
by providing a renewed frame of reference for the
personnel of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) deployed in the area and
for the local authorities, who have welcomed the
document. Once it is made public, the implementation
plan will be the complementary document necessary
for attaining the ambitious objectives set out in the
"Standards for Kosovo" document. It will enable the
Security Council to have up-to-date and detailed
information on the developments on the ground.

In that connection, Spain believes that the delay
apparently to occur in the document's publication will
be detrimental for UNMIK itself - having stated a
deadline that was not met - and for the process itself,
given the limited time at our disposal. In other words,
we have barely 15 months, with, let us not forget, two
electoral processes to take place in that time. However,
those will not be substantial problems if the plan comes
out soon - as has been announced on several
occasions - and if the premises the entire peace
process has been based so far are respected.
Here, I shall reiterate some of those premises that
Spain believes must be taken into account in the
coming months. First, it is important to note that the
plan is not, and should not be, a joint document of
UNMIK and the Provisional Institutions of Self-
Government. Rather, it should provide a practical
method for complying with, implementing and
evaluating the standards established by the
international community.

Secondly, implementation of the standards does
not prejudge either the decision the Security Council
must take on the beginning of the status process or the
future status of the territory, as the Secretary-General
very clearly notes in his report (S/2004/7l). Rather,
implementation of the work plan is a necessary
condition for creating a reasonable, democratic climate
so that the dialogue can take place in a legitimate
manner.

Thirdly, it is our understanding that the plan's
objective is to measure actual progress made in
implementing resolution 1244 (1999). One of the
requirements that most concerns us is progress in the
direct dialogue with Belgrade. We support
Mr. Holkeri's appeal to the parties to ensure that all
working groups can begin their work as soon as
possible.

Finally, we must not forget that our common
objective is to restore a multi-ethnic Kosovo that is
based on values such as tolerance and mutual respect
and that can freely decide its own future. The
Provisional Institutions, in particular the Kosovo
Assembly, have a very special responsibility for the
success or failure of that process. We urge them to
make progress on the establishment of an apolitical
administration with the participation of minorities at all
levels, including the Kosovo Protection Corps, and on
the economic recovery of Kosovo by means of an
equitable legal framework and a fair privatization
policy. As well, we appeal to the Kosovo Serbs to
participate constructively in this process, one which,
we recall, has the support of the entire international
community.

