Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein): Liechtenstein
strongly condemns all forms of terrorism and reaffirms
its commitment to contributing to the fullest extent
to the international fight against terrorism in all its
aspects, including through cooperation with the relevant
United Nations bodies. We welcome initiatives to
make the United Nations counter-terrorism work more
effective, and share the view that a comprehensive and
holistic approach is the only way to tackle terrorism in
a sustainable manner. Indeed, the 2006 United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy is based on that
notion, and we agree that there is a need to implement
all of its four pillars evenly. In the interest of time, I
will address only a few subtopics of the Strategy in my
statement today.

Effective action to counter the financing ofterrorism
is a key tool for weakening the operational capabilities
of terrorists. It is a top priority of Liechtenstein's
overall commitment to ensuring that its financial
centre is not abused for any type of criminal activity.
The key to success in that area is strong domestic
legislation requiring all financial intermediaries to
exercise due diligence, backed up by Government
institutions - such as financial intelligence units -with
the necessary resources and capabilities to follow up
reported suspicious transactions. In its 12 years of
existence, the Liechtenstein financial intelligence unit
has been the backbone of our domestic effort in that
regard, in cooperation with its international partners.
Furthermore, the Liechtenstein unit continues to assist
other countries in establishing and training their
financial intelligence units, recognizing that capacity-
building is key to our global effort to curb the financing
of terrorism.

Despite the comprehensive nature of the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, police

and military action is frequently at the forefront of the
response to terrorism. Such action is often undertaken
in extreme circumstances and on the basis of sweeping
anti-terrorism legislation. Indeed, it is the duty of every
State to protect its residents from indiscriminate violent
attacks.

At the same time, every effort must be made to
ensure that a Government response to terrorism remains
within the confines of applicable human rights law, as
well as applicable rules of international humanitarian
law. It can be difficult to determine exactly what that
entails in a particular situation, especially as some
applicable rules of international law are rather general
in nature and require a Government's actions to be
proportional to its goals and to balance competing
rights and interests. However, some practices that are
currently applied systematically are clearly ruled out by
international law. The United Nations should do more
to highlight such violations and share best practices in
that regard.

Nevertheless, the main responsibility rests with
individual Governments. They must ensure that the rule
of law is not an afterthought to its counter-terrorism
efforts, but rather its guiding light. Governments
must also consider the extent to which extreme
countermeasures may plant the seed of further terrorist
violence or otherwise undermine the principles of rule
of law and good governance. In that regard, we wish to
commend the Security Council for its continued effort

to strengthen fair and clear procedures for sanctions
listings regarding the individuals and entities associated
with Al-Qaida.

The Council has come a long way in improving legal
remedies for those who - rightly or wrongly - are
affected by sanctions, in particular through the extensive
mandate of the Ombudsperson, Ms. Kimberly Prost.
Now is the time for the Council to apply the lessons
of that process to other sanctions regimes, and thereby
underline its commitment to the rule of law.

Finally, I would be remiss ifI failed to mention the
need to conclude the draft comprehensive convention
on international terrorism as part of our comprehensive
approach. In implementing the Global Counter-
Terrorism Strategy, the various intergovernmental
organs, Secretariat offices and expert groups dealing
with counter-terrorism efforts have been successful,
mainly because they have placed results and
pragmatism above ideology. Who is to say that we will
not one day be able to do the same in the negotiations
on that overarching legal instrument? After more than
a decade of negotiations, it is time to make a last push
for a pragmatic solution - or otherwise to abandon the
effort.

