Mr. Leon: Since my last briefing to the Council
(S/PV.7398), the situation in Libya has continued to
deteriorate amidst significant political fragmentation
and violence. Too many Libyans have died in a fight
among brothers, and far too much destruction has taken
place. The chaos on the ground has also given way to
the expansion of extremist groups, including Daesh
affiliates, into a number of areas across the country.
This vacuum of authority has also been exploited by
human smugglers, and many refugees, asylum seekers
and migrants are using the country as a launching area
for an unprecedented surge in dangerous crossings of
the Mediterranean.

The Libyan people have been crying out for an
end to the chaos. I am pleased to report today that this
message has been heard by a number of courageous
Libyan leaders, who, on 11 July, in Skhirat, Morocco,
initialled a political agreement. This act signalled
the adoption of a framework for further talks and
has brought the country one step closer to ending the
conflict and fulfilling the goals of the 2011 revolution.

While some members of the dialogue were
not present, the message in Skhirat was one of
reconciliation and encouragement for all Libyans to
join together to end the unnecessary state of affairs and
suffering. The agreement was initialled by the dialogue
committee of the Libyan House of Representatives,
boycotting members of the House of Representatives
and independent personalities, as well as a number of
representatives of political parties and of municipalities
from eastern and western Libya who witnessed a
ceremony that was attended by the Foreign Minister of
Morocco.

The initialling of the agreement is only one albeit
important step forward in the process of addressing
the political and institutional divisions. This initialling
also marks a consensus on the text among the parties,
with the clear understanding that it will not be further
amended, without prejudice to the negotiations on its
annexes.

The agreement sets out a comprehensive framework
that will allow Libya to complete the transition that
started in 2011. The text includes guiding principles
and puts in place institutions and decision-making
mechanisms to steer the transition until the adoption
of a permanent constitution. It is intended to culminate
in the creation of a modern, democratic State based on
the principle of inclusion, the rule of law, separation of
powers and respect for human rights.

I want to praise the Libyan participants for their
achievement after months of tough negotiations. It is a
Libyan agreement, developed by Libyan representatives
through their relentless efforts and political
determination. The multiple tracks of this process
sought to involve all segments of Libyan society, from
municipal representatives to political parties, women
and activists who have been engaged since January and
gathered in Algeria, Egypt, Tunisia, Switzerland and
Morocco, and at the European Union in Brussels.

As members of the Council know, the dialogue
committee ofthe General National Congress decided not
to initial the agreement, although it remains committed
to the dialogue process. As I mentioned in Skhirat, I
want to emphasize that the door remains open for them
to join. I also wish to emphasize and acknowledge their
important role in developing the text. The agreement
is also the fruit of their hard work, and they should not
be on the sidelines as the shared vision for a solution to
the crisis continues to take shape. The Libyan people
have unequivocally expressed themselves as favouring
peace, and I am confident that moderate voices will
hear the call and work constructively to end the conflict

and bring Libya back to the path of stability, democratic
transition and economic recovery.

Through the agreement, which has received strong
support from the international community, important
progress has been made. But I shall not shy away from
underscoring that crucial work remains to be done to
complete this first and significant development. As
we move on to the next phase of negotiations, on the
formation of a Government of national accord and
the annexes to the agreement, I am confident that all
remaining issues will be addressed. The Libyan people
deserve a strong Government representing all Libyans,
a Government that the international community can
and will support, to address the many challenges that
the country is facing.

Allow me to express my earnest gratitude to
Morocco and all of Libya's neighbours for their
support and generosity in hosting the many sessions
of the dialogue. Their support, and that of many other
countries, such as Algeria, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Turkey
and the United Arab Emirates, as well as the League
of Arab States and the European Union, has been
crucial in building consensus throughout the process.
I also wish to thank the African Union and the forum
of Libya's neighbouring countries for their support and
for having provided important opportunities for crucial
discussions and exchanges.

In western Libya, local ceasefires and reconciliation
agreements have improved the security situation
and allowed for an improvement in the humanitarian
situation. A growing rapprochement between the cities
of Misrata, Warshafana, Al-Zawiya and Zintan has
been instrumental in facilitating the ceasefires.

In central Libya, Daesh-affiliated militants
established full control over the city of Sirte and the
surrounding coastal area. Misrata forces withdrew to
the area of Abu Grain, some 75 kilometres east of Sirte,
but continue to carry out air strikes and to block the
Daesh advances westward. The prevailing political and
security divisions within the country have prevented
the development of a coordinated policy to deal with
the threat of Daesh affiliates.

In Benghazi, clashes between the Shura Council
of Benghazi Revolutionaries and Operation Dignity
continue, with neither side making significant gains.
The Shura Council of Benghazi Revolutionaries' early
July offensive has not changed the situation on the
ground. In Derna, hard-line Islamists from the Shura
Council of Mujahedin in Derna ejected Daesh from the
city in June.

The United Nations Support Mission in Libya
(UNSMIL) has continued its efforts to convene the
security track ofthe political dialogue. For that purpose,
the Mission has organized a number of meetings with
armed groups in Libya and abroad, and intensified
its regular bilateral contacts with leaders of armed
formations from all sides. We expect to have meetings
in the coming weeks in Egypt and other countries of
the region, and to convene the track of tribal leaders in
Egypt, whose role has been equally important.

The role of security actors is another important
part of the overall reconciliation effort and will
be instrumental in sustaining, supporting and
implementing the political agreement. We have listened
to their concerns and taken on board their contributions,
and it is my intention to convene all those involved in
security before the final signing of the agreement.

With respect to the human rights situation in
the country, violations and abuses of international
human rights and humanitarian law have continued
to take place with impunity across Libya, with the
civilian population bearing the brunt of the protracted
fighting. In Benghazi, where fighting has again
escalated in recent days, the shelling of residential
areas has led to the killing and injury of children and
medical workers, as well as to further destruction of
the civilian infrastructure. The two main hospitals
still functioning, the Benghazi Medical Centre and
the Jalaa hospital, have been hit. Armed men wielding
hand grenades reportedly entered the Medical Centre
on 5 July, threatening doctors and other staff. A number
of civilians are believed to be trapped, including in
Al-Blaad and Al-Sabri, as the warring parties fail to
ensure their safe evacuation. More than half of the
population in Benghazi is estimated to have left in
a bid to escape the violence, and ongoing fighting is
impeding humanitarian relief operations. The situation
in Benghazi, birthplace of the revolution, remains of
serious concern. We must refocus our efforts on that
city in particular to try to put an end to the fighting,
which has caused so much destruction.

In western Libya, periodic outbursts of fighting,
including in residential areas, have led to the killing and
injury of civilians, including children, in the cities of
Al-Zawiya and Al-Ajailat. Armed groups have targeted
individuals because of their family or perceived
political affiliations. Thousands of Libyans remain
illegally detained, including detainees have reportedly
been tortured. They include people held solely based
on their family or tribal identity, and many have been
abducted for the purpose of exchanging them for
fighters. Also among them are humanitarian workers.
I was encouraged by the recent release of prisoners in
various cities during the past weeks. However, all those
illegally detained should be released without further
delay. I have urged all parties to do so before the end
of Ramadan. Such measures are not only a matter of
human rights; they could also contribute significantly
to facilitating the next phase of the political dialogue
and to reconciliation.

I would be remiss ifI did not mention the plight
of foreign nationals, especially irregular migrants from
sub-Saharan Africa, who remain vulnerable to killings,
prolonged arbitrary detention, exploitation and sexual
violence, among other abuses. A number ofnon-Muslim
migrant workers remain missing after having being
abducted around Sirte in previous months. I fear for
their safety after Daesh released videos in February
and April 2015 depicting the brutal killings of some 50
Christians.

The lack of security impedes the resumption of the
work of the judiciary in Benghazi, Derna and Sirte. In
Tripoli, the final session of the trial of Saif Al-Islam
Al-Qadhafi, Abdullah Al-Senussi and 35 other former
regime officials for violations committed during the
2011 conflict took place on 20 May, and the verdict
is still expected on 28 July. Libya must overcome this
dark chapter in its history by holding those responsible
for serious crimes accountable in accordance with
international standards for due process and fair trial.

The overall humanitarian situation continues to
cause concern. The number of internally displaced
persons has doubled since September 2014, and there
has been an underfunded humanitarian response.
Awbari, Ghat and other areas of the south that
require assistance remain largely inaccessible to the
international humanitarian community as a result of
deteriorating security conditions.

Libya is at a critical stage, and it is my duty to seize
this opportunity in addressing the Council to urge all
parties in Libya to continue to engage constructively
in the dialogue process. Spoilers should be held
accountable because they bear the responsibility of
hindering the political agreement. Once again, we
must join together to send an unequivocal message that
only through dialogue and political compromise can
a peaceful resolution of the conflict be achieved. A
peaceful transition will succeed in Libya only through
a significant and coordinated effort in supporting a
future Government of national accord and by ensuring
that sufficient security is achieved in Tripoli and
throughout the country so that the key functions of the
public administration can resume. A Government of
national accord is the only interlocutor through which
the growing threat of Daesh and its affiliate groups can
be effectively tackled.
I am confident that the international community is
ready to offer the needed support based on the priorities
that the Libyans will identify. The United Nations
stands ready to work with the Libyans to ensure national
ownership in that process.

