Mr. Elmajerbi (Libya) (Spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate you, Mr. President,
on the Franco-German co-presidency of the Council's
work this month and to wish you every success. I also
thank Mr. Ghassan Salame, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, for his briefing on the activities
of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya
(UNSMIL). I thank as well Ambassador Juergen Schulz,
Chair of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya,
for his briefing on the work and the activities of
the Committee.

My delegation appreciates all the efforts undertaken
by Mr. Salame' and certain sisterly and friendly
countries to urge stakeholders with influence in Libya
to participate in a political peaceful dialogue that is free
from violence. In that regard, I note the commitment of
the Government of National Accord to the democratic
process, whose aim is to establish the unification of
State institutions and to pave the way towards a civil,
democratic and modern State and ensure that there is
separation of powers.

The President of the Presidency Council of the
Government of National Accord met recently with
Libyan stakeholders to discuss ways of extricating the
country from the current crisis as well as to propose
consensual solutions that could be built upon during the
inclusive National Conference. In that regard, I wish to
stress that the solution is not owned by one stakeholder;
all Libyan stakeholders must be involved in order to
achieve the desired stability and hold presidential and
parliamentary elections by the end of the year on a solid
constitutional basis.

The Libyan people have pinned their hopes on
the inclusive national conference, overseen by the
United Nations, to break the impasse that has marred
the political process in Libya and to put an end to the
power struggle among the various Libyan stakeholders,
who must stop ignoring the sacrifices made by the
Libyans in order to establish a State that places the
supreme interest of its citizens at its very heart and
rejects policies of exclusion. These differences have
had a negative, even destructive impact on the process
of achieving stability and peace in Libya.

Those stakeholders are striving to advance their
parochial interests, forgetting the sacrifices made by
the Libyan people, who are seeking to live in peace
in a civil and democratic State, like other peoples of
the world who enjoy progress and prosperity. Those
stakeholders have for years been presenting pretexts
that can be interpreted only as attempts to maintain the
status quo, under which fear and terrorism reign. This is
undermining efforts to achieve national reconciliation
and build the State so long anticipated by the Libyan
people. We believe that free, fair and inclusive elections
are the only way to emerge from the crisis. Those who
are trying to undermine the efforts under way must
understand that power is not a reward but a national
mission subject to accountability. Those in power must
fight corruption and make tireless efforts to bring about
security, stability and prosperity in the country.

The Government of National Accord has been
making tremendous efforts to bring about economic
stability and security, but it is facing myriad difficulties
and challenges imposed by certain stakeholders in Libya
that do not hesitate to undermine those efforts. They
have launched media campaigns in order not to ease the
suffering of citizens but to create chaos, forgetting that
the Government of National Accord is the Government
of all the Libyan people alike and that it aspires to reach
a consensus that would lift the country out of the crisis.

Despite all these challenges, my country's
Government has initiated economic and financial
reforms that have yielded positive results. At the
security level, despite the difficult circumstances
plaguing the country, the Government is trying to
make changes through programmes carried out by
the Ministry of the Interior aimed at unifying and
strengthening security institutions throughout the
country in order for them to be able to discharge their
duties in a professional manner.

The Libyan Government has consistently supported
all efforts undertaken by the Libyan stakeholders to
restore stability and combat terrorist groups. In that
regard, we note the importance of cooperation and
coordination among all stakeholders throughout the
country in order to enable the State to provide the
services necessary to ensure security and to put an end
to practices of extortion, which are detrimental to vital
facilities and have cost the national economy hundreds
of millions of dollars.

In conclusion, my country's delegation calls on
members of the international community and the
Security Council to set aside their differences, take
advantage of the current circumstances in Libya and
support the strenuous efforts made by Mr. Ghassan
Salame, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, as well as the Libyan stakeholders, through
the holding of an inclusive national conference aimed
at reaching an agreement that would end intra-Libyan
discord and begin a new phase of total peace
throughout Libya.

