Mr. Mufioz (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): I wish
first of all to express my thanks for the report of the
Secretary-General of 13 August (S/2004/669) on
Timor-Leste and the briefing from the Assistant
Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,
Mr. Hedi Annabi, who has given us some information
on the latest developments in the country. I also wish to
commend the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General and UNMISET for the work that they achieved
in these first few months of the new mandate pursuant
to resolution 1543 (2004).

We are encouraged to know that, in spite of the
existing limitations, resolute steps have been taken
forward in this consolidation phase. In particular, we
welcome the fact that the Government has officially
undertaken responsibility for the internal and external
security of the country, adopting a number of
fundamental laws and taking steps in the area of
electoral registration.

As regards UNMISET's functioning, we would
like to highlight three key aspects. With respect to the
first programme element, we hail the improvements in
the capacity and structure of public administration.
However, we concur that, in addition to having civil
servants prepared for leadership roles, the right
personnel must be available for middle management
posts. There is no doubt that the structure and
development of public administration in Timor-Leste
still presents us with significant challenges that must
be taken into consideration.

The work done by UNMISET's civilian advisors
in the instruction and training of civil servants of
Timor-Leste is essential. I would like to stress that,
notwithstanding the existing limitations, Timor-Leste
has a unique opportunity to train public officials who
are dedicated to public service and will also be models
of rectitude and probity.

We share the concern about the lengthy delays in
the administration of justice and the lack that we
perceive in the area of human rights in terms of
procedure, and we agree with the need to develop
capacities in this area. In this context, we welcome the
new measures taken by the coordinating council for the
judicial system.

We would also like to underscore that in May, a
delegation of representatives of the countries from the
convening group of the Community of Democracies,
made up of Chile, the Republic of Korea, Portugal and
the United States, in addition to Australia, Cape Verde,
Italy, New Zealand and Israel, visited Timor-Leste. On
that occasion, they met with the highest political, judicial
and parliamentary authorities, as well as civil society.
They also visited several cities in order to assess the
most urgent needs with regard to institutional
rebuilding and the state of the judicial, social and
electoral systems. At the same time, the delegation
identified areas in which the Community of
Democracies, over which Chile currently has the
honour to preside, could provide cooperation and
support. Next September, in just a few weeks, the
United States and Portugal will issue a follow-up report
to that visit.

In the sphere of human rights, we welcome the
assistance provided by UNMISET through the Serious
Crimes Unit in an effort to shed light on the crimes
committed in 1999. We also wish to highlight the
strategy put forward to process, before May 2005, all
the arrest warrants issued against indicted persons
whose cases have not yet gone before a tribunal. We
must keep in mind that it is likely that that work will
not be completed by the scheduled date, and that we
should therefore not discount the possibility of taking
additional measures in the future if necessary.

In the same vein, we especially appreciate the
work being done by the Commission on Reception,
Truth and Reconciliation. We look forward with
interest to its final report and recommendations on
additional activities, which the Commission will issue
towards the end of October.

With regard to programme 11, we particularly
welcome the work done by the national police, as
Mr. Annabi has highlighted. We note that its 3,020
personnel are already carrying out their work in every
district of the country. Moreover, we believe it
essential to continue to support the training of the
Border Patrol Unit. Despite the progress made, we
agree that the national police should continue its
training, in particular with regard to achieving greater
professionalism, efficiency and responsibility, with
strong emphasis on respect for human rights. We also
note the work done by UNMISET's political
component in providing training, education and
supervision for the national police of Timor-Leste.

With regard to programme III, concerning the
maintenance of security, we welcome the fact that the
situation in the country has been fairly calm. However,
we should not overlook certain areas where there is
instability, such as smuggling, illegal trafficking and
border crossings and the demonstrations that have
taken place in Dili, as Mr. Annabi has also noted. In
that regard, we believe that the provisions of resolution
1543 (2004) thus far appear to have proved appropriate
and reasonable.

Lastly, another key challenge in attaining stability
in Timor-Leste is to achieve a level of economic
development that makes it possible to overcome
poverty, create jobs, improve the well-being of the
population and attain the social and economic success
that the country desires. In that connection, we wish to
highlight the assistance programmes being carried out
by the United Nations, the Bretton Woods institutions
and several donor countries. However, it is clear to us
that even more support from the international
community is necessary to tackle, among other things,
the lack of employment, the low level of development
and poverty. In that regard, we hope there will be
greater progress in exploiting the country's mineral
resources. I am certain that many countries can provide
assistance in that area, including mine.

We welcome the cooperation that exists between
Timor-Leste and Indonesia. We are pleased at the
willingness shown to achieve an agreement on the
territorial borders, as well as at the progress that Mr.
Annabi has just spoken of. We hope that a definitive
agreement will soon be reached, which we are certain
will have a very significant impact on improving
bilateral relations. We also hope that progress will
continue to be made in other important areas of
bilateral relations. In particular, we hope that those
responsible for serious crimes committed in 1999 will
be held accountable for their actions.

Finally, we also wish to commend the valuable
work done by other regional actors and by donors from
the international community. Chile, which has stood by
Timor-Leste from the outset and which contributed
troops in the early stages, hopes that this young country
will become an international model of success and hope.

