Mr. Bermudez Alvarez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, I would like to commend the
President of the Council for choosing this subject as
the topic for one of the open debates during the Polish
presidency for the month of May.

The United Nations came into existence in 1945
with the aim of achieving world peace and agreeing on
a union of States that, through friendly and cooperative
relations, would resolve their conflicts using peaceful
means. The Charter of the United Nations established
a series of principles to guide relations between the
States and joint bodies to advance the achievement of
the Organization's objectives. The Security Council
was created as part of its organic system and tasked
with safeguarding international peace and security. In
that regard, Article 24 of the Charter establishes that

"In order to ensure prompt and effective action
by the United Nations, its members confer on the
Security Council primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security,
and agree that in carrying out its duties under
this responsibility the Security Council acts on
their behalf."

The Charter thus gives the Council responsibility for
the maintenance of peace and security, which must be
fulfilled within the framework of international law and
with respect for the principles it establishes. The most
basic principle in the system that we have created is
refraining from resorting to the threat or use of force
against the territorial integrity or political independence
of any State. International peace is also maintained
through the peaceful settlement of disputes, as the
Charter indicates. In that area, we should strengthen
relations with the International Court of Justice, the
judicial organ of the United Nations charged with
resolving disputes. That is the arena that the Security
Council should use to promote the settlement of
disputes, especially legal ones, when other means such
as negotiation or mediation have proved ineffective.
Uruguay, as a member of the Accountability,
Coherence and Transparency group, advocated for
transparency in the work of the Security Council
during the period when it had the honour of being one
of its non-permanent members. We therefore always
stress the need for, and act in such a way as to uphold,
such transparency.

In keeping with the responsibility conferred on
it, the Security Council must strive to ensure respect
for human life in situations where conflict could not
be averted, through resolutions aimed at ensuring
respect for humanitarian law, and impose sanctions
when necessary.

Along the same lines, the Security Council should
resort to the special international tribunals, and, in
compliance with the mandate set out in the Statute of the
International Criminal Court in its article 13 (b), play
a more active role in the prosecution of crimes against
humanity, war crimes and genocide, as well as the
crime of aggression, which will now be covered. Under
this mandate, as appropriate, the Council must refer
allegations of such crimes to the International Criminal
Court and undertake the relevant investigations,
prosecuting and punishing perpetrators and combating
impunity. The Security Council could also, through
a resolution, request the Prosecutor not to initiate or
defer an investigation, as provided for in article 16 of
the Statute.

On this point, unfortunately, much has been
said about attributing criminal responsibility to
perpetrators 4 widely known as accountability 4 but
very little has been done. We should give thought
to the deterrent effect that a functioning, effective
international criminal-justice system would have on
potential perpetrators and warlords.

The international community can safeguard peace
by maintaining abalance that depends on every one ofits
member States and by upholding the legality emanating
from this Organization 4 a common body of law that
differs from States' domestic legislation and consists of
compliance with international norms or derives from
certain generally accepted and practiced behaviours.

We are currently witnessing a worrisome trend of
many Member States' non-compliance with Security
Council resolutions, reflecting a lack of or weak
adherence to the international law emanating from that
body and the system as a whole. In abiding by these
norms, account should be taken of the scope of action
and functions of the Security Council, which must not
overstep its mandate. We must not lose sight of the
principles of non-intervention and self-determination
in dealing with internal conflicts. The Council must act
using the means and within the scope established in the
Charter, and, when the conditions and situation demand
it and in adopting measures, it should particularly bear
in mind the principle of proportionality.

As has been noted, Council resolutions should
bolster as well as be motivated by and focused on the
protection of human beings and the strict observance
of international humanitarian law and international
human rights law.

In a situation such as this, where we are trying
to strengthen preventive action by various means,
the Security Council can use all the available tools
granted to it to maintain peace. Perhaps we should try
to find new and imaginative ways to achieve this by
promoting fresh forms of dialogue that start right here
in the Security Council itself. Uruguay believes that the
time has come for a change of pace in the work of the
Security Council, which, without abandoning its focus
on legality or overstepping its mandate, could become
more unified and effective in a framework of respect
for all and on the basis of all the guiding principles set
out in the Charter, which gave rise to the Organization.

