Mr. Pressman (United States ofAmerica): I should
like to welcome European Union High Representative
for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy Federica
Mogherini to the Security Council and to thank you,
Mr. President, and the Secretary-General for your
briefings today.

As you rightly point out, Mr. President, we face
pressing and unprecedented challenges that are as
diverse as they are dangerous. Our approach to each
of them underscores the depth and importance of our
partnership with the European Union (EU), and I would
like to discuss a few of these this morning.

All of us, from countries near and far, have watched
with horror as medieval barbarism has engulfed swathes
of territory in Syria, Iraq and northern Nigeria. Boko
Haram and the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL) have demonstrated more than a zeal for cruelty;
they have a professed disgust for modernity. Rational
thought, diversity of faith and difference of any kind is
used as justification for crimes so barbaric they shock
our conscience.

And yet, despite this unfolding horror, we see too
many citizens of too many nations, including many of
those represented around this table, travelling great
distances to join this crusade of cruelty. If we are to
advance the cause of international peace and security,
if we are to protect the most basic freedoms of faith,
expression and thought, if we are to prevail over terror,
we must remain strong in our condemnation of, and
united in our resolve to confront, those who facilitate,
conspire or participate in the murderous work of ISIL
and Boko Haram. And when their depraved ideology
manifests itself further abroad, whether in the offices
of a French paper that expressed itself through satire
or in the slaughter of innocents shopping in a kosher
market, we must remain resolute in our determination
to defeat this new threat to our global society and our
collective freedoms.

As such, we welcome the European Union's recent
announcement of a €1 billion package to address the
situation in Syria and Iraq and to advance the fight
against ISIL. The EU's release of a regional strategy
in February is a valuable addition to the international
community's response to this crisis.
While we speak often of countering violent
extremism, and we all agreed in resolution 2178 (2014)
that this is an essential element in responding to the
foreign terrorist fighter threat, we know too little about
what works and even lack a shared understanding
of what it means. One Member State's countering
extremism can become another Member State's
definition of political repression. We should not gloss
over the potential for manipulation, but neither should
we shy away from tackling the problem of too many
people, in too many countries, signing up with terrorist
organizations that seek to threaten the very fabric of
our civilized world.

Countering violent extremism, therefore, must
be an active process of engagement at the local level
providing services to those who need them, resources to
those without them, building resilience in communities
targeted for recruitment, and highlighting paths to
peace for those being drawn down the roads of terror.
Doing any of this is a lot harder than talking about it,
and that is why the White House convened a high-level
summit focused on countering violent extremism in
Washington last month, to help share best practices,
develop new strategies and seize opportunities. We are
encouraged by the level of support and pledges already
announced by our partners, including the European
Union, to follow up on the principles and goals agreed
upon at the summit. That is a challenge that we must
confront, and we must succeed.

The fight against terrorism unites each member
of the Council. We should be just as unified in our
respect for the sovereignty, independence, unity and
territorial integrity of fellow Member States. Over
the past year, however, we have seen peace in Europe
challenged in the most fundamental manner. Russia, a
permanent member of the Council, has taken it upon
itself to seize territory, sponsor instability and redraw
the international borders of its neighbour Ukraine. We
commend the actions the European Union has taken,
including the imposition of sanctions, to exert pressure
on Russia to de-escalate the situation in Ukraine.
Those sanctions must remain in place until Russia
fully implements its commitments under the Minsk
agreements. We will continue to work with the EU and
to use all available multilateral avenues to seek a swift
resolution to the ongoing conflict, which has caused so
much suffering to the Ukrainian people. The September
Minsk agreements have been signed. The package
of measures to implement the Minsk agreements has
also been signed. Now it is time for those agreements
to translate into changed behaviour. Both Russia and
the separatists it supports are signatories to the Minsk
implementation plan, and we expect Russia and the
separatists it supports to honour the agreements they
have signed.

The European Union and the United Nations are key
partners in the efforts to advance Middle East peace,
including in their role as members of the Quartet. We
remain committed to working with the parties and all
of our partners to achieve a comprehensive and lasting
peace between the Israelis and Palestinians. Despite
some biased accounts of the facts on the ground that we
have heard today, we continue to believe that final-status
negotiations are the only way for the parties to reach a
peaceful resolution.

Of course, in order to ensure peace and stability
in the Middle East, we must ensure that Iran does not
acquire a nuclear weapon. Iran's nuclear programme is
rightfully a matter of deep and serious concern for the
entire world. We believe that diplomacy is the preferred
route to our shared aim to ensure that Iran does not ever
obtain a nuclear weapon. That is why we continue our
critical work with the EU in the P5+1 negotiations. That
is why we must ensure that Iran cooperates seriously
with the International Atomic Energy Agency. That
is why we must stringently enforce the resolutions
adopted by the Council. We must not allow Iran to
obtain nuclear weapons.

When it comes to peacekeeping, all of us must do

more. The Organization needs the support of advanced
militaries now more than ever. We have seen the role EU
civilian and military operations have played to battle
piracy off the Horn of Africa, to train troops in Mali,
to strengthen security in the Central African Republic,
to build civilian capacity in the Niger. Twenty years
ago, European countries were also leaders in United
Nations peacekeeping; 25,000 troops from European
militaries served in United Nations peacekeeping
operations, more than 40 per cent of the Blue Helments
at the time. Today, United Nations peacekeeping
would benefit exponentially from a more diverse array
of troop contributors and other forms of assistance.
As Ambassador Power announced just hours ago in
Brussels, that is why President Obama will be hosting a
summit of world leaders in September in New York to
help ensure that the United Nations and the world have
the peacekeepers needed to address today's crises.

The values on which the European Union was
founded are the same ones that give strength to the
United Nations. They are the values that catalyse our
collective action and animate our pursuit of peace and
security. They are the values that recognize the strength
and diversity of expressions, richness in diversity of
perspectives, resilience in diversity of belief and faith
in the enduring promise of equality and freedom for
all. As we navigate the many challenges and threats we
confront, we will continue to rely upon and take great
pride in our and the Organization's deep and enduring
partnership with the European Union.

