Mr. Vinay Kumar (India): At the outset, let me
thank the Deputy Secretary-General, the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees and the Ministers
from Iraq, Jordan, Lebanon, Turkey, Colombia, France,
Morocco, Togo and the United Kingdom for their
participation in today's meeting and for their statements.

Since the beginning of the crisis in Syria, in March
2011, the situation has steadily deteriorated. More than
2.5 millionpeople are inneed ofhumanitarian assistance,
more than 1 million are internally displaced and more
than 200,000 are refugees. The continuing military
operations by all sides have prevented the timely and
adequate delivery of humanitarian assistance to those
in need. Efforts by the international community have
so far failed to address the crisis, which is increasingly
affecting the region as a whole.

It is unfortunate that neither side to the Syrian
conflict has implemented its obligations under the
six-point plan, which was endorsed by resolutions
2042 (2012) and 2043 (2012). The conflict has become
increasingly more militarized and has been exploited
by well-known terrorist groups. A number of terrorist
acts have been committed against State institutions and
public infrastructure. There have been gross violations
of human rights by all sides. Unfortunately, the Syrian
parties, instead of seriously commencing a Syrian-led
political process, have pursued a military approach to
realize their objectives.

We strongly condemn all violence and violations
of human rights irrespective of who their perpetrators
are. We also condemn in the strongest possible terms
the terrorist acts that have been and continue to be
committed in Syria. We call upon all parties, Syrian as
well as foreign, to dissociate themselves from terrorist
groups and ensure that no space or justification is
provided for terrorist acts.

Under the prevailing circumstances in Syria, there is
an urgent need for the international community to close
ranks and send a united message to the Syrian parties to
renounce their military approach and resolve the crisis
through an inclusive, Syrian-led political process. There
is no other way to bring about a sustained cessation of
violence in all its forms by all parties. That is also the
only way to end human rights violations and create
an atmosphere conducive to the safe and unhindered
delivery of urgently needed humanitarian assistance.
Any further militarization of the conflict will not only
make it more difficult to reach a political solution,
but also exacerbate the humanitarian situation. In that
connection, any militarization of the humanitarian
situation will worsen the security situation and the
humanitarian conditions for millions of Syrians; it must
therefore be avoided.

In order to assist the Syrian parties, change their
course and address the crisis through political dialogue,
it is important that all parties, inside and outside Syria,
fully abide by their obligations under resolutions 2042
(2012) and 2043 (2012). The parties must be prevailed
upon to implement the relevant resolutions of the
Security Council and the final communique issued on
30 June in Geneva.

India firmly believes that it is critical for the
United Nations to remain strongly engaged with the
Syrian parties and other actors in the search for a way
forward. Unilateral action of any kind will not resolve
the crisis. It will only exacerbate the problem and cause
greater instability and violence, even beyond Syria's
borders. We also believe that the leadership of Syria
is for Syrians to decide through a democratic process.
The task of the international community, anchored in
the United Nations, is to assist the Syrian parties in that
process.

India has consistently called for and supported
international efforts to assist the Syrian parties in
resolving the crisis and bringing about peace through
dialogue and political processes. Accordingly, we
strongly supported the efforts of Joint Special Envoy
Kofi Annan. We now welcome the appointment of
Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi as the new Special Envoy and
urge all sides, Syrian and foreign, to cooperate with him
in good faith so that the Syrian crisis can be resolved
without any further bloodshed.

