Mr. Burian (Slovakia): At the outset, I would
like to join my colleagues in thanking Mr. Schwarz-
Schilling for his briefing and valuable observations
concerning current developments in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. We also wish to extend our welcome to
the Chairman of the Council of Ministers of Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Mr. Adnan Terzic.

Slovakia fully aligns itself with the statement that
will be delivered shortly by the Permanent
Representative of Austria on behalf of the European
Union. I will therefore limit my statement to the
following few points.

We would like to commend the remarkable
progress that Bosnia and Herzegovina has achieved in
its transformation process, overcoming a very difficult
legacy of war and inter-ethnic conflict. We believe that
European integration has been and remains one of the
decisive factors in the context of stabilization and
peacebuilding in Bosnia and Herzegovina and in the
western Balkans as a whole. That is why we support
the continuation of the integration processes, so as to
ensure the future of Bosnia and Herzegovina and of
other countries of the western Balkans in the European
Union (EU).

At the same time, we understand that Bosnia and
Herzegovina must overcome many challenges and
avoid many pitfalls on its way towards integration into
the EU and lasting stability.

First of all, Bosnia and Herzegovina needs
stronger State institutions, including judiciary and law
enforcement structures compatible with European
standards. The current system of government is
unsustainable and requires sweeping constitutional
reforms. In that context, we welcome the progress
achieved so far in the ongoing talks on constitutional
reform.

We encourage political leaders in Bosnia and
Herzegovina to continue their efforts to overcome the
remaining disagreements. The political parties must put
aside their narrow political and ethnic interests so as to
reach agreement on the reform package currently under
discussion in Bosnia and Herzegovina's parliament and
adopt it expeditiously.

Secondly, we agree with Mr. Schwarz-Schilling
that it is high time to change the form of the
international community's engagement in the country.
Bosnia and Herzegovina and its democratically elected
leaders and institutions must gradually assume full
ownership and responsibility for the transformation
processes, with, of course, the continued support and
assistance of the international community, especially
the EU.

In that context, we welcome the very constructive
stance of the High Representative and EU Special
Representative Mr. Schwarz-Schilling, who is ready
and willing to take on more of an advisory role rather
than use his executive Bonn powers.

Thirdly, we also agree that special attention
should be paid to security sector reform, including
police reform, aimed at creating a single professional
police force recruited on the basis of technical, not
political, criteria. We welcome the continuing progress
in this direction and, in that regard, we commend the
role of the European Union Police Mission in the
police reform.

In that context, we also wish to point out the need
to resolve the problem of those police officers who
were decertified by a United Nations Police Task Force
decision. We believe that all decertified police officers
should be guaranteed due process, including the right
to appeal. We believe that urgent, direct United Nations
action in that regard is required to solve this problem
as soon as possible, bearing in mind the political
sensitivity of the issue and the credibility of the new
State institutions in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

In that connection, we would like to ask
Mr. Schwarz-Schilling to elaborate a little bit more on
possible ways of addressing this problem and on the
possible implications of this issue for the police reform
and the transformation processes, including the
forthcoming elections.

Last but not least, we would like to express our
appreciation at the progress made in the framework of
the cooperation of the Bosnia and Herzegovina
authorities with the International Criminal Tribunal for
the former Yugoslavia (ICTY). We would like to
encourage all parties, institutions and leaders in Bosnia
and Herzegovina to help and contribute to bringing the
remaining perpetrators to justice, thus closing this very
sad chapter in the history of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
This step is, in our opinion, very important for final
reconciliation in Bosnia and Herzegovina, as well as
for the country's integration in the EU.

In conclusion, I should like to assure you,
Mr. President, that Slovakia is ready to continue its
active support and assistance to Bosnia and
Herzegovina in its transformation and integration and
to share the experience of our own successful
transformation.

