Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in French): First of all, allow me to thank Mr. Annadif,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, for
his briefing and his unwavering commitment to peace
and reconciliation in Mali, of which we are all aware.

I would also like to welcome Mr. Tiebile Drame,
Minister for Foreign Affairs and International
Cooperation of Mali, and thank him for coming all the
way to New York to participate in today's debate.

Since our last debate on the situation in Mali in
March (see S/PV.8497), regrettably, more Blue Helmets
and Malian soldiers have fallen in the line of duty and
more acts ofviolence against civilians, which have been
particularly shocking, have occurred in the country. I
would like to honour the memory of all ofthose victims.

The implementation of the Agreement on Peace and
Reconciliation in Mali has not progressed as quickly as
we had all hoped. Belgium is deeply concerned about
the delays in its implementation. Such delays serve
only to bolster the enemies of peace, who are quick
to denounce the path of dialogue and compromise
as a dead-end and, instead, promote violence as an
alternative. Such violence has now spread to central
Mali and even beyond the country's borders. However,
Belgium naturally welcomes the recent progress in the
implementation of the agreement.

With regard to the constitutional reform process,
we understand how crucial yet delicate it is. My
country knows that to reach a compromise that satisfies
everyone and ensure proper ownership, including on
the part of women and young people, it is sometimes
better to invest a little time in the process in order to
achieve a solid outcome, rather than impose arbitrary
deadlines. Inclusive political dialogue is crucial
for Mali. However, it obviously cannot be allowed to
slow the implementation of the agreement.

Those efforts and political courage are critical to
carrying out State reform, but must be extended to the
other major provisions of the agreement. I stress that
this responsibility is incumbent upon three signatory
parties and I urge them to make it a top priority. In
addition, those measures will be meaningful only if
they are long-term and enjoy the resources necessary
to sustain them.

Finally, the Council has specific tools to counter
those who obstruct peace. Targeted sanctions have
already been imposed and the Council must be ready to
impose additional sanctions, as needed.

We note that the situation in central Mali
is continuously deteriorating. Terrorist acts and
intercommunal violence are leading to an alarming
downwards spiral. Atrocities at this scale are unheard
of in a country like Mali, a country of peaceful
intercommunal mixing and coexistence. Terrorists
and aggressive militias cannot be allowed to take root.
I therefore encourage the Government to exercise its
sovereign power to ensure the security of its population
by immediately disarming the armed militias and
putting an end to impunity for all criminals. It must
launch investigations and, when it does so, bring
criminals to justice as soon as possible.

More generally, as the Council constantly
emphasizes, the solution cannot be based on security
alone, although that is an essential precondition. The
aspirations expressed with regard to governance, the
fight against corruption, justice and basic services must
be heard. Coexistence and refusal to stigmatize any
particular ethnic group, local mediation and the fight
against impunity are essential elements for restoring
State authority and legitimacy throughout the territory.

In that connection, Belgium welcomes the
implementation of the political framework for crisis
management in central Mali. A solution to the crisis
can be found only through a genuine, Malia-owned
political process, which must be as inclusive as possible
and take all of the dimensions of the conflict into
account. In that regard, my country believes that the
future mandate of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA)
should promote intra-Malian dialogue in the centre of
the country and focus particularly on the protection of
civilians, in support of the primary responsibility of the
State authority.

In conclusion, only the people of Mali hold the
key, and the United Nations must support them in
their efforts.

