Mr. Martirosyan (Armenia): Let me first join
previous speakers in thanking you, Mr. President, for
organizing and presiding over this open debate. We
also express appreciation for the presence earlier today
of the Foreign Minister of Chile.

The plight of children affected by armed conflict
merits the utmost attention on the part of the
international community, and their protection must be
the primary responsibility of all of us.

The delegation of Armenia takes note of some
positive trends in the field of the protection of children
in armed conflict in recent years. As outlined in the
Secretary-General's report, the issue has gained
significant public and political recognition. A set of
legal instruments has been adopted, providing a
comprehensive framework for addressing the issue. We
welcome the recent entry into force of two major
instruments: the Rome Statute of the International
Criminal Court, and the Optional Protocol to the
Convention on the Rights of the Child on the
involvement of children in armed conflict. I would like
to inform the Council that Armenia is a signatory to
both instruments and that their ratification is under
way.
It is unfortunate that, despite the legal safeguards
in place, horrendous violations of children's rights,
such as child soldiering and the killing, maiming and
rape of children, still continue in many parts of the
world. Obviously, it would have been naive to expect
that problems of such gravity could have been resolved
by the mere provision of the relevant legal norms. My
delegation therefore fully supports the Secretary-
General's call for "an era of application" of the
internationally agreed norms and standards for the
protection of children in armed conflict.

We believe that, since it is the primary
responsibility of Governments to ensure the protection
of children in armed conflict and to alleviate their
suffering, States' reporting mechanisms to relevant
treaty bodies and to the Committee on the Rights of the
Child must be strengthened in order to ensure that the
necessary focus is maintained on the issue of children
affected by armed conflict.

Special measures must also be elaborated and
implemented by the international community, and by
the Council in particular, in order to ensure compliance
by non-State actors. In this regard, systematic
monitoring and reporting with respect to the situation
in the field take on particular importance. We view the
integration of child- protection mandates and the
deployment of special advisers in peacekeeping
missions as a positive step forward. However, the issue
of impunity remains critical, and decisive action is
needed in order to put an end to the vicious crimes that
are being perpetrated against children.

The issue of refugee children and their
rehabilitation and reintegration into society are other
important aspects of the problem. Related issues range
from demobilization to the provision of humanitarian
assistance and the ensuring of children's physical and
psychological recovery. We believe also that the needs
of girls must be given special consideration in the
overall policy of addressing the problems of children
affected by armed conflict.

As a country hosting about 65,000 refugee
children from Azerbaijan, the Government of Armenia
deems these issues of particular concern. Despite the
current socio-economic difficulties facing the country,
the post-conflict rehabilitation of children, particularly
with respect to health care and education, are the focus
of the Government's attention. The situation of these
children is also reflected in Armenia's second periodic
report to the Committee on the Rights of the Child
(CRC), which was considered by the Committee on 15
January last.

I would like to take this opportunity to once again
express my Government's appreciation to the United
Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF) and to donor
countries for their assistance and support with respect
to child-related issues.

The protection of children affected by armed
conflict is a complex issue which requires a
comprehensive approach. Armenia therefore believes
that concerted action is necessary at the national,
regional and international levels. We believe also that
our efforts should complement each other, with all
stakeholders utilizing the comparative advantages of
their respective mandates and experience. The
Government of Armenia is committed to doing its
utmost and constructively to contribute to global
efforts to promote this noble cause.

Finally, having followed the discussions, which
evolved in a very constructive manner - something
that is particularly gratifying given the participation of
countries that are not often in agreement with each
other - I cannot but express my regret at the
continued repetition by the delegation of Azerbaijan of
its unchanged rhetoric.

The reference to the so-called military aggression
of Armenia is totally misleading. The resulting
situation is the forced reaction of the people of
Nagorno-Karabakh to Azerbaijan's decision to use
military force to suppress the legitimate, just and
peaceful quest of the people of Nagorno-Karabakh to
exercise the right to self-determination, which is
guaranteed by international law and the United Nations
Charter.

The references to the four Security Council
resolutions on the Nagorno-Karabakh conflict are a
clear attempt on the part of Azerbaijan to read those
resolutions and apply them selectively in a partial and
self-serving manner. Indeed, Azerbaijan itself is in
violation of those resolutions, which urge the parties
concerned to pursue negotiations within the framework
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE) Minsk group, as well as through direct
contacts between them.

Azerbaijan's refusal to engage in direct
negotiations with the elected representatives of
Nagorno-Karabakh is one of the main impediments to
the resolution of the conflict. Meanwhile, what Azeri
representatives continue to fail to acknowledge is that
Armenia has done exactly what the relevant Security
Council resolutions have called on it to do - to use its
good offices with the leadership of Nagorno-Karabakh
to help find a peaceful solution of the conflict.

