Sir Jeremy Greenstock (United Kingdom): Let
me first make very clear the strength of the United
Kingdom condemnation of all terrorist attacks. We
deeply regret the loss of life and extend our sympathies
to the families of the recent victims, which on this
occasion included a 19-year-old British national,
Jonathan J esner, to whom the Permanent
Representative of Israel referred just now. There can be
no valid excuse for the indiscriminate and deliberate
taking of civilian lives, of any nationality, under
whatever circumstances.

Both Palestinians and Israelis must take action to
break the cycle of violence and to help the other party
to do likewise. We should be clear that such attacks are
aimed at the search for peace itself. We should not let
rejectionists succeed in derailing what progress has
been achieved and what we want to achieve in the
future. If the logic of peace were the priority, the Israeli
Government and the Palestinian Authority would be
working together to deal with the threat to the peace
which they both claim to seek.

We are seriously concerned by the worsening
humanitarian situation. The desperation of the
Palestinian population fuels the extremists and stifles
hopes of a political process. While the Palestinian
Authority needs to take concrete steps against
terrorists, Israel should do more to ease restrictions on
Palestinians and to enable economic life to recover and
the humanitarian situation to improve. We are working
with others to help alleviate the suffering and to agree a
long-term resolution to this crisis.

The United Kingdom's diplomacy in all its forms
is aimed at achieving an end to the violence and at
restoring the political process. But we have learnt by
now that the international community cannot impose
peace. We are all now close to disgust that the parties
continue to fail to appreciate that there can be no
military solution. Only a return to the negotiating table
will provide the peaceful solution which we are
convinced both peoples want and deserve.

Israel has a right to exist in security. It is entitled
to take steps to protect itself from terrorist attack, but
these should be neither disproportionate nor excessive.
Deployment of Israeli tanks in Ramallah and Gaza, and
further destruction of President Arafat's compound, are
not the answer. The blockade is unjustified and should
end. Not only is it counterproductive for the search for
long-term security for Israel; it also flies in the face of
the Security Council's sensible and widely supported
prescriptions for eventual peace, most recently
expressed in resolution 1397 (2002).

The Palestinians have a right to establish a
sovereign, viable and independent Palestinian State.
The Palestinian Authority must do all in its power to
prevent terrorist attacks. We welcome its condemnation
of the latest bombings and recent pleas to the
Palestinian population to renounce violence. We stand
ready to help it rebuild and reform itself so that it can
regain the confidence of the international community in
its work to clamp down on violence.

The Quartet set out on 17 September its
commitment to a concrete three-phase implementation
road map. It did this after consultation with Israel, the
Palestinian Authority and representatives of the Arab
League follow-up committee. We fully support the
Quartet in its efforts because they represent the hope of
which the Secretary-General spoke so eloquently to us
this morning. Our focus now should be on agreement to
a detailed road map and its implementation. Bad
decisions and extremist action are standing in the way.

