Mr. Vrailas: I have the honour to speak on behalf
of the European Union and its member State. The
candidate countries the former Yugoslav Republic
of Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia and Albania; the
country of the Stabilization and Association Process
and potential candidate Bosnia and Herzegovina; and
Georgia, align themselves with this statement.

We thank the Venezuelan presidency of the Security
Council for providing the Council and the United
Nations as a whole with this opportunity to reflect
on and reaffirm our commitment to the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations and
their continued relevance in the twenty-first century.
More than ever, the Charter needs to be respected and
implemented. This debate also gives us an opportunity
to pay tribute to those who have sacrificed themselves
in the hope of a free, democratic and peaceful world,
established on the basis of the universal values that not
only underlie the United Nations but also inspired the
foundation of the European Union.

As we mark this year, the fiftieth anniversary of
the International Covenant on Economic, Social and
Cultural Rights and the International Covenant on Civil
and Political Rights, and look ahead to the seventieth
anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights in 2018, it is appropriate to recall that the
Charter of the United Nations has provided the bedrock
on which an extensive network of international human
rights obligations and commitments have been built.

In its work, the Security Council has increasingly
embraced the advancement of human rights as a
critical element of promoting peace and security and
preventing conflicts and atrocities. Ranging from its
consideration of country situations to taking forward
the women and peace and security agenda, such efforts
should continue and intensify. The Council also has the
important power to refer situations in which genocide,
crimes against humanity or war crimes appear to have
been committed to the International Criminal Court, as
well as to decide on targeted sanctions.

The Secretary-General's Human Rights Up Front
initiative also draws on the foundational human rights
principles enshrined in the Charter, in the context of
its aspirations to gear the entire United Nations system
towards the advancement of human rights and to seek to
ensure that mass atrocities become a thing of the past.

In paragraph 4, Article 2, the Charter calls on all
Members of the Organization to

"refrain in their international relations from the

threat or use of force against the territorial integrity

or political independence of any State".
It provides that all Member States shall settle their
international disputes by peaceful means and fulfil
in good faith the obligations assumed by them. The
European Union and its member States are deeply
committed to those core principles of the United
Nations. We firmly believe that there is no place in the
twenty-first century for the use of force and coercion to
change internationally recognized borders in Europe or
elsewhere.

In that regard, the European Union recalls General
Assembly resolution 68/262 and remains strongly
committed to upholding the sovereignty, independence,
unity and territorial integrity of Ukraine. Similarly,
we are heartened by the positive momentum and the
atmosphere surrounding the intensified unification
talks in Cyprus under United Nations auspices. We
look forward to bringing that process to a successful
conclusion and to reaching a comprehensive settlement
as soon as possible, on the basis ofthe relevant Security
Council resolutions and in line with European Union
principles.

Nowhere are the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations being tested more
severely today than in Syria. That conflict continues
to rage, with disastrous consequences for the Syrian
population, for the neighbouring countries and for the
wider region, including for us in the European Union.
We strongly condemn the use of starvation as a method
of warfare, which most of all affects the weakest and
most vulnerable, in particular women, children, older
persons and persons with disabilities. As Secretary
General Ban Ki-moon recently pointed out, the use of
starvation as a weapon of war is a war crime. In that
regard, it is crucial to reaffirm our firm commitment to
fight impunity.

The indiscriminate bombing of civilian areas is
unacceptable. It has led to mass displacements and
huge refugee flows. It has also encouraged recruitment
by, and the flourishing of, terrorist groups in Syria. The
European Union calls on all parties to cease all attacks
on civilian objects and take all the appropriate steps to
protect civilians, including members of ethnic, religious
and confessional communities, and to grant immediate
access to humanitarian relief operations. They must
fully respect international humanitarian law and
implement the relevant Security Council resolutions.
We also recall that the primary responsibility to protect
its population lies with the Syrian regime. When that
responsibility is not fulfilled, the Security Council is
responsible for taking decisive action.

It is indeed urgent to halt the conflict in Syria
and put an end to the suffering of the population. The
European Union fully supports the United Nations
Special Envoy for Syria, Mr. Staffan de Mistura, and
his efforts in Geneva to make progress in the Syrian
political process on the basis of resolution 2254 (2015).

Allow me, in that context, to also welcome the
outcome of the recent international donors conference
in London convened by the United Kingdom, Germany,
Norway, Kuwait and the United Nations on 4 February,
which managed to raise more than $10 billion. The
EU has mobilized almost 65 billion so far. We already
committed substantial support to Turkey, and are
putting together comprehensive support packages for
Jordan and Lebanon.

Against the background of continued suffering in
Syria and the significant challenges that still remain
elsewhere, including in Libya, where the EU strongly
encourages all parties to fully implement the political
agreement, it is important to highlight that important
progress has been made in the region. Last July, after
years of difficult and complex negotiations coordinated
by the European Union, an agreement was reached on
the Iranian nuclear issue. The adoption of the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action in October, endorsed
in resolution 2231 (2015), marked another important
milestone to ensure the exclusively peaceful nature
of Iran's nuclear programme. The proclamation of
implementation day on 16 January marks a further
milestone in that process and demonstrates that
diplomacy and multilateralism deliver effective results
for peace and security. It shows that cooperation can
prevail over confrontation.

The fight against all forms of radicalization,
violent extremism and terrorism continues to be of
paramount importance to the European Union. The
horrific attacks in Istanbul, Paris, Beirut and Garissa
serve as a stark and most egregious reminder of the
unacceptable costs of a collective failure to act swiftly
and effectively. We welcome the Secretary-General's
plan of action for preventing violent extremism,
which was released in January. We look forward to its
discussion and implementation, and trust that further
preventive action will be taken by the Secretary-
General and all bodies of the Organization, including
by the Council, as well as Member States. We also look
forward to engage in the upcoming tenth anniversary
review of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy in June 2016. It remains imperative that the
United Nations ensures coherence and coordination of
its actions in supporting Member States to fight this
scourge. The European Union will continue to step up
its efforts at home and with the external partners in
this area, in line with the relevant Security Council and
General Assembly resolutions, as well as in accordance
with international law, particularly human rights law,
international humanitarian law and refugee law.

