It is an honour for me to address the Council during this open debate on conflict-related sexual violence. The theme of this meeting is more than relevant in a global context characterized by an upsurge in gender-based violence, in general, and conflict-related sexual violence, in particular. As if wars were not devastating enough, thousands of people suffer inhuman sexual violence in times of conflict, committed as a strategy of war, political repression, torture and terror. The Secretary-General's report on this issue (S/2020/487) confirms that sad reality. It is an issue that concerns us all and must be combated. That is why the Niger welcomes this important meeting and thanks Ms. Pramila Patten, Special Representative of the Secretary-General, and the civil society representatives for their insightful briefings. Speaking on the International Day for the Elimination of Sexual Violence in Conflict, Nobel Peace Prize laureate Denis Mukwege reminded us that such acts cause the disintegration of the social fabric and compromise any prospect of lasting peace. I would like to draw the attention of the Security Council and its member States to the particular situation of increased vulnerability faced by people in the Sahel region. For some years now, the tri-border area and the Lake Chad basin have faced a situation of insecurity exacerbated by several factors, such as the presence of armed terrorist groups, the proliferation of small arms, the lack of socioeconomic opportunities, community tensions and the exclusion of young girls and boys from decision-making spheres. It has been noted that violence against women and girls is experiencing an unprecedented upsurge, particularly in the regions of Diffa and Tillberi, where women and girls are suffering severe hardships. These acts constitute a violation of their human rights. In the Lake Chad basin region, terrorist groups such as Boko Haram are abducting girls and women and forcibly integrating them into the ranks of combatants. Forced marriages, sexual slavery and economic exploitation have become the daily lot of these victims. We all remember the abduction of the Chibok and Dapchi girls from the Government Girls' Science and Technical College in Nigeria and the less publicized but equally painful abduction of the women of N'galewa in the Niger. During the first quarter of 2020, in the region of Diffa, 54 kidnapping incidents were recorded, resulting in the abduction of 144 people, including 48 women and 29 children. The Niger calls on all States Members of the United Nations to support the reintegration of victims of sexual violence related to armed conflict in accordance with the survivor-centred approach advocated in resolution 2467 (2019). That approach is all the more important as it considers the context of each case. In most of our communities, these acts of sexual violence are difficult to monitor because they are rarely reported, either because the competent services do not exist or because families, subjected to strong sociocultural burdens, are afraid of social stigmatization. Victims suffer in silence. That work of caring for victims of sexual violence cannot be done adequately without contextual data. That is why my ministerial department conducted a study in 2015 on the extent and determinants of gender-based violence in the Niger. Our research revealed that in the Niger, 53 per cent of the population is or has been subjected to gender-based violence in the course of their lives. Children constitute an important fringe of people affected by such violence, including child marriage. The national prevalence rate of gender-based violence is 28.4 per cent, while the prevalence rate of violence against women is 60 per cent. Women and girls are therefore more likely to be victims of gender-based violence in the Niger. Emergency situations and humanitarian crises linked to natural disasters and the resulting population displacements increase the vulnerability of women and girls. In the early stages of a disaster, those vulnerable groups may be exposed to specific risks, such as separation from their families, which can make them vulnerable to trafficking, abduction and sexual assault. Cognizant of the fact that such violence is an obstacle to the achievement of the objectives of peace, sustainable development and the promotion of human rights, our country has taken legislative, legal, institutional and administrative measures to address it. Among other things, the Niger has made combating violence against women and girls a national priority enshrined in the Constitution of 25 November 2010. In 2010, our country also adopted an ordinance on combating trafficking in persons, particularly women and children. Undoubtedly, the adoption of the National Gender Policy and the National Strategy for the Prevention of and Response to Gender-based Violence in 2017 was a decisive step in the implementation of the national action plan on resolution 1325 (2000) and the women and peace and security agenda. We attach great importance to the holistic care of survivors of sexual violence, especially in the areas most affected by the security crisis. To that end, we have established centres in the regions of Diffa and Tillberi. People there in situations of forced displacement are particularly vulnerable because displaced populations, the majority of whom are women and children, often have fewer opportunities and access to basic services, which can expose them to various forms of gender-based violence, including sexual violence. One of the most effective ways to address conflict-related sexual violence is prevention, including access to quality education. In that regard, the Niger has set up centres for the prevention, promotion and protection of children, which carry out preventive activities in the areas of behaviour change, communication and the handling of cases of victims of gender-based violence. Furthermore, while our country has made significant progress in the area of education, due to the conflict, attacks on education and schools are increasingly becoming a cause for concern. We must protect access to education, especially for girls. That is a sure way to address the root causes of sexual violence, including gender discrimination, the lack of economic opportunities and toxic masculinities. Access to education can contribute to sustainable poverty reduction, address gender inequalities and, simply, promote dignity. The Niger has signed the Safe Schools Declaration and we call on all Member States that have not yet signed it to do the same. In conclusion, the Niger would like to make some additional recommendations: First, with regard to the adoption of a survivor-centred approach, it is important that Member States establish or strengthen their legal and judicial assistance beyond the health, psychological, social and economic dimensions. The National Agency for Legal and Judicial Assistance in the Niger is a perfect example. Secondly, that approach must be contextual and include community outreach activities that consider traditional care mechanisms. Civil society in the Niger is doing remarkable work in that regard, in collaboration with local authorities and women's organizations. Thirdly, implementation cannot take place without reliable and disaggregated data on conflict-related sexual violence. This step is important to ensure more effective implementation of the women and peace and security agenda, on which we are reflecting deeply at this critical juncture for this agenda. Finally, in conflict zones, it is essential that Member States ensure that acts of sexual violence are investigated and perpetrators are held to account. Member States should, therefore, intensify the training of national defence and security forces on gender-based and conflict-related sexual violence. Our country, as a troop contributor, calls for greater efforts to ensure that these issues are taken into account in peace operations and processes, including through the strengthening of early warning systems. In a global context marked by the coronavirus disease pandemic, gender- based violence, including sexual violence, is unfortunately on the rise. The Niger reiterates its commitment to combat gender-based violence and conflict-related sexual violence.
