Mr. Onemola (Nigeria): I, too, wish to thank the
Permanent Representatives of South Africa, India and
Germany for their briefings on the activities of the
Committees established pursuant to resolutions 1267
(1999), 1373 (2001) and 1540 (2004).

Nigeria appreciates the important role played by
the 1540 Committee and its Group of Experts in
strengthening the global non-proliferation regime. In
that regard, we commend Member States for their
increased awareness of their obligations under that
resolution. The increase in reports and the intensified
efforts to promote cooperation between States and
other stakeholders, as well as the adoption of
resolution 1977 (2011) last month, further strengthen

11-3390]
our collective resolve to achieve global security. More
outreach activities, through regular workshops and
consultations at the country and regional levels, will
help to underpin those improvements. They will also
help to address two critical challenges, namely, the
limited implementation of resolution 1540 (2004), in
particular by developing countries, and the lack of
relevant legislative, regulatory and administrative
structures to support implementation efforts.

Nigeria attaches great importance to the clearing
house role of the Committee and expects that the
revised assistance procedures will facilitate the prompt
matching of offers and requests for assistance by
States. By finding potential donors to support
assistance requests, the Committee will help more
States to benefit from relevant technical assistance and
support.

Over the years, resolution 1373 (2001) has
remained an indispensable tool in our collective efforts
to curb the activities of terrorist groups. Resolution
1963 (2010), adopted last year, increases the focus on
the robustness of our engagement on this issue.

Nigeria is satisfied with the role that the Counter-
Terrorism Committee, established pursuant to
resolution 1373 (2001), has played in guiding our
efforts towards the full implementation of both
resolutions. We welcome the Committee's adoption of
a plan of action for the implementation of resolution
1624 (2005). In implementing this resolution, due
cognizance should be taken of a country's and region's
specific experiences and challenges. There is no doubt
that the 1373 Committee's work will also benefit from
outreach activities and sustained dialogue with States.
Both activities will help affected States to develop
relevant legislative, regulatory and administrative
structures to support the implementation of all the
resolutions.

Nigeria notes with satisfaction the depth of the
cooperation that exists among the 1373 Committee, the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
(CTED) and international, regional and subregional
organizations. In this regard, we commend the
Committee on the success of its special meeting in
Strasbourg, France last month. We also note with
satisfaction CTED's ongoing cooperation with the
Economic Community of West African States on
counter-terrorism initiatives in that subregion. I hope

11-3390]
that this cooperation will yield some concrete
outcomes during the coming year.

Nigeria welcomes the changes to improve the
programme of work of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999)
concerning Al-Qaida and the Taliban and associated
individuals and entities, including the regular updating
of the Committee's website and implementation of
recommendations of the last review process. The
improved activities and reports submitted to the
Committee are an indication of the remarkable and
exhaustive work and the unequalled support of the
Monitoring Team.

We commend Ms. Kimberly Prost, the
Ombudsperson, for her valuable work and contribution
to us in improving the procedures of the sanctions
regime. We welcome the recent review of deceased
persons, pursuant to paragraph 26 of resolution 1904
(2009), to keep the Consolidated List updated and
relevant.

The determination of de-listing requests for three
names submitted through the Ombudsperson is a good
example of the application of the reform in a fair and
credible manner. These positive efforts should be
further strengthened through the continuous
improvement of the sanctions regime and by keeping
the Consolidated Lists as accurate as possible. The
need to ensure consistency with international standards
of due process, international law and respect for human
rights must be overriding in the Committee's work. It
is therefore necessary to start considering further
measures to strengthen resolution 1904 (2009).

Active engagement and cooperation between the
three Security Council Committees remain imperative
for strengthening the implementation of their
respective mandates. In closing, we wish to commend
Ambassadors Peter Wittig, Hardeep Singh Puri and
Baso Sangqu for their dynamic leadership and sterling
contributions to the work of their respective
Committees. We assure them of Nigeria's continued
support in the discharge of their daunting
responsibilities.

