Mr. Ruiz Blanco (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
At the outset, I want to thank the Arab Republic of
Egypt for convening this meeting and for the concept
note (S/2016/416, annex) prepared for this debate.

Colombia strongly rejects acts of terrorism and
violent extremism in all their forms and manifestations,
out of our conviction that such acts are criminal and
unjustifiable, regardless of their motivations and at
whatever time or by whomever they are committed.
Those acts pose a grave threat to the life, well-being
and fundamental freedoms of all peoples and threaten
international peace and security by undermining
the values and principles of States, their democratic
institutions, the rule oflaw and the freedoms enshrined
in and promoted by the various instruments of the
United Nations. Terrorism cannot and should not be
associated with any religion, ethnicity, community or
nationality. We must therefore unite to forcefully fight
that scourge based on objective criteria.

At this point, I would like to clarify that, although
Colombia has not suffered the terrible effects of violent
extremism based on religious grounds, it has, for years,
suffered great violence owing to a domestic conflict
in which terrorism was used as a tool of action. As a
result, my country has acquired good practices and
capabilities to deal with such new phenomena, which
could yield notable results.

The Secretary-General's Plan of Action to Prevent
Violent Extremism (A/70/674) offers Member States a
series of recommendations for countering the threat,
which Colombia considers useful. Of particular
interest to this debate are the recommendations on
prevention. States must work with relevant members
of their local communities and with non-governmental
actors in the development of strategies to counter all
kinds of incitement to acts of terrorism, regardless
of their purported justification. We are aware of the
importance of the participation and involvement of
civil society and local communities in efforts to help
the victims of terrorism, especially in the promotion of
trust, harmony and intercultural respect and in efforts
to boost individual and community resilience against
terrorist activities.

Women should be included in all stages of the
design, implementation, monitoring and evaluation
of counter-terrorism efforts. Those efforts must be
accompanied by the promotion of education for girls
and women, which in the medium- and long-term,
enables them to increase their capabilities, knowledge
and resources and which, by extension, will enable
them to play a more active role in the actions that
States and societies take in countering terrorism and
violent extremism.

The policies for the prevention of terrorism and
violent extremism must also focus on our young people,
providing them with opportunities to study and work and
play an active role in their societies. That will minimize
the risk of their being radicalized and recruited by
terrorist groups. Similarly, I consider it important to
highlight the crucial role of the communications media
in sensitizing and mobilizing public opinion against
the atrocities committed by terrorist groups, using an
approach that emphasizes the rights of Victims and
that forcefully condemns the perpetrators of terrorist
acts. The international media have already begun to
contribute to the common goal of creating spaces and
opportunities in which we can raise awareness of the
tragic consequences of terrorism.

At the same time, with regard to prevention, we
must assess the negative impact of the cult of violence,
to which many, in particular those same younger
populations, are exposed. Under no circumstances can
we accept the paradigm in which the use of violence is
presented as an option for resolving conflicts or dealing
with situations of any kind.

Finally, Colombia supports the further strengthening
of international cooperation aimed at supporting
the victims of terrorism, as called for in the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. It is vitally
important that Governments, international and regional
organizations, non-governmental organizations and
the media continue the work of supporting the victims
of terrorism. My delegation reiterates its commitment
to continuing to work actively with the international
community in the discussion of this issue and in
particular on the deliberations that will begin this
week for the fifth Review of the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy. Dialogue, cooperation
and concerted efforts are indispensable to a civilized
coexistence free of the scourge of terrorism.

