Mr. Brahimi: I thank you very much, Sir, for
inviting me to take part in today's debate.

Your concept paper for today's debate sets the
problem very accurately and very clearly. When a
peace agreement has been signed and a United Nations
peacekeeping operation moves in, there are certain
critical needs that must be swiftly addressed if we are
to have a real chance of building a sustainable peace,
and yet we continue to face many of the same
challenges that existed a decade ago and more.

In the limited time available to me, I shall address
only two issues: funding and civilian capacity. I shall
do so briefly and draw exclusively on my past personal
experience.

Looking back to Afghanistan in December 2001,
the political challenges were great, but we had one
important factor working in our favour - there was
enormous international attention focused on the
country and a strong commitment to making the peace
process succeed. That, we knew, would bring us a lot
of good will and political support. Most important, we
also expected it to provide us with some cash. As I told
the many observers present with us at the Bonn peace
talks, we needed to arrive in Kabul with money in a
bag - to take it with us - because we had to begin
providing some peace dividends soon after our arrival.
However, while we had plenty of ideas, we had
very little money to pay for them, and I must confess
that what little cash we did have we did not always use
wisely. For example, we needed to get the ministries up
and running. So what did we do? We bought, for each
minister, one car, one desk, one chair and one

computer. That served only to embarrass the minister
in front of his officials because, in his department,
there were no desks and no chairs, windows were
broken and there was no electricity and no heating. We
next embarrassed ourselves when we invited Afghan
ministers and other officials to the inauguration of the
beautifully refurbished offices of one of our agencies.
While Government offices still had no electricity, no
heating and no water, that particular building of ours
had been redone fast and to the highest international
standards. Its transformation did not go unnoticed by
the Afghan population.

In Afghanistan and elsewhere, United Nations
officials are often asked how much of the funds
donated to help these countries is actually spent by the
United Nations and international non-governmental
organizations on themselves and why. They do not
understand why the funds pledged to them actually go
into two very separate pots - one pot that was
intended for the host country and a separate pot that
would pay for refurbishing United Nations buildings,
purchasing fleets of big white vehicles, and bringing
lots of highly paid international staff.

As if to add insult to injury, while the pot that
pays for refurbishing our own offices, running our
generators and paying our own personnel fills up rather
quickly, the other pot does not. In Afghanistan, while
hundreds of millions were contributed to United
Nations agencies in the early days, very little was
available directly to the ministries and other national
institutions. Besides, I am sure that everyone must
have seen the recent Oxfam study that said that a
staggering 40 per cent of the funds donated go back to
donor countries in the form of salaries for expatriates
and the like.

Thus, we had to resort to creative measures to
establish a mechanism within the Government, with
support from donors and the United Nations
Development Programme, to ensure that the very
modest salaries of all civil servants were paid. That
was a real exploit that had to be repeated every month.
Rebuilding roads, hospitals and schools had to wait. It
needed even more ingenuity and the patient support of
many dedicated and able ambassadors, including one
now present in this Chamber, United States
Ambassador Khalilzad.

Peacebuilding does not occur just by sending
United Nations staff to a country and putting our flags

in the ground. Funds are needed. The most complex
operations, from Haiti to the Sudan, from the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to Afghanistan,
have peacebuilding activities at the very core of their
mandates, ranging from police reform and the
strengthening of judicial institutions to elections and
the refurbishment of prisons, yet they have no
allocations in their budgets for those activities. That
creates a huge gap at a time when the greatest risk
exists of relapse into conflict.

United Nations trust funds have been established
in a few missions to make funding available from
voluntary contributions. However, 13 per cent of the
contributions have to be paid to the United Nations for
what are called programme support costs. Nobody has
been able to explain to me why such a staggering tax is
imposed on those trust funds. It is, fortunately, possible
to negotiate a substantial reduction of that tax, but it
takes months to bring such negotiations to a fruitful
end. It is no wonder that many donors balk at
contributing to those trust funds. In addition, missions
complain about the cumbersome procedures for
accessing funds. As a result, after all these years and
struggles, we are still unable to use the trust funds
effectively.

I now come to the issue of civilian capacity. You
will recall, Sir, that we tried to approach our mandate
in Afghanistan with what we called a light footprint.
That concept is really very simple. We should have as
many international staff as we need to get the job done,
but not one single staff member more than that. Our
goal in the mission, individually and collectively,
should be from the outset to work ourselves out of a
job. We should not suddenly realize, as our mandate is
coming to a close, that we have overlooked the need to
build national capacity. That is one area in which I
believe we continue to do rather poorly.

First, we assume that each country we enter has
little or no capacity of its own. Perhaps that is because
we do not look hard enough. In Afghanistan, which had
been ravaged by 23 years of war, we met countless
Afghans with skills that the United Nations could have
used. If we had made it a priority at the outset of the
mission to recruit Afghans, we could have hired many
of them to serve in all parts of the Administration, in
Kabul as well as in the provinces, and a very large
number of positions within the United Nations mission
and agencies might have been filled by locals. Even if
we could not find the expertise we needed in the
country, there was an Afghan diaspora - at least
Smillion-strong ~ most of which was across the

border in Pakistan and Iran.

The second issue is the size of our missions and
the fact that we are never able to recruit our authorized
staff in a timely manner. We then attribute many of the
mission's failures to the shortfall in staff. Some
suggestions have been put on the table, such as having
national Governments assist with developing civilian
cadres and rosters of rapidly deployable civilians.
Those are worthwhile suggestions and they must be
explored. I personally believe that the real need is in
the field of the rule of law and my favourite option
would be for the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations itself to be enabled to establish its own
roster of retired policemen, judges and so on. I know
for a fact that in many countries large and small, in the
North and in the South alike, such capacity does exist
and awaits to be mobilized, but perhaps those
difficulties in identifying experts, along with the lack
of programmatic funds for peacekeeping operations,
offer a good opportunity to the Council to re-examine
its own approach to peacekeeping mandates.

I have the impression that one of the key
recommendations contained in the 2000 report of the
Panel on United Nations Peace Operations
(8/2000/809) is not always fully taken into
consideration when peacekeeping mandates are
discussed. That is the recommendation that the Council
should give the United Nations achievable mandates
and ensure that the mission is provided with all the
resources - staff, funds and equipment - that are
necessary to do the job. We must also ask whether the
United Nations, given its conditions of service, will
ever attract qualified staff in sufficient numbers. And
we must ask whether we will continue to have
difficulty persuading qualified individuals, especially
women, to work in non-family duty stations.

Perhaps more important, we must avoid putting
together "template" missions that set out complex and
ambitious tasks for imagined armies of expert civilians
who are to carry out the same laundry list of tasks in
dramatically different post-conflict settings. It would
pay out handsomely for us to take the time to look at
the capacity that exists in-country and to see how the
United Nations could partner with domestic
institutions, rather than setting up our own heavy and
costly structures.

To state the obvious once again, mandates must
be based on the actual - not the perceived - needs of
any given country. We cannot fully understand those
needs until we have been present for a while, engaged
in a dialogue with leaders and civil society, and until
we have, together with them, formed a clear
understanding of what is really needed. I believe that
such an approach would move us towards much
smaller, more focused missions.

At the same time, leaders of peacekeeping
missions should not forget that other United Nations
entities have preceded them in the country where they
themselves have just arrived; those entities may even
have been working there for years and years, perhaps
decades. The new mission must endeavour to
complement - not duplicate or replace - the work of
the United Nations agencies already there. Allow me to
insist on the importance of the light-footprint approach
and on the necessity of systematically exploring the
possibility of using local capacity as early and as
extensively as possible. Others are doing this; why not
the United Nations?

The Swedish Committee for Afghanistan is a non-
governmental organization that has been active in
Afghanistan since the early 1980s. It is funded by the
Government and the people of Sweden, and it now
employs 8,000 Afghans, including doctors, teachers
and engineers. Yet it does not count more than
15 internationals among its staff. The United Nations
itself runs very important and successful demining
activities, with 7,000 to 8,000 Afghans and only around
20 internationals.

I often say that, if I could return to Afghanistan in
the year 2001, one of the things I would do differently
would be to place priority on strengthening the rule of
law. What do I mean by that? Do I mean that we should
have had more foreign experts focusing on rule-of-law
issues, drafting laws and training judges? No; what we
needed was better and more effective use of our
political leverage on that issue. We should have played
a stronger and a more proactive political facilitation
role in uniting the various national actors behind a
common vision and a national plan for strengthening
the rule of law in the country.

In that connection, I am pleased to see that the
Secretary-General has just issued a new guidance note
on a common United Nations approach to the rule of
law, which highlights that the role of the United

Nations is to facilitate the processes through which
various national stakeholders debate and outline the
elements of their countries' plans to strengthen the rule
of law and secure sustainable justice, and that the aim
of United Nations rule-of-law assistance is to help
those national stakeholders to develop their own
visions, agendas and approaches to reform and
programmes.

Process, leadership and decision-making must be
put in the hands of national stakeholders as early as
possible. The Secretary-General correctly states that
rule-of-law assistance has often overemphasized
technical dimensions and paid less attention to political
and strategic considerations and that, until national
stakeholders see the utility of supporting rule-of-law
development, technical assistance will have little
impact.

The Council does not need to be reminded of the
importance of the role that the United Nations plays in
helping countries to manage and resolve their conflicts
and to rebuild their national institutions and
economies. Precious experience has been gained over
the years, and United Nations missions perform better
today than they did a few years ago. But we must not
be complacent. Quite a few missions are struggling to
find the right balance between the goals set for them
and the resources that they have been able to obtain. In
particular, funding and civilian capacity are two of the
important gaps that need to be addressed most urgently.
The manner in which the Council discusses and
decides on peacekeeping mandates may contribute
significantly to the solution of these problems.

The international community spends billions
every year on peacekeeping. It is clearly not good
enough that, in some cases, we have entered host
countries to the sound of the population's cheers, only
to bow our heads in disbelief and embarrassment in the
face of that same population's disappointment, anger
and even hostility a few months later because we have
been unable to deliver tangible peace dividends.
However, this is not inevitable; we can and should do
much better.
