Mr. Parham (United Kingdom): We have just
passed a tough new resolution aimed at stopping North
Korea's nuclear and ballistic missile programmes. Its
unanimous adoption shows that the international
community is united in condemning North Korea's
continued proliferation activities and its attempts to
disrupt regional security.

The resolution is clear in its condemnation of
North Korea's nuclear test of 25 May and demands that
it not conduct any further nuclear tests or launches
using ballistic missile technology. It shows that the
international community will not tolerate North Korea
flouting its international obligations. In particular, the
resolution includes new measures that will impede
North Korea's proliferation to other countries, toughen
the arms embargo on North Korea and tackle the flows
of finance that help to support its weapons
programmes. We call on all Member States to
implement these measures, including the new
inspections regimes, fully and without delay.

Just as when this Council adopted its presidential
statement of 13 April (S/PRST/2009/7) in response to
the previous violation, this resolution commits the
sanctions committee established by resolution 1718
(2006) to determine additional items, entities and
individuals to be designated. I can assure the
Committee of the full and active cooperation of the
United Kingdom in this regard, both in the immediate
30-day time frame and in continuing to work with
partners in the United Nations and the European Union
to ensure prompt and effective implementation of all
robust measures in the resolution.

We urge North Korea to refrain from any further
provocative actions - actions that breach Security
Council resolutions and North Korea's obligations
under the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty, that
undermine regional and global security and further
isolate North Korea. North Korea should return to the
negotiating table and start engaging seriously with the
international community. Only once North Korea starts
re-engaging seriously on denuclearization will the
international community be willing to engage with it as
an equal partner. North Korea and its people have
everything to gain from such re-engagement.

