Mr. Al Habib (Islamic Republic of Iran): I
would like to begin by thanking you, Mr. President,
for organizing this meeting. My thanks also go to
Ms. DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-General for Political and
Peacebuilding Affairs, Mr. Lamamra, African Union
High Representative for Silencing the Guns in Africa,
and Mr. Gounden, Founder and Executive Director of
the African Centre for the Constructive Resolution of
Disputes, for their valuable briefings.

We welcome this open debate, focused mainly
on silencing the guns in Africa. The fact that the five
largest peacekeeping missions of the United Nations
are deployed in Africa proves the importance that the
United Nations attaches to preserving and promoting
peace and security in Africa. And the fact that more
than half of the top 20 countries that contribute troops
to United Nations peacekeeping operations are African
shows that African countries are playing a decisive
role in promoting international peace and security,
something that United Nations and the Council should
acknowledge and greatly appreciate.

At the same time, in order to ensure that African
countries and organizations can continue those
contributions, they should be helped to preserve and
promote their capacities for maintaining peace and
security in Africa and other parts of the world. That is
crucial, as some African troop-contributing countries
and African Union peace operations are constrained
in terms of financial resources and equipment,
which limits their ability to respond to peace and
security challenges.

However, when it comes to assisting African
countries in conflict prevention and the promotion
of peace and security, one basic principle should be
observed, which is that African problems require
African solutions. In other words, in order to promote
peace and security on the African continent and in
African countries, Africa's leading role in resolving its
own security issues has to be fully respected.

From that perspective, one of the most important
tasks is assisting African States in addressing the
main sources of the occurrence, exacerbation and
prolongation of conflicts in Africa. One such source
is certainly the illicit manufacture, transfer and
circulation of arms, particularly small arms and light
weapons, along with their excessive accumulation and
uncontrolled proliferation. That has a wide range of
humanitarian and socioeconomic consequences and
poses a serious threat to peace, security, stability and
sustainable development in various parts of Africa. In
that context, African countries need help in fully and
effectively implementing the relevant international
instruments, the United Nations Programme of
Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit
Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its
Aspects and the International Instrument to Enable
States to Identify and Trace, in a Timely and Reliable
Manner, Illicit Small Arms and Light Weapons. That
is important when taking into account the statistics
that show that the proliferation of small arms and light
weapons is one of the biggest obstacles to Africa's
security and development. More important, taking into
account that there are also several relevant instruments
and initiatives in Africa, African countries must be
supported financially, technically and technologically
to effectively implement such instruments and realize
the goals of those initiatives.

In that regard, rendering genuine and sustained
support to African States in realizing the objective of
such an important initiative as silencing the guns in
Africa should be accorded high priority. That would
greatly contribute to the ambitious goal established by
the African countries, namely, a conflict-free Africa,
which will not be easily achievable. However, it does
not mean it is impossible. Since African States have
indicated their strong resolve to reach that objective,
the international community should lend a helping
hand to Africa to make it become a reality.

In conclusion, a conflict-free Africa would indeed
be a place where durable peace, stability and prosperity
can flourish. That is what Africa wants, and we should
help it materialize.

