Mr. Al-Saadi (Yemen) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, I congratulate you, Mr. President, on Belgium's presidency of the Security Council for this month. I wish you and your friendly delegation every success. I also thank Mr. Martin Griffiths, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Yemen, for his briefing and I thank Mr. Mark Lowcock, Under-Secretary- General for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator. Our thanks also go to Ambassador Inga Rhonda King, Permanent Representative of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, in her capacity as Chair of the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 2140 (2014), for her efforts. I thank the Committee members, as well. The Yemeni Government has been eager to achieve lasting peace in accordance with the agreed parameters, namely, the Gulf Cooperation Council Initiative and its Implementation Mechanism, the outcome of the comprehensive National Dialogue Conference and the relevant Security Council resolutions, in particular resolution 2216 (2015). The Yemeni Government has always expressed its support for the efforts of Mr. Griffiths. In order to achieve such a noble goal, we have participated in many consultations in good faith, and we have made significant compromises, the latest of which was made in Sweden. We had hoped that the Stockholm Agreement would serve as a positive starting point to build confidence, reach the desired peace that the Yemeni people aspire to and end the conflict and humanitarian suffering of our patient Yemeni people, brought on by the reckless war waged by the Iran-backed armed Houthi militias. Regrettably, after more than a year since the conclusion of that Agreement, it has led nowhere. We have entered a new phase of escalation, exacerbation of the conflict and increased suffering among the Yemeni people as a result of the Houthis' recklessness, their evasion of implementing their commitments and their attempts to tighten their grip over the city and port of Al-Hudaydah. Such acts are in disregard of the provisions of the Agreement and United Nations efforts. The militias have committed more crimes and violations against the Yemeni people, amid the obvious silence by the international community. They have opened new war fronts in an attempt to bring our people to their knees and make them submit to their ideological and sectarian rule, while implementing the Iranian agenda and scheme in Yemen and the region. The grave escalation by the Houthi militias in Al-Jawf, Ma'rib and Nihm and their targeting of cities and displaced persons camps, as well as hospitals and mosques, thereby claiming the lives of many civilians, including women and children, underscores their intention to abort peace efforts and prolong the war. Their actions are in flagrant defiance of all efforts undertaken by the United Nations, including the Security Council. The Yemeni Government once again reiterates the that holding of any future consultations primarily hinges upon achieving genuine and realistic progress in the implementation of the Stockholm Agreement, as well as on ensuring the success of such consultations. The Yemeni Government commends the efforts of Special Envoy Griffiths and the International Committee of the Red Cross in connection with reaching a phased agreement for the release of prisoners under the Stockholm Agreement. The Yemeni Government pursued that effort, as instructed by His Excellency Mr. Abdrabuh Mansour Hadi Mansour, President of the Republic of Yemen, since the beginning, in accordance with the principle of all-for-all. We reiterate that this step is purely humanitarian and should be implemented without procrastination, in line with the agreements reached in the meeting held recently in Jordan. The Yemeni Government commends the important role of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, the alliance leader, in supervising and ensuring the implementationof the Riyadh agreement. The Government is deploying significant efforts, as directed by President Hadi, to implement the provisions of the agreement, in line with the chronological order agreed on, without any selectivity. The Government has implemented all those steps in accordance with the signed timetable, and it looks forward to taking measures leading to the implementation of the agreement and to join efforts in order to defeat the Iranian-Houthi agenda. The practices perpetrated by the Houthi militias against humanitarian organizations and_ workers, which include stealing and pillaging humanitarian aid, controlling its distribution, detaining and intimidating relief workers, undermining humanitarian action, denying some areas their aid and imposing measures and levies on humanitarian assistance, require the international community to take a firm and decisive stance to put an end to such practices, hold to account the perpetrators and condemn such behaviour by the militias, which must stop that approach. The Yemeni Government holds the Houthi militias fully responsible for the announcement made by some donor countries and United Nations agencies to reduce or stop aid or relief activities in Houthi-controlled areas. That will have serious ramifications on the economic, health and humanitarian situations of millions of people in dire need of such aid. That announcement is a natural consequence of the practices and behaviour of the militias. It corroborates what we have repeatedly said and emphasized here in the Council, namely, that the militias do not care about the humanitarian situation in the areas under their control. They have adopted a policy of humiliation, impoverishment and starvation against Yemenis. They also use humanitarian suffering to turn a profit and make political and media bids before local and international public opinion. The Yemeni Government is committed to providing all facilities conducive to relief efforts and attenuating the humanitarian disaster. We once again call on our friends in donor countries and humanitarian organizations and agencies to coordinate with the Yemeni Government in order to consider a mechanism to provide assistance for beneficiaries in the Houthi- controlled areas and to stop yielding to the dictates, pressure and extortion by those militias at the expense of the groups in need. The effects of the war waged by the Houthi militias, as well as the risks to the safety, integrity and future of Yemen and Yemenis, are not limited to the humanitarian suffering and disaster endured by my country to date. They go beyond that to include long-term threats represented by supporting terrorist organizations. The Houthi militias support the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant, which exists in Yemen, by providing it with technical support, releasing its members and allowing it to control some military positions or posts under their control, according to United Nations reports. The Iranian weapons seized by the United States Navy on Sunday, 9 February, which included 150 anti-tank missiles, surface-to-air missiles, binoculars, thermal imaging equipment, drone components and other ammunition, which were bound for the Houthi militias, constitute a flagrant violation of Council resolutions and provide irrefutable evidence of the close relationship between the mullah regime in Tehran and the Houthi militias. They have common objectives to perpetuate the war, undermine United Nations effortstowards reaching peace, exacerbate the suffering of the Yemeni people and threaten the security, safety and stability of the region and the world. In conclusion, the Houthi militias continue to deny United Nations teams access to the FSO SAFER oil tanker in Ras Isa. The international community and the Security Council must assume their responsibility and bring pressure to bear on the Houthi militias. They must also determine which Houthi leaders are responsible for undermining the efforts to address the situation of the tanker, while taking measures to deter them and avoid a dangerous environmental disaster in the Red Sea.
