Mr. Syihab (Indonesia): We thank the Secretary- General for his remarks and Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo for her briefing. Let me begin by expressing our serious concern over the worsening situation due to the escalation in Idlib. During yesterday's humanitarian meeting (see S/PV.8734), Indonesia clearly emphasized the urgent need for all key countries in the conflict to immediately cease hostilities. Today we would like to reiterate that call. The intensification of hostilities has worsened the humanitarian situation in the north-west. More individuals are displaced and their lives are increasingly at risk. We endorse the Secretary-General's statement today that the most pressing need is an immediate ceasefire before the situation gets entirely out of control. We urge a continued dialogue to de-escalate conflict between key countries. Indonesia appreciates the ongoing efforts made by and talks among various parties with the aim of ending the violence. These dialogues, however, need to be immediately implemented and translated into impactful action to achieve a sustainable ceasefire. The current priority must be the civilians. Indonesia echoes the Secretary-General's call on all parties to fulfil their obligations under international humanitarian law and to avoid any additional resulting harm to civilians, including civilian infrastructure. As the need for humanitarian assistance increases, the international community also needs to support the immediate delivery of emergency assistance, shelter support, food, non-food items and other logistical support. The provision of humanitarian deliveries requires timely, safe, unimpeded and_ sustained access by the United Nations in order to reach all civilians in need in the north-west and in other areas of Syria. Indonesia encourages and supports enhanced cooperation between the Syrian Government and the United Nations in this regard. The Security Council indeed has a critical role to play in supporting the humanitarian efforts in Syria. Once again, my delegation underlines the importance for the issues of humanitarian assistance not to be politicized by anybody. To conclude, Indonesia extends its strong support to the work of Special Envoy Geir Pedersen in engaging the Syrian parties, as well as other key countries, to try to unlock progress on the political track, in accordance with resolution 2254 (2015).
