Mr. Suarez Moreno (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We would like to
welcome the presence here today of the Deputy
Secretary-General, the Assistant Secretary-General
for Human Rights, the Director of the Coordination
and Response Division of the United Nations Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and the
Chief Monitor of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe Special Monitoring Mission to
Ukraine.

The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela reiterates
that the full implementation of resolution 2202 (2015),
which supports the decision adopted in Minsk on
12 February by the representatives of Ukraine, the
Russia Federation, France and Germany, is essential as
part of the consolidation of efforts to be pursued by the
parties in the quest for a political and peaceful solution
to the crisis in Ukraine.

During the meeting of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) troika
against the backdrop of the Ministerial Council meeting
on 3 December, the Foreign Ministers of Serbia,
Switzerland and Germany reaffirmed their full support
for the political process within the framework of the
Trilateral Contact Group and the work of the OSCE
Special Monitoring Mission to Ukraine. Furthermore,
they expressed their concern in the light of the fact
that, although the ceasefire was holding, periods of
relative or absolute calm were nonetheless frequently
interspersed with intense and targeted fighting. We
are unequivocal in our demand that the parties to the
conflict must be determined and unrelenting in working
towards delivering a complete and sustainable peace. A
definitive cessation of hostilities therefore constitutes a
vital goal that cannot be postponed any longer.

In that understanding, our country welcomes the
work being carried out by the OSCE to support the
effective implementation of the Minsk agreements. It
is important to emphasize that only through dialogue,
direct negotiation and the political will of the parties
will we be able to arrive at a peaceful and durable
solution to the crisis in the region. We also believe
that the application of unilateral coercive sanctions is
incompatible with international law. Such sanctions
are also counterproductive to hopes for achieving
peace and stability in the region, given that they sour
the atmosphere necessary for the dialogue that is so
essential for rebuilding trust between the parties.

With the support of the international community
and by strictly complying with the Minsk agreements
and the resolutions of the Security Council, it should be
possible to avoid military escalation and the spreading
ofthe conflict. All possible efforts must also be made to
address the structural and historical root causes of the
crisis, with the aim of achieving lasting and sustainable
peace.

We call upon the parties to strictly adhere to their
obligations relating to the protection of civilians in
the regions affected by violence, including the need
to guarantee access for humanitarian assistance to
residents in those areas, as well as to internally displaced
persons and refugees who find themselves in the areas
affected by the conflict. We reject acts of violence and
ethnic and politically based persecution, as well as acts
of terrorism, irrespective of who is behind them. Any
such incident must be duly investigated independently,
and the investigation must produce the evidence found
to support the conclusions drawn.

Finally, we call upon all parties to redouble their
efforts in the quest for a just and lasting political
solution, which is to their benefit and to that of the
entire region.

