Mr. Briens (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for having convened
this debate and I welcome this momentum, begun in
West Africa and beneficial to the entire continent.

Security issues are among the major challenges to
the building or rebuilding of a State if it is to be
sustainable and respect the rule of law. Security sector
reform (SSR) is therefore a useful tool both for
peacebuilding and for conflict prevention in Africa. It
promotes governance that respects democratic values
and human rights. It also makes possible an
environment conducive to reconstruction and
development.

SSR is particularly necessary for countries
emerging from crisis. It involves the guaranteed
payment of wages, return to barracks, setting up an
effective disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration (DDR) programme, and helping
demobilized combatants through reintegration or
retirement plans. It also entails establishing a judicial
system that holds security forces accountable for
Violations of human rights or international
humanitarian law.

The Security Council has integrated SSR into
many of the mandates it has given to peacekeeping
operation in Africa. In Cote d'Ivoire, support for SSR
is one of the highest priorities of the mandate of the
United Nations Operation in Cote d'Ivoire,
reconfigured by resolution 2000 (2011) in July. The
challenge is considerable there, because we must help
two armies to merge and to train and equip itself.
Success in that endeavour will be a critical factor for
long-term peace in C6te d'Ivoire.

To be successful, SSR absolutely requires
national ownership and strong political will. A political
reform by its very nature, SSR cannot be imposed from
the outside, but rather depends on strong national
commitment. It requires an inclusive national dialogue.
The international community can facilitate, encourage
and provide follow-up to the process, but it cannot
replace the partner State, national actors or civil
society.

The international community has been involved
in SSR in the Democratic Republic of the Congo since
the year 2000. It is crucial that the Congolese
Government prioritize its needs, adopt and formulate
texts that define reform, and then implement them.

The United Nations has a role to play in
encouraging national ownership of SSR. The transfer
of security responsibilities from a peacekeeping
mission to national authorities is a complex process. As
Liberia prepares to solidify its democratic roots with
the presidential election of 11 October, we must make
sure that the Government actively engages in SSR,
especially in forming a police force, as the United
Nations Mission in Liberia progressively draws down.

The international community must continue its
support for SSR in Africa. We must place greater
emphasis on the intimate link between SSR and DDR
programmes. Too often, the failure of SSR is a result of
incomplete or poorly managed DDR programmes
undermining the implementation of SSR. Bitter social
divisions that result from the impunity of security
forces or the lack of reconciliation mechanisms are
also risk factors.

More broadly, SSR programmes must also
address the fundamental question of people's will to
live together - an especially acute problem in
post-conflict situations. In Libya, the new authorities
have grasped this very well and have asked for United
Nations assistance with SSR. It is our collective
responsibility to support them in restoring order and
ensuring respect for the rule of law.

Lastly, SSR programmes require funding that is
lasting and diversified. Bilateral support, the
Peacebuilding Fund and international organizations
such as the World Bank must all be solicited for funds.

The European Union (EU), for its part, has been a
major presence in this sector in Africa for years. In
Somalia, in close cooperation with the African Union
Mission in Somalia, the European Union has been
training the security forces of the Transitional Federal
Government. It has also intervened in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo through its mission to provide
advice and assistance for security reform and its Police
Mission In Kinshasa, to promote military and police
reform in that country. The European Union is also
active throughout the continent through the
EURORECAMP programme, which helps the African
Union to train its standby forces.

In a national capacity, France supports SSR
training, mainly through the Geneva Centre for the
Democratic Control of Armed Forces. It has also
deployed many experts to various European operations
in Africa and on other continents. France calls for a
civic service to aid development that, with the support
of armed forces, would facilitate the reintegration of
young volunteers into civilian life with specific
professional training. Such a development assistance
service would be a concrete response to problems of
demobilization and reintegration in the aftermath of
conflicts.

