Mrs. Cordova Soria (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): This is the second-to-last
meeting concerning the situation in the Middle East,
including the Palestinian question, that my delegation
will be attending, and I have only to express the
profound feeling of frustration at the almost total lack
of movement towards a solution to the illegal Israeli
occupation to which the Palestinian people are subject.

Although the Security Council has adopted more
than 80 resolutions - 86 to be exact - that should
each constitute the unequivocal certainty that the State
of Israel and its allies are fully committed to peace
and security in the world, we are now witnesses to the
exact opposite. Let us take as an immediate reference
resolution 2334 (2016), on the illegality of Israeli
settlements in occupied Palestinian territories.

An example of the expansionist policies of Israel
are the demolitions in what is called Area C, or the
recent threat of demolition of the buildings in the
village of Khan Al-Ahmar, located in the heart of the
West Bank, where approximately 250 Palestinians
live. If that demolition is not permanently suspended,
it will swell the lists of Palestinians men and women
who are displaced from their homes. We again call on
the international community, including the Security
Council, not to recognize any alteration or modification
to the borders established in 1967.

We have also seen in the past few weeks how
Israel has increased its violent military actions against
the Palestinian civilian population. Last week Israeli
bombings killed seven Palestinians amid a brutal
military action that, due to the disproportionate use of
force and violence against the population of the Gaza
strip, has been compared to the 2014 attacks. In that
regard, my delegation categorically rejects the firing
of rockets into areas inhabited by civilians in Israeli
territories. We deem it inadmissible that heavy artillery
and lethal warfare machinery in general should be used
to target places inhabited by civilians who are not part
of the conflict.

During armed conflicts, it is the women and
children who are most affected, even more so if they
do not have the only intangible tool that can help them
get out of the situations of violence that oppress them:
education. It is for that reason that Bolivia has decided
to endorse the Safe Schools Declaration, an instrument
of a political nature that echoes our principled position
and reflects our commitment and advocacy when it
comes to the human right to education, on which our
future and the future of children depend, particularly
those who are Victims of war.
In that order of priorities, we express our optimism
at the announcement of the ceasefire made by the
Government of Israel and Hamas militants on the
side of the Gaza Strip. We hope that the praiseworthy
mediation efforts that the Government of Egypt is
carrying out together with the Special Coordinator will
lead to the pacification of the area so that negotiations
can recommence with a View to resolving tensions
definitively. We cannot allow the military apparatus of
the Israeli Defence Forces to continue killing innocent
Palestinians, and we demand compliance with the
ceasefire between the parties in the terms agreed upon
in 2014.

On this occasion we again bring to the attention of
the Security Council the painful humanitarian situation
in Gaza. That situation has worsened as a result of the
latest attacks against the Palestinian population, which
has already been living under a dire Israeli blockade
for almost 12 years. In that context, we express our
deep concern for the nearly 20,000 people injured in
Gaza during the Great March of Return, which began in
March, who have still not received proper attention due
to the lack of medicines or basic surgical equipment in
the city's hospitals and emergency centres.

The Israeli Government must lift the blockade
on the Gaza Strip, which for more than 11 years has
been living under a regime of collective punishment
that denies Palestinians access to water and sanitation,
restricts their human rights to health care and their
access to decent work and the freedom of movement.
That Government is responsible for a long list of
violations, which all of us in this Chamber have been
witnessing month after month and year after year.

As it has done on other occasions, Bolivia demands
that Israel, the occupying Power, refrain from such
actions and fully comply with its legal obligations and
responsibilities under the Geneva Convention relative
to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War, of
12 August 1949.

We renew our firm commitment to all international
efforts seeking a peaceful solution conducive to ending
the situation of the Palestinian occupation. In that
regard, we endorse initiatives such as the Quartet road
map, the Madrid principles, the Arab Peace Initiative
and others that aim to ensure ajust and lasting peace so
that both peoples can live within recognized and secure
borders.

We reaffirm our conviction that the only long-
term solution to the occupation suffered by the
Palestinian people is the two-State solution, which at
last provides for the establishment of a free, sovereign
and independent Palestinian State within the pre-1967
international borders and East Jerusalem as its capital,
in accordance with the relevant Security Council and
General Assembly resolutions.

