Mr. Linkevicius (Lithuania): The political and
security situation in the Middle East has rarely been
more dramatic. No other modern conflict has produced
such massive destruction. Over 12 million displaced
and refugees, hundreds of thousands of killed and
wounded, two million children deprived of education,
and a country in ruin - such is the cost ofthis conflict,
now well into its fifth year.

Syria's neighbours Turkey, Jordan and Lebanon
are bearing the brunt of refugee flows. The capacity
of Jordan and Lebanon in particular to cope with the
flows of refugees is stretched to the limit, threatening
a breakdown of Vital services and infrastructure. The
Syrian Government's war against its own population
has enabled the spread of violent extremism and
terrorism in the country, which is further fuelled by
the influx of foreign terrorist fighters. The fighting
in Yemen and the fragility of the situations in Iraq,
Libya and elsewhere in the region risk expanding the
zone of terror even further, contributing to even greater
displacement.

Syrians make up some 70 per cent ofthose trying to
cross the Mediterranean. While it is first and foremost
a glaring failure of the Syrian Government to protect
its population, it is also the Security Council's failure.
The Council should have acted early and forcefully
on the crisis in Syria. Instead, it remained paralysed
by a succession of vetoes aimed at protecting the
perpetrators, not the civilian victims. Those who
cast those vetoes share with the Syrian regime the
heavy responsibility for the deaths, destruction and
displacement of the Syrian people.

My delegation is firmly convinced that the use
of the veto has no place in cases of massive abuses of
human rights, crimes against humanity, war crimes and
genocide. We therefore welcome France's initiative on
veto restraint. Lithuania also joined Liechtenstein's
initiative on the code of conduct regarding Security
Council action against genocide, crimes against
humanity and war crimes.

One cannot pretend to defend the law by practicing
lawlessness. One cannot fight terrorism by attacking and
abusing the civilian population. Extending Al-Assad's
stay in power, including by foreign military buildup in
Syria, is not a viable solution and can only deepen the
conflict. The Syrian Government and those supporting
it must stop bombing its Syrian people and engage fully
on the implementation of the Geneva Communique of
June 2012. Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura has our
full support as he seeks to put the political process back
on track.

While some criticism for Europe's response to the
refugee crisis is in order, the European Union is doing a
lot to respond to the crisis in a comprehensive manner,
working with countries of origin, transit countries and
countries of destination. As a follow-up to the European
Agenda on Migration adopted earlier this year, the
European Commission produced a comprehensive
package of proposals to help address the refugee crisis,

including by tackling the root causes that make people
seek refuge.

We hope the Security Council will support
European actions aimed at tackling the smugglers in
the Mediterranean, who profit unscrupulously and
cynically from human suffering while putting more and
more human lives at risk. Inaction is not an option. The
migrant-smuggling industry expands and develops,
pouring money into the hands of criminal gangs and,
eventually, the hands of terrorists.

Lithuania has pledged its share in receiving the
refugees. Necessary preparations are being made as the
first families from Syria and Iraq are being resettled.
At the same time we are providing assistance to and
welcoming refugees from Ukraine's regions occupied
by Russia's proxies. Let us not forget that Russia's
aggression against Ukraine and the illegal annexation
of Crimea caused massive displacement and left five
million people dependent on humanitarian assistance.
The recent criminal decision by Russian-backed illegal
militants in eastern Ukraine to expel United Nations
and other humanitarian agencies will increase the
suffering of the local population even further as the
cold season approaches.

The Council has created an impressive normative
base for combatting terrorism, including resolutions
1373 (2001) and 1624 (2005), whose tenth anniversary
we marked earlier this September. The Council has
also responded to the emergence of the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) and the phenomenon
of foreign terrorist fighters by reinforcing existing
counterterrorism framework with resolutions 2170
(2014), 2178 (2014) and 2199 (2015) and a comprehensive
presidential statement (S/PRST/2015/ 11) adopted under
the Lithuanian presidency in May. We must now ensure
that no gaps remain between the normative base and its
implementation.

Modern-day terrorists like ISIL can be brutal and
barbaric, but they are also sophisticated in their use of
modern communications technologies for propaganda
and recruitment. To fight them effectively, we must
constantly adjust and adapt our responses and engage
the whole range of actors: Governments, the private
sector, academia, community and religious leaders,
youth, and women, as well as survivors of terrorist
attacks. I want to stress in particular the role women.
They can serve in the first line of defence against
radicalization and violent extremism, starting from
their families and local communities all the way to
national and international leadership.

Just as they make people flee and seek salvation
elsewhere, protracted conflicts, the breakdown of
governance and the rule of law, oppressive regimes and
rampant corruption, exclusion and abuse of minorities,
extreme inequalities and systematic gross violations
of human rights all play into the hands of extremism
and terrorism. To tackle the threat of terrorism, we
must cut off its life support by addressing those
very underlying causes, as well as the injustices and
lingering grievances that make people vulnerable to
incitement and recruitment.

We must also focus on accountability for terrorist
crimes. We can no longer tolerate continued impunity
for terrorist acts, terrorism financing, recruitment
and incitement. Enhancing national and international
capacities needed to go after terrorists and their
sponsors, and better use ofexistingjustice mechanisms,
including the International Criminal Court, must be
part and parcel of anti-terrorism strategies and our
common commitment.

Accountability is a key to deterrence. It is also
the key to doing justice to the victims of terrorism.
Those victims should never be forgotten. They must
inspire us to redouble our efforts in stemming this most
dangerous phenomenon, which threatens humanity and
all the very best that we as humans beings stand for.

