Mr. Nazarian (Armenia): Allow me to join
previous speakers in thanking the Brazilian Minister of
External Relations for presiding over this important
debate, and other Ministers for participating in our
discussions. I would also like to express our gratitude
to Secretary General Ban Ki-moon and the Special
Representative of the World Bank for their
contributions.

As has been noted before, there can be no
development without security and no security without
development. We believe that this debate will help to
further galvanize and push forward two of our most
critical common objectives - the achievement of
lasting security and the realization of the Millennium
Development Goals, which are so closely interlinked.
We also believe that this is another important
opportunity to bring together all international actors
with development mandates in order for all of us to
examine the progress made and the challenges ahead,
to reflect on the evolution of our cooperation in the
recent past, and to share our experiences for the benefit
of our concerted efforts towards those goals.

As we take stock of the progress made in
exploring the security-development nexus and related
policies, we welcome the positive initiatives that have
been implemented in this arena. However, many
challenges, conceptual and practical alike, remain.
While we all agree that security and development are
interdependent, we must recognize that in many ways
each is also a very distinct goal with its own unique
challenges and policy implications. Security and
development are already very broad concepts that
encompass a number of elements. The range of factors
that can influence the interplay between security and
development is vast. As such, context is important and
narrowing our focus is critical to enabling us to come
up with effective policies and solutions on a practical
level.

The experience of international organizations
dealing with conflict situations has demonstrated that
lasting and sustainable peace will require a
comprehensive package of solutions and an approach
to security that takes into consideration both the root
causes and the economic situation on the ground.

Today, the South Caucasus region continues to
suffer from multiple challenges, and as a whole
encounters great difficulties in making sufficient
progress towards achieving regional security and
development targets. Most important, the region is
negatively impacted by the lack of full cooperation.
Yet, we have not fully employed an essential resource
that could bring us closer to peace, that is, sustainable
development. One might question the value of
embarking on such an effort in post-conflict situations
where negotiations among the parties are ongoing.
However, international experience has shown that
economic cooperation and interaction can be a valuable
confidence-building measure, often leading to political
adhesion. Examples can be found in Western and
Eastern Europe and, increasingly, in Asia.

The experience of the past two decades in the
South Caucasus shows that the rejection of regional
economic cooperation and the imposition of closed
borders and blockades do not create political solutions;
to the contrary, they alienate peoples in the
surrounding region and destroy their trust and hope for
lasting peace.
In order to achieve greater coherence in the
region and expand the geographic area of cooperation,
the South Caucasus needs to implement various
initiatives and programmes sponsored by donor
countries and organizations. In addition, international
financial institutions, as well as private sector
contributions, should to play a decisive role towards
that end.

In that respect, Armenia shares the common
responsibility to support the Council as the centre-
stage of dialogue and collective action to address the
multiple challenges of security and development.

