Mr. Baali (Algeria): I would like to congratulate
you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council and to express our gratitude to
Ambassador Mufioz and his delegation for conducting
our work efficiently last month. I would also like to
express my deepest condolences to the Russian
delegation after the horrendous terrorist attack that
took place today in Moscow. Finally, let me join other
delegations in thanking and commending Mr. Holkeri
for his comprehensive briefing and for his work in
Kosovo.

My delegation welcomes the establishment last
November of a mechanism to review the progress of
the Provisional Institutions towards meeting
benchmarks of the "standards before status" policy and
the launch on 10 December of the "Standards for
Kosovo" document, which sets out in detailed terms
the standards to be achieved by Kosovo. In the same
spirit, we are pleased with the transfer of
responsibilities, under Chapter 5 of the Constitutional
Framework, to the Provisional Institutions at the end of
2003, which constitutes a very important development
in the sense that such a transfer will increase their
capacity to respond to the needs of citizens in some
areas. The completion of the transfer of
responsibilities, however, remains an objective to
attain. The meeting that took place in Vienna on 14
October 2003 to launch the dialogue between Pristina
and Belgrade also represents a positive initiative that
can help to create confidence and a climate conducive
to constructive cooperation in areas of mutual interest.
That initiative deserves to be supported.

Those developments have given new momentum
to the current policy, which needs to be sustained by
early adoption of the work plan for implementation of
the standards. In that respect, my delegation expresses
its support for the Steering Group, co-chaired by the
Special Representative and by the Kosovo Prime
Minister, to convene meetings of the working groups
for that purpose. In the meantime, we consider that the
successful completion of that task will require an
inclusive process. We emphasize that greater attention
should now be devoted to the obstacles preventing
participation by all the parties in the process. On the
other hand, my delegation is pleased to hear that some
progress has been made towards consolidating the rule
of law, particularly in fighting organized crime and
terrorism and in increasing minority participation in
Kosovo's justice system.

The significant results we have witnessed in the
process of implementing resolution 1244 (1999)
through the "standards before status" policy should not,
however, divert us from the difficult part of the process
or from the challenges that remain to be met before the
general review of progress is carried out in mid-2005.
In fact, the reality in Kosovo shows that the task of the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) and of the Provisional Institutions is
challenging and strenuous.

Indeed, the Secretary-General's report
(S/2004/7I) reveals the difficulties and challenges to
overcome in the months ahead. It is imperative that
UNMIK and the Provisional Institutions intensify their
efforts to meet the internationally endorsed standards
that are prerequisites for the beginning of a political
process leading to the determination of Kosovo's future
status. The pledge of Kosovo's Prime Minister that "the
Government will do its best to contribute to the
realization of these standards" is encouraging.

Building a prosperous, democratic, multi-ethnic
and tolerant Kosovo is our common goal; it is also our
common responsibility. Economic prosperity in
Kosovo requires, in our opinion, creating appropriate
and essential conditions conducive to economic
development that can generate basic infrastructure, can
reduce the alarming unemployment rate - which
remains between 50 and 60 per cent - and can help to
improve living conditions in Kosovo.

Furthermore, building a multi-ethnic and tolerant
society in the province requires promotion of the
process of reconciliation and understanding,
achievement of the standard on the return of refugees
and internally displaced persons to their places of
origin, and protection of the rights of minorities.
Putting an end to acts of intimidation and violence -
in particular against minorities - improving security
conditions and increasing freedom of movement and
active participation by all communities in the
Provisional Institutions are of paramount importance.

The dismantling of parallel structures in Kosovo
would also consolidate efforts aimed at easing tensions
and promoting a multi-ethnic and harmonious Kosovo.
Bringing the whole process to fruition will require
genuine commitment on the part of all Kosovans and
financial and political backing from the international
community. In that regard, my delegation shares the
view of the Secretary-General that UNMIK's work can
continue at its current pace only if the necessary
funding in crucial areas is available and only if his
appeal for the provision of financial and other
assistance is met.

