Mr. Spatafora (Italy): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union. The acceding
countries Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Estonia,
Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Malta, Poland, Slovakia
and Slovenia, the associated countries Bulgaria,
Romania and Turkey, and the European Free Trade
Association countries Iceland and Liechtenstein,
members of the European Economic Area, align
themselves with this statement.

The European Union expresses its strongest
concern over the upsurge of violence in the Middle
East. Our priority is to call all parties concerned in the
region to exert maximum restraint, stop violence and
respect their obligations in order to make rapid
progress towards full implementation of the Quartet's
road map.

The European Union is strongly opposed to the
construction by Israel of a separation wall in the West
Bank, and urges the Government of Israel to stop its
construction in the Palestinian territories, including in
and around Jerusalem, and other illegal activities, such
as the confiscation of land and the demolition of
houses, that it entails. It undermines Palestinian trust in
the road map and appears to prejudge the final borders
of a future Palestinian State. The current and planned
path of the security fence is unacceptable.

The European Union also calls on Israel to freeze
all settlement activities. They create a material obstacle
and a fait accompli that would prevent the realization
of the two-State solution, as laid out in the road map
accepted by the two parties at the Aqaba Summit on 4
June 2003. As a result, a negotiated peace settlement
would be much more difficult to achieve. The
inadmissibility of the acquisition of territory by force is
a fundamental principle of resolution 242 (1967), on
which any peace process must be based.

The European Union condemns in the strongest
possible terms the vicious terrorist attacks against
Israeli citizens. Such attacks, including last week's
suicide bombing in Haifa, which once again caused the
death and injury of numerous innocent civilians, are
not only morally indefensible, but damage the interests
of the Palestinian people. The European Union
expresses again its deepest condolences to the families
of the victims.

The European Union considers the authors of
these acts enemies of peace. It strongly urges the
Palestinian Authority to take all immediate, decisive
steps against individuals and groups conducting and
planning violent attacks. The European Union further
calls on all States to end the harbouring and support,
including fund-raising and financial assistance, of any
groups and individuals that use terror and violence to
advance their goals.
The European Union renews the call to all
Palestinian organizations to immediately declare a
ceasefire. It calls on Israel to abstain from any punitive
measures, including extrajudicial killings and
collective reprisals, and to act in accordance with
international law.

The European Union understands the security
preoccupation of Israel and recognizes its legitimate
right to self-defence in the face of terrorist attacks
against its citizens. The European Union also stresses
that the fight against terrorism must be carried out in
full respect for the principles and rules of international
law and international humanitarian law. It reaffirms its
belief that only a negotiated settlement of the conflict,
leading to the end of the occupation and the creation of
a viable Palestinian State alongside Israel, will bring
the security that Israel is entitled to.

Also in the context of international law, the
European Union calls on the Government of Israel to
exert maximum efforts to avoid civilian casualties.
Therefore, the Government of Israel, as the road map
states, must

"take no action undermining trust, including
deportations, confiscation and/or demolition of
Palestinian homes and property, destruction of
Palestinian institutions and infrastructure; and
other measures specified in the Tenet Work Plan."

The European Union calls on the Government of
Israel to take immediate steps to ease the humanitarian
and economic plight of the Palestinian people,
including through easing the movement of people and
goods and ensuring access to international
humanitarian organizations. The European Union
reaffirms that settlement activity must stop.

Finally the European Union reiterates its call on
the Government of Israel made on 12 September not to
implement the decision in principle to expel the
Chairman of the Palestinian Authority.

The European Union reaffirms the strategic
importance of the Palestinian Authority as a partner for
peace. It reiterates its call on the Palestinian Authority
to undertake visible efforts to dismantle terrorist
organizations and to pursue economic and security
reforms. It assures the Palestinian Authority of its full
support to achieve these objectives, and expresses its
support for the formation of a stable and empowered
Palestinian Government.

The European Union strongly believes that to
achieve a lasting, just and peaceful settlement of the
conflict and a comprehensive peace in the region,
including Syria and Lebanon, there is no alternative to
the speedy implementation, in good faith, by all sides
of the Quartet road map, which contains clear timelines
for the establishment of an independent and viable
Palestinian State, living side by side with Israel,
together in peace and security and for the
normalization of Arab-Israeli relations. The European
Union underlines the need to move quickly towards
political negotiation among the parties with the support
of the international community.

The European Union reaffirms its commitment
and the need for determined and coordinated action by
the international community, and draws the attention of
the parties to the statement (S/2003/951) of the Quartet
of 26 September. The European Union is maintaining
close contacts with all the parties involved, and is
ready to assist them in their implementation of the road
map. It also emphasizes the vital need for an effective
and credible monitoring mechanism in the field, which
is essential to that implementation, and stands ready to
participate and contribute to it.

