Mr. Zarif: I wish to take this oportunity to extend
my congratulations to the President and all the new
members of the Security Council for having been
elected to this body.

In my statement today, I must take note of the
remarkable progress achieved during 2013. It was a year
of significant changes, as well as political progress, in
particular through the historic achievement, in April
2013, of the First Agreement of Principles Governing
the Normalization of Relations between Belgrade and
Pristina.

The essential basis for that progress has been
an increased level of mutual confidence and direct
communication between the parties, which have been
sustained regardless of disagreements and disputes
over the details of implementation. I once again wish
to recognize the two Prime Ministers for their ongoing
efforts at reconciliation and confidence-building,
commendably facilitated by European Union (EU)
High Representative Catherine Ashton.

Since my last briefing to the Council (see S/PV.7064),
several additional concrete steps have been completed
successfully. By the end of this reporting period, some
80 former Serbian police officers had completed their
induction and transition to the Kosovo police. In just
the few weeks since then, the number has grown to a
total of 142 officers, who have already been deployed
for active duty in the northern regional command. It
is expected that some 100 additional officers will
complete their induction and assume duties in the north
by the end of this week.

The implementation of the terms agreed regarding
the judiciary in northern Kosovo has not been completed
yet, although some progress was made during the most
recent high-level discussions in Brussels, on 27 January.
Both parties should be urged to move expeditiously
to bring the discussion to a conclusion, hopefully
during their twenty-second round of high-level talks,
scheduled for the day after tomorrow in Brussels.
Flexibility should be demonstrated by both sides on
such future arrangements as would ensure maximum
access to justice and promote broad public confidence
in the system.
Building greater confidence in the police and
judiciary throughout Kosovo is of the highest
importance, especially as implementation proceeds in
northern Kosovo. Two recent as yet unresolved cases
only underscore that importance. On 16 January, one
of the newly elected members of the North Mitrovica
Municipal Assembly, Dimitrije Janieijevie, was killed
near his home. Although the motives remain unknown,
the murder followed repeated violent attacks on the
same individual and his property in recent years. The
deplorable killing, last September, of a Lithuanian
European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo
(EULEX) official, Audrius Senavicius, in a cowardly
attack on a EULEX convoy remains unresolved.
Regardless of the circumstances and background
of those and other major crimes, as long as they
remain unsolved, they will continue to negatively
affect perceptions of insecurity and impunity for the
perpetrators and those who support and protect them.
Active cooperation by all in resolving those cases is
essential for normalizing the situation in northern
Kosovo.

Meanwhile, the implementation of other
agreements has moved forward in several areas. In
November, regular information exchange started
between the respective revenue authorities via the
European Commission's System for Exchange of
Excise Data, fulfilling a joint commitment made by
the parties. On 14 December, the collection of duties
commenced at the two main northern crossing points.
That followed further agreement on the management of
funds collected there through a special account.

More recently, on 24 January, Belgrade, through
the European Union, handed over a first batch of
digitized cadastral records to Pristina. That marked the
start of a comprehensive comparison and reconciliation
of Kosovo property records - the first since the end of
the conflict.

Despite the overall successful conduct of Kosovo
local elections, we have witnessed a slow pace in the
establishment of new administrations in northern
Kosovo municipalities. Indeed, the inaugurations of
newly elected municipal councils were finally held on
11 January, the last day of the official deadline, after a
series of postponements. At this very moment, during
the last hours of the deadline, municipal assemblies
of the four northern municipalities are in session
to discuss and adopt the statute of their respective
municipalities. In the North Mitrovica municipality, the
decision ofthe mayor-elect not to take the oath of office
has necessitated a new mayoral election, which is now
scheduled for 23 February. In addition, the arrest, on
27 January, of a prominent local Kosovo Serb political
leader and a candidate for the position of mayor in
northern Mitrovica, Oliver Ivanovie, on charges of
war crimes and aggravated murder, triggered local
tensions, leading to protests and public calls for his
release pending trial. That situation is indicative of
the challenges and delicacy of the implementation of
19 April Agreement.

While an important milestone will be reached with
the full constitution of the municipal administrations,
the establishment of a community/association of
Serb-majority municipalities will represent another
major step in the full implementation of the 19 April
Agreement. In order to ensure their effectiveness and
sustainability, the new municipal administrations
should be supported, both in terms of resources and
political engagement, by all local and international
stakeholders, through a well-coordinated assistance
mechanism.

The deep prevailing concerns among the local
public in the north over the implications of the ongoing
political transitions on their daily lives should be met
by determined efforts to achieve visible progress in
improving local infrastructure and delivery of public
services and in ensuring reliable and responsive law
enforcement. High demands and expectations from the
population are directed to the newly elected mayors
and members of the municipal councils. They will need
early and firm support in order to fulfil reasonable
expectations.

Looking ahead, international engagement will
be critical in enabling Kosovo Serbs to exercise their
franchise in the early Serbian parliamentary elections
scheduled for 16 March. Extensive discussions have
also taken place among local Kosovo political actors on
possible elections for the Kosovo Assembly and on the
issue of electoral reform, with a view to ensuring greater
transparency, simplicity and inclusiveness, including
the updating of the electoral lists. Some exchanges have
also taken place on possible constitutional amendments,
in particular those related to the so-called reserved
seats for representatives of the minority communities.
Those discussions have not concluded at the present
time, but their results will be crucial in paving the way
for a broader participation of Kosovo Serbs and other
minorities in Kosovo's legislative elections.
Speaking in the broader context of international
peace and security, as the issue was raised within the
Chamber, I wish to mention that a debate also took place
within Kosovo on the participation of local residents in
conflicts in other regions, such as Syria. Last week, the
Kosovo authorities proposed to the Kosovo Assembly
a draft law that would prohibit and criminalize the
participation of Kosovars in armed conflicts abroad.

As noted in the Secretary-General's report
(S/20l4/68), some progress is being made in the
clarification of the fates of missing persons from
the conflict, with the discovery of human remains
at a suspected mass grave site in southern Serbia.
Excavations, which were suspended for the winter,
are due to resume in the spring. However, far too
many families on both sides still have no word on the
fate of their missing loved ones. It is imperative that
individuals and institutions with any knowledge of the
fate of the missing persons come forward and help to
achieve closure of that painful chapter. Progress on
that important matter, as well as finding an appropriate
mechanism for compensating the aggrieved families,
will certainly go a long way towards facilitating
greater reconciliation and integration among Kosovo
communities, as well as furthering the normalization
of relations between Belgrade and Pristina.

Major developments have taken place during the
past year, several of them breakthroughs on issues
outstanding since the end of the conflict. The European
perspective, as well as the effective facilitation led by
the EU High Representative Catherine Ashton, have
emerged as key instruments for political progress and
for encouraging the gradual reform and modernization
of Kosovo's public institutions.

In December, the Council of the European Union
noted the opening of negotiations for a stabilization
and association agreement with Kosovo and took
note of the intention of the European Commission to
conclude the negotiations in the course of 2014. The
Council also adopted the general EU position for the
opening of accession negotiations with Serbia, and the
first intergovernmental conference with Serbia was
launched on 21 January. Within the broader context of
progress by both parties in their respective relations
with European institutions, major European assistance
to local projects and programmes in Kosovo will also
clearly remain central.

Moreover, bilateral donor assistance projects
should be carefully coordinated with all other efforts
on the ground. In that regard, United Nations agencies,
programmes and funds are a ready and able partner
to add value to that effort. On its part, the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) welcomes those processes and will continue
to be fully engaged in a coordinated effort, applying
its resources and relations with all communities to
build up confidence on the ground. It will be essential
for Belgrade and Pristina to consolidate the historic
progress achieved thus far and to overcome, gradually
but steadily, the many outstanding issues through
dialogue. It is also my hope that members of the
Council will, individually and collectively, welcome
the pragmatic steps being taken by the parties towards
the normalization of their relations. Acknowledging the
substantial progress achieved and encouraging further
steps will greatly strengthen the resolve of both sides
in overcoming the remaining challenges to building a
stable and peaceful future.

Allow me to conclude by thanking you, Madam
President, and all members of the Council for your
valuable engagement with the parties and for your
continuing support to the work of UNMIK.

