Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): Let me, like others,
thank our briefers today.

The United Kingdom welcomes the fact that the
United States-brokered ceasefire is holding in north-
east Syria and that the fighting appears to be over. We
note the agreement announced on Tuesday by President
Vladimir Putin and President Recep Erdogan that
this ceasefire is now permanent and the subsequent
announcement by the Turkish Ministry of Defence that
they see no need for further operations. In that context,
let me say that we call on Turkey - as we do all actors
in the Syrian conflict - to comply with the obligations
towards civilians under international humanitarian
law. We will be looking very closely at the details and
implementation of the agreements announced, including
their impact on governance and the local population.

The security situation in the north-east remains
volatile. Military developments have led to 180,000
people displaced, 80,000 of whom are children and
over 10,000 of whom have fled to Iraq. A number of
international aid workers have felt compelled to leave,
which has had a serious impact on operations. It is
essential that humanitarian actors have unrestricted
access to areas where people continue to be in need.
We hope that these displaced people will soon be able
to return to their homes safely and that damage caused
to critical infrastructure is swiftly repaired.

On 16 October, the Council agreed press elements
expressing our collective concern about the impact of
recent developments on the humanitarian situation and
the possible resurgence of Da'esh. The Sochi agreement
has not alleviated our concern. It is imperative that the
Council be kept informed of the humanitarian situation,
including in internally displaced persons camps, as well
as on the threat posed by Da'esh. We note the return of
regime forces to areas of north-east Syria following the
agreement between the Syrian Democratic Forces and
Damascus. Given the appalling record of the regime's
security forces elsewhere, the behaviour of those forces
is something we will monitor very closely.
We continue to support the rights of Syrian refugees
to return to their homes when it is considered safe to
do so, but we would have serious concerns about any
attempt to force refugees to return to Syria against their
will. Any returns must be voluntary and in line with
the principles of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees. Any attempt at deliberate
demographic change would be unacceptable.

The United Kingdom is one of the largest donors
to the humanitarian needs of Syrians, and we do so
throughout Syria and its neighbours. There is no
politicization in our provision of life-saving support.
But, as we and our European Union partners have
previously made clear, we will not provide stabilization
or development assistance in areas where the rights of
local populations are ignored.

All of those concerns mean that the United
Nations has a much more important role to play in
north-east Syria, particularly given the difficulties
being faced by other humanitarian agencies. To allow
humanitarian agencies to prepare, plan and respond, we
would welcome clarity about how the United Nations
plans to scale up its response. Assistant Secretary-
General Mueller made clear - and it was echoed by
the humanitarian co-penholders - the need for the
renewal of the cross-border aid resolution 2449 (2018).
I would also like to acknowledge Ms. Marcaillou's
assessment and depiction of the scale of the challenge;
as the United Nations Mine Action Service seeks to
step up its efforts, we will need - and we expect - to
see the regime cooperating fully and allowing access.

We cannot let events elsewhere in Syria distract
us from the dire humanitarian situation that persists
in Idlib. We were extremely concerned to learn of the
resumption of air strikes and shelling last week. Let us
remember that over 1,000 civilians have been killed
since the beginning of May, including more than 500
women and children, and over 688,000 people have
been forced to leave their homes. We therefore urge all
parties to respect the ceasefire agreed on 31 August.
We look forward to the board of inquiry's investigation
into the appalling attacks in Idlib and its subsequent
update to the Security Council.

The United Kingdom would once again like
to welcome the first meeting of the Constitutional
Committee next week - a momentous occasion.
Mr. Pederson has the United Kingdom's full backing.
A political process in line with resolution 2254 (2015)
is crucial for peace in Syria. The Syrian people have
suffered through nine years of conflict and, as events
in Idlib and the north-east testify, that suffering is not
over. The Constitutional Committee is an opportunity
for Syrians from all sides to sit down to grapple with
the real issues that have caused the conflict. It is an
important signal, but it must be more than that - it
must be the start of real, genuine change. That will
require serious engagement and commitment from all
participants to succeed. Unless the regime realizes
that its actions have been a fundamental reason for the
conflict, nothing will be achieved. We call on the regime
representatives to demonstrate that understanding at
the upcoming first meeting.

