Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I thank Mr. Salame
and Mr. Chergui for their briefings, as well as the
German Ambassador for his report on the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011)
concerning Libya. We are very grateful that the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General could be
here in New York. That was a very sobering and quite
alarming briefing he delivered. We take very seriously
the warnings that you, Mr. President, have given.

I want to set out three clear things right at the start,
so that there can be no ambiguity.

First, in response to Mr. Salame's appeal to the
parties on the ground and his request for a very firm
message from the Council, I want to express the
United Kingdom's very firm support for Mr. Salame.
The United Nations-led process is the only way to
ultimately achieve the security and stability that all
Libyans deserve.

Secondly, we are extremely clear in our call, which
I repeat today, for all those involved in the conflict
to commit to an immediate ceasefire, unfettered
humanitarian access and a resumption of political talks
facilitated by Mr. Salame. I would like to really stress
those points, and I invite all Council members to do
likewise, so that there is no doubt about the strength
of feeling of the Council on those issues and the
importance of unity within the Council.

We are very concerned as the briefings, including
from the African Union Commissioner, implied that
the security and humanitarian situation continues to
deteriorate. As I said, that is alarming. There can be
no military solution and there certainly will not be
anything like a clean victory for any party in Libya.
The protracted and worsening violence, as the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General said, certainly
does not benefit ordinary people in Libya, and we really
need to put them front and centre of what we are doing.

I would like to turn to the arms embargo. All
Member States have an obligation under resolution
1970 (2011). We know, as we heard earlier, that ships
may even now be on their way to Libyan ports with
arms. Flooding Libya with arms is only going to fuel
escalation, prolong the conflict and retard progress
towards the ceasefire. We therefore call on all Member
States to implement the arms embargo in full, and we
hope that the Libya Sanctions Committee will continue
to do its good work looking at transgressions of the
arms embargo.

I believe that we also need to remember that Da'esh
and other extremist groups are capitalizing on the chaos
in Libya to carry out opportunistic attacks, which ought
to worry all of us, particularly those of us that are at
direct risk from Da'esh-inspired terrorism. Continued
fighting will continue to have a negative impact on
the counter-terrorism agenda in Libya, and we need to
keep in mind that the people who benefit most from that
conflict are actually those extremist groups, which is
another sobering point on which we all ought to reflect.

I would like to say a few words about the
humanitarian situation and oil. There have been reports
ofthe targeting of civilians. I want to urgently call on all
parties to respect their obligations under international
humanitarian law and ensure that civilians, civilian
infrastructure, medical personnel, facilities and
transport vehicles are protected. I want to underscore
the obligations in resolution 2286 (2016) about not
targeting health workers and detention centres. I want
to stress the need for the greatest possible humanitarian
access on the ground.

The Special Representative mentioned the oil
situation. We believe that it is essential that all Libya's
oil exports remain under the supervision of the
National Oil Corporation of Tripoli, in accordance with
the Council's resolutions. Any attempt by the parties
to the conflict to divert Libya's oil resources for their
own ends again needs to be addressed by the Libya
Sanctions Committee.

We heard a little bit about Mr. Kartas from the
German representative. We have supported the United
Nations in that, and we continue to support the United
Nations. We have heard reports of his safe release, but I
would like to underscore that United Nations personnel
carry immunity. They work for the United Nations, and
the United Nations works for the benefit of all citizens
in those countries where it is situated. We call on
Member States to respect that.
In conclusion, the safety of United Nations personnel
in general is of great concern to us. A ceasefire and a
return to the United Nations-led political process are
the only way to end the bloodshed in Libya and chart
a way forward before the situation collapses into an
even more deadly and chaotic conflict. As penholder,
we will continue to engage Council members on a way
forward and the appropriate steps that the Council can
take in support of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General.

