Ms. Citaku: Before I read out my remarks, I wish
to stress that I will abide by the lO-minute time limit
that you, Sir, proposed, out of respect for your time
as President and out of respect for the members of the
Security Council.

Secondly, allow me to convey our deep condolences
in connection with the passing of Ambassador Vitaly
Churkin. We disagreed on almost everything, but we
appreciate his role and contribution.

Ten days ago, Kosovo celebrated the ninth
anniversary of its independence. We allremembervividly
that cold day in Pristina: the emotions, expectations and
dreams. All the suffering that Kosovars were subjected
to, the years of discrimination, exclusion, mass killings,
ethnic cleansing, rape and deportation, did not deter
us from pursuing our destiny. We persevered, and we
succeeded. The lessons of Kosovo are quite simple; you
can win if you are right and if the cause is just, even if
you are not the powerful one.

Furthermore, humankind is capable of miracles.
When there is solidarity among the free nations of
the world, life prevails over death and good prevails
over evil. We will forever be grateful for the role the
Council has played, but the time has come to move
on. Corning here every three months, taking up the
Council's valuable time and hearing the same old
stories represents an unjustified use of the Council's
valuable time. Spending millions to maintain a mission
in Kosovo that no longer has a function or purpose is
an unjustified expenditure of United Nations resources
given that we know very well that they could be put to
much better use.

Frankly, Iwill not go through every topic mentioned
in the relevant report of the Special Representative. If
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo criteria were used also to write reports about
the countries of the representatives sitting around this
table, trust me, many reports would have to be produced.

I will just mention briefly several issues. First,
with respect to the incident that took place in the city
of Gjakova, what the report failed to mention is that in
1998-1999, 1,665 civilians were killed in that city. That
is 13 per cent of the entire population. In the village of
Meje alone, 373 civilians were killed in less than an
hour. Three thousand women were raped. Hundreds
went missing. Houses, schools and religious sites were
destroyed. Yet the mayor of Gjakova, Ms. Mimoza
Kusari, has been working hard to accommodate
minority communities in her municipality.

For the record, the municipality has invested in the
reconstruction of the Serbian Orthodox church there.
The church does notpay for any utilities; the municipality
covers all costs. Moreover, the municipality has
invested in a small farm on the premises of the church
in order to be even more accommodating to the people
who are living and serving there. The Orthodox Church
in Gjakova was never attacked, and there is good
cooperation. The incident to which the report refers
has to do with a very specific situation, that of people
who were involved in war crimes coming to visit the
site. This is the whole story. The context is everything,
and often the reports of the Special Representative
fail to provide that. While we heard from my Serbian
counterpart about a parallel universe, let me please tell
the Council what is happening in the real world.

First, Kosovo is a free, independent and sovereign
State recognized by the overwhelming majority of
the free nations of the world. Just today, Bangladesh
recognized the Republic of Kosovo, and we wish to
thank its Government and its people. We wish also to
thank the people and the Government of Singapore,
which recognized Kosovo previously, in December. It
is very clear that this process is unstoppable.

Kosovo is a member of more than 50 regional and
international organizations and on a clear path towards
becoming a member of the European Union, and
soon, hopefully, a Member of the United Nations. The
legitimacy of our cause was sealed by the crystal-clear
ruling of the International Court of Justice. The Court
ruled that States exists for the population, not vice
versa, thereby confirming without any ambiguity
that we did not break any international law when we
declared our independence.

Secondly, just because Serbia refuses to accept us
as a State does not make us any less ofa State. That only
signifies that Serbia is a neighbour that remains hostage
to its own hegemonic and neo-colonial past. Its attitude
is clearly demonstrated by the abuse of the issuance of
an INTERPOL red notice, as we recently witnessed in
the case of the detention of the former Prime Minister
of Kosovo, Mr. Ramush Haradinaj. Mr. Haradinaj was
twice acquitted at The Hague tribunal, and we have
absolutely no doubt that the justice system in France
will function professionally and release him. That is
long overdue.
This is not justice. This is not prosecution. This
is persecution. Furthermore, this is a desperate act by
Serbia to reverse history. As a reminder to everyone,
Serbia conducted and levelled similar trials and charges
against all Western leaders in 2000, including Bill
Clinton, Tony Blair, Jacques Chirac, Gerhard Schroder
and Javier Solana, among others. We have no doubt
that this Kafkaesque process will end soon and that
Mr. Haradinaj will return to Kosovo where he belongs,
but the really disturbing element in all of this drama
is Serbia's failure to deal with its own past - with the
real and not the fictional crimes that were committed in
Kosovo during the war.

Just last month, the Humanitarian Law Center
in Belgrade published a shiver-inducing report
substantiated by facts and figures of unprecedented
measures that Serbia undertook to hide traces of war
crimes, going so far as building structures on top of
the mass graves. According to Serbian logic, Churchill,
De Gaulle, Roosevelt and Eisenhower should have
faced the Nuremberg trials - not the Nazis. Let
us imagine just for one second those thousands of
families in Kosovo who are demanding answers and a
proper burial for their loved ones. Instead of finding
the strength to deal with their own past, catharsis and
de-Nazification, Serbia has chosen the path of denial.
Zero is the number of Serbians charged or convicted
for war crimes committed in Kosovo. Instead, they are
being promoted to high-level positions, such as in the
case ofGeneral Dikovie, the current Chief of Staff ofthe
Serbian Armed Forces, who, as has been documented,
is responsible for the killing of 1,400 civilians.

The Kosovo Liberation Army (KLA) is and was not
a terrorist organization. The KLA has been the most
successful liberation movement in recent history.

What we face on an almost daily basis from Serbia
are one-sided provocations aimed at destabilizing
Kosovo. There is a train service that runs twice daily
between Kosovo and Serbia. People commute from
one side of the border to the other. There was never
a problem, until one day in mid-January when Serbia
decided to send a train fully-loaded with hatred to
Kosovo covered with the slogan "Kosovo is Serbia"
translated into 21 languages, including Albanian.

Now, really, does anyone have any idea of what
Serbia thinking? Would any Council member sitting
around this table allow the same thing to happen in his
or her country? Kosovo, of course, took measures to
stop the train, and after seeing our resolve, just before
it reached the border, Serbia decided to stop the train.
Frankly speaking, there is no reason to praise Serbia for
doing that. It is playing the roles ofboth pyromaniac and
fireman. It should not be rewarded for fixing a problem
that it created in the first place. We experienced a
similar situation with regard to the wall that was built
in the centre of the city of Mitrovica and later removed
by those who put it there in the first place. Those kinds
of games should end.

Serbs living in Kosovo should not be held hostage
by Serbia and played as pawns in order to create
leverage. They should be masters of their own lives.
Kosovo institutions have gone to great lengths to
accommodate their needs. Unprecedented legislative
and constitutional measures have been put in place in
order to make sure that their rights are guaranteed. We
will, in accordance with our Constitution, implement
all the agreements that we reached in Brussels. We
will establish the association/community of Serb-
majority municipalities but only in accordance with
our Constitution, without their having any legislative
or executive power.

We will not allow Serbia to hold us back and
hostage to its own troubling past. We understand that
dealing with the past is sometimes more difficult for
the perpetrator than for the victim. Questions need
to be answered and, for some, that past is shameful.
We will not discuss with Serbia or with anyone else
the establishment and the creation of our own armed
forces. That is a legitimate and a sovereign decision for
the Kosovo authorities to make.

Although the President of Kosovo established the
Truth and Reconciliation Commission because we
believe that every family and every victim, regardless
of ethnicity, deserves truth and justice, what we heard
from Serbian President in January was a call for war.
Now, obviously, there will be no war - we all know how
the last one ended - but in order to build sustainable
peace, the absence of war is not enough. I should be
clear that we in Kosovo will not be distracted. We
know exactly who we are, and we know exactly what
we want. We want peace, dialogue and reconciliation,
but never submission.

Young, dedicated and selfless people in Kosovo are
writing history and making us proud every day. These
include Majlinda Kelmendi, who once again won the
world judo championship, and Arta Dobroshi and Shpat
Deda, who collaborated with British producers and just
brought home our first award from the British Academy
of Film and Television Arts.
In the real world, beyond politics and political
turmoil, there is a Kosovo in which youngsters try
hard, challenge the boundaries imposed by politics,
dream big and never let us down. I would like to invite
everyone here to come and visit, so that they can see
with their own eyes what Kosovo looks like today.

