Mr. Mladenovie (Yugoslavia): I would like to
thank Mr. Hans Haekkerup, the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and Head of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK), for his very informative statement. I would
also like to welcome the latest report of the Secretary-
General on the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo.

Since Mr. Hans Haekkerup's assumption of the
post of Special Representative, a new phase has
emerged in the work of the international civil presence
in Kosovo and Metohija, the autonomous province of
the Yugoslav constituent Republic of Serbia and, it
seems, in its relations with the newly elected
democratic Government. A process of cooperation has
begun. Contacts and talks at all levels have multiplied,
and a possibility has recently been provided for direct
communications with representatives of UNMIK in
Belgrade. My Government is willing to further develop
and improve that cooperation and stands ready to
conclude an agreement on the status of UNMIK that
would resolve a number of outstanding questions.

The Government of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia is committed to full and consistent
implementation of Security Council resolution 1244
(1999). It will persist in its quest for peaceful political
solutions to all problems in Kosovo and Metohija, The
Security Council resolution renders a clear framework
and provides for full respect for the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia. The position of Yugoslavia regarding the
implementation of Security Council resolution 1244
(1999) was elaborated in greater detail by Prime
Minister Zoran Zizic' in his recent address to the
Security Council.

Following the democratic changes, the
Government of my country has been constructively
cooperating with the international community. It is
high time that other involved actors interested in a
peaceful and political solution directed their efforts
towards overcoming the current serious problems in
Kosovo and Metohija.

Here I primarily have in mind the establishment
of a secure environment for all residents of Kosovo and
Metohija, irrespective of their national or religious
affiliation; a vigorous suppression of extremism and
terrorism; the creation of conditions for the return of
expellees and displaced persons; and the taking of
effective measures to trace missing and abducted
persons in the period since the arrival of the Kosovo
Force (KFOR) and UNMIK in this Serbian province.

I have to point out that we are still waiting for
this to happen and that the present situation in Kosovo
and Metohija is unacceptable for my Government.
Regrettably, KFOR and UNMIK are far from fulfilling
the mandate entrusted to them by the Security Council
in its resolution 1244 (1999). It is a fact that no secure
environment for all residents of the province has been
ensured. Through the adoption of a series of measures
and/or the taking of or failure to take actions, the clear
provisions of the resolution regarding the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia have been brought into question. The latest
escalation of terrorism by ethnic Albanian extremists,
the victims of which are primarily Serbs and other non-
Albanians, once again provides ample evidence that
extremist Albanian groups have not been demilitarized.
Terrorists continue to be recruited and armed. They are
active not only in Kosovo and Metohija, but also in
southern Serbia, inside and outside the ground safety
zone, as well as in neighbouring Macedonia. The latest
dramatic developments have demonstrated that the
Yugoslav border in the area of Kosovo and Metohija
near Albania and Macedonia continues to be very
penetrable and that it is necessary that KFOR and
UNMIK take more effective measures to control it. All
this has contributed to the deterioration of the situation
in and around Kosovo and Metohija and to the
impediment of the return of expelled Serbs and other
non-Albanians, short of which there can be no multi-
ethnic Kosovo and Metohija and no lasting political
solution.

Regarding Kosovo-wide elections, my
Government considers that, prior to holding them, it is
necessary to create an appropriate environment. This
means first and foremost the return to Kosovo and
Metohija of all expelled and displaced persons, as well
as the exact determination of the bodies for which
elections will be held and their competencies - that is,
to establish a legal framework. We are very interested
in making a contribution to this effort. The
Government of my country is resolved to cooperate
with all interested parties, in particular KFOR and
UNMIK, in addressing all relevant issues. For our part,
we have been active in promoting confidence-building
measures. The recent adoption of the Amnesty Law is
just one example in that context.

Let me take this opportunity to draw the
Council's attention to the latest developments related to
the situation in Kosovo and Metohija. The recent
agreement on a ceasefire in the ground safety zone in
southern Serbia and the agreement between the
Government of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and
KFOR on the entry of Yugoslav forces into the part of
the zone bordering Macedonia constitute the first
positive steps towards overcoming the crisis, which is
fraught with serious threats to peace and stability in the
region.

Although these threats have not yet been
removed, the Government of my country considers that
conditions have been created for the full
implementation of the Security Council's repeated
requests to end the violence immediately and to have
armed Albanian groups disbanded, disarmed and
withdrawn from the ground safety zone. Those groups
will otherwise continue to pose a serious threat to the
safety and security of the population and to the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Republic of
Serbia and the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia.
Furthermore, steps towards a gradual and complete
elimination of the ground safety zone would contribute
to a comprehensive implementation of the plan and
programme of the Governments of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia and the Republic of Serbia for
a peaceful solution to the crisis in the ground safety
zone and southern Serbia, of which I informed the
Security Council at its meeting on 13 February 2001.

The Federal Republic of Yugoslavia expects the
Security Council to render unanimous support to these
constructive efforts in order to implement the plan and
programme in their entirety and thus remove the risk of
further conflagration and threats to peace and security
in the region. We believe that the Security Council will
send a clear message to all those who seek to solve
problems by resorting to extremism and terrorism that
such an approach will not be tolerated and that it will
be met with the strong condemnation and resolute
actions of the international community.

Before concluding, I would just like to say that
today's meeting of the Security Council is not the
appropriate place to read and respond to newspaper
articles, so I will refrain from commenting on the
accusations made earlier.

