Mr. Mounzer (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, allow me to congratulate you,
Mr. President, on Egypt's accession to the presidency
of the Security Council for this month.
Yesterday, in Aleppo city alone, 28 civilians were
killed, including infants, in addition to 80 persons
who were wounded following the targeting by armed
terrorist groups - or the "moderate opposition", as
some in the Council like to call them - ofthe Al-Zubayr
maternity hospital and many neighbourhoods in
Aleppo. Regrettably, the number of fatalities is likely to
increase, as there are many critically wounded people.

At this point, I say to the representatives of States
that they either support or cover up terrorist acts in
Syria: Enough hypocrisy, enough politicization and
enough playing with the blood of Syrians. How can
the opposition be called moderate when it kills infants
in medical facilities and when it bombs civilians
indiscriminately on a daily basis? How can that
opposition be moderate when it rains down thousands of
indiscriminate shells on Aleppo, when it has used light
and heavy rockets, explosive shells, gas canisters and
mortars to kill more than 118 civilians, wounding more
than 206 people, including women, children and elderly
just in the past 10 days? This is the very embodiment of
terrorism. It cannot be called by any other name.

All this escalation by armed , with the Al-Nusra
Front and allied groups at the helm, was not coincidental.
It came in the wake of the failure by those terrorist
organizations to carry out a wide-ranging attack from
many points against Aleppo city under orders from
well-known States. The attack coincided with the
withdrawal of the so-called Al-Riyadh delegation from
the latest round of the Geneva talks. Two things should
therefore be clear to everyone.

First, the Syrian Government has participated in the
Geneva talks, in good faith and with full seriousness,
in order to reach a political settlement to the crisis in
Syria. For its part, the Al-Riyadh delegation came with
the prior intention to abort the talks. That was made
quite clear in its withdrawal from the latest round
of talks.

Secondly, the Syrian Government has abided by the
cessation of hostilities agreement based on its desire to
protect the blood of innocent Syrians, to restore security
and stability and to combat terrorism. At the same time,
the armed groups allied with the terrorists of Jabhat
Al-Nusra have violated the agreement, particularly
in Aleppo. That is a manifestation of the threats
made by the Al-Riyadh delegation, which has called
for burning Syrian cities, thereby confounding the
agreement, and for an escalation of military activities
against the Syrian Government, thereby flouting the
cessation of hostilities and all the efforts made to date
to stem the bloodshed of innocent civilians and free
them from the cycle of political pressures. What the
Syrian Government has been doing in Aleppo city is
merely fulfilling its obligation to protect its citizens
from terrorism, a response to escalation, killing and
destruction by terrorist groups in the city.

Today I would reiterate that the Syrian Government
is prepared to effectively participate in any sincere
effort aimed at reaching a political settlement that
would be decided by Syrians alone, in which they would
decide their future and make their choices through an
intra-Syrian dialogue under Syrian leadership and
without foreign intervention. Such a settlement should
ensure Syria's sovereignty, independence and territorial
integrity and rid from it the scourge of terrorism. In
that regard, let me stress the importance of the support
provided by some States to armed terrorist groups in
Syria. It is essential to control the borders, in particular
the borders between Turkey and Syria, where terrorists
are flowing daily in large numbers.

