Nana Effah-Apenteng (Ghana): At the outset, I
wish to thank the Chairpersons of the Counter-
Terrorism Committee, the Al-Qaida and Taliban
sanctions Committee and the 1540 Committee for their
incisive and comprehensive briefings.

Security Council resolution 1624 (2005) is one of
the most critical and far-reaching resolutions adopted
by the Security Council, in the sense that it invites
States to push the envelope of criminal liability. There
are two approaches to the implementation of that
resolution: using or extending existing provisions in
the criminal code on causing harm to persons and
property, or enacting specific legislation against
incitement to terrorist activities. In view of the legal
pitfalls in using vague legislation to prosecute terrorist
activities, the second option may be better. We
therefore call on the Counter-Terrorism Committee,
which is already doing a laudable job, to continue, in
consultation with donor countries and organizations, to
assist in building capacity and providing technical
assistance to States lagging behind in the critical areas
of legislative drafting and law enforcement. It is
imperative that in combating terrorism, which is a
constantly mutating phenomenon, we utilize all
innovative tools at our disposal, without compromising
freedom of expression and other human rights.

As noted by the Chairperson in her report, only
about one third of States have fulfilled their reporting
obligations. We believe that non-reporting by States
may not necessarily stem from lack of interest or
political will, but is rather due to technical difficulties
in implementation.

On the question of denial of safe haven to persons
with respect to whom there is reasonable evidence of
their having been guilty of incitement to terrorist acts,
what is important is the sharing of information among
the various intelligence and law enforcement agencies.
The same approach is recommended in the efforts of
Member States to strengthen their international
borders. It may also be necessary for States to invest in
advanced data collection and screening equipment at
their various ports of entry.
Dialogue among civilizations pursued on the
basis of mutual respect and good faith also has a role to
play in our efforts against terrorism. It is undeniable
that dialogue is necessary not only for mutual
understanding of the various cultures and religions, but
also because lack of understanding creates a fertile
breeding ground for tension, mistrust and suspicion,
which in turn constitute potential sources of hate-
mongering, racism and religious intolerance. To this
end, we welcome the various initiatives taken by the
Secretary-General, the General Assembly and various
other institutions and organizations on this subject.

My delegation is concerned about the extent to
which terrorist and extremist groups have been using
the tools of information technology to further their
murderous objectives, thereby opening a new front in
the war against terrorism. The proliferation of websites
on the Internet disseminating hate propaganda and
inflammatory ideas is a further challenge in our efforts
to contain incitement. This places on all of us the
collective burden of finding sophisticated means of
neutralizing such websites.

With regard to the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999),
concerning Al-Qaida and the Taliban and associated
individuals and entities, my delegation is pleased to
note that since the last briefing, the Committee has
made significant progress in streamlining the listing
and de-listing procedures. The refining of the listing
and de-listing process is critical, not only for the sake
of transparency and due process, but also to ensure
credibility and, hopefully, to reduce the number of
challenges in domestic courts. In this regard, we are
convinced that the Chairman's visits to States are
indispensable to the attainment of the objectives of the
Committee. These visits not only constitute an
invaluable tool in assessing the implementation of
sanctions, but also provide an opportunity for
consultations and exchanges of information with the
intelligence and law enforcement agencies of States. It
is also one way of assessing the needs of States and
thereby determining how efficiently and expeditiously
technical assistance can be channelled.

We take this opportunity to commend the
Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team for
the recommendations in its fourth and fifth reports on
the improvement of the sanctions regime, and for its
pivotal role in ensuring the efficient functioning of the
Committee. We call on the Council to renew the
mandate of the Monitoring Team before it expires at
the end of the year.

The Committee's efforts to develop the Interpol-
Security Council special notices should also be
commended. Cooperation with Interpol and other
international and regional organizations will enhance
its counter-terrorism activities.

The Security Council, by its unanimous adoption
of resolution 1673 (2006), which extended the mandate
of the 1540 Committee, unambiguously exhibited its
resolve and determination to diligently pursue efforts
to comprehensively address the nexus between
weapons of mass destruction proliferation and
terrorism, which separately and jointly constitute the
greatest threat to an already fragile international
security environment.

If we acknowledge that all States, irrespective of
their economic status and military and security
capabilities, are vulnerable to the threat of nuclear
terrorism, then the collective strength of the
community of nations should be harnessed to prevent
non-State actors from acquiring weapons of mass
destruction and their means of delivery, for which
resolution 1540 (2004) and, by extension, resolution
1673 (2006) seek to achieve.

It is, therefore, disheartening to note that only
three countries out of the 62 that had not submitted their
national reports as at last January have fulfilled their
obligation. We reiterate our call on the remaining 59
States to fulfil their obligations. There has not been any
appreciable increase in the number of States that have
provided additional reports.

It is against this backdrop that we consider the
outreach programme to be an essential element, since it
creates a forum for holistic discussion of the
implementation of the resolution among regional
groups, thereby encouraging countries that have yet to
report to do so.

Ghana, as noted by the Chairman of the 1540
Committee, is ready to host the 9-10 November 2006
seminar for Africa. We are optimistic that, after that
meeting and the similar seminar to be held in Peru,
fewer States will fall within the non-reporting bracket.

The provision of assistance and resources,
especially to developing countries, to enable them to
effectively implement salient national measures is
imperative, since the primary aim that underpinned the
adoption of resolutions 1540 (2004) and 1673 (2006)
will be elusive without international cooperation and
assistance.

The fight against the twin scourge of the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and
nuclear terrorism is a collective concern. Therefore,
every effort should be made to prevent the
politicization of the issue or the process being held
hostage to the parochial interests of any State or group
of States. Our initial unanimity of purpose should be
the primary principle as we forge ahead.

Finally, we welcome and applaud the growing
cooperation between the three Committees and hope
that the joint action strategy on non-reporting States, if
implemented, will serve as the beginning of closer
cooperation, given the eventual convergence of their
ultimate goals.

