President Buyoya (spoke in French): May I first
of all congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council, and tell you how
certain we are that your country, Mexico, will make an
important contribution to the Council's mission of
ensuring international peace and security.

Similarly, we welcome the dedication and
competence with which Mauritius presided over the
Council's work during the month of January. We have
noted in particular the holding, during its presidency,
of the public debate on conflicts in Africa, a situation
of concern to the entire community of nations.

May I extend to you, Mr. President, my heartfelt
gratitude for making this meeting possible. This is an
excellent opportunity that we will utilize to tell the
Council about the prevailing political situation in
Burundi. By way of reminder - and it is important to
emphasize this - we have opted for peace through
dialogue due to our conviction that any other way
would lead the country to an impasse. Advocating
dialogue in an armed conflict is not always easy, but
our responsibility gives us no alternative.

Today we can state - and the Burundian people
and the world can attest to this - that, despite
remaining difficulties, we have chosen the right option,
and that we have achieved satisfactory results. We have
the moral strength and the political conviction to go
forward so as to create conditions for lasting peace in
Burundi. In this statement we will inform the Council
of the political climate in Burundi and the stages we
have passed through in order to take up the challenges
we must face.

The political climate in Burundi has improved
considerably, especially following the establishment of
transitional institutions. On 1 November 2001, an
important date in the Burundi peace process,
transitional Government was established in accordance
with the Arusha Agreement. All parties and political
groups signatories to the Peace Agreement are
represented in the Government, with the exception of
one political group that preferred not to participate.

The political leaders who had been living in
exile-some for more than three decades-have
returned to Burundi and are carrying out important
political duties within the transitional institutions. This
augurs well for even greater movement in the days to
come, and refugees are already returning by the
hundreds every week.

The other transitional institutions, namely, the
National Assembly and the Senate, have also been
established.

The beginning of the implementation of the Peace
Agreement has created a new situation in Burundi. All
former political actors now find themselves side by
side in the same institutions to implement the Peace
Agreement they negotiated with such difficulty for
almost three years at Arusha.

The quarrels regarding the transitional leadership,
which caused so much discord among the political
class in Burundi, have ended. Reason has now
prevailed, and political forces are now playing their
role peacefully. The Burundian population is today
relieved to see that the peace process has been brought
home and is being led from within the country. The
voice of the people of Burundi on the ground will now
be better heard by the transitional Government and by
the Implementation Monitoring Committee for the
Peace Agreement, headquartered in Bujumbura. Our
common point of reference today is the Arusha
Agreement, a compromise platform that broadly takes
into account the concerns of all.

The political horizon for the people of Burundi,
including the entire political class of our country, is
now brighter. Deadlines have been adhered to closely.
Eighteen months from 1 November 2001, there will be
a transfer of power at the head of State level. Local
elections will be organized, to be followed six months
later by legislative elections. Then, to conclude the
transition after 36 months, a presidential election will
be held.

I am convinced that the institutions in place in
Burundi have the political means to begin the
necessary reforms. The negotiation and signing of a
ceasefire is crucial to speeding up and concluding the
needed reform process. An enormous task lies ahead,
but we can perform it. The proper functioning of
institutions is a guarantee of success. Daily experience
testifies to the serious-minded commitment of everyone
involved; this gives us grounds for optimism.

Although there are indeed reasons for hope, there
are real challenges to the peace process which could
compromise our progress towards peace if we fail to
find satisfactory solutions in the short term. The first
challenge is the continued violence. One characteristic
of our peace process is that we negotiated without a
ceasefire, signed the Arusha Agreement on Peace and
Reconciliation in Burundi without a ceasefire and
began the Agreement's implementation while rebel
violence continued in our country. That was and is a
difficult situation to manage. How can we make the
population understand that a peace agreement has been
signed when violence continues?

For our part, we have decided never to be an
obstacle to peace: in the present situation, the
negotiation, signing and implementation of the Arusha
Agreement has proved to be the best approach. That is
surely why we have enjoyed the understanding of the
Security Council and of the rest of the international
community, which has been tirelessly pressing the
Burundian rebels to join the peace process and
negotiate a ceasefire with our Government.

Our heartfelt gratitude goes to you, Mr. President,
and to the institution you represent. The Council's
constant appeal to the rebels to lay down their weapons
and join the other Barundi on the road to peace
constitutes valuable support for the people of Burundi.
Last May's visit to Burundi by all the members of the
Security Council to Burundi was a memorable moment
in our relations with the United Nations. It had a very
positive impact on political actors in Burundi and
throughout the subregion. We would greatly appreciate
a further Security Council visit to Burundi to assess
and support our peace process.

The violence that the rebels continue to impose
on the Burundian people is a challenge not only to us
in Burundi but to the Security Council, which bears
primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace. We take this opportunity to repeat
our request. The Security Council has the means to
make the Burundian rebels renounce violence. If
diplomatic means do not succeed, all other means
should be used to prevent the rebels from taking the
peace process hostage. That process is today guided by
a Government that is the outcome of negotiations and
that enjoys international legitimacy, as the Security
Council acknowledged in a recent statement on
Burundi. We also call on other countries of our
subregion to halt those who seek to destabilize our
country.

Burundi is in a good position to understand that a
lack of security in a given country has a harmful
impact on that country's neighbours. Peace in the Great
Lakes region will come when every country of the
region lives in peace. Here, both individual and
collective efforts are needed.

The second challenge is to rebuild our country.
After eight years of crisis, Burundi's economy has
suffered greatly. Let me illustrate this poverty with a
few statistics. The number of people living below the
poverty line has doubled, rising from 35 per cent of the
population in 1992 to more than 60 per cent today. We
bear a heavy external debt burden, with contractual
debt-service obligations reaching 98 per cent of our
exports, with arrears estimated at more than $112
million, and with debts exceeding 180 per cent of gross
domestic product, to mention only a few figures.

Here again, we ask the Security Council to raise
the international community's awareness of the need to
provide substantial support for our peace effort. The
people of Burundi hope for a positive impact from the
peace process, and are entitled to expect a better life.
Our efforts in this sphere recently achieved success at
Geneva, where donors pledged more than $800 million
over the next three years. We hope the pledges will be
redeemed without further delay, because a catastrophic
economic situation is, for us as it is elsewhere, a factor
for destabilization and, above all, for despair among
our people. Additional inputs are required because
great sums will be needed for the repatriation of
refugees, the resettlement of displaced persons and the
rebuilding of damaged infrastructure.

While we in Burundi are concerned with our
internal problems, we are following with interest the
problems of our subregion, and we are making our
modest contribution to anything that could help create
a better regional climate. It is crucial to improve
bilateral relations with our neighbours, and we are
committed to pursuing this process. Our Government is
also prepared to play a role in preparations for the
regional conference on peace in the Great Lakes region
so that it can be held successfully.

I can affirm on behalf of my country that the
people, the institutions and the political leaders of
Burundi are determined to work more vigorously for
peace. We welcome outside contributions, but we know
that making peace in Burundi is our own responsibility.

