Mr. Pressman (United States of America): I
thank Special Representative Zarif for his briefing.
We welcome Deputy Prime Ministers and Foreign
Ministers Thaci and Dacie back to the Security Council.
We would also like to extend our thanks to the men and
women of the Kosovo Force and the European Union
Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo, who continue to play
an indispensable role in Kosovo.

I would like to begin by congratulating Kosovo
on the European Commission's recent approval of
a stabilization and association agreement proposal
with Kosovo. We are happy to see Kosovo taking that
important step on the path to European Union (EU)
membership. During the reporting period, we were also
heartened to hear of continued progress on the Kosovo-
Serbia dialogue, in particular the agreement already
being implemented to integrate Kosovo's judiciary,
as well as an agreement to integrate Serbian civilian
protection core personnel into Kosovo institutions. We
also note the progress made by northern municipalities
in approving budgets and rationalizing payrolls.
We look forward to further engagement through the
EU-facilitated dialogue process in the near future,
and urge both Kosovo and Serbia to continue making
progress on the telecoms, energy and insurance
issues, as well as on the formation of an association
of Serb-majority municipalities and a resolution of the
Mitrovica bridge issue.

The United States takes all allegations of war
crimes very seriously, so let me clearly say that Kosovo
must respond appropriately to allegations of serious
crimes committed between 1998 and 2000. Kosovo
must uphold its commitments undertaken in its 2014
exchange of letters with the EU High Representative
by promptly adopting the necessary legal measures
to set up a robust specialist court that can adjudicate
those cases, following the past summer's findings by
the EU Special Investigative Task Force that there is
sufficient evidence to indict a handful of individuals
for serious crimes committed during that period. We
urge the Government of Kosovo to grasp the momentum
of the recent months and to unite and pass enabling
constitutional amendments and the necessary statutes
as soon as possible.

The United States is pleased to support the
EU-led investigative effort through seconding a new
Chief Prosecutor, David Schwendiman, who arrived in
Brussels to assume the role in the past week. We were
also pleased to observe Kosovo and Serbia's continued
commitment to fighting terrorism. We welcome
Kosovo's new foreign terrorist fighter legislation,
enacted in March, and its formation of a national
countering violent extremism working group, the goal
of which is to develop a nationwide plan on countering
violent extremism. We congratulate Serbia on hosting
a successful counter-terrorism conference in April and
particularly commend Serbia's inclusive approach with
regard to Kosovo's participation.

Both Kosovo and Serbia's membership in the
anti-Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant coalition and
their participation in the regional countering violent
extremism summit last week are appreciated. We ask
that Serbia and other non-recognizers acknowledge the
importance of Kosovo's membership in INTERPOL
as a means of facilitating important law enforcement
cooperation on counter-terrorism and organized crime,
and not block Kosovo's membership application.
The United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo (UNMIK) should support Kosovo's
INTERPOL membership by turning its international
police cooperation competency over to the Government
of Kosovo.

The United States commends Kosovo for cooperating
with its neighbours on law enforcement issues. We were
pleased to see the national police directors of Kosovo
and Serbia meet for the first time during the reporting
period. Such exchanges are important, and we hope
that they will continue. We also note the Government
of Kosovo's measured and constructive response to the
events in Macedonia.

In closing, I would like to stress that while the
United States believes the situation in Kosovo remains
an important issue, the burden on the Security Council
of these meetings must be reduced. Of the seven topics
covered by the Security Council under the debate
format, UNMIK has accounted for fully 25 per cent
of all meetings in just the past 12 months. Only the
situation in Afghanistan receives the same level of
attention in this format. We reiterate our preference
that the Council extend the reporting period for the
Secretary-General to every six months.

