Mr. Bessho (Japan): I thank the presidency for its
initiative in convening this briefing today. I also thank
Secretary-General Guterres for his informative briefing.

Japan is deeply committed to United Nations
peacekeeping and is the third-largest contributor to its
budget. We are eager to discuss how this vital tool for
international peace and stability can deliver the greatest
impact on the ground.

Our goal in reviewing peacekeeping operations
should be to ensure that peacekeeping achieves results
consistently. It is thus our essential task to undertake
serious, well-informed discussions to determine in
concrete terms what we want each mission to deliver.

Today's discussion must be put into context: while
we should always seek to improve the efficiency of
United Nations peacekeeping, overall it is a cost-
effective tool. To give just one example, an analysis
carried out by the United States Government
Accountability Office in 2006 found that the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti was costing less
than half of what a United States operation of equal size
and duration would have required. Our priority is not
to simply scale back or downsize peacekeeping, but to
ensure that it is effectively employed where it can make
a difference with limited resources.
In the process of reviewing operations, some
improvements may take time. But one measure we
can implement this very day is to hold more in-depth
discussions in the Council on the mandates that we
authorize. We tend to add on different capacities to
missions in response to individual circumstances, but
we must stop to reflect on this habit. The Council has
the primary responsibility to identify a mission's core
objective and priorities through focused discussions.
The clarity and effectiveness of mandates, and thus
of peacekeeping itself, stem from the quality of such
discussions. This requires us to methodically review and
analyse information from the field, troop-contributing
countries and the Secretariat. A recent good example
is the extensive discussion on the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo between Council members
and troop-contributing countries, which resulted in a
clearer and better-prioritized mandate.

We must assess whether the continued deployment
ofa given peacekeeping operation fits the reality on the
ground. We often hear that shrinking mandates or troop
levels can undermine peace and security if the timing
is not right. But this cannot be an excuse for status quo
mandate rollovers without serious consideration. We
need deeper discussions in the Council to link political
processes closely to mandates. We should also consider
whether the timing of deployment is appropriate in the
conflict spectrum.

We must be prepared to constructively discuss
peacekeeping exit strategies with an understanding
of the context on the ground, including what would
follow on from a premature withdrawal where political
solutions are elusive. In doing so, the Council should
explore enhanced coordination with the Peacebuilding
Commission, which can play an important role in the
transition from peacekeeping to post-conflict recovery.

As one means of making peacekeeping even
more cost-effective, Japan proposes that we further
explore coordinated initiatives to increase personnel
capabilities across missions. Individual troop-
contributing countries are responsible for ensuring
high troop standards, but in many cases enhanced
capacity through additional training can be beneficial.
Triangular cooperation among the Secretariat, troop-
contributing countries and a third country such as Japan
can help ensure that peacekeepers are well prepared for
the field. Standardizing this practice could be one way
of guaranteeing that missions consistently receive the
best personnel to complete their mandates.

We must use United Nations peacekeeping even
more effectively so that this vital tool can continue
to protect the most vulnerable while fitting into a
broader framework for sustaining peace that is built
on the pillars of peace and security, human rights and
development. There are, naturally, many views on how
this can best be accomplished. Japan hopes that today's
briefing will mark the start of more in-depth Council
discussions involving a wide range of stakeholders on
each mission and mandate.

