Mr. Prystaiko (Ukraine): I sincerely thank all
members of the Security Council for giving me a
chance to speak today. It has been a very important
discussion for Ukraine, and I think that all of us agree,
at least, that the Minsk agreements are the only way
forward, in their entirety and complexity, starting
from the ceasefire and the withdrawal of weapons and
foreign troops, inter alia, to the political resolution, the
changes in our Constitution and the decentralization of
Ukraine. Incidentally, Ukraine has already started the
process of decentralization, and the only part that is not
decentralized is held by pro-Russian proxies.

With regard to the Russian representative's
statement, I am sick and tired, having been in these
negotiations for more than two years, of the accusations
of a bloody revolt in Ukraine. The statement was full
of the usual "Ds": distract, distort and deny. We have
heard it all before. I have made a very serious effort to
familiarize myself with all of the public statements on
this subject made by the Russian representative up to
now. They add up to 84 pages that are worth reading.
Most of the elements are well-formulated and resemble
the truth, but only if one allows oneself to forget one
principal thing: who came into whose land? Who
appropriated the land? Who started killing people?
Who sent in additional tanks and mercenaries?

With regard to the draft press statement proposed
by the Russian Federation, there is no issue with regard
to the first part, because it represents, as I mentioned
earlier, what all of us here believe and what our leaders
have confirmed, namely, that we have to support the
Normandy format and the Minsk agreements. In
connection with the tragic events in Odessa, my native
city and not that of the Russian representative, I believe
that we have to investigate all of the events there, starting
from the Russians' actions in Crimea and their support
and incitement that lead to the killing of people, some
of whom were burned alive, in numerous Ukrainian
cities, using knives and other means that were provided
by the Russians. We therefore do not believe that the
draft statement represents an honest attempt on the
part of the Russian representative to bring those tragic
events to our attention, because Russian media have
already reported on the draft statement well before we
were given a chance to read it.

