Mr. Kandeel (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): I extend
a very heartfelt thanks to Mr. Sebastian Kurz, Foreign
Minister of Austria and Chairperson-in-Office of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE). I thank him for his very detailed briefing on the
future priorities of that organization. We have always
emphasized the importance of regional organizations,
including the OSCE, in the area ofinternational peace and
security under Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United
Nations. We support the Austrian priorities in tackling
current challenges, namely, de-escalating conflicts in
the region; countering extremism, in particular among
youth; countering confrontations between countries;
and maintaining opening communication between the
parties to the various conflicts.

We also appreciate the efforts of the OSCE to find
a political solution to various long-standing conflicts,
including in Ukraine, Nagorno Karabakh, Georgia and
elsewhere. In that connection, we reaffirm that there
is no military solution to the conflicts in the region.
There is no alternative to bolstering efforts to launch
constructive dialogues aimed at seeking political
solutions to conflicts. We urge all parties to shoulder
their responsibility and demonstrate the necessary
political will to solve those conflicts peacefully. We
note in particular the attempts by the OSCE to pool
efforts for a political solution to the crisis in Ukraine, in
line with the Minsk agreements, which offer the most
promising framework for a lasting solution.

We also support the mediation efforts undertaken
by various actors, which enjoy the respect of the parties
themselves and of the international community. There
are close links between security in Europe and security
in the Middle East and the Mediterranean. We should
strengthen our ties with the OSCE, in the framework of
cooperation with our Mediterranean partners, in order
to resolve crises in the region, first and foremost the
crises in Libya and Syria.

I would also like to cite terrorism and extremism,
which require the strengthening of dialogue between
religions and civilizations in order to confront
Islamophobia and solve problems related to immigration,
the protection of refugees, and trafficking in human
persons in the Mediterranean, among others. We call
for a strengthening of international efforts - with
the participation of all interested parties, including
the OSCE - to eradicate terrorism through a global
approach that is not limited to military and security
solutions, but also takes into account the cultural,
economic and developmental dimensions.

Egypt is one of the OSCE's partners in the
Mediterranean and will spare no effort in working
to achieve these goals, in particular by adopting
cooperation frameworks between the OSCE and
moderate religious institutions, such as the Al-Azhar
mosque, in order to enhance religious dialogue. This
is one of the most important areas of work in the
framework of a global strategy to counter terrorism
and extremism.

Common security in the Mediterranean requires
identifying the root causes of existing problems. It
also requires seeking lasting and permanent solutions
through constructive dialogue among the countries
of the region. Egypt would like in the near future to
see greater cooperation and coordination between the
United Nations and the OSCE, so that our shared vision
can be translated into concrete measures that will help
to strengthen our cooperation.

