Mr. Nambiar (India): Since the last
consideration by the Security Council of the situation
in Afghanistan, a number of momentous developments
have taken place. The first and most positive
development has been the successful conclusion last
month of the Emergency Loya Jirga, which represents
the will of the Afghan people. From the selection of
approximately 1,000 delegates from 390 districts of
Afghanistan - in particular the selection and activism
of some 200 women delegates - through the actual
conduct of the Loya Jirga, the progressive evolution of
a consensus and, finally, the election of the head of
State, approval and appointment of the Transitional
Authority of Afghanistan and of other structures, the
entire process was carried out in accordance with the
agreement reached in Bonn, where the Afghan parties
had pledged to move towards a freely elected and
constitutional Government. We welcome the outcome
of the Emergency Loya Jirga and the election of Hamid
Karzai as the President of the transitional Islamic
Government of Afghanistan.

The transitional Government, like its predecessor,
the Interim Administration, faces the uphill task of
rebuilding the Afghan national economy, infrastructure
and institutions of governance. It also faces an
uncertain security situation in certain parts of the
country.

While the international community has every
reason to feel satisfied at the remarkable process of
transformation in Afghanistan from the totalitarian,
unrepresentative and brutal Taliban regime to the
multi-ethnic, democratic order represented by the
Transitional Administration, we cannot overlook the
threats and dangers that could undermine those
achievements. The assassination on 6 July of Vice-
President Haji Abdul Qadir, within a month of the
Loya Jirga, was a disquieting sign that the forces of
instability and extremism continue to cast their dark
shadow over Afghanistan and the rest of the region. We
strongly condemn this and other incidents. We cannot
allow those forces to succeed.
We are grateful to the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Ambassador Brahimi, for his
valuable briefing today. The Secretary-General, in his
11 July report (S/2002/737) on the situation in
Afghanistan and its implications for international peace
and security refers to the threats to the consolidation of
peace and civil government in the country posed by
actions of the ex-Taliban and Al Qaeda forces that
explicitly oppose the Bonn process, as well as to those
posed by the presence of armed factions. The continued
regrouping of Al Qaeda and Taliban cadres along
Afghanistan's southern and south-eastern borders
heavily impinges on the security situation in
Afghanistan, as well as on the rest of our region, and is
of serious concern to us. What is more worrying is that
they continue to receive external support. It would be
tragic and downright dangerous for Afghanistan and
for regional and international peace and security if the
malevolent and extremist forces manifested in Al
Qaeda and the Taliban, and their external support, were
allowed to succeed in their efforts.

To meet this challenge, a major element of the
institutional reconstruction effort in Afghanistan has to
be the development of the country's security structures.
It is important that those structures be established as
Afghan institutions flowing out of intra-Afghan
processes relevant to and targeted at meeting Afghan
needs in response to internal and external threats. As a
measure of our support to institution-building in
Afghanistan, my Government has undertaken the
organization and conduct of 12 training courses
involving approximately 250 officers of the Afghan
police in specialized areas including investigation
techniques, logistics, personnel management and
general policing duties.

In order to address the multifaceted challenges
that it faces today - and this includes the continuing
threats from regrouping Al Qaeda and Taliban
elements - Afghanistan requires substantial, extensive
and long-term international assistance to meet its
reconstruction and humanitarian requirements. This
would be a process of nation-building to which the
international community would have to lend a
continuous helping hand.

India is committed to providing extensive
humanitarian, project and financial assistance to
Afghanistan's reconstruction. As part of our $100
million financial commitment, we transferred $10
million to the Afghan Government as a cash subsidy
grant on 10 July 2002. Another $11.5 million is
available for project-related assistance. Details are
being worked out for the transfer of three Airbus
aircraft as a grant to Ariana Airlines. Fifty buses have
been provided to the Afghan Government. We have
committed an amount of 1 million tonnes of wheat as
food aid to Afghanistan. Discussions are on with the
World Food Programme to operationalize part of that
commitment as high protein biscuits for a school
feeding programme in Afghanistan.

We have also provided medical and paramedical
teams, extensive medical stores, medical instruments
and equipment in various cities of Afghanistan. More
than 18 tonnes of material for artificial limbs was sent
to set up a camp for amputees in Kabul. Earthquake
relief in the form of 10,000 blankets, a substantial
number of tents and medical supplies was delivered in
April 2002. A computer training centre has been
established and is being run in Afghanistan by Indian
experts. Skills upgrading for various professionals and
Internet access via very small aperture terminals
(VSAT) have also been established for the Interim
Administration of Afghanistan. In extending our
assistance, we have scrupulously adhered to the
concept of Afghan ownership and prioritization in
designing and implementing programmes for
Afghanistan.

One of the bulwarks against destabilizing factors
in the Afghan capital has been the International
Security Assistance Force (ISAF), which has
performed commendably under difficult circumstances.
We wish to commend the Government of the United
Kingdom for their successful handling of the ISAF
command. We also express our appreciation to the
Government of Turkey for agreeing to take over
command of ISAF. We wish them all success in their
important task of maintaining security in the Kabul
area.

On behalf of my Government, I wish to express
our strong commendation of Ambassador Brahimi,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, and
the team of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan for their tireless, imaginative and highly
disciplined efforts, which have contributed so
significantly to bringing us to this stage in the difficult
process of the political stabilization and reconstruction
of Afghanistan. We extend our support to them in the
task of furthering the consensus in favour of positive
change and of working with the Afghan people in
meeting the challenges before them as they move
towards the establishment of a freely elected,
constitutional and democratic Government in
Afghanistan.
I would like to underline my Government's
support for, and best wishes to, President Hamid
Karzai, to the Transitional Authority and to the people
of Afghanistan in their efforts to build and secure for
themselves a stable, prosperous and democratic nation.
India's interest, and also the interest of all peace-loving
peoples around the world, lies in the emergence of a
strong, united and independent Afghanistan.

