We would like to thank the Estonian presidency for convening this open debate on the issue of the protection of civilians in armed conflict, which is also a priority for Peru. We particularly welcome the participation of the President of Estonia, Her Excellency Mrs. Kersti Kaljulaid. We would also like to thank Secretary-General Antonio Guterres for his important presentation, as well as Mr. Peter Maurer, President of the International Committee of the Red Cross, and Ms. Ellen Johnson Sirleaf, Nobel Peace Laureate. Peru is a country that is committed to multilateralism and the rule of law as fundamental tenets of the international community. Within the rule of law, two bodies of law are key: international humanitarian law and international human rights law. We are party to the core international instruments in both areas, and their provisions are duly reflected, developed and implemented in our national legislation. During our recent membership of the Security Council, we attached high priority to the Council's responsibility to protect civilians, in line with the obligations established under international humanitarian law. We believe that the Council has a moral and legal obligation to act as one to put an end to the suffering of millions of people in the many situations on its agenda, including those who are particularly vulnerable - children, young people, the elderly and persons with disabilities, among others. The international community must respect and comply with the principles of international humanitarian law, including the principle of distinction between civilians and combatants and between civilian objects and military objectives, and the principle of proportionality, among others. This is a collective legal obligation, as the International Court of Justice specified in its 1996 advisory opinion on the Legality of the threat or use of nuclear weapons, in which it set out that "these fundamental rules are to be observed by all States whether or not they have ratified the conventions that contain them, because they constitute intransgressible principles of international customary law" (4/51/2/8, annex, para. 79). States have the primary responsibility to respect and ensure the human rights of all persons within their territory and subject to their jurisdiction. Similarly, it is the obligation of all parties to armed conflict to take measures to protect civilians. This is in accordance with international law, as affirmed on several occasions by the Security Council. In that regard, Peru adheres to the concept of the responsibility to protect. This year marks 15 years since the concept was unanimously agreed and adopted by the General Assembly in resolution 60/1, thereby establishing the responsibility of each State to protect its population from genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity. In that connection, we wish to emphasize that 119 States, including Peru, have endorsed the Accountability, Coherence and Transparency group's code of conduct, which commits us to acting in a timely and decisive manner to prevent and put an end to crimes of atrocity. We stress that the various peacekeeping operations deployed as a result of a Council resolution are mandated to protect civilians, including from the actions of their own Government's regular army. We note with great concern that the latest report of the Secretary-General on the protection of civilians in armed conflict (S/2020/366) points out that, for the ninth consecutive year, the harm caused by the use of explosive weapons with wide-area effects in populated areas is devastating for civilians, who have long been the most affected by these devices, which violate the principles of distinction and proportionality prescribed by international humanitarian law. In that regard, and in the light of the recommendation of the Secretary-General and the International Committee of the Red Cross, Peru fully supports the process leading to the negotiation and adoption of an international political declaration on the use of explosive weapons in populated areas. We should bear in mind that we must achieve the goal of a world free of poverty and hunger in order to implement the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and the vision of a world without poverty and hunger, with equitable and widespread access to quality education, health care and social protection, thereby fulfilling the rights to an adequate standard of living, education and health, as set out in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. We must therefore act decisively so as to comply with the obligations of international humanitarian law and develop effective measures to prevent violations in order to ensure the protection of civilians and civilian infrastructure during armed conflict, since that, in turn, leads to forced displacement and the economic exclusion of victims. The protection of civilians and civilian infrastructure is particularly important in situations such as the current one, where the coronavirus disease pandemic is affecting all humankind through its rapid spread and where vulnerable and marginalized groups are more exposed to the disease and its repercussions in other areas. This reality is affecting millions of people, the vast majority of whom are civilians, for whom, in addition to suffering armed conflict, there is the impact of a disease that is making the highest demands on all our health systems. It is a disease that now more than ever needs civilian infrastructure - particularly for health care and the production and distribution of medicines and food - which must therefore be protected. For that reason, Peru firmly supports the Secretary-General's call for a global ceasefire to help contain the coronavirus disease. We note with great concern the persistence of sexual violence related to armed conflict, of which, as the Secretary-General's report mentions, women and girls continue to represent the vast majority of victims. We reiterate our condemnation, in the strongest terms, of all forms of sexual violence in armed conflict, as well as the urgent need to protect victims and ensure that those responsible are held accountable. Meanwhile, we believe that the care and rehabilitation of victims is fundamental to any sustainable peacebuilding process, which must take into account the fact that the psychological impacts of conflicts, particularly on civilians, have the potential to destroy the social fabric of communities, thereby making them more likely to suffer new conflicts. We believe that it is important to take into account the needs and concerns of affected communities in order to enhance their protection. Their involvement in conflict prevention gives greater credibility to negotiation and peacebuilding processes. In that context, we highlight the role that young people and women are called upon to play in conflict prevention and resolution, justice and reconciliation. Both are crucial to building the inclusive vision of the future required to achieve sustainable peace. It is equally critical to ensure accountability for the commission of atrocity crimes. The universalization of international criminal jurisdiction will make it possible to prevent the suffering of civilians in conflicts more effectively. In conclusion, we would like to pay tribute to the humanitarian agencies and workers, as well as the Blue Helmets, involved in protecting civilians in conflict areas under the most difficult conditions, risking their lives to save others.
