Ms. Morrison Gonzalez (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): We would like to begin by applauding the efforts of Special Representative Salame, given the challenging and commendable work he conducts with his team on the ground to end the crisis in Libya. We also thank the representative of Germany for his briefing on the work of the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya. We also congratulate Germany on organizing the Berlin international conference on Libya, Algeria for hosting the ministerial meeting for Libya's neighbours in Algiers, and the Republic of the Congo for holding today's meeting of the African Union High-Level Committee on Libya, in Brazzaville, all of which are important meetings on the future and the role of international actors, including regional organizations, can play to assist the Libyan people in achieving lasting peace. We also welcome the concrete steps taken by the parties to appoint members to Libya's Joint Military Commission, which we hope will garner results in the coming days at the meetings in Geneva. We are concerned about reports of ongoing attacks, including on schools, hospitals and airports, as well as of flagrant violations of international humanitarian law and the arms embargo, following the conclusions agreed at the Berlin conference. Accordingly, we call on all relevant actors to take advantage of the momentum generated at the international level and the provisions made in good faith, which representatives of various Member States negotiated in recent forums to bring about a truce and genuine ceasefire. We recall that there is no military solution to the Libyan conflict and that the ceasefire must be agreed upon without preconditions. The Libyan people must not and cannot continue to suffer from the inability of the Members of the United Nations to fulfil their obligations, in line with the arms embargo and international law. The efforts of the Council must focus on slowing the escalation of indiscriminate attacks, in particular those on civilian infrastructure, which serve only to exacerbate the very fragile humanitarian situation. It is therefore important to convey a clear message on the Council's unity in this regard. We remain concerned about the enforced disappearance more than six months ago of Ms. Siham Sergewa, an elected member of the Libyan House of Representatives. We encourage the authorities to do their utmost to investigate and bring to justice those responsible. Any act of violence against women in politics threatens the building of strong democratic institutions and the well-being of the Libyan people. Similarly, we again express great dismay at the distressing conditions in detention centres, where recurrent cases of severe malnutrition, torture, sexual violence and forced labour are documented. We urge the Libyan Government to end arbitrary detentions, in particular of children, and seek alternatives that meet minimum international standards and human dignity. Young Libyans are involved in mitigating the effects of the conflict and in building peace and social cohesion in their communities. We would therefore like to welcome the Peacebuilding Fund's joint project to support young people and adolescents in Sirte, as well as to provide training in leadership and conflict resolution and opportunities to participate in decision-making processes. The reins of a political process that brings peace, security and stability must be in the hands of Libyans and in particular of women and young people, who play a critical role in the dialogue for lasting peace throughout Libya.
