Mrs. Camara (Guinea) (interpretation from French):
At the outset I should like to address to you, Mr. President,
the thanks of the African Group, on whose behalf I have
the honour of speaking, for convening this meeting on the
situation in Angola. I should also like to thank all members
of the Security Council for their tireless efforts, and for the
noteworthy efforts that our Organization has continued to
make in its attempt to resolve the situation in Angola.

The report on the situation in Angola, presented to the
African Group on 25 August by the Permanent
Representative of Angola, Ambassador Afonso Van Dunem
"Mbinda", is disturbing. The fact that UNITA has recruited
some 2,000 individuals and that, according to the report,
there are nine fully operational military camps, is cause for
concern.

The Security Council has acknowledged and declared
that the Angolan people bear the ultimate responsibility for
the pursuit of the peace process. The Council should no
longer wait around for UNITA to respect its wishes while
the Government of Angola has been very accommodating
in its response to the appeals of the Council and the
international community. UNITA has openly adopted a
fractious and recalcitrant attitude and made all
cooperation conditional.

UNITA has respected neither the resolutions of the
Security Council nor the wishes of the international
community. The Lusaka Protocol, which provided the
basis for the formation of the Government of National
Unity, has since it was signed been violated with
impunity.

The time has come for UNIT A to acknowledge the
full authority of the Security Council. Whereas the
representatives of UNITA who are members of the
Government of National Unity continue, like the good
patriots they are, to play a constructive role in Angola,
those who have become masters of banditry and
bloodshed remain the real enemies of peace and of the
long-suffering Angolan people.

It cannot be denied that the Angolan people bear the
ultimate responsibility for the success of the peace
process. Nevertheless, it is the duty of the Security
Council to ensure that the peace process is not threatened;
and if it is imperilled, the Council should take every
necessary step to preserve peace.

We cannot allow the results of the noteworthy work
done by Kofi Annan and his Special Representative for
Angola, Maitre Blondin Beye, to come to naught because
of UNITA' s uncooperative and irresponsible attitude. This
is why we request the Secretary-General and his Special
Representative to continue their tireless efforts for peace,
stability and security in Angola. We would urge the
Security Council, in the interests of peace in Angola, to
impose comprehensive and appropriate sanctions on
UNITA in order to safeguard the fragile peace which
currently prevails in Angola.

