Mr. Sallah (Gambia): The importance of the oil-for-
food programme cannot be overemphasized, for the
procurement and distribution of food, medicine and other
humanitarian supplies to assist in the alleviation of the
hardship being suffered by the vulnerable sectors of the
Iraqi population is a great step in the right direction. This
is an important element in the implementation of Security
Council resolution 986 (1995).

My delegation welcomes the substantial increase
effected in this direction, as outlined in the distribution
plan submitted by the Secretary-General, which is the
object of the draft resolution being considered. The fact
that the distribution plan is not being affected in any way
by the present circumstances is very gratifying to my
delegation, for this shows the great concern the Security
Council has for the well-being of the ordinary Iraqi
citizens.

The implementation of this programme in its
increased form, as recommended by the Secretary-
General, will also assist in putting back into proper shape
the deteriorating infrastructure, which is vital in
ameliorating the agricultural and other sectors. Thus, my
delegation feels that Iraq should not form any linkage
between the enhanced programme and non-compliance
with the implementation of resolution 687 (1991). We
therefore urge Iraq to embrace this magnanimous gesture
and cooperate fully with the implementation of the
distribution plan under the oil-for-food programme.

My country, the Gambia, is not insensitive to the
suffering of the vulnerable groups in Iraq affected by the
imposition of sanctions. The grim statistics in the
Secretary-General's report of 1 February 1998, document
S/1998/90, speak for themselves. But the Iraqi authorities
have an obligation to fulfil: full compliance with all the
relevant Security Council resolutions, as well as
cooperation with the Secretariat on the implementation of
the expanded oil-for-food programme. The Iraqi
authorities should not hold their suffering people as
hostages.
In the interest of peace and tranquillity, we are
further urging Iraq to afford the Secretary-General the
necessary cooperation so that a bright light can be seen at
the end of the tunnel. The Iraqi authorities should not lose
sight of the fact that the whole world is advocating a
peaceful resolution of the present stand-off, and the
opportunity now presents itself in the form of the
variables being offered in this regard by the Security

 

Council through the Secretary-General. We urge them to
fulfil their part of the bargain.

With these remarks, we reiterate our profound wish for
a very successful mission by the Secretary-General, whose
untiring efforts for the peaceful resolution of the present
impasse are highly commendable. In the light of the
foregoing, my delegation will vote in favour of the draft
resolution before us today.

