Mr. Pankin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We would like to take this opportunity to
thank the French presidency for leading the Council's
work successfully in May, and we wish you every
success, Mr. President, in leading the Council this
month. We also thank the Presidents and Prosecutors of
the Tribunals for presenting their reports.

Today's briefings by the leadership of the
Tribunals is particularly important, as it is the first
since the adoption of resolution 1966 (2010), which set
specific dates for the launch of the Residual
Mechanism for the Tribunals and the deadlines for the
functioning of the International Criminal Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR).

In considering the reports of the Tribunals in
terms of the demands laid out in that resolution, first
and foremost we would note the progress made in their
work over the last half a year. Several major
proceedings were completed. The process of preparing
to transfer cases to the Residual Mechanism is moving
ahead. We note the arrest by Serb authorities of Ratko
Mladie and his transfer to The Hague. We also
welcome the arrest in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo of Bernard Munyagishari, an individual sought
by the ITCR. We understand that, in accordance with
current plans, his case will be referred to the relevant
national court.

On the whole, we believe that the cooperation
with the Tribunals of all States in the respective
regions during the reporting period to be positive. With
respect to the pace of the Tribunals' closing, we note
the efforts of the ICTR, whose work remains on
schedule for completion in accordance with the
aforementioned resolution. Unfortunately, we are again
unable to give a positive assessment to the work of the
ICTY in that area. Its report (S/2011/316, annex 1)
contains newly updated timelines for the consideration
of cases, which is a source of serious concern. For
instance, the consideration of the Karadzie case has
been extended. Increasingly odious is the case of
Seselj, who has already spent almost nine years in
detention awaiting a decision in the first instance.
There are plans to extend the timeline in his case, too.

These delays fail to meet any conceivable
standard of civilized international justice. The
reconsideration of the Haradinaj case is only now
beginning one year after the opening of the retrial.
Although these cases remain within the timeline set out
in resolution 1966 (2010), these trends cannot but
alarm us. One example is the unacceptable situation
with regard to the appeals proceedings in the Prlie,
Seselj and Tolirnir cases, in which, as a result of the
latest extension of the timelines for proceedings in both
instances, the conclusion of appeals is planned for
2015, which is beyond the date set in resolution 1966
(2010) for the ICTY's closure.

We recall that the basis for the compromise that
led to the adoption of resolution 1966 (2010) was the
schedule for the completion of cases presented last
year by the ICTY itself. We insist that the key
parameters of the compromise be strictly respected. We
also do not consider the arrest of Ratko Mladie to be
grounds for a possible extension of the ICTY's work.
Trial activities of this case in the first instance can and
must meet the deadline of 31 December 2014. The
appeals in that case must be heard by the Residual
Mechanism.

We understand that the complications in the
proceedings are to a certain extent due to the problem
of the departure of staff from both Tribunals. For our
part, we are ready to assist in resolving that problem.
We also recognize the existence of a problem arising
from a lack of space in the penitentiary systems of the
States that have concluded relevant agreements with
the ICTY for individuals convicted to serve their
sentences in prison. This problem must also be given
close attention.

