Mr. Ladeb (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, I would like to thank Mr. Geir Pedersen, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Syria, and Mr. Mark Lowcock, Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator, for their invaluable briefings. We would also like to express our condolences to the families of the two Oxfam workers who were killed in Syria. We follow with concern the military escalation that is taking place in the north-west of Syria. We regret that developments are not leading to a path that would enable a resumption of the political process on a solid basis and in an environment of calm, stability and mutual trust. We also express our deep concern over the humanitarian situation in Idlib and its vicinity as a result of the recent security developments that have led to growing casualties among civilians, the displacement of large numbers of residents and the lack of shelter for thousands of displaced people after housing capacity was exhausted under severe weather conditions, leading to the deaths of a large number of children. We also call upon all parties to respect their obligations pursuant to international humanitarian law and international law in order to guarantee the protection of civilians and civilian infrastructure. Priority must urgently be given to de-escalation through a cease-fire, and parties on the ground must exhibit maximum self-restraint and avoid any further escalation in the region. We hope that the ongoing contacts between Russia and Turkey will contribute towards that end. We also support the United Nations involvement in supporting efforts to achieve a full and lasting cease-fire. The de-escalation agreements in Idlib, while important, will remain only temporary unless they effectively include practical and comprehensive solution that excludes terrorist organizations, such as Hayat Tahrir al-Sham and its allies, guarantees an end to their presence both within and beyond Syria and maintains the security, independence and sovereignty of Syria and throughout its territory. We hope that the Constitutional Committee will resume a new round of negotiations this month or next month, as the Special Envoy has previously stated. We urge the relevant Syrian parties to exercise flexibility,seek common ground and engage constructively in the efforts of the Committee without preconditions in such a way as to lay the groundwork for progress in the political process. We also reaffirm the importance of the political process under way to be accompanied by confidence-building measures and progress in releasing detainees and hostages so as to uphold political and social harmony. The brotherly Syrian people, including the generation of the current conflict, that continue to suffer the burden of war and deterioration at all levels have the right to aspire to a life of security, peace and tranquillity. In conclusion, my delegation would like to renew its support for the Special Envoy and his team. We would also like to confirm once again that there can be no military solution to the crisis in Syria. The only solution is through a cease-fire, progress on the political track, in accordance with resolution 2254 (2015), under Syrian leadership and ownership along with United Nations sponsorship. That would happen through an agreement among Syrian political and civil parties on a new constitution that guarantees free and fair elections, under United Nations supervision, to meet the legitimate aspirations of the Syrian people for freedom and dignity. Such a constitution would preserve the unity, independence and territorial integrity of Syria, and ensure security and stability in the region.
