Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): You can turn your wonderful hourglass as
many times as you wish, Mr. President, but I will take
as much time as I need.

We are both surprised and yet not surprised that the
Security Council convened an extraordinary meeting
today with the participation of the Vice President of
the United States, whom you, Sir, are of course always
happy to see in this Chamber. It is just a pity, however,
that he did not want to listen to the views of the other
members of the Council on the situation in Venezuela.
Today we are witnessing yet another episode in a tragedy
in many acts in an attempt to effect regime change in
Venezuela. The situation in Venezuela does not pose a
threat to international peace and security. However, the
outside players involved are a direct threat to the peace
and security of Venezuela itself, and we have just heard
that today.

We just heard a horrific description of the
suffering of the Venezuelan people under the yoke of
an illegitimate dictator that can be eased only through
decisive action by the international community,
needless to say led by the United States. I would like to
know where they got all the numbers and testimony that
we heard about today. When was the last time anyone
who spoke today was in Venezuela? As it turns out, the
situation has to be studied at a distance, based on the
premise that so-called President Guaido is the country's
only legitimate authority and source of information
about what is going on there. By the way, I would like
to say to Ms. Page, who gave us a worrying description
of the health-care situation in Venezuela and of the
measles epidemic there in particular, that epidemics
unfortunately happen. Does Ms. Page know that the
New York authorities have declared an emergency due
to a measles epidemic in New York that is just a few
hundred metres from the United Nations Headquarters
building, in the borough of Brooklyn?

We have seen all of this already in other regions
of the world. We heard so-called witnesses who had
settled in the West tell blood-curdling stories about
the suffering of the peoples of Iraq, Libya and Syria,
after which it was precisely because of the Western
intervention in those countries that their real suffering
began and has continued to this day. Does the Council
want to see a similar scenario in Venezuela?

Like the legitimate authorities in Caracas, we do
not deny the fact that the humanitarian situation in
Venezuela is definitely not ideal. We are ready to work
with them to improve the situation, based on General
Assembly resolution 46/182, which among other
things requires that humanitarian assistance should
be requested by a country's legitimate Government.
The Secretariat should assist in that, but the briefing
on behalf of the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) has left us with a dual
impression. On one hand, it stresses the importance
of separating political and humanitarian tasks in
providing assistance to Venezuela. Needless to say,
we are in favour of neutral and impartial humanitarian
assistance. On the other hand, we are disappointed
that the data presented was collected and published
without the agreement of the legitimate Government
of Venezuela. It appears that we are returning to those
less than glorious times when OCHA was used to
disseminate unverified information. We would like to
think that is not the case now. Furthermore, preparing
a needs assessment is an indissoluble part of preparing
a humanitarian assistance plan, which in its turn can
be done only with the agreement of the legitimate
authorities. Any failure to comply with that principle
undermines a key aspect of resolution 46/182.

We categorically reject the methods of the United
States with regard to Venezuela. With one hand, by
continually imposing new sanctions and restrictions
that prevent the country from developing normally, it is
keeping Venezuela in a choke hold, when international
assistance to States that need it should be designed to
establish a situation that enables a State to take care of
its own citizens. And with the other hand it is picking
Venezuelans' pockets, expropriating Venezuelan assets
in Western banks. Just since the beginning of this year
the United States has taken more than $30 billion from
Venezuela, asserting that now only self-proclaimed
President Guaido can use that money. The overall
damage that United States actions have done to the
Venezuelan economy since 2013 amounts to hundreds
of billions of dollars. And despite all of that it keeps
calling more loudly than anyone for help for the people
of Venezuela.

Incidentally, I would like to remind the Council that
humanitarian assistance has definitely not gone smoothly
of late in the United States itself. It still has not fully
dealt with the destruction wrought by Hurricane Maria,
which devastated Puerto Rico, among other places, in
the autumn of 2017. At the time there were horrendous
problems with the lack of water, food, electricity and
medical assistance. Some 225,000 families were left
homeless. An entire harvest of crops vital to the island
was lost. According to various estimates at the time,
the total damage was assessed at between $45 billion
and $90 billion, and Washington completely rejected
any international assistance. In September 2017,
President Maduro expressed Venezuela's readiness
to immediately launch a programme of support and
solidarity to Puerto Rico. Cuba also offered to help
Puerto Rico deal with the effects of the hurricane,
which Washington also rejected. Venezuela eventually
did provide assistance to Puerto Rico through Citgo,
the United States subsidiary of Petroleos de Venezuela,
S.A., while the Cuban Government respected the
America's refusal of its help and did not insist or make
use of the subject for propaganda purposes, despite the
fact that many in the United States were not pleased
with the decision.

Caracas is not refusing humanitarian assistance
that is provided in accordance with the principles
approved by the United Nations. Russia and a number
of other countries have provided such assistance
through the World Health Organization. The sanctions
and outside interference in this State's internal affairs
will not allow the crisis in Venezuela to end. As for the
country's internal political conflicts, we believe firmly
that the only thing that will help to overcome them is a
dialogue within Venezuela itself.
The United States has persisted in destabilizing the
situation in Venezuela by creating an artificial crisis
around the country in order to replace its legitimately
elected leader with its own pawn. There are endless
examples of the United States' blatant interference in
the affairs of Latin American countries and its use of
military force to overthrow leaders it does not like. I
would like to once again ask Venezuela's neighbours
if they have really learned nothing from history. Do
they really not understand that Venezuela is merely a
bargaining chip in the geopolitical and geostrategic
struggle for influence in the region and the world,
in the spirit of a revitalized Monroe Doctrine? By
the way, the attitude of Latin American countries to
what is happening in Venezuela is not as unequivocal
and uniform as the Vice-President of the United
States told us today. We have heard that in previous
Council meetings.

It is very odd to be speaking yet again about what
should be self-evident truths, which is that a resolution
of a crisis created in Venezuela can be achieved only
through internal Venezuelan dialogue. It is only the
self-proclaimed President who is unwilling to do that,
because he has received no orders to that effect, but
there is no other way. In that context, we welcome
the international initiatives coming from the Latin
American region aimed at promoting a dialogue
between the legitimate Government and the leaders of
the opposition. Our experience suggests that Mexico
and Uruguay's proposal for a Montevideo mechanism
has the greatest potential in that regard. It provides
for establishing a comprehensive and all-inclusive
dialogue and in that regard has much greater chances
of success than initiatives that require preconditions
before anything can start.

The possibility ofjoining in the efforts to provide
good offices or mediation should be open to everyone
trying to contribute constructively to establishing an
inclusive dialogue within Venezuela. Unfortunately,
what is going on in the Security Council today is merely
another episode in the frontal attack on the official
Government in Caracas and ordinary Venezuelans. I
want to point out that alongside their attempts to impose
humanitarian services, so-called well-wishers are
actively trying to challenge the credentials of official
Venezuelan delegations to international platforms. We
heard this today from the lips of the Vice-President
of the United States. I will not comment on his tone,
but I want to say that the Permanent Representative
of Venezuela, who is in this Chamber today, was
appointed by his country's legitimate Government,
and his appointment was confirmed by the General
Assembly of the United Nations. Furthermore, these so-
called friends of Venezuela are replacing Venezuela's
official ambassadors and abetting the seizure of
diplomatic property and thereby blatantly violating
the founding principles of the Charter of the United
Nations and undermining some of the most important
norms of international law. It may be that the so-
called international rules-based order that our Western
colleagues are promoting so actively provides for
such thuggish action, but international law definitely
does not.

We urge the United States to acknowledge, finally,
that Venezuelans and other peoples have the right to
determine their own destiny. If the United States wants
to make America great again, something that we are all
sincerely interested in, it should stop interfering in the
internal affairs of other States. It will only be respected
for doing so. After all, the United States does not like it
when anyone interferes in its affairs. No one likes that.

