Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
are grateful for the valuable information provided
by the speakers invited to today's briefing, which
enables us to once again sound the alarm about the
serious humanitarian crisis, economic collapse and
disintegration of public services, unprecedented in the
history of Latin America, that the Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela is experiencing. In that regard, I want
to emphasize that Argentina, Brazil, Canada, Chile,
Colombia, Costa Rica, Guatemala, Honduras, Panama
and Paraguay, member countries of the Lima Group,
align themselves with this statement.

In order to understand the situation in Venezuela,
it will suffice to mention some figures on its economy.
For example, according to estimates by the International
Monetary Fund, there was 1.5 million per cent inflation
in 2018 alone and the gross domestic product has fallen
by 44 per cent since 2013. According to the National
Survey of Living Conditions, which is ajoint project of
three Venezuelan universities - Central, Andres Bello
Catholic and Simon Bolivar - Venezuela, which once
had one of the highest incomes in the region, is now a
country 94 per cent of whose citizens live in poverty,
with 60 per cent in extreme poverty and 80 per cent at
risk of food insecurity because they do not have enough
income to buy food.

Therefore, while Nicolas Maduro's illegitimate
regime hides those figures, which show that the
economy in Venezuela is in free fall, and boasts that the
country does not need humanitarian aid, hospitals are
collapsing without vaccines or medicines, diseases that
had been eradicated are resurfacing, unemployment is
increasing at a dizzying rate, cities are becoming more
violent, electricity and water supplies are collapsing
and the flight of talent suggests a future that is even
gloomier and more worrisome than ever. All this is
the responsibility of a regime that has been declared
illegitimate in a resolution of the Permanent Council
of the Organization of American States. It is an
authoritarian regime that silences the media, represses
and imprisons the opposition and abuses its total power.

In that context, the number of people who have
emigrated recently reached more than 3.5 million,
with 5,000 new and ongoing daily departures, which
represents an enormous challenge for host countries
and their health, education, housing, employment
and integration services. It is worth noting that the
countries of the region have had to allocate significant
and unanticipated domestic resources to provide
such social services to the hundreds of thousands of
Venezuelans we have hosted, which in some cases is
beyond our capabilities.

How did we arrive at that situation? The answer is
clear. The unprecedented crisis is due to the illegitimate
and oppressive nature of a regime that has added to
the breakdown of the constitutional order and the rule
of law its incompetence in economic management,
corruption and the illicit diversion of resources, turning
a prosperous and thriving country like Venezuela
into one where poverty, insecurity and hopelessness
are prevalent.

There is now an urgent need to alleviate the
humanitarian crisis of millions of Venezuelans,
which clearly cannot be controlled or entrusted to an
illegitimate regime that uses aid solely for political and
propaganda purposes. In the short term, it is urgent to
channel humanitarian assistance through the United
Nations system and the International Committee of the
Red Cross, possibly with the support and participation of
local and international non-governmental organizations
on the ground. That will allow for an impartial and
independent delivery aimed at those most in need.

However, that urgent and necessary response should
not lead us to forget that it is only a palliative to the true
solution to the Venezuelan problem, whose impact on
the region threatens peace and security. The solution
involves the restoration of democracy and the rule of
law in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, led by the
Venezuelans themselves in a peaceful manner, within
the framework of the Constitution and international
law, supported by political and diplomatic means and
without the use of force. We therefore reaffirm our
recognition of and support for the National Assembly,
the interim President of Venezuela, Juan Guaido, and
his representatives entrusted with that mandate.

We therefore ask the international community and
the members of the Council to support the countries
of the Lima Group in their efforts to help restore
constitutional order in the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela in order to address the root cause of the
serious humanitarian situation about which we are
meeting today.

