The President: I thank the representative of
Cote d'Ivoire for the kind words she addressed to me.

There are no further speakers.

This is, in the nature of things, not a meeting for
drawing formal conclusions or making decisions. I would
like just to say that I think that this occasion has proved a
useful exchange in this formal, and therefore open and
transparent, mode, and that our discussion this morning has
been enriched by three features: first, by the presence of the
Foreign Minister of Liberia himself, to whom we are
grateful for having taken the trouble to come and to speak
to us in this way; secondly, by the happy coincidence that
this meeting came very shortly after the return from
Liberia of Ambassador Albright and her briefing to us
before she had even had a chance to debrief to her own
Head of State; and, thirdly, of course, by the fact that we
have had this discussion enriched by a wider airing of
views by other Member States which are not at present on
the Security Council itself.

As I said, it is not, I think, for the presidency in this
case to try and draw conclusions from this meeting, but
I think it is fair to highlight some of the many elements
which were raised in this wide-ranging discussion. I have
in mind particularly that more or less all speakers
emphasized that the peace process in Liberia is now at a
critical juncture; secondly, that the efforts of everyone
concerned will be required if recent setbacks are to be
overcome; thirdly, that in this there is a complementarity
between national, regional and wider international efforts;
fourthly, that all speakers underlined the need for the
Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS)
Monitoring Group (ECOMOG) to have our continued
support and highlighted - at least some speakers did -
the question of resources and logistic support in that
connection; and, finally, that many speakers made the
point that the conflicts and ambitions which are at
loggerheads in Liberia seem to be those among the elite,
not among the people at large. And the conclusion was
drawn by some in their interventions that the main
responsibility therefore lay with the leaders of the parties
and the factions in that country.

This wider discussion today, at this first reading of
the Secretary-General's report, will be very useful
background for those of us who are members of the
Council and who now have to proceed to further
consideration of the Secretary-General's
recommendations - namely, for the extension of the
mandate of the United Nations Observer Mission in
Liberia (UNOMIL) until the end of May, with provision
for a progress report by the end of March. Those further
consultations will take place imminently. May I just
remind everybody in closing that there will also be a
troop-contributors' consultation on UNOMIL tomorrow
afternoon.

The meeting rose at 2 pm.
