Mrs. Haley (United States of America): I thank
Mr. Feltman for his briefing, and Ms. Patten for her
leadership and service.

As we confront issues like this one, it is important
that we hear stories, and when we hear the stories, we
have to imagine the faces because; otherwise these are
just numbers or yet more impersonal pieces of data.
But to understand that these are stories, then we have
to take it one step further and ask "What if this was
my family?"

Therefore, to accompany Ms. Patten's stories,
I want to tell the Security Council about Jenna: she
is a 10-year-old Rohingya refugee and she has lost
everything. In Jenna's words, "I saw with my own eyes
people killed by the military and chopped into pieces".
She continues:

"[t]hey burned my house but not only my house:
every house next to my house was burning. We all
ran from our houses and together we fled. Anyone
the military caught was slaughtered. After they were
shot or stabbed, they were cut into many pieces, put
inside plastic bins and thrown in the river."

Speaking with the reporter, Jenna swallows her
emotions and says one more thing: "They shot him
dead. They killed my father. I am very sad that I lost
my father."

The pain and the suffering of the Rohingya are
unimaginable. Over and over we hear stories like
Jenna's. The refugees tell us about security forces
destroying their homes, gang raping women, burning
children and killing people in the most twisted ways. It
is for Rohingya children like Jenna, and to learn all that
we can of what happened, that we are here today. We
must speak out for them and reject any attempt to play
down the magnitude of this man-made tragedy. We must
shine a spotlight on these accounts of ethnic cleansing.

The number of people who have fled Burma in just
over three months has now risen to 646,000 people - an
average ofmore than 40,000 people per week. This is the
fastest displacement of refugees since Rwanda. More
people are dead and displaced inside Burma, yet we still
have not seen any concrete action to hold accountable
those responsible for these atrocities. Instead, we
see an investigation by the Burmese military that
denies all responsibility. This is unacceptable. Burma
must allow an independent, transparent and credible
investigation into what has happened. Allowing full
access for the United Nations fact-finding mission to
gather information and evidence on the ground is vital
to accountability and a solution to the crisis. We cannot
allow more time to pass. There is no denying that these
atrocities, including ethnic cleansing, have taken place.

The United States unequivocally condemns all acts
of violence in Burma, including the horrific violence
conducted by the Burmese security forces, who should
be the ones protecting their own people. What is worse, if
one asks the Rohingya if they want to go home, they are
too scared to go back. Before they can return, Burmese
authorities must create an environment that is safe for
people to return voluntarily to their homes. It is more
than just a process; there must be a cultural change,
which only Burmese leadership can effect. While we
hear promises from the Government of Burma, we
need to see action. We call on Burma to work with the
United Nations and its agencies and allow immediate
and unhindered access to all humanitarian actors so
that they can provide help to those who need it.

We continue to be grateful to the Government
of Bangladesh for hosting such a large number of
refugees. We also encourage Bangladesh to continue
to partner more closely with the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugee to address this
challenge and ensure that survivors of sexual violence
receive the support they desperately need. We remain
concerned about the fact that refugees in the camps are
vulnerable to disease and human trafficking, among
other dangers. We therefore hope that the international
community will step up to support the United Nations
response. Around here, we keep hearing that the
situation in Burma is complex and that it will take time,
but there are steps that we can take right now to help
the Burmese people. We can demand that independent
investigators be allowed to enter the country to help
hold those responsible for atrocities to account. We can
provide help to those who have been brutally attacked
by members of the Burmese security forces and we can
speak out for the human rights of all people in Burma.
Our plea is simple. Let us do what we can without
delay, work diligently to see every refugee home safe
and urgently pursue justice so that all of Burma can be
made whole.

