Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): China is
deeply shocked and saddened by the terrorist attack on
a school in Peshawar, Pakistan, on 16 December, which
resulted in many casualties, including many children.
China condemns this terrorist attack in the strongest
terms and expresses its deep condolences to the victims,
the injured and the bereaved families. China is against
all forms of terrorism and will continue to resolutely
support the Government and people of Pakistan in
their unrelenting effort to fight against terrorism and
maintain the stability of the country and safety of its
people.

The Chinese delegation thanks Chad for its
initiative to convene today's open debate. I thank you,
Mr. President, for coming to New York to preside
over today's meeting. I thank Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon for his briefing, and I have listened carefully
to the statement made by Mr. Buyoya on behalf of the
African Union (AU).

The Charter of the United Nations entrusts the
Security Council with the primary responsibility for
the maintenance of international peace and security.
Chapter VIII of the Charter encourages the pacific
settlement of regional conflicts through regional
arrangements. In today's world, we face many problems
and challenges that require robust responses at the
international, regional and national levels. Currently,
almost 70 per cent ofthe items on the Security Council's
agenda are related to Africa. Two thirds of United
Nations peacekeeping operations are also deployed in
Africa.

As the largest and most representative regional
organization in Africa, the African Union plays an
increasingly important role in regional peace and
security. Strengthened cooperation between the United
Nations and the AU is required in order to promote
multilateralism. It is also an important development in
terms of international collective security mechanisms.
China commends the United Nations for establishing a
stable cooperative relationship with the African Union,
strengthening its communication and contacts with the
AU on the resolution of hot spot African issues and
further strengthening coordination and cooperation in
the field of peacekeeping. I would like to make four
points on furthering the cooperation between the
United Nations and the African Union in the field of
peacekeeping.

First, the United Nations should respect the will
of Africa and actively support the African Union's
peacekeeping efforts. In dealing with issues in
the region, the African Union has more in-depth
understanding and knowledge, and is in a position
to put forward African solutions to solve African
problems from an African perspective. The Security
Council should consider supporting the AU's key role
in resolving regional conflicts on a priority basis and
heed the AU's opinion and suggestions effectively.

Secondly, the United Nations should engage in
comprehensive cooperation with the AU. That should
cover many areas, including security and development,
and the various stages of confidence-building, conflict
prevention, the maintenance of peace, peacebuilding
and sustainable development. Advocating for a culture
of reconciliation and comprehensive development not
only helps in addressing the root causes of conflicts,
but also lays a more solid basis for peace in Africa.
China supports the Security Council, the Peacebuilding
Commission and the Secretariat in their efforts to build
a multidimensional coordination mechanism with the
AU.

Thirdly, the United Nations should assist the AU
in building its peacekeeping capacity. Due to capacity
and resource limitations, the AU needs to strengthen
its capacity-building in crisis response and conflict
resolution. The United Nations should proceed from the
overall goal of maintaining African and international
peace and security; mobilize more resources to
support Africa in its related efforts for early warning
systems, peacekeeping deployment, good offices and
mediation or dialogue; and effectively enhance the
AU's peacekeeping capacity through a multitude of
channels, such as personnel training, logistical support,
information sharing and exchanges of experiences.

Fourthly, the United Nations should pay more
attention to the transition of peacekeeping operations
from the AU to the United Nations. Starting last
year, with the vigorous support of the AU and other
subregional organizations, the African peacekeeping
operations in Somalia and the Central African Republic
were transitioned to United Nations peacekeeping
operations. China supports the Secretary-General
in his effort to summarize experiences and put
forward proposals on issues related to transitioning
peacekeeping operations and further sorting out the
cooperative relationship between the United Nations
and the AU.

China has consistently been a constructive
participant in Africa's peace and security affairs. To
date, China has deployed a total of 2,000 peacekeepers
to seven peacekeeping operations in Africa, including
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Liberia.
China wishes to increase the number ofits peacekeepers
participating in the United Nations Mission in South
Sudan, and has provided the African Union Mission in
Somalia with multifacted assistance.

In October, China held its first round of strategic
dialogue with the African Union in the context of
the peace and security sub-group. We are committed
to implementing the China-Africa Security and
Cooperation Partnership initiative, supporting the
African Capacity for Immediate Response to Crises,
continuing to provide training to African troop-
contributing countries, and helping Africa to strengthen
its peacekeeping capacities. We will continue to strive,
alongside the international community, to contribute to
strengthening peacekeeping cooperation between the
United Nations and the African Union and to promoting
its sound development.

