Mr. Thoms (Germany): Germany aligns itself with
the statement to be delivered by the observer of the
European Union.

In his report (S/2016/1049), the Secretary General
highlights some encouraging developments. Germany
welcomes the peace agreement with Hezb-i Islami
(Gulbuddin), which gives us new hope that lasting
peace is possible in Afghanistan. 1 would like to
commend the Government of National Unity for
keeping its doors open for peace negotiations with the
Taliban. A comprehensive peace and reconciliation
process remains the only way to long-term stability
in Afghanistan and the region. We call on all Afghan
parties to seize the moment and to join the peace talks.

Furthermore, we are encouraged by the transparent
recruitment process for the Independent Elections
Commission. That was an important step towards the
holding of early parliamentary and district council
elections. It will now be critically important that the
Government act with resolve and unity of purpose in
implementing the necessary electoral reforms.

We also took note, with appreciation, that the
Anti-Corruption Criminal Justice Centre took up its
work, received its first cases and held its first trials.
Visible progress in fighting corruption is key to
economic development, and we strongly encourage
the Afghan Government to maintain its efforts to fight
corruption and foster the rule of law. The culture of
impunity must be eradicated. To that effect, we have
called for a fair and transparent official investigation
with regard to the allegations of recent gross human
rights violations and abuses by the Vice-President.

The security situation continues to be the main
challenge in Afghanistan. As the Secretary General
points out in his report, the number of armed clashes
rose by 22 per cent. The number of civilian casualties
continues to be very high, and the number of child
casualties has increased by another 15 per cent.
Germany recently assumed the chairmanship of the
local group of friends on children in armed conflict.
We will continue to raise awareness about the suffering
of that most vulnerable group of victims.

The difficult security situation is also one of the
reasons that the eradication efforts on opium poppy
cultivation have decreased by 90 per cent as compared
to last year. The production and trade in illegal
narcotics negatively affects the entire region, as well
as Europe, but it also increasingly has an impact on the
health of Afghan society. We strongly encourage the
Government to step up its efforts to fight opium poppy
cultivation and opium production more decisively.

The volatile security situation in large parts of
the country hampers economic growth and constitutes
an additional challenge to accommodating returning
refugees. As has been reported, over 500,000 Afghans
have been displaced internally, and over 600,000
Afghan refugees have returned to Afghanistan from
neighbouring countries during the course of the year.
I would like to commend the long-time host countries,
such as Pakistan and Iran, for the assistance they have
provided Afghan refugees. I also thank the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
and the International Organization for Migration for
their support to the returning refugees. At the same
time, we call upon all parties to ensure that the return of
refugees is conducted in a dignified manner and takes
into account the absorption capacity of Afghanistan.
A stable security situation, economic growth and
job creation will be essential to avoiding a possible
humanitarian crisis. Germany remains committed to
supporting the Afghan Government's efforts towards a
sustainable reintegration of the returning refugees and
encourages all Member States to join that endeavour.

Afghanistan represents Germany's single-largest
engagement in a foreign country in both civilian and
military terms. At the Brussels Conference, we pledged
to support the Afghan Government with substantial
financial resources. Germany remains committed to
supporting Afghanistan in close cooperation with the
Government and our international partners.

