Mr. Baublys (Lithuania) (spoke in French): We
express our gratitude to the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Ms. Sandra Honore, and her
team as well as to the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) for its work, which
has made an extraordinary contribution to peace and
stability in Haiti. The important progress made since
since the earthquake inspires hope. We sincerely hope
that the Haitian Government will soon be able to resume
full control and that the United Nations can take on a
different role.

(spoke in English)

Lithuania aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered on behalf of the European Union. For my
part, I would like to address three key issues: inclusive
elections, the rule of law and institution-building.

In February, five years on from the earthquake,
the Council paid a visit to a country that continues
to consolidate gains in stability and democracy. Few
people today are without shelter, water or access to
social services. More children go to school. Significant
steps have been taken to improve governance and
strengthen the rule of law. The launching of the Haiti
transitional appeal for 2015-2016, aimed at addressing
social and economic inequalities, will hopefully lead to
further normalization.

An inclusive and transparent political process is a
prerequisite for sustainable peace and stability on the
island. We welcome the appointment of the provisional
Electoral Council and the decision, albeit a late one,
to hold elections this year. We appreciate the strong
commitment by President Martelly to ensure that the
elections are credible, independent, transparent and
inclusive. It is essential to stick to the proposed electoral
calendar and for all the stakeholders, including the
opposition, to overcome their differences. The future of
Haiti depends on the inclusivity of the electoral process.

When the Council met in Port-au-Prince with at the
newly appointed ministers, we were inspired by their
ambitious plans and their appreciation of the immense
challenges ahead. Among the challenges, pre-eminent
remains that of strengthening the rule oflaw, which is at
the core of further progress in unlocking the country's
economic and social potential.

Strengthening of the Superior Council of the
Judiciary, including the certification ofjudges, has been
one of the steps towards the much-needed reform of
the judicial system. The independence of the judiciary
should be further strengthened. More needs to be done,
including to address pre-trial detention, overcrowded
corrections institutions and the protection of human
rights.

There is a need to further improve the operational
capacity of the Office of the Ombudsman. The
engagement of stakeholders on human rights reporting
is a welcome step. Human rights must be the focus of
the new Government. Accountability for human rights
abuses must be ensured. We encourage Haiti to continue
reviewing the penal code in order to adequately address
gender-based violence.

In April, the Haiti National Police (HNP) will be over
13,000 strong. It will be less dependent on MINUSTAH,
with greater authority and more confidence. The
capacity and performance of the HNP has improved
significantly. We look forward to increased police
deployment outside the Port-au-Prince metropolis
and continued efforts to increase accountability and
build trust with the population. Strengthening of the
Inspectorate General, the vetting of police officers, and
community outreach programmes are welcome steps in
that regard. Increased capacity of the Haitian National
Police and making full use of the level of MINUSTAH
troops, as authorized by resolution 2180 (2014), should
enable the Haitian authorities to maintain law and order
during the upcoming elections.

As armed violence continues to plague the country,
the MINUSTAH community violence reduction
programme has been key to dismantling criminal
gangs and allowing development actors to reach what
were previously "no go" areas. Offering economic
alternatives is an essential element of preventing gang
recruitment. At the same time, the United Nations
and Haiti's Government need to focus on addressing
the proliferation and smuggling of small arms and
countering drug trafficking.

The upcoming elections, stronger rule of law
institutions and a committed Government portend a new
chapter in the history of Haiti. The United Nations will
continue to render indispensable support during this
crucial year. But Haiti must assume responsibility for
its own stability. The consolidation of the MINUSTAH
mandate and its forthcoming reconfiguration, including
enhancing quick-reaction capabilities, should aim at
enabling the United Nations to continue assisting the
Haitian people in targeted areas. International efforts
should now focus on addressing social, economic and,
increasingly, developmental issues. The States of the
region should play a more vocal role. The European
Union, as one of the largest donors, will continue to
support institutional reforms, enhance the State's
financial capacity and promote tax reform, among
other goals.
In conclusion, let me again express our gratitude
to the Special Representative, MINUSTAH troop- and
police-contributing countries and the United Nations
country office in Haiti.

