Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I thank
the Spanish presidency for agreeing to convene today's
urgent meeting at the request of France and the United
Kingdom. I also thank the Secretary-General for his
briefing and his commitment.

As we speak, the worst-case scenario is occurring in
Aleppo. The massacre of civilians is taking place under
the eyes of the international community. According to
the information we have, summary executions have been

carried out in the streets of eastern Aleppo. Civilians
are being murdered, and at times burnt alive in their
homes. The dead bodies of civilians and children litter
the streets of Aleppo.

The worst is that that abomination was predictable,
as we have said here. We are all familiar with the
barbaric methods of the Bashar Al-Assad regime. We
are perfectly aware of the disregard he has shown for
the lives of civilians since the beginning of the Syrian
conflict. We all know very well of what could happen in
the next few hours to some 120,000 people who are still
trapped in eastern Aleppo, and who, if we do nothing,
could be subjected to the brutality of the Al-Assad
forces.

An immediate end to the massacre is absolutely
critical in order to allow the evacuation under
international protection of all civilians towards
the destination of their choice and to authorize the
immediate and unimpeded access of humanitarian
assistance. That is the message that France and its
partners conveyed during the meeting that the French
Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr. Jean-Marc Ayrault,
held in Paris on 10 December. It is the message that
the General Assembly conveyed to the world through
resolution 71/130, adopted by an overwhelming majority
a few days ago. Once again, France forcefully calls
upon those who have the capacity to act, particularly
Russia, to put an immediate end to the bloodshed and
respond to the humanitarian emergency, which is, once
again, an absolute emergency.

Let us make no mistake: the tragedy of Aleppo is
not the painful path that we must go down to finally
achieve the stabilization of Syria - a so-called
expedient and rebuilt Syria. No, at the end of this
plunge into the abyss, of these children maimed by
bombs, disfigured by hunger, there is the promise of
an endless conflict from which terrorist groups will be
the primary beneficiaries. The tragedy of Aleppo - we
must repeat this and hammer it home - mechanically
fuels radicalization, and therefore terrorism. It is a
gift to the terrorists. Therefore, the comparison of
Aleppo today and Guernica during the Spanish civil
war appears more relevant than ever. Aleppo is both the
epicentre of the worst humanitarian tragedy of the early
twenty-first century and a black hole that sucks up and
destroys all the values of the United Nations. Moreover,
it carries the promise of terrible tragedies to follow.

Finally, allow me to stress that the tragedy ofAleppo
did not happen by accident. We will need to dismantle
the processes that have made possible this plunge into
the abyss. This tragedy is the result of the savagery of
some people, of the active complicity and complete
cynicism of others, but also ofa great deal of cowardice
and indifference and - we need to have the courage
to say it - of the powerlessness of the international
community and the United Nations. In order to avoid
this collective powerlessness that we find ourselves in,
which seriously calls into question the very credibility
of the Security Council, France has proposed, together
with Mexico, an initiative allowing for the suspension
of the resort to the veto by permanent member States in
cases of mass atrocities. That initiative, which France
will continue to promote, has already received the
support of approximately 100 countries.

I do not want to go on too long, but in these
terrible times for Aleppo - a city that has seen so
many brilliant civilizations and that is now delivered
up to barbarity - France again calls for action and
therefore for the necessary uniting around the common
goals founded on the minimum principle of humanity,
which the Secretary-General has just recalled. Tens
of thousands of lives are at stake. They have just
one glimmer of hope, and they depend on us. Let us
therefore act.

