The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with Article 11 of the Statute of the International Court
of Justice, the Council will now hold a second meeting
to elect a member of the International Court of Justice
through a new vote, in order to fill the remaining
position.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Zhoa Yong
(China) and Mr. Van Kemseke (Belgium) acted as
tellers.

The President (spoke in Spanish): I understand
that the Council is now ready to proceed to the vote.

It is so decided. I ask the conference officer to
distribute the ballot papers.

Members of the Council should place an "X" in
the box next to the name of the candidate for whom
they wish to vote.

I remind the Council members that they can only
vote for the candidates whose names appear on the
ballots and that ballots that contain votes for more than
one candidate will be considered invalid.

>l<>l<>l<


The President (spoke in Spanish): I take it that
all members of the Council have now marked their
ballots. I ask the conference officer to collect the ballot
papers.

>k>l<>l<


The President (spoke in Spanish): All the ballot
papers have been collected, and we will now proceed
to count the votes in the Security Council.

I understand that the President of the General
Assembly has proposed that the Assembly suspend its
meeting in order to proceed to the counting of the votes
from the second round of voting.

I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
suspend this meeting until 12.55 pm. If there are no
objections, I shall take it that the Council agrees.
The meeting was suspended at 12.50 pm. and
resumed at 1.10 pm.


The President (spoke in Spanish): I wish to
inform the Security Council that one candidate
obtained a majority in the Council's second vote.

I have been informed that, in the second vote in
the General Assembly, no candidate has obtained an
absolute majority. The President of the Assembly has
proposed that the Assembly meet again at 3 pm, when
a third round of voting will take place in the Assembly.

Given that the Assembly will have to carry out a
new vote, I propose that the Council proceed in the
same fashion and resume this meeting at 3.30 pm.
since the Council does not need to carry out a third
round of voting until the General Assembly has a
candidate who has obtained a majority.

The President of the General Assembly will
inform me of the candidate who has obtained a
majority in the Assembly. If it is the same candidate
who obtained a majority in the Council's second round
of voting, that candidate will have been elected.

If the candidate who obtains the majority in the
General Assembly is different from the candidate who
obtained a majority in the Security Council, both the
Council and Assembly will vote again.

We must wait for a candidate to obtain a majority
in the Assembly and for the President of the Assembly
to inform me of that fact. I will then see if it is the
same person or not, and at that time we will decide on
a course of action.

If the members of the Council agree, we will
reconvene at 3.30 pm. I see no objection.

It is so decided.

The meeting was suspended at 1.15 pm. and
resumed at 3.45 pm.


The President (spoke in Spanish): As members
of the Security Council will recall, the President of the
General Assembly proposed that the Assembly
reconvene at 3 pm. in order to conduct a third ballot to
fill the remaining one vacancy for the International
Court of Justice. I have been informed that the ballots
in the Assembly have now been counted, that once
again no candidate has received an absolute majority
and that the Assembly will now proceed to a fourth
ballot. Members will also recall that, in the second
08-59064
ballot in the Security Council this morning, one
candidate for the remaining one vacancy received an
absolute majority. Accordingly, the Council is not
required to conduct a further ballot at this time.

I propose that, with the consent of Council
members, we suspend the meeting until 4.15 p.m. to
await the results of the fourth ballot in the General
Assembly.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

The meeting was suspended at 3.50 pm. and
resumed at 6pm.


The President (spoke in Spanish): As members
of the Council will recall, the General Assembly
conducted a fourth ballot to fill the remaining one
vacancy for the International Court of Justice. I have
been informed that, in the General Assembly, the
representative of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo informed the Assembly that his national group
had decided to withdraw its nomination of
Mr. Sayeman Bula-Bula as a candidate for membership
of the Court. Since Mr. Bula-Bula had been nominated
only by the national group of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, his name was not included in the fourth
ballot conducted by the General Assembly.

I have been informed that the votes have been
counted in the General Assembly and that one
candidate has obtained an absolute majority.

Members of the Council will recall that in the
second ballot in the Security Council this morning, one
candidate for the remaining one vacancy received an
absolute majority. The result of the second ballot is as
follows:

Number of ballot papers: 15
Number of invalid ballots: 0
Number of valid ballots: 15

Required majority: 8
08-59064
Number of votes obtained:
Mr. Sayeman Bula-Bula
Ms. Miriam Defensor-Santiago
Mr. Maurice Kamto
Mr. Abdulgawi Ahmed Yusuf

Accordingly, Mr. Abdulqawi Ahmed Yusuf has
received the required majority of votes in the Security
Council and I have communicated the result of the vote
to the President of the General Assembly in writing.

OOUINO

I should like to inform the members of the
Council that I have just received from the President of
the General Assembly the following letter:

"I have the honour to inform you that at the
40th plenary meeting of the General Assembly,
which was held today for the purpose of electing
five members of the International Court of
Justice, the following candidate received the
required majority of votes in the General
Assembly: Mr. Abdulgawi Ahmed Yusuf."

As both the Security Council and the General
Assembly have agreed on the same candidate, the
distinguished jurist Mr. Abdulgawi Ahmed Yusuf has
been elected a member of the International Court of
Justice for a term of office of nine years, beginning on
6 February 2009.

On behalf of the Security Council, I should like
to congratulate the five candidates elected today -
Mr. Ronny Abraham, Mr. Awn Shawkat Al-Khasawneh,
Mr. Antonio Augusto Cancado Trindade,
Mr. Christopher Greenwood and Mr. Abdulqawi
Ahmed Yusuf - and to wish them every success in the
high office to which they have been elected.

Also on behalf of the Council, I would like to
thank the tellers for their assistance in the conduct of
the elections.

The Security Council has thus concluded its
consideration of the item on its agenda.

The meeting rose at 6.10 pm.

