Mr. Chen Xu (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
should like at the outset to thank the Secretary-General
for his report, as well as Ambassador Sharma, the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, for
his briefing.

The general situation in East Timor is
encouraging. Under the leadership of the Government
of Timor-Leste, and with the active support of the
United Nations Mission of Support in East Timor
(UNMISET), the people of Timor-Leste have, since
independence, been pursuing the task of nation-
building in all its aspects in a steady and orderly
manner. The administrative and judicial systems are
gradually moving towards institutionalization. The
national defence force and the National Police have
been intensifying their preparations for fulfilling their
responsibilities for defending national peace and
stability.

Timor-Leste is integrating itself into the
international community. It has continued to develop
its relations with Indonesia and other countries in the
region.

We are pleased to see what has been achieved by
the Timorese Government and people. However, given
the situation in the country, we cannot let our guard
down. Not long ago, following a series of armed and
violent incidents, the security situation deteriorated,
giving rise to concern on the part of the international
community and of the Security Council. For that
reason, the Council adopted resolution 1473 (2003) and
adjusted UNMISET's downsizing plan.

As the Secretary-General pointed out in
paragraph 64 of his report,

"By adopting resolution 1473 (2003), the
Security Council showed that it remains
determined to provide the support required for the
long-term success of Timor-Leste."

We have noted the considerable efforts deployed
by UNMISET in helping Timor-Leste to enhance its
public administration capacities and to finalize the
establishment of its judicial system. It has made
progress in dealing with the threat posed by armed
groups and has gradually created conditions for the
national defence force and National Police to take over
fully defence and policing matters.

The Chinese delegation commends UNMISET
and Ambassador Sharma for their achievements in
helping the Government to carry out its work. We
endorse the Secretary-General's recommendation,
contained in his report, to extend UNMISET's
mandate.

Timor-Leste continues to confront various
difficulties and challenges in its endeavours to ensure
national security and stability and in promoting
economic and social development. We endorse the
Secretary-General's observation that nation-building
efforts in Timor-Leste will require the assistance of the
international community, in particular the donor
countries, the United Nations system and international
financial institutions.

China will, as always, lend its strong support to
the Timorese people in their efforts to maintain
national stability and to build their country, and will
continue to support the work of Ambassador Sharma
and of UNMISET. China will continue to provide
assistance to the extent of its capabilities.

