The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of Algeria, in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
consideration without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Yousfi
(Algeria) took a seat at the Council table.

The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council condemns in the
strongest terms the two suicide attacks that
occurred in Algiers on 11 April 2007, causing
numerous deaths and injuries, and expresses its
deep sympathy and condolences to the victims of
these heinous acts of terrorism and their families,
and to the people and the Government of Algeria.
"The Security Council underlines the need
to bring perpetrators, organizers, financiers and
sponsors of these reprehensible acts of terrorism
to justice, and urges all States, in accordance with
their obligations under international law and
resolutions 1373 (2001) and 1624 (2005), to
cooperate actively with the Algerian authorities in
this regard.

"The Security Council reaffirms that
terrorism in all its forms and manifestations
constitutes one of the most serious threats to
international peace and security, and that any acts
of terrorism are criminal and unjustifiable,
regardless of their motivation, wherever,
whenever and by whomsoever committed.

"The Security Council further reaffirms the
need to combat by all means, in accordance with
the Charter of the United Nations, threats to
international peace and security caused by
terrorist acts. The Council reminds States that
they must ensure that any measures taken to
combat terrorism comply with all their
obligations under international law, in particular
international human rights, refugee and
humanitarian law.

"The Security Council reiterates its
determination to combat all forms of terrorism, in
accordance with its responsibilities under the
Charter of the United Nations."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2007/ 10.

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 7.15 p.m.
07-30483

