Mr. Kama] (Malaysia): My delegation commends the
Netherlands for convening this formal meeting on a very
important subject. The fact that you are presiding over the
debate, Sir, demonstrates the importance your country
attaches to African issues.

In a similar discussion during the ministerial-level
Council meeting held a little over a year ago, many
commended the Secretary-General for his candid and
comprehensive report (S/1998/318) of 13 April 1998,
which sought to give focus to the subject as a whole.
Now the Secretary-General has issued a progress report
(S/ 1999/ 1008) dated 25 September 1999 for the Council's
further consideration. We note that the current report
outlines follow-up actions that have been initiated or
completed in the areas of peace and security, as well as
in development and related areas, in implementation of
the recommendations contained in his earlier report.

African issues dominate the work of the Council.
The point of departure of today's meeting is our common
and shared responsibility for international peace and
security as it applies to Africa. We need to consider
openly and critically how the Council has met this
responsibility. We need to look ahead at what the Council
and we as Member States can do differently and
expeditiously.

Notwithstanding Kosovo and East Timor, many are
still sceptical about the commitment and resolve of the
United Nations to intervene in conflict situations in
Africa. Only last week, the Council heard the appeal
made by President Frederick Chiluba of the Republic of
Zambia for the Council to be more forthcoming in its
support for African peace efforts. Much of this hesitation
is due to the failed intervention in Somalia and the non-
intervention in Rwanda in the early 1990s. It was only
last year that the Council finally began to take up
peacekeeping efforts, as seen in the Central African
Republic and Sierra Leone. It is our fervent hope that the
current reassessment by the Council with regard to its
Charter obligations will make it possible for the Council
to avoid past reluctance and indecisiveness when faced
with similar situations in the future. We urge the Council
to establish clear criteria for authorizing peacekeeping and
enforcement actions whenever situations arise, regardless
of their geographical locations.

During the ongoing general debate in the General
Assembly, arguments have been advanced both for and
against humanitarian intervention in conflict situations.
The Secretary-General initiated the debate, when he
correctly pointed out that the Council cannot remain
indifferent to grave humanitarian situations, and spoke of
the need to apply the Charter in a consistent manner. On

 

the other hand, many Member States have equally voiced
the position that sovereignty is their last bastion against
encroachment and interference in their internal affairs.

Whatever the merits of each argument, my delegation
wishes to state unequivocally that the Council's
authorization is a prerequisite for any use of force against
Member States of the Organization. We share the View that
the legal mandate given by having such missions authorized
by the Council brings with it the assurance and confidence
that this body has acted responsibly and on behalf of the
entire membership of the Organization, as called for in
Article 24 of the Charter of the United Nations.

Malaysia believes that as the Council attempts to focus
more effectively in trying to resolve conflicts in Africa, a
sustained political commitment is required in order to
prevent the fragile truce in many parts of the continent
from reigniting into bloodier fighting. The Council must
assert its moral authority and deploy its entire gamut of
diplomatic resources to promote peace and security. The
United Nations is the only global mechanism for effective
collaboration in circumstances in which States are reluctant
or ill-placed to act alone. But it must be equipped with
better tools and resources to do the job. The Organization
must be given the means and support in order to succeed.

In the context of the current conflict situations in
Africa, there is a need for an enhanced working cooperation
and coordination between the Organization of African Unity
and the United Nations. This is recognized by both
organizations, and efforts are being made to put this into
practical effect as they strive to resolve the various conflicts
in the African continent. This enhanced cooperation and
coordination between the United Nations and the
Organization of African Unity must be strengthened by
sustained political support and commitment, backed by the
necessary support in other areas. In this regard, we urge
States and relevant international bodies to continue to
provide financial and technical support to further strengthen
African regional and subregional efforts for conflict
prevention, the maintenance of peace and security, and
dispute settlement.

Regional and subregional organizations can play an
important role in the prevention of conflict and in
peacekeeping. The efforts of the Economic Community of
West African States Monitoring Group (ECOMOG) in
respect of the conflicts in Liberia, Sierra Leone and Guinea-
Bissau are clear testimony of this. We wish to pay tribute
to the commendable and courageous efforts of ECOMOG
in the maintenance of regional peace and security in West
Africa. We also recognize the efforts of other subregional
organizations in Africa. However, regional peacekeeping
efforts do not absolve the Council of its responsibility for
peacekeeping in the context of the maintenance of
international peace and security. It cannot subcontract its
Charter-mandated responsibility. Since joining the
Security Council at the beginning of this year, my
delegation has raised, on a number of occasions, the need
for Nigeria - the largest troop contributor to
ECOMOG - to be supported to enable it to continue to
maintain its peacekeeping troops in Sierra Leone for a
longer period of time. Adequate support is imperative if
ECOMOG is to continue to assist in consolidating the
still-fragile peace process in Sierra Leone. Such forces are
acting on the Organization's behalf and are sacrificing
their lives for peace in the region. It is only proper and
morally correct that we endeavour to provide the means
to allow such troop-contributing countries to continue
their presence in the conflict areas. In Sierra Leone, as
well as in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, what is
needed most is prompt and decisive action from us in
order to build on the momentum generated by the signing
of the respective Lorne and Lusaka agreements.

My delegation notes with particular concern the
proliferation of small arms in Africa, which clearly have
contributed to the intensity and duration of the conflicts
on the continent. We therefore strongly support the call
for stricter controls of arms flows to conflict areas. We
are equally concerned about the use of sophisticated
weaponry, which would add a new destabilizing factor
with regard to which Africa and the international
community as a whole will have to be particularly
vigilant.

Peace and security in Africa can be attained only
through common action by Africa that is supported by the
international community. We must bring our collective
commitment and resolve to bear on the settlement of the
crises in order to free up resources and energies for the
essential task of economic and social development.
Africa's well-being is in the interest of the international
community.

We have seen just recently how swift and decisive
the Council was in its action on the situation in East
Timor. We expect the Council to do no less on African
conflicts lest it be seen to be selective and apply double
standards in its work. To borrow the words of the
Secretary-General in his address to the General Assembly
on 20 September 1999, at this fifty-fourth session,

 

"If the new commitment to intervention in the
face of extreme suffering is to retain the support of
the world's peoples, it must be, and must be seen to
be, fairly and consistently applied, irrespective of
region or nation. Humanity, after all, is indivisible."
(A/54/PV.4)

