Mr. Orrenius Skau (Sweden): I would like to thank
Under-Secretary-General Jean-Pierre Lacroix, Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General Nicholas Haysom and
Special Envoy Ismail Wais for their briefings today. Let
me also extend a particular word of thanks to Ms. Grace
John for her briefing. We heard her loud and clear,
including her call to urgently enforce the ceasefire,
put an end to impunity and ensure accountability and
continue promoting women's meaningful participation.
I can assure her that we will do our utmost to follow
through on her calls.

I would like to start by commending the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD)
and the facilitators of the High-level Revitalization
Forum process, in particular the Government of the
Sudan and Special Envoy Wais. Their tireless efforts
over recent months, with the backing of a coherent
region, were instrumental for reaching the revitalized
Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in the
Republic of South Sudan. I also acknowledge the
efforts of the South Sudanese for the progress made
and for having demonstrated the necessary flexibility
and willingness to compromise. But the Agreement is
only a first step. What is now needed is a clear political
will of the parties to implement what has been agreed
to in an inclusive manner and to engage in genuine
peacebuilding and reconciliation activities.

While we welcome reduced levels of fighting in
recent weeks, we are also deeply concerned about reports
of continued military operations. A complete cessation
of hostilities by all parties, the Government and armed
groups alike, is urgent and must be unconditional.
There must be consequences for violations of the
Cessation of Hostilities Agreement, as well as against
those who stand in the way of the full implementation
of the Peace Agreement.

We encourage the region, supported by the
international community, to maintain its active
engagement and continue to play a proactive role. The
region's involvement in monitoring the implementation
of the Agreement and holding the parties to account
will now be especially important. It is also vital that
the Council continue to support those regional efforts,
making sure that we speak with one voice.

The spirit of inclusivity, which was a crucial element
of the High-level Revitalization Forum, must now be
maintained in the coming implementation phase. The
quest for peace will be viable only if it includes all
stakeholders. We must continue to assure the effective
participation ofyouth, women and civil society. Gender
equality is central to peace and security, and we
should support further efforts to increase the political
representation of women.

An important aspect as we move forward will
advancing accountability and transitional justice
mechanisms, including by establishing the envisaged
hybrid court for South Sudan without further delay.
Impunity for human rights violations and abuses and
violations of international humanitarian law, not
least are acts of sexual violence targeting women and
girls, cannot be accepted. The continued high level
of conflict-related sexual violence, as highlighted by
the Secretary-Generals report (S/2018/831), is truly
appalling. The continued monitoring and reporting of
such crimes will remain important.

We also remain deeply concerned about the
humanitarian situation, which results directly and
indirectly from the conflict. The rapid, safe and
unhindered delivery of humanitarian relief across
South Sudan must be ensured. In that context, we
again commend the United Nations Mission in
South Sudan (UNMISS) for its efforts to reach areas
critical to addressing protection concerns, as well as
its preparedness to now support the parties in taking
further steps on the path towards peace. It is worrisome
that violations of the status-of-forces agreement
continue. The denial of access and restrictions of
movement remain unacceptable. UNMISS has to
be able to carry out its mandated tasks, including to
monitor and investigate the human rights situation and
to protect civilians.

The millions of South Sudanese caught up in this
brutal and futile war have waited for over four years
for an end to the conflict and an opportunity to start
rebuilding their lives and country. The Agreement
reached last week provides a unique opportunity for
peace, reconciliation and recovery. This is not the time
for euphemisms, but we cannot afford an attitude of
cynicism either. As Mr. Haysom said, we cannot allow
the perfect to become the enemy of the good. We must
remain focused, and all parties must stay the course and
seize this opportunity. The continuous efforts of IGAD
and the African Union will need our full support. The
current momentum must not be lost.

