Mr. Ilkin (Turkey): I would like to begin by
welcoming and congratulating Mr. Abdurrahman
Mohamed Shalgham, new Permanent Representative of
the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, and wishing him every
success. I would be grateful, Mr. President, if you
could kindly convey that message to our new
colleague. I also wish to thank you for convening
today's open debate on the report of the African Union-
United Nations panel on modalities for support to
African Union (AU) peacekeeping operations under a
United Nations mandate. In addition, I would like to
thank His Excellency Mr. Ramtane Lamamra,
Commissioner for Peace and Security of the African
Union; Her Excellency Ms. Nkosazana Dlamini Zuma,
Foreign Minister of South Africa; and, of course, His
Excellency Mr. Romano Prodi, Chairman of the panel,
for their participation in and contributions to this
important and timely debate.

In today's volatile and fragile security
environment, effective peacekeeping is of vital
importance to the maintenance of international peace
and security. In that context, there is no doubt about the

role and the responsibility of the United Nations in
leading such efforts. However, many United Nations
peacekeeping missions throughout the world encounter
certain human, material and financial constraints.
Moreover, the ever-growing demand for peacekeeping
around the globe, coupled with increasingly robust and
demanding mandates, suggests that constraints may
persist in the years to come.

Against that background, it is imperative that the
United Nations enhance its peacekeeping capabilities,
including by establishing new coalitions and
partnerships in the area of peacekeeping. In fact, that is
a commitment and a challenge that we collectively
undertook under paragraph 170 of the 2005 World
Summit Outcome Document (General Assembly resolution 60/1). Turkey therefore supports the call for
the establishment of more effective arrangements
between the United Nations and regional organizations
having complementary peacekeeping capabilities.

In that context, we congratulate Mr. Prodi and
other members of the panel for their thorough and
analytical report on the role that the African Union can
play in peacekeeping and the support that the United
Nations can provide for such an undertaking. The
report addresses key issues in a comprehensive way.
Thus, rather than repeating them, I will just say that we
concur with all the basic findings of the report, as well
as with the thrust of its recommendations.

In particular, we support the panel's visionary
recommendations aimed at developing a more effective
partnership between the United Nations and the
African Union not only on peacekeeping, but also on
conflict prevention and post-conflict reconstruction.
Furthermore, we share the views concerning the need
to enhance African peacekeeping capabilities. The
success of all such efforts requires support from the
relevant United Nations bodies and organs, as well as
from Member States.
The United Nations has embarked upon a
comprehensive review aimed at enhancing the
effectiveness of United Nations peacekeeping
operations. As a matter of fact, the Secretary-General
has invited the members of the Security Council and
high-level administrators of the Secretariat to a retreat
this weekend to discuss that issue. As a major troop-
and police-contributing country, Turkey actively
follows the review process. We believe that the
development of an effective partnership between the
United Nations and the African Union, as well as the
enhancement of the Union's peacekeeping capabilities,
should constitute an integral part of that process.

One of the crucial aspects of long-term capacity-
building is, of course, funding. Hence, the priority
accorded by the panel to examining the difficulties in
that area is well placed. Indeed, the provision of
predictable and sustainable funding to support the
African Union's peacekeeping efforts is of utmost
importance to the success of that endeavour. We
believe that the recommendations contained in the
report regarding this particular aspect are of
significance and merit due and in-depth consideration.

In other words, we believe that the panel's report
depicts the serious challenges standing in the way of
effective African peacekeeping, as well as the
opportunities and prospects that it entails. Therefore,
the thought-provoking recommendations included in
the report with a view to overcoming those difficulties
should be fully taken into account in our own review.
Accordingly, we hope that, following the evaluation of
the Secretary-General, a joint United Nations and
African Union team can soon be established to
examine these recommendations and how best to
implement them.

Investing in Africans' peacekeeping capacity
means investing in the security, stability and future of
that great continent. It is a sound investment that will
surely pay off as the African continent fully develops
its own capabilities. Turkey is ready and willing to do
its fair share in this regard. The rapidly developing
relations between Turkey and the African countries, as
evidenced by the African Union's declaration of
Turkey as one of its three strategic partners, provides
us ample ground to build upon, and we are committed
to doing so.

