Mr. Aisi (Papua New Guinea): I wish first to
thank you, Mr. President, for having convened this
meeting and for having allowed it to be an open
meeting, thereby enabling others to express their
views, particularly our friends from the region. I wish
also to thank members for their comments this morning
and Mr. Danilo Tiirk for his report.

Papua New Guinea expresses sincere appreciation
and gratitude for the opportunity to participate in this
most important debate on the future of the peace
process in Bougainville and the well-being of Papua
New Guinea as a whole.

It allows us to place on record the sincere
appreciation of all of the parties for the support the
United Nations has given the peace process, through
the United Nations Political Office in Bougainville,
Papua New Guinea (UNPOB) - which, for the sake of
consistency with agreements between the parties, is
known on the ground as the United Nations Observer
Mission in Bougainville, Papua New Guinea
(UNOMB). It allows us to contribute to the Security
Council's review of UNPOB/UNOMB.

Papua New Guinea is, of course, conscious of the
basis on which the Security Council agreed to extend
UNPOB/UNOMB for a further 12 months at the end of
last year. This meeting is therefore additionally
welcome and critical to the future of the peace process,
enabling the Government, on behalf of all the parties,
to raise the issue of - and seek the continuing
assistance of the United Nations in meeting - the need
for further support, for a limited period, in fulfilling the
remaining responsibilities of the United Nations and
completing the assignment previously agreed.

The peace process in Bougainville, Papua New
Guinea, not only continues, but keeps moving ahead.
While progress is not always as rapid as many
observers and participants would prefer, it is
nonetheless real and substantial.

While the peace process has some features which
are unique to Bougainville and Papua New Guinea as a
whole, the way in which it continues, consolidates and
progresses is, in certain respects, a model for peace
processes in other parts of the world.

The foundations of this peace process lie in the
hearts and minds of the people around Bougainville
and throughout Papua New Guinea, who are committed
to peace. The commitment to practical peace-building
by leaders and former combatants on all sides ensures
that it keeps gaining strength.

The key to the success achieved to date is the way
in which the peace process proceeds on the basis of
consultation and cooperation; the same factors may
also explain not only the rate at which gains are made
but also their solidity.

This success owes a great deal to the support
which the peace process has received from UNPOB/
UNOMB and to the successive arrangements by which
a neutral regional presence has been provided and
maintained. The contributors to that neutral regional
presence are Australia, Fiji, New Zealand and Vanuatu.

Their cooperation in providing such a presence
began when the Truce Monitoring Group arrived in late
1997. It continued when the TMG was replaced by the
Peace Monitoring Group (PMG), after the ceasefire
agreement was signed on 30 April 1998. Following
gradual downsizing, the PMG eventually withdrew on
30 June this year.

The neutral regional presence then took the form
of an even more substantially scaled-down presence -
the entirely civilian Bougainville transition team,
which will withdraw at the end of this month. Like all
of its predecessors, the team is unarmed. When it
leaves, the peace process will reach another critical
milestone on the road to self-sustaining peace.

The Bougainville parties and the national
Government will be directly and visibly responsible for
maintaining, consolidating and building peace for
themselves. Having considered the matter when they
met in the Interim Joint Supervisory Body from 21 to
23 October 2003, political leaders in Bougainville and
at the national level are agreed that the team's
withdrawal can safely proceed.

The Kuri resolution on implementation of
autonomy records the Interim Joint Supervisory Body's
agreed view. In forming that judgment, leaders have
also agreed that it is critical that the United Nations
remain on the ground and continue to provide support
for a limited time.

It was a sign of the faith that all of the parties
have in the United Nations that they originally agreed
to give certain critical, very sensitive responsibilities in
the peace process to UNPOB/UNOMB. It was a further
expression of confidence and trust in the effectiveness
of UNPOB/UNOMB that the parties agreed to give this
body further responsibilities in relation to weapons
disposal.

Those responsibilities are specified in the
resolution by which the Peace Process Consultative
Committee (PPCC), chaired by the Director of
UNPOB/UNOMB, adopted the agreed weapons-
disposal plan. They were then incorporated in the
Bougainville Peace Agreement. Some of them have
now been given force of law, through the amendment
to the national Constitution of Papua New Guinea and
the organic law implementing the Agreement.

The faith, confidence and trust that the parties
have in UNPOB/UNOMB is not only a compliment to
this particular body; it is also a strong expression of
confidence in the United Nations. Concretely, it also a
product of, and a tribute to, the integrity, dedication
and effectiveness of the Director, Ambassador Noel
Sinclair, and other personnel of UNPOB/UNOMB. It is
a mark of the confidence, respect and trust they enjoy
on all sides.

The agreed weapons-disposal plan makes
UNPOB/UNOMB responsible for supervising and
holding one of two keys to each of the containers in
which weapons are held at stage II. With the decision
on the final fate of the weapons at stage III still to be
made and put into effect, this responsibility is an
important part of UNPOB/UNOMB's unfinished
business - a part of the agreed weapons plan, which
the Government naturally wants to see brought to an
end through the destruction of the guns at the earliest
practicable opportunity.

In addition, through provisions which are
probably unique in the world, the Constitution of Papua
New Guinea makes specific reference, at a number of
points, to the United Nations Observer Mission in
Bougainville. The provision which specifies this body's
role in relation to verification and certification of stage
II of the agreed weapons plan is no longer relevant, as
the responsibilities arising from it have been fulfilled.

The report verifying and certifying stage II was
presented to the Government more than four months
ago. The Government acted immediately to bring into
full operation the constitutional arrangements
providing for the establishment of the autonomous
Bougainville Government under a Bougainville
Constitution made in accordance with the Constitution
of Papua New Guinea, and the holding of a deferred
and conditional referendum on Bougainville's political
future. The remaining responsibilities which the Papua
New Guinea constitution vests in UNPOB/UNOMB
have to do with determining the outcome of any
disputes between the parties on the question of whether
conditions are conducive to the holding of elections for
an autonomous Bougainville government, including
whether the elections should be deferred and the length
of any deferral.

The relevant provision is section 279, subsection
2, of the Papua New Guinea Constitution. That
provision was agreed upon at a time when the parties
expected the peace process to be concluded much
earlier than has proved possible. The date specified in
the Bougainville Peace Agreement for
UNPOB/UN OMB to complete its assignment and leave
was a prediction, not an agreed target, and,
unfortunately, it has not been achieved. The reason was
not a setback, or deliberate delays. It was, in certain
respects, a result of the way in which the peace process
was founded and has continued to gather strength,
through consultation and cooperation.

Thus, Papua New Guinea's request for continuing
United Nations support for the peace process is not so
much a matter of seeking an extension as of seeing a
previously agreed assignment through. It is concerned
with ensuring that an agreed role is completed and that
remaining responsibilities are fulfilled. Made at a time
when peace and good governance are pressing
international concerns, it is a request for assistance in
honouring previous agreements to support peace-
building and giving effect to provisions contained in
Papua New Guinea's democratic Constitution, all of
which have been previously agreed.

For the sake of avoiding unnecessary uncertainty,
disputes and possible resort to the courts, it would be
best if the continuing presence of the United Nations
could still be known as the United Nations Observer
Mission in Bougainville, Papua New Guinea -
perhaps with a word like "transitional", "interim" or
"temporary" added to make clear that it will exist for
only a very limited time, until the autonomous
Bougainville government is elected - which is
expected to be during 2004.

Papua New Guinea's request for United Nations
assistance in seeing the role and responsibilities given
to UNPOB/UNOMB through is not a matter only of
implementing the agreed weapons disposal plan or of
meeting formal constitutional requirements. It is also
relevant to other concerns.

When the TMG first arrived in 1997, the parties
involved in the peace process were aware of the need
to consult and cooperate in resolving any difficulties
that might arise and in keeping the peace process
moving ahead. They therefore agreed to set up a
mechanism for that purpose. The Cairns Commitment
was signed in late 1997. When the Ceasefire
Agreement was signed and UNPOB/UNOMB
commenced, the mechanism evolved into the Peace
Process Consultative Committee (PPCC), which the
head of UNPOB/UNOMB has, by agreement, been
invited to chair.

The PPCC is the principal means of ensuring
regular contact between all of the parties involved in
the peace process. It is the forum in which the national
Government and the former combatant groups, in
particular, can consult when difficulties arise and
cooperate in planning the way ahead.

It is vital that the PPCC continue to operate until
a government representative of the people of
Bougainville is elected and assumes responsibility for
the government of Bougainville under the agreed
autonomy arrangements contained in the Bougainville
Peace Agreement and implementing laws. As I have
already said, that is expected to take place during 2004.
As the Kuri resolution on the implementation of
autonomy records, leaders on all sides see a need for a
continuing United Nations presence until then. They
have also agreed the United Nations should cease
operating and should leave as soon as the autonomous
Bougainville government has been elected.
The agreement contained in the resolution states,

"that in view of the important role that UNOMB
and its director continue to play, and the
confidence and trust they enjoy on all sides, the
national Government should seek an extension for
UNOMB under the continuing leadership of His
Excellency Ambassador Noel Sinclair for a
further 12 months, or, if earlier, until the elections
for the autonomous Bougainville government
have been held and the autonomous Bougainville
government is set up".

The meaning is clear: there is still a continuing
need for the United Nations to continue, consolidate
and complete the remaining responsibilities originally
agreed upon for UNPOB/UNOMB. The United Nations
presence should remain until the autonomous
Bougainville government has been elected. It should
then be withdrawn. None of the parties wants to see the
peace process become dependent on external support.
All of them are committed to honouring the letter and
the spirit of existing agreements. They are determined
to see that peace-building and peace itself become self-
sustaining as soon as the agreed procedures for
establishing the autonomous Bougainville government
have been followed and elections held.

Agreement to place the Bougainville Peace
Agreement within the framework of the Papua New
Guinea Constitution is basic to the entire Agreement. It
was, in certain respects, quite hard-won, as far as
certain Bougainville parties were concerned. It is
critical for the National Government and Papua New
Guinea as a whole. It is therefore very important that
the United Nations maintain a continuing presence in
Bougainville until the agreed processes for building
peace and getting the autonomous Bougainville
government up and running have been achieved.

The respect and trust that the head, Ambassador
Noel Sinclair, and the personnel of UNPOB/UNOMB
enjoy has a very significant influence on the parties'
willingness to compromise. There are many advantages
to asking Ambassador Noel Sinclair, in particular, to
stay on so that the parties can continue to draw on his
experience and influence and so that unnecessary
disruption can be avoided. The sensitive way in which
the Ambassador has encouraged the parties to come
together has facilitated agreement. Recently, he was
able to provide encouragement with respect to the
resolution in which the main former combatant groups
committed themselves to destruction as the ultimate
goal of weapons disposal.
The head and staff of UNPOB/UNOMB continue
to support and promote further cooperation among all
parties. They make a significant, active contribution to
efforts to remove existing barriers and bring Francis
Ona and his remaining supporters in the "no-go zone"
around Panguna into the peace process so that peace
can be secured throughout Bougainville.

The attendance by former members of the
Me'ekamui Defence Force at recent PPCC meetings,
together with their active involvement in the recent
meeting of former combatants on Nissan Island to
prepare for stage III of weapons disposal, shows that
progress is being made. Meanwhile, the national
Government and the Bougainville parties continue to
consult and cooperate in developing a constitution for
the autonomous Bougainville government. The
Government has recently acted decisively to resolve
issues that might otherwise have impacted negatively
on constitution-making in Bougainville.

The Government has also acted decisively to
delegate certain police functions and powers to
Bougainville in order to prepare the way for
strengthening policing there in other ways. It is
preparing for progress on the restoration of civil
authority more generally, including with regard to
courts and correctional services. In fact, the police
Commander in Bougainville will be commissioned as
an Assistant Commissioner of the Royal Papua New
Guinea Constabulary in the next day or so, with the
enhanced delegation of functions and powers that go
with his new rank.

The National Executive Council, which is the
Cabinet of Papua New Guinea, has already delegated
its own functions and powers in relation to policing to
the Bougainville Interim Provincial Government,
which will exercise them, on the basis of the principles
that apply to the police at the national level - with the
addition, in this case, of informal consultations with
the Bougainville People's Congress.

Bougainville police will be allowed to wear
special insignia on their uniforms. The national
Government has mobilized funds to help reduce
tensions by settling outstanding financial claims,
entitlements and other payments.

In relation to weapons disposal, the conditions
that former combatants have placed on the
implementation of destruction at stage III -
reconciliation, and the implementation of the
Bougainville constitution - have no authority under
the Bougainville Peace Agreement. The agreement
does not provide for delay. The PPCC meeting which is
due to be held in Buka this week should agree to
destruction and implement the decision with all
deliberate speed, so normalcy can return and peace can
be secured.

Thus, the peace process in Bougainville, Papua
New Guinea, continues to advance. The letter that my
Government has sent to the Secretary-General, Kofi
Annan, and the aide-memoire that we have circulated
to members of the Security Council, explain our
request for UNPOB/UNOMB and Ambassador Noel
Sinclair to remain.

We recognize the need for economy and for an
exit strategy. We are aware of legitimate pressures for
UNPOB/UNOMB to remain lean, focused and
effective. We accept that the successor to UNPOB/
UNOMB in its present form will therefore probably
have to be somewhat scaled down.

Papua New Guinea is grateful for the support that
Australia and other countries in our region have
expressed for our request. We are confident others will
be sympathetic and give their support; I was pleased to
hear this morning that many support the continued
presence of the United Nations.

Papua New Guinea also appreciates that the
various United Nations organs have roles and
responsibilities of their own. My Government
understands the need to follow proper procedures. It is
against the background of our shared understanding
with officials and other States Members of the United
Nations that Papua New Guinea seeks a continuing
United Nations presence in Bougainville, Papua New
Guinea, for a limited time to see the role and
responsibilities given to UNPOB/UNOMB through to
an early conclusion. We make that request as part of
our commitment to the goal that has guided the peace
process from the earliest stages: to secure lasting peace
by peaceful means so that peace becomes self-
sustaining.

Papua New Guinea commends that request to the
Security Council for its most careful consideration and
support. In doing so, I take the opportunity to express
once again and to emphasize, on behalf of all parties,
Papua New Guinea's sincere appreciation for the
contributions UNPOB/UNOMB has made, the support
that the Secretary-General and the Security Council
have provided and the assistance that a number of
United Nations specialized agencies continue to
provide to the peace process and to practical peace-
building in Bougainville, Papua New Guinea.
