Mr. Heller (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Fernandez-Taranco for the briefing he has given
us, as well as the representatives of Israel and the
Permanent Observer Mission of Palestine for their
statements.

For decades, the international community has
witnessed wars, tension and violence in the Middle
East, quite often without having the capacity to
respond, hoping that some day the conflict would
finally end and give way to peaceful coexistence
between those nations. At present, no efforts are being
spared to achieve that goal. The United Nations and
various States, both from within and outside the region,
have been resolutely involved in this complex task.

The situation is quite different from that which
prevailed 60 years ago. Peace agreements have been
signed, the existence of the State of Israel has been
recognized by the vast majority of the international
community and dialogue has been established between
the main parties involved, namely, Israelis and
Palestinians. On occasion, that dialogue has
substantive; at times, it has been a dialogue of the deaf.

However, the conflict persists, and we have not
achieved the objective that would make it possible to
resolve the conflict once and for all, that is, the
creation of a sovereign and independent Palestinian
State that is politically and economically viable and
living in peace side by side with Israel within secure
and internationally recognized borders.

At the beginning of September, thanks to the
efforts of President Obama's Administration, hopes for
peace were once again rekindled owing to the
restoration of direct dialogue between Israel and the
Palestinian Authority, supported by the Quartet, the
Arab League and the international community. The
goal is ambitious: to resolve all the central issues
within a year. All the relevant stakeholders have
become involved in that task, with the firm goal of
giving shape to the so-called two-State solution. They
all knew that there would obstacles, threats and risks,
but were determined to become involved in the process
sincerely and seriously.

Today, ongoing dialogue hangs from a thread, and
the process of rapprochement seems to be slipping
backwards. This situation is not acceptable. Dialogue
and negotiation must continue and must produce
tangible results for the Palestinians and the Israelis.
The status quo is not a viable alternative. It will only
exacerbate tensions and lead to greater violence and
confrontation, directly affecting the civilian population
and destabilizing the region.

The international community also has a role to
play in restoring substantive and direct dialogue
between Israel and the Palestinian Authority, not only
because the alternative to dialogue is more violence,
but because we truly believe in the need for the
Palestinian people to have a sovereign and independent
State. This was established by the Quartet in its
statement of 19 March and in subsequent statements,
and it has been recognized by the vast majority of
Member States of the Organization.

But perhaps the most decisive factor will be when
both parties abstain from carrying out provocative acts
or acts that run counter to their obligations under the
Road Map. Israel and the Palestinian Authority must
create a context that is conducive to negotiations. In
that regard, the resumption of construction in illegal
settlements in the West Bank and the announcement of
new construction in East Jerusalem are a serious step
backwards. The international community has been
unanimous on this point: settlements in the occupied
Palestinian territories are illegal, run counter to
international law and are a serious obstacle to the
peace process, as they prejudge and alter the results of
the negotiations.
Contrary to what some think, settlements do not
provide for greater security. On the contrary, they
generate tension, resentment and violence between the
two peoples, as we have seen in the past few weeks and
over the years. We urge Israel to cease this practice
once and for all, including the so-called natural growth.
This would confirm its commitment to the peace
process.

The Palestinian Authority must also continue to
meet its commitments under the Road Map. Despite the
tragic attacks against Israeli civilians, which we have
firmly condemned, we have noted with satisfaction the
improved capacities of Palestinian security forces, as
well as a gradual improvement in the economic
situation of the West Bank.

We cannot think about improving the living
conditions of the Palestinians without considering the
civilian population in Gaza. The blockade imposed on
Gaza is unsustainable and counter-productive and has
severe humanitarian consequences for the civilian
population of the Gaza Strip. The partial lifting of
restrictions is welcome, but it is insufficient. The
blockade must be completely lifted, and, as we have
continued to state since January 2009 and taking
account of the legitimate security concerns of Israel,
we believe that this will only be possible if an
international monitoring mechanism is set up which
will guarantee a lasting ceasefire, the complete
openness of border crossings and control of illicit
weapons trafficking to Gaza, in accordance with
Security Council resolution 1860 (2009). This will also
lead to a significant reduction in tension and deaths
resulting from this situation, such as the attack on the
Freedom flotilla on 31 May.

We trust that the Panel of Inquiry established by
the Secretary-General will clarify the events that took
place during that incident, and we reiterate the primacy
of international norms. An investigation must be
carried out, as stated in the Council's presidential
statement (S/PRST/2010/9), and it must be prompt,
impartial, credible and transparent. We await the early
outcome of the investigations under way. It is also
essential that inter-Palestinian dialogue continue, as
facilitated by Egypt and other States involved.

Assessing the situation in the Middle East
requires that we take into account the regional
situation. We have noted with concern an increase in
inter-community tensions in Lebanon, which endangers
the political balance and coexistence among the
various factions within Lebanese political society and
has led to ongoing violations of Security Council
resolution 1701 (2006), in particular through the
caching of weapons and explosives in the areas of
operation of the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon, as well as daily incursions by Israeli armed
forces into Lebanon's territory. We appeal both to
Israel and to Lebanon, as well as to other relevant
political stakeholders, to comply with the provisions of
Security Council resolutions and to avoid any
belligerent rhetoric that could lead to an escalation in
violence.

Moreover, the work of the Special Tribunal for
Lebanon has generated increased tension and
controversy in the region. As pointed out by the
Secretary-General on 6 October, the Tribunal is an
independent body with a clear Security Council
mandate to end impunity in an extremely serious case.
Its conclusions must not be prejudged, and there must
be no interference with its work.

The time has come for the leaders of Israel and
the Palestinian Authority to take important but difficult
political decisions to benefit their own people as well
as to ensure international peace and stability. The
situation requires political will, which has been lacking
so far.

We appeal to Israel and to the Palestinian
Authority to demonstrate through tangible actions,
their determination to resolve this conflict in a way that
goes beyond provocation and short-term political
interests.

