The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Israel, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya
and South Africa, in which they request to be invited to
participate in the discussion of the item on the
Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
discussion without the right to vote, in accordance with
the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Lancry
(Israel) took a seat at the Council table and Mr.
Dorda (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) and Mr. Kumalo
(South Africa) took the seats reserved for them at
the side of the Council Chamber.

The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter dated 22
November 2000 from the Permanent Observer of
Palestine to the United Nations, which will be issued as
document S/2000/1112, which reads as follows:

"I have the honour to request that in accordance
with its previous practice, the Security Council
invite the Permanent Observer of Palestine to the
United Nations to participate in the meeting of
the Security Council to be held on Wednesday, 22
November 2000, with regard to the situation in
the occupied Palestinian territories, including
Jerusalem."

I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite the Permanent Observe of Palestine to
participate in the current debate, in accordance with the
rules of procedure and the previous practice in this
regard.
There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Al-Kidwa
(Palestine), took a seat at the Council table.


The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Security Council is meeting in response to the request
contained in a letter dated 21 November 2000 from the
Permanent Representative of the Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya to the United Nations addressed to the
President of the Security Council, document
S/2000/llO9. I should like to draw the attention of the
members of the Council to document S/2000/1107,
which contains the text of the identical letters dated 20
November 2000 from the Permanent Observer of
Palestine to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General and to the President of the Security
Council.

I call on the Permanent Observer of Palestine.


