Mr. Kandeel (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to extend my sincere thanks to
Ms. Federica Mogherini, High Representative of the

European Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy,
for her comprehensive briefing on the European Union's
future priorities. I would also like to congratulate
Ms. Mogherini and her delegation - and all European
delegations in the Security Council - on the occasion
of Europe Day. I also congratulate the delegation of the
Russian Federation on the occasion of Victory Day.

Egypt recognizes the important role played by
regional and subregional organizations in maintaining
international peace and security. Their role in
preventing, managing and settling conflicts is essential
and growing. Egypt also calls for promoting and
enhancing the relationship between the United Nations
and such regional mechanisms in accordance with
Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations.

Our world today is witness to great unprecedented
challenges, including terrorism, radicalization,
irregular migration, illegal trafficking in humans and
drugs, piracy and transborder organized crime. Such
challenges go beyond the capacity of any one party to
resolve them alone. A concerted effort to address them is
therefore needed at the regional and international levels.

Given that the European Union has significant
political and economic weight at the international level,
it is one of the most influential international actors
capable of contributing effectively to finding solutions
to many of the challenges the world is facing today,
in particular in the Middle East and Africa. Egypt
recognizes the important role of the European Union in
that regard, given the history, geography and challenges
that link Europe to the Middle East and Africa.

The EU's recent adoption of its new Global Strategy
on Foreign and Security Policy is noteworthy. Egypt
trusts that the implementation of the Strategy will
take place in full respect for the Charter of the United
Nations and the general principles of international
law, particularly the principle of sovereignty and
non-interference in the internal affairs of States, and
in coordination with active regional actors, including
taking their concerns into consideration to achieve
common goals and purposes and avoid the mistakes of
the past.

The partnership between the United Nations and the
EU is one of the major strategic partnerships between
regional organizations. Such partnerships include the
active engagement in a number of conflicts and crises
that go beyond the immediate EU neighbourhood.
Hence, the importance of the full integration between
EU efforts and those of the United Nations in matters
related to international peace and security.

One of those main arenas is peacekeeping
operations - for example, in Africa. The United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic plays a central
role in supporting efforts by national authorities
to establish State authority and restore security
throughout the country. The European Union Military
Training Mission in the Central African Republic
makes a significant contribution in that respect, as it
provides training to the Central African Republic army
military units as a part of security sector reform. In that
connection, I would like to highlight the importance of
forging coordination with the AU and other regional
parties that are capable of building up the capacities
of the Central African Republic army to accelerate
that process, in response to the calls by the national
authorities to do so.

We also look forward to optimizing the role of the
European Union Military Training Mission in Mali
and the European Union Capacity Building Mission in
Mali, in coordination with the United Nations and other
international and regional partners.

In conclusion, Egypt highly values Operation
Sophia and underlines its important role in addressing
illegal migration, given the loss of thousands of lives in
the Mediterranean as a result. Egypt stresses the need
to examine the possibility of expanding the mandate of
the Operation to address the phenomenon of the flow of
foreign terrorist fighters, weapons and funds to conflict
zones, particularly Libya.

