Mr. Amde (Ethiopia): We wish to thank Under-
Secretary-General Lacroix, Permanent Secretary
Maman Sidikou of the Group of Five for the Sahel
(G-5 Sahel), African Union High Representative for
Mali and the Sahel Pierre Buyoya, and the Deputy
Secretary-General for Common Security and Defence
Policy and Crisis response at the European External
Action Service, Pedro Serrano, for their respective
briefings and updates concerning the situation in the
Sahel region and the activities of the G-5 Sahel.

We fully recognize that the restoration and
expansion of State authority in northern Mali and G-5
Sahel countries still remains a serious challenge. In the
absence of viable State structures, the promotion of
peace and reconciliation across the region and carrying
out critical institutional reforms, including security
sector reform and disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration in Mali, have been very difficult.

The threats and frequent attacks in recent months
against security forces and other personnel serving in
State institutions, as well as the destruction of public
facilities, must be taken very seriously. We agree with
the Secretary-General's report (S/2018/1006) that the
numerous recent terrorist attacks are clear indications
of the growing presence of terrorist groups in the region,
including those along the Libyan-Chadian border, which
are taking advantage of the security vacuum not covered
by the operations of the international forces or the G-5
Sahel member States armed forces. This situation calls
for stronger coordination and deterrence work by the
GS-Sahel Joint Force and the national militaries and
security agents of each State of the region.

The joint efforts of the G-5 Sahel member States
and their commitment, which was renewed during the
high-level week of the General Assembly through the
pledge of Member States to fully operationalize the
Joint Force, deserve appreciation. If countries of the
region are assured ofpredictable financing and supplied
with adequate equipment capabilities, we believe that
there is no reason why this should not materialize.

At the aforementioned high-level event on Mali and
the Sahel, representatives of donor countries expressed
their willingness to support the Joint Force and urged the
G-5 Sahel member States to accelerate force generation
efforts. It is, however, important that the international
community, including the Council, take concrete action,
as requested by President Ibrahim Keita of Mali and
other representatives from the region, to place the G-5
Sahel Joint Force under a Chapter VII mandate so as to
ensure continuous support and funding. The geographic
challenge of military operations in the Sahel desert and
the vastness of the terrain make it imperative that the
capacity of the Joint Force be strengthened through
robust international support.

We support the African Union's work in reporting on
the activities of the Joint Force, focusing on progress in
its operationalization, international support to the Joint
Force, the implementation of the technical agreement,
challenges encountered, and adherence by the G-5
Sahel to human rights and international humanitarian
law. In this context, we very much support efforts of
the G-5 Sahel in restructuring its secretariat to meet its
operational demands.

While the operationalization of the G-5 Sahel
Joint Force and presence of other international
forces are contributing to resolving the security
problem in the Sahel, partnerships in the social and
economic development aspects, and principally in
the implementation of the priority investment plan,
should be a major preoccupation in order to ensure
sustainable development in the region. In that regard,
the cooperation of the United Nations agencies - such
as the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, the
United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization,
the World Food Programme, the United Nations
Development Programme, the European Union and
the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali - is indeed vital. We
hope that the outcome of the annual discussion of the
Peacebuilding Commission on 12 November will help
mobilize support for the G-5 Sahel and the wider region.

Although the Governments of the region do not
stint in exerting efforts, the humanitarian situation in
the Sahel remains very precarious and may continue to
be worsened by increasing conflict and climate-related
challenges. We wish to extend our support to the
emergency programme for the rehabilitation of local
infrastructure in border areas ofthe countries ofthe Sahel
region. In that connection, it is important that access to
basic services andjob opportunities in the border areas
be scaled up in the context of implementation of the
United Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel and
the United Nations Support Plan for the Sahel.

