Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I would like to
sincerely thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for his briefing on the most recent
report of the Secretary-General (S/2018/1092). I would
also like to thank Mr. F edotov and Ambassador Umarov
for their briefings today. I join other colleagues in
thanking Ms. Ghizaal Haress for her insights into the
elections process. As other have said, it is very helpful
to have her here as we discuss today's important issue.

I would like to start by congratulating every
Afghan who participated in the October parliamentary
elections, in the face of violence and intimidation. I
think they reflect what the Afghan representative and
the Dutch representative have both said. There is a
new generation of Afghans knocking on the door of a
new Afghanistan. Peace needs to be durable and must
increase political, social and economic opportunities
for every Afghan, as the Afghan Ambassador made
clear. I think it is a message the Taliban needs to heard
loud and clear from all members of the Council. The
Taliban lives in an Afghanistan of the past, which no
one wants to see restored. I think the Council can really
help to make that message understood, loud and clear.
To that end, we call on the Taliban to recognize that in
the elections, the wishes of Afghans across the country
to have a say in their country's future and their strong
desire for a peaceful and prosperous Afghanistan have
been heard loud and clear. In contrast, we are forced
once again to condemn intimidation and attacks
on civilians.

A number of speakers look forward to next year's
presidential elections. It is important that the Afghan
people get the transparent and credible presidential
elections that they deserve next year. As today's
debate and the report have shown, there are a number
of technical and operational challenges that affect
the elections and that need to be ironed out. Also, the
lessons learned and the necessary reforms must be
implemented so that those issues are resolved before
the next presidential elections. In that context, I want to
welcome the support of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) for those efforts
and its work to capture lessons learned. As part of that
process, I would urge the Mission to consider what
more UNAMA could do and what additional resources
it needs to strengthen its support ahead of the 2019
elections. I would ask through you, Mr. President, for
an update from the United Nations on that issue in the
new year.

Turning to peace, recent developments include the
efforts of the new United States Special Representative
for Afghanistan Reconciliation, Mr. Khalilzad, who I
used to know in this Chamber. His appointment, the
creation of a high advisory board for peace and the
announcement of an official Afghanistan negotiation
team offer a real opportunity to move the Afghan-led
and Afghan-owned peace process forward. To give it
the best chance of success, it is vital that all other peace
efforts underpin Afghan efforts in a way that reinforces
the indigenous progress. Any parallel process would
simply risk undermining progress and empowering
the Taliban. I think that General Assembly resolution
73/88, on the situation in Afghanistan, made clear that
States Members of the United Nations want efforts to
be driven by Afghanistan. Furthermore, they want all
other efforts to reinforce the Afghan Government's
efforts in that respect. It is critical that the international
community give that its full support. It is also critical
that the countries in the region give it their full support.

I want to take a moment to commend the efforts
of President Ghani and his Government so far and
to encourage them, as other speakers have done, to
focus on inclusivity, particularly of women and youth,
and on ensuring engagement at the community level
in electoral and peace processes. I think that what
Ms. Haress said about women's rights and human rights
is absolutely vital in that connection. It is important
that we think about how we might approach supporting
Afghanistan's reform and development after any peace
settlement, even if that seems to be some time away at
this point.

Today's briefing by Ambassador Umarov on the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1988 (2011) reminds us of the important
role sanctions play in the pursuit of peace. However,
for a sanctions regime to be credible and effective,
it is essential that relevant procedures be followed at
all times. In particular, any request for travel-ban
exemptions need to be submitted in a timely manner.

Others have mentioned the humanitarian situation.
We join them in worrying very much about the dire
situation, and the food insecurity issue should only add
impetus to the peace process. We call on all partners
to do more, not just to respond to the current crisis,
particularly the ongoing drought, but to help strengthen
the resilience of Afghanistan's most vulnerable people
in the long term.

I think we all know that 2019 will be a critical year
for Afghanistan. There is a significant opportunity for
progress on its path towards peace and democracy. The
United Kingdom is fully committed to supporting the
Special Representative, the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan and the Afghan Government as
they continue their important work to help the Afghan
people, the Government and the peace process.

