Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian):
We are grateful to you, Sir, and the Venezuelan
delegation for the skilful and effective way in which you
have fulfilled presidential functions in February. This
month was extremely busy because of the heavy work
programme proposed by the presidency and because
of events developing quickly around the world. The
Security Council must still hold some key meetings.
Therefore, today's wrap-up session can only be interim
in nature.

We would like to point out in particular the meeting
(see S/PV.7621) presided over by the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Venezuela, Ms. Delcy Eloina Rodriguez
Gomez. At a time when a clear understanding of the
principles of the Charter of the United Nations and
its inviolable nature are often lacking, we consider
it necessary to clearly reconfirm our common
commitment to such provisions, to which there is no
alternative. We cannot close our eyes to what is taking
place today as a result of the flagrant interference in
the internal affairs of many States, through supporting
illegal regime change or the violent implanting of
alien cultural or social norms. The Council is aware of
such examples, and we dwelt on this subject in detail
during the meeting on 15 February. Discussions on the
principles ofthe Charter are directly related to all issues
discussed within these walls and, on the basis of the
Charter, we must agree on the ways in which we will
implement joint risk management in the context of ever-
more difficult international relations. Without respect
for the founding principles, this will not be successful.

It was a particularly difficult time with regard to
many issues in the Security Council this month. To a
large extent, that was related to the challenging tasks we
faced and the difficult political nature of the issues we
have been considering. However, we would like to point
out some issues in which compromise was not reached
because of the unwillingness of many delegations to
sacrifice their narrow national ambitions for the sake of
the common good. For example, for the second time we
have not been able to agree on a press statement on the
Regional Centre for Preventive Diplomacy for Central
Asia. Despite the fact that, generally, there is no doubt
in anyone's mind regarding the importance of United
Nations cooperation with regional organizations, on
several occasions some delegations have refused to
recognize the cooperation of the Regional Centre with
organizations that are making a genuine contribution to
peace and stability in the region. The Collective Security
Treaty Organization and the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization are clear examples of the double standards
we regrettably encounter in the Security Council.

The discussion on extending sanctions in Darfur
cannot be deemed productive either. The authors
of the resolution abused their position and tried
unceremoniously to impose their national priorities
on the text, attempting to restrict entire sectors of that
country's economy. By hiding behind good intentions to
establish peace in Darfur and arbitrarily interpreting the
recommendations of the sanctions experts, the authors
have tried to put pressure on Khartoum, depriving it of
its main source of income. However, they fully ignored
the views of other delegations on this matter. Such a
tactic undermines the unity in the Security Council.
As a result, we had to have a particularly technical
extension of the sanctions resolution, putting to a vote
last year's text.

The document that was adopted did not include
extremely important wording, including as proposed
by the Russian delegation, to condemn violations of the
arms embargo by illegal armed groups, the recruitment
of child soldiers by rebels and attacks on peacekeepers,
or an appeal for the complete, as opposed to a selective,
implementation of the Doha Document for Peace in
Darfur. We hope that this negative experience will
be taken into account when we vote on other draft
resolutions in the Security Council.

At the centre of global politics and the Council's

work programme in February was the situation in the
Middle East, and first and foremost in Syria. It is not
surprising given the number of significant agreements
that were reached this month, and we worked intensively
with the Council keeping its finger on the pulse. The
new trend, if it is exploited responsibly, will make it
possible to hope for an early resumption of inter-Syrian
negotiations under the auspices of the United Nations,
as they were forced to come to an artificial pause at the
beginning of the month because of the unwillingness
on the part of the Syrian opposition to take part in
constructive talks. We hope that the grave blunder that
such groups were allowed to make by putting forward
preconditions will not be repeated.

Close attention was paid to the humanitarian
situation prevailing for a number of years because
of the conflict and the terrorist movements that have
struck that country. We firmly repeat that humanitarian
issues must be considered in a comprehensive way
without unnecessary politicization, which does not help
the Syrians who are suffering. The situation continues
to be difficult, but we did bring this month to a close
with promising progress in that area, which became
possible, including because of Russia's efforts. On
two occasions at the Security Council, our delegation
raised the issue of the continuing violations of Syrian
sovereignty by Turkey, which are fraught with the risk
of an escalation ofthat conflict. We hope that that signal
will be received and understood by those to whom it
is addressed and by those who sponsor them. The
publication of the first report of the Organization for
the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons-United Nations
Joint Investigative Mechanism to investigate the use of
chemical weapons was another important moment. In
our View, in the light of new facts regarding the use
by terrorists of poisonous substances in Syria and Iraq
and evidence of the free movement of such chemicals
in the region, the importance of the mechanism will
increase and the geographical scope of its mechanism
will broaden.

In conclusion, we would like to wish the Venezuelan
presidency a successful completion of its work
this month. In a couple ofhours, we will meet to discuss
a draft resolution that is crucial to a settlement in Syria
on the adoption of a joint statement by the co-Chairs of
the International Syria Support Group on the cessation
of hostilities. On Monday, we will discuss cooperation
between the United Nations and the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe, as well as the
work of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo.

Right now, however, I would like to take this
opportunity to wish the incoming Angolan presidency
every success in carrying out its important functions.

