Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish): We
would like to thank Mr. Robert Serry for his briefing on
the situation in the Middle East.

The frequency with which we address this topic
has often been questioned within the Security Council.
However, the current situation in the region is so volatile
and changeable, and has such enormous implications,
that it must be acknowledged that frequent monitoring is
justified. The first rapture with which the Arab Spring
was received in the Chamber only a little more than
a year ago is now seasoned with a dose of scepticism
about how easy or difficult we can expect the transition
to be from authoritarian Governments towards more
democratic, participative, pluralistic and open systems.
The recent events in Egypt are but one testimony to that
fact. At the same time, increasing sectarian tensions
and their frequent spillover into violence are matters of
growing concern, for obvious reasons.

But now is not the moment to discuss the overall
situation. I shall therefore focus on the two topics that
have been the principal object of our attention - first
the situation in Syria, and secondly the Middle East
peace process. They are radically different situations,
but at this point they have one thing in common, namely,
the recognition that the road towards reconciliation
begins by bringing the conflicting parties to the table
to talk to each other, and, eventually, to seek agreement
through direct negotiations. That is the logic behind
the initiative known as "Geneva II", and underlies
the imperative that it must be the parties directly
affected - Israel and Palestine - that define the path
that will lead to the two-State solution, allowing them
to live in peace behind secure borders.

I turn now to the situation in Syria, which is a
human tragedy of immense proportions and a source
of ongoing frustration for my delegation. Clearly, the
Security Council has failed to meet its basic purpose,
first, to avoid and then to put an end to the spiral of
violence that has destroyed lives, communities and
the cultural legacy of millennia. The anxious search
for a negotiated and peaceful political solution has
not met with success. The danger that the crisis will
spread to neighbouring countries is growing, and the
humanitarian cost has reached unimaginable levels.

In the context of this sombre scenario, our only
hope, which is fading with time, lies in the attempts
of the United States, the Russian Federation and
the Secretariat to establish the basis for the holding
of a conference that could trigger a dialogue and
negotiation between the parties. We fervently want
such a conference to take place as soon as possible and,
above all, the parties to commit themselves to seeking
a definitive solution to the conflict, which would
require a transitional authority. We do not believe that
conditions should be set for the participation in such a
gathering or preclude any possible outcome.

We also reiterate our admiration and respect for the
Governments of Jordan and Lebanon, both of which,
despite the enormous pressure they are enduring, have
maintained their borders open to the refugees from the
Syrian conflict. They more than deserve the support of
the international community.

As regards the peace process in the Middle East,
including the question of Palestine, steps have been
taken in recent months suggesting that it may still
be possible to reach a mutual agreement between the
parties and to salvage the two-State solution. The bases
that could lead to renewed talks have recently been
agreed to in the context of the diplomatic initiative of the
Secretary of State of the United States, and supported,
we trust, by the Quartet, the League of Arab States and
the European Union. The involvement of other actors
also demonstrates the sense of urgency with which a
search for a definitive solution to the conflict between
Israel and Palestine is being pursued. We hope that
both parties can show the leadership and responsibility
necessary to continue their commitment to the peace
process. We believe that the involvement of the Quartet
in this initiative is essential.

As we have done on previous occasions, we
maintain our position that both parties must avoid any
act thatjeopardizes the prospects of a peaceful solution
to the conflict. Such acts only undermine any prospect
that both peoples can live in peace and security. We
believe that the construction of new or the expansion
of existing settlements falls within this category and
constitutes a violation of international law. Naturally,
the firing of rockets from the Gaza Strip into Israeli
territory must cease totally. At the same time, we hope
that in the short term the economic restrictions being
placed on the Gaza Strip will be reduced, since they
undercut any prospects of progress.

Finally, we believe that the international community,
through the United Nations, is duty-bound to condemn
all and any violation that may undermine the peace
process. The parties involved cannot be expected to act
responsibly when the international community ignores
flagrant violations committed by either.

