Mr. Gomersall (United Kingdom): I would like first
of all to read out a statement just made by the British
Foreign Secretary, Mr. Robin Cook.

"Today, the United Nations has responded to
Saddam Hussein's provocation swiftly, strongly and
unanimously. We have met his defiance with a
tightening of sanctions. I hope Saddam will now
return to his senses and let UNSCOM. resume its
work. If he does, and Iraq then complies with all the
relevant United Nations resolutions, the process for
lifting sanctions can be started. But as the resolution
just passed has made clear, if he continues to defy
the will of the United Nations, further measures will
be taken. Saddam Hussein should be in no doubt
that the Security Council is united and determined."

My Government is glad that the Council has
unanimously delivered an unequivocal message to Iraq.
There is no short cut to the lifting of sanctions. The
international community is determined that Iraq should
comply fully with the Council's resolutions.

 

We are meeting today in the face of the latest and
most serious challenge which we have faced from Saddam
Hussein since the end of the Gulf War. At stake is the
future of the Special Commission (UNSCOM), the body
charged by the international community to rid Iraq of its
illegal weapons of mass destruction. This body was
established in resolution 687 (1991), whose acceptance by
Iraq brought an end to the Gulf War. The Government of
Iraq, through its unacceptable decision of 29 October, has
tried to dictate to the United Nations the terms and
conditions of how the Special Commission fulfils its
mandate. All such conditions are totally unacceptable to my
Government.

The successful completion of the work of the Special
Commission is essential for maintaining regional and
international peace and security. The latest report of the
Special Commission makes clear that there is still much
work to be done, especially in the chemical and biological
weapons areas, before it can report that it has accomplished
its task and the world is free from the threat posed by Iraqi
weapons of mass destruction. It is therefore crucial that it
be able to continue its work, without restrictions or
conditions. We want UNSCOM. to complete its task.

We welcomed the initiative of the Secretary-General
and the efforts of others to persuade Iraq to reverse its
decision of 29 October. We agreed to go the extra mile in
the hope that Saddam Hussein would listen to reason. The
Iraqi response was a flat "no" to the Secretary-General, his
representatives and the Security Council. The Council has
now acted unanimously to send a clear message to the
Government of Iraq that it must comply fully and
unconditionally with all relevant resolutions.

We have heard a lot of special pleading from Iraq on
the damage caused by six and a half years of sanctions. I
will not repeat the steps which we and other Governments
have taken to alleviate the suffering of the Iraqi people. We
will continue to see that resolutions 986 (1995) and 1111
(1997) are implemented as intended. But what we would
ask Mr. Tariq Aziz: For whose purposes did Iraq invade
Kuwait? For whose purposes did it unleash its weapons on
its own people? For whose purposes has Iraq continued to
obstruct the efforts of the Special Commission to draw an
end to its investigation and destruction of Iraq's weapons of
mass destruction?

It is clear that the humanitarian interests of the Iraqi
people and their welfare have been subordinated to the
misguided policies of the leadership and that it is these
policies which are the fundamental problem. We therefore
welcome the Council's endorsement today of the simple
message that the only route to normalization for Iraq lies
through the implementation of the Council's resolutions
and that the Council will remain fully determined to
achieve this.

