Ms. Amos: In the interests of time, I will not
respond to all of the detailed points that have been
made, but I can reassure Council members that I have
taken note of them. I would, however, like to respond
to some of the recurring themes raised during the
debate.

First, I welcome the support expressed for the
informal Expert Group and the interesting proposals
from a number of States to expand its use and
increase its utility to the Council. I also welcome
today's adoption of the updated aide-memoire
(S/PRST/2010/25, annex).

I am encouraged that the majority of speakers
have referred to the core challenges that we face in
enhancing the protection of civilians and the need to
redouble our efforts in that regard.

Many speakers have underlined the need for
compliance by parties to conflict with their obligations
to protect civilians and the significance, in that respect,
of ensuring the accountability of those who violate the
law. Attention has been drawn too to the importance of
safe, timely and unimpeded humanitarian access to
those in need.

I welcome the focus on compliance and access.
However, if we are to succeed in improving both,
humanitarian actors must be able to engage with
non-State armed groups. A small number of States have
expressed the concern that humanitarian engagement
may afford such groups legitimacy. That is not
supported by our experience. Only through engagement
can we promote and seek improved protection for
civilians and have consistent and safer access to those
in need.
I also took note of the support for improving
monitoring against established benchmarks and
indicators. I consider that a key gap in more successful
implementation of protection measures on the ground
and in reporting progress made in protecting civilians.
I will report back to the Council on that in my next
report.

Some speakers have raised concerns over the
inclusion of certain situations in the report of the
Secretary-General and their characterization as
situations of armed conflict. Whether a situation
constitutes armed conflict is determined by the facts on
the ground. It is determined on the basis of criteria
developed in the jurisprudence of international
tribunals. Such a determination does not affect the
legal status of the parties involved; it does not equate
the parties in any way. And it should not be seen as
judging or condemning the conduct of the parties. It is
also completely separate from the determination of
whether the use of force is legal and whether the
actions of the parties comply with international
humanitarian law and human rights law.

Finally, reference has been made to the nature of
contemporary conflict marked by the struggle against
non-State armed groups in so-called asymmetric
warfare. I acknowledge the complexity of those
challenges and would emphasize that international
humanitarian law is no less relevant in those contexts.
32

The law is very clear: all parties to conflict must
at all times take the necessary steps to spare the
civilian population and distinguish at all times between
civilians and combatants. Moreover, violations by one
party, including non-State parties, do not permit or
justify violations by any other party to that same
conflict. Indeed, the nature of contemporary conflicts
and the increasing prevalence of conflict in densely
populated settings require ever more vigilance from the
parties and determined efforts to respect and to ensure
respect for their obligations under the law.

I look forward to working with the Council in the
coming years in addressing protection-of-civilians
concerns and issues relating to humanitarian action
more broadly, as well as working with individual
Member States. I also look forward to continuing the
practice of bringing particular situation-specific
concerns to the attention of the Council following my
country missions.

