Mr. Yoda (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French):
Burkina Faso welcomes the international community's
continued interest in the peace process in C6te
d'Ivoire. We would like to express our encouragement
and gratitude to various partners, in particular the
United Nations for its outstanding role in the
implementation of the Ouagadougou Political
Agreement and its supplementary agreements.

We believe that today's political, social and
economic environment in Cote d'Ivoire is a cause for
optimism concerning a definitive resolution of the
crisis. The smooth implementation of the identification
and registration effort, which was completed on 30
June 2009, the ongoing work on the electoral register
with a view to the upcoming publication of the
provisional electoral list, and the current pre-campaign
electoral atmosphere in the country are all signs of a
return to peace. The relevant recommendations
emanating from the fifth meeting of the Permanent
Consultative Framework and from the seventh meeting
of the Evaluation and Monitoring Committee, which
09-53141
were held in Ouagadougou on 18 May and 9 August
2009, respectively, have provided impetus to the
implementation of the Political Agreement.

Significant progress has been made in numerous
areas thanks to the resolve of political stakeholders in
Cote d'Ivoire. Efforts are continuing to implement
various measures provided for in the Ouagadougou
Political Agreement and its supplementary agreements.

Adhering to the entirety of the electoral timeline
for the holding of the first round of presidential
elections on 29 November 2009, as scheduled by cote
d'Ivoire's political leaders, continues to be the main
challenge to the peace process. However, the upcoming
publication of the provisional electoral list illustrates
that there is still room for hope. The basic goal remains
the holding of credible, free, transparent, democratic
and indisputable elections that will allow Cote d'Ivoire
to overcome the crisis once and for all. To that end, it
is crucial to focus on the essential tasks that arise in the
run-up to elections.

In that regard, there should be special focus on
how potential disputes over the provisional electoral
list are handled. It is also imperative to provide the
Integrated Command Centre with the necessary means
to implement the comprehensive programme for
elections security.

With regard to certifying the electoral process, we
welcome the commitment of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for care d'Ivoire to
continuing to fully exercise the mandate conferred
upon him by the Security Council. We assure him of
the readiness of the facilitation to pursue relations of
good cooperation with him in order to ensure the
holding of free, open, transparent and democratic
elections. However, properly resolving pending
military issues, ensuring the re-establishment of State
administration throughout the country, and securing
financial support for the holding of elections and
demobilization efforts are crucial to the success of the
elections.

The results to date in the implementation of the
Ouagadougou Political Agreement have been very
encouraging. Nevertheless, there are still many
complex challenges to be overcome in order to achieve
the ultimate goal. However, they are not
insurmountable so long as the political will of Ivorian
political stakeholders to work towards peace continues.
09-53141
We are therefore convinced that the date of
29 November continues to be viable.

The recent official visit to C6te d'Ivoire by
President Blaise Compaore, President of Burkina Faso
and Facilitator of the inter-Ivorian dialogue, was an
opportunity to take note of the determination of Ivorian
political actors to hold the elections on the scheduled
date. In that regard, the Facilitator foresees the holding
of a meeting of the Permanent Consultative Framework
in mid-November in order to provide decisive impetus
to the electoral process. I take this opportunity to
reiterate the gratitude of the Facilitator to the entire
international community for its support of the peace
process.

Respect for the full electoral timeline requires the
mobilization of all stakeholders concerned in order to
carry out the tasks set out therein within the deadlines
established. Burkina Faso calls on the international
community, and in particular the Security Council, to
pursue its efforts and to support the process to end the
crisis to its conclusion. We are prepared to join our
efforts with those of the international community and
all Ivorian stakeholders in order to succeed together in
returning peace to Cote d'Ivoire.

In conclusion, I would like to thank the
delegation of France for its preparation of the
presidential statement, which Burkina Faso fully
supports.

