Mr. van Walsum (Netherlands): We are here to listen
to the Secretary-General and to other delegations, especially
those that represent African organizations such as the
Organization of African Unity or the Economic Community
of West African States, so I shall be very brief.

The Secretary-General stated very clearly that
Mr. Sankoh must be held accountable and we have heard
this echoed by all other speakers.

Last year, the signing of the Lorne Agreement was
welcomed with a sense of relief. At last there seemed to be
hope for peace in Sierra Leone. But parts of the Lome
Peace Agreement clearly did not bode well for future peace.
Important Government posts were set aside for perpetrators
of monstrous crimes, and a blanket amnesty was decreed
for them with, almost unbelievably, a special amnesty
provision for Mr. Sankoh.

The Netherlands delegation expressed its dismay at
these provisions at the time because we felt they conveyed
a dangerous message, namely, that committing unspeakable
atrocities pays. We proposed to include a reference to our
concerns in resolutions 1260 (1999) and 1270 (1999) but
we were prevailed upon not to insist because any talk of
accountability was likely to prolong the war.

Today, we can only wonder to what extent the
international community's failure to insist on the
Revolutionary United Front's accountability may have
contributed to Mr. Sankoh's current foolhardiness. In any
case, it must be clear that someone who flouts the Lome
Agreement cannot invoke that same Agreement as a basis
for his impunity. The Lorne Agreement binds only the
countries that are parties to it. The Security Council
cannot deviate from what it has repeatedly and solemnly
stated with regard to the need "to bring to justice, in an
appropriate manner, individuals who incite or cause
violence against civilians in situations of armed conflict
or who otherwise violate international humanitarian and
human rights law." (S/PRST/1999/6)

We continue to hold the view that without full
accountability for the atrocities committed in Sierra
Leone, no lasting peace can be established in that country.

