Mr. Arguello (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
First, allow me to congratulate you, Sir, on your
endeavours as President of the Security Council for the
month of August and to thank you, above all, for
convening this open debate on a subject to which my
country attaches great importance. I would like to take
advantage of this opportunity to reiterate to you and,
through you, to the other members of the Security
Council the need for the Council to hold frequent open
meetings so as to allow all Members of the
Organization to express their opinions and to interact
with the Council members.

Likewise, I would like to thank Ms. Susana
Malcorra and Mr. Alain Le Roy for their briefings this
morning, which we followed with great attention.

The United Nations is the foundation of the
international collective security system, which, as
stated in the Preamble of the Charter, was established
to save succeeding generations from the scourge of war
and, to that end, to unite our strength to maintain
international peace and security. However, to mitigate
the non-functioning of the mechanisms intended to
carry out that purpose it was necessary to create
peacekeeping operations.

Since 1948, peacekeeping operations have
become one of the Organization's most effective tools
for fulfilling its mandate, which is why my country
considers that, in their various forms, they continue to
be a valid and essential tool to maintain and strengthen
international peace and security. At the same time, we
believe that, ultimately, the Organization's success will
be proved the day its presence, in particular through
the deployment of peacekeeping operations, is no
longer necessary.

Mindful of that objective, my country particularly
values the efforts being made in various areas of the
Organization to strengthen its capacity to deploy
peacekeeping operations as well as to improve the
coordination of activities on the ground. Likewise, my
country believes that the French-British initiative
regarding the Council and the concepts set out in the
New Horizon non-paper contribute valuable elements
for consideration in the debate on the future of
peacekeeping operations.

There is a consensus among States Members of
the Organization regarding the need to strengthen the
capacity of the United Nations to advance
peacekeeping operations. There is also agreement that
peacekeeping operations are not and cannot be a sole
solution applicable to all conflict situations.

If the Organization is to be more effective in its
action, we must refine the tools that we have been
using for the past 50 years. We must incorporate
elements that will enable us to more precisely measure
progress in the implementation of mandates. What is
more, we must establish peacekeeping operations with
a clear plan setting out successive stages that will
enable us to lay the groundwork for an exit strategy
and avoid precipitous withdrawal, which could oblige
us to return later and remain indefinitely on the ground.
We must act bearing in mind the need to strengthen
local institutions so that local authorities can assume
responsibility for their own security at the appropriate
time.

Here, it is important to recognize the fact that,
nearly 10 years after it was issued, the Brahimi report
(S/2000/809) remains valid. We should recall that
among its principal recommendations is the necessity
that mandates be appropriate and realistic and that they
include provisions for the security of personnel and
civilians, with solid rules of engagement.

Sufficient financing for operations and the
centrality of training of personnel continue to be
absolutely essential factors. In that regard, I wish to
emphasize that, in Argentina at the national level, we
have two training centres for personnel participating in
United Nations peacekeeping operations - one for
police officers and the other for military personnel.
Likewise, in 2007, convinced of the need to strengthen
cooperation in the training of personnel participating in
peacekeeping operations, we established a network in
the region comprising the training centres of Argentina,
Brazil, Chile, Ecuador, Guatemala, Peru and Uruguay.

In addition, my country believes that in order to
improve the effectiveness of United Nations action, it
is necessary to improve the communication and
coordination between the members of the Security
Council, who formulate the mandates of peacekeeping
operations, and the Secretariat and the troop- and
police-contributing countries, which must carry out
those mandates on the ground.

Argentina is a member of the Group of Friends of
Haiti, together with other countries in the region and
various members of the Council. The Group of Friends
of Haiti is a clear example of the importance of this
kind of informal mechanisms. By considering the draft
resolutions that, inter alia, renew the mandate of the
mission in Haiti, the Group helps to maintain the
support of Member States for the mission, ensuring
both the continuity of efforts and the unity of
objectives.

Permit me to conclude by highlighting the fact
that in 2008 my country celebrated 50 years of
uninterrupted participation in United Nations
peacekeeping operations. Currently, nearly 900 troops
deployed in six missions throughout the world continue
to demonstrate Argentina's clear commitment to the
maintenance of international peace and security.

