Mr. MacKay (New Zealand): The New Zealand
Government deeply regrets the breakdown of the
diplomatic process and the hostilities that are now
under way. While we acknowledge the endeavour to
avoid civilian casualties, the loss of life on both sides
is of deep concern. It is also essential that the Geneva
Conventions be adhered to by all parties.

But our immediate focus now should be to the
future. Our common objective must be to end
hostilities as quickly as possible, so that the risks to the
Iraqi people are minimized and so that their
humanitarian needs can be met. Those involved in
initiating the military action appear to have
acknowledged their responsibilities in this respect in
their planning. The broader international community
needs to respond urgently to the United Nations call for
humanitarian relief funds. New Zealand has already
announced a contribution to relief agencies, and we are
looking at other ways we can help as needs and means
become clearer.

The Security Council must move to resolve
practical issues relating to the oil for food programme
in these circumstances. The programme needs to
continue to operate effectively. The Secretary-General
has made proposals for its continuing effectiveness,
and the Council should work quickly to reach an
agreement on this.

This has been an extremely divisive and difficult
period for the Council. We want to see it now set aside
those differences and focus on the welfare of the Iraqi
people. There will be a challenging period of
reconstruction in Iraq ahead. It will be in the longer-
term interest of us all to see the United Nations itself
fully engaged. The United Nations has the experience
to contribute and to help define the international
architecture for the delivery of humanitarian and
reconstruction assistance. Member States will expect
the Council to work cooperatively to facilitate United
Nations involvement.

New Zealand will, of course, work with others in
the United Nations to assist with this humanitarian and
reconstruction response.

