The Secretary-General: I thank the presidency
of the Council for organizing a discussion on this
important topic.

The protection of children in armed conflict is a
litmus test for the United Nations and the
Organization's Member States. It is a moral call and
deserves to be placed above politics. It requires the
innovative and fearless engagement of all stakeholders.

Over the past 12 years, that issue has been placed
firmly on the international agenda, beginning with the
groundbreaking report of Graca Machel and the
establishment of the mandate of my Special
Representative for Children and Armed Conflict. Since
then, a solid body of international legal standards has
been elaborated. The Rome Statute of the International
Criminal Court classifies the recruitment of children
into fighting forces as a war crime and a crime against
humanity. The International Labour Organization's
3

Convention No. 182 defines child soldiering as one of
the worst forms of child labour. The African Charter on
the Rights and Welfare of the Child outlaws child
soldiering, and the Optional Protocol to the Convention
on the Rights of the Child established 18 as the
minimum age for children's participation in hostilities.
With that foundation in place, the international
community is now shifting its focus from standards-
setting to an era of application and the provision of real
protection. Indeed, we have seen encouraging signs
that impunity for crimes against children will no longer
be tolerated.

For its part, the Security Council held its first
open debate on the subject in 1998 and has returned to
the matter again and again. Its resolutions have focused
in particular on six grave violations drawn from
international humanitarian law: abduction, sexual
violence, child soldiers, killing and maiming, attacks
on schools and hospitals and the denial of humanitarian
access. The Council has established a Working Group
on Children and Armed Conflict, and the monitoring
and reporting mechanism is now operational in
15 situations of concern. I am also encouraged to note
that action plans from several parties to conflict have
been secured, in which those parties agree to the
release of children from their ranks.

Of course, once children are released, we must be
ready to support their full and sustainable reintegration
into society, in line with the good practices set out in
the Paris Principles. I call on the international
community to strengthen its support for Governments,
development partners and others involved in such
efforts, including through the mobilization of the
necessary resources. Let us not forget that poverty and
underdevelopment can make children more vulnerable
to exploitation and violence.

I commend the Council for its work on this issue,
which is beginning to yield results. Yet we have only
begun to scratch the surface. I hope that the Council
will consolidate the gains that have been made and
move forward to cover all grave violations and all
situations of concern. Political will is crucial. Only
concerted international efforts involving all United
Nations partners will be capable of meeting the needs
of children living in situations of armed conflict. I look
forward to working with the Council so that children
can be safe and, above all, so that they may dream of a
better future for themselves, their families and their
communities.
