Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): I would like to thank Under-
Secretary-Generals Valerie Amos and Alain Le Roy,
High Commissioner Navi Pillay and the Director-
General of the International Committee of the Red
Cross, Yves Daccord, for their briefings. I also express
my appreciation to the Secretary-General for his in-
depth report (S/2010/579), which provides a useful
overview of the progress made and challenges found in
protecting civilians over the past 18 months and
contains many important recommendations. We are
pleased that the Council has taken up a number of them
in the presidential statement adopted this morning
(S/PRST/2010/25).

Among the several aspects of such a wide-
ranging issue as the protection of civilians, I would
like to focus my comments today on three points:
reporting, peacekeeping and the root causes of conflict.

Comprehensive though they may be, periodic
reports of the Secretary-General on the protection of
civilians have not provide detailed enough information
on the protection aspects of all agenda items where
such aspects are of concern. Brazil would therefore
welcome more information on protection issues in the
Secretary-General's country-specific reports to the
Council, as also mentioned by the Permanent
Representative of Austria. Such enhanced reporting
could also use information that is already available to
the United Nations and currently shared in a more
limited and informal fashion, for instance with the
Security Council informal Expert Group. Broadening
and deepening the treatment of protection issues in
country-specific reports by the Secretary-General
would also allow protection information to be
disseminated to the wider membership.

I reiterate the great importance that Brazil
attaches to the protection of civilians by peacekeepers.
I also reaffirm our firm belief that the protection of
civilians is a multidimensional task that must be
pursued by all mission components in the field and by
both the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and
the Department of Field Support at Headquarters. The
breadth of protection of civilian mandates is such that
fulfilling them as completely or as perfectly as one
would like will always be challenging. Yet every effort
must continue to be made to ensure that peacekeeping
missions have the capabilities and resources they need
to discharge their protection responsibilities as
effectively as possible.

My delegation very much appreciates the
emphasis in the presidential statement
(S/PRST/2010/25) adopted today on the critical issue
of communication between peacekeepers and local
populations. A positive two-way dialogue is an
indispensable element of a comprehensive and
effective protection strategy. Valuable resources, such
as United Nations radio stations and town hall
meetings, must be used more consistently and in an
integrated and mutually reinforcing manner. Moreover,
for protection strategies to work, the information
gathered from dialogue with local populations must
feed into effective information-management and crisis-
response mechanisms. The situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo is a case that quickly comes to
mind in that regard. The production of intelligence to
inform protection strategies is vital. Without
intelligence, operations will be limited to reacting and
responding to events.

One of the main challenges in effectively
protecting civilians is balancing the imperatives of
immediate protection, such as defending civilians from
physical violence and ensuring humanitarian access,
with attention to long-term protection. In many cases,
this means combining traditional peacekeeping
components with political and economic tools to
address the root causes of conflict. In that context, my
delegation welcomes and agrees with the Secretary-
General's emphasis on the role of housing, land,
natural resources and property issues in conflicts.
Addressing such critical issues is key to achieving
sustainable peace and development, which is, in the
long term, the best way to ensure the protection of
civilians. While those are fundamentally internal issues
and the legal basis for the Council to address them is
narrow, as they are not explicitly security issues, the
international community must be prepared to give
political, material and technical support to their
resolution in conflict and post-conflict situations in
order to enhance the prospects for sustainable peace.

After a decade of experience, we are still
struggling to effectively protect civilians in armed
conflicts. While recognizing the progress made in
defining policy and building a framework for the
protection of civilians, my delegation concurs with the
Secretary-General and with Mr. Yves Daccord that we
must now redouble efforts to enhance protection on the
ground.

