Mr. Dabouis (spoke in French): I have the honour
to speak on behalf of the European Union and its 28
member States. The candidate countries Turkey, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro,
Serbia and Albania; the country of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidate Bosnia and
Herzegovina; as well as the Republic of Moldova and
Georgia, align themselves with this statement.

I would first like to thank the Secretary-General for
his report (S/2017/604), and his Special Representative
for her briefing. I also thank the Permanent
Representative of Haiti for his statement.

On 13 April, the Security Council adopted
resolution 2350 (2017), which extended the mandate
of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH) for a final period of six months. The
resolution also laid down the legal framework for the
transition to the United Nations Mission in Support of
Justice in Haiti (MINUJUSTH), whose role will be to
strengthen the rule of law and the police and to protect
and promote human rights. MINUSTAH has played a
key role in the area of security for the people of Haiti
for almost 10 years, including ensuring security during
especially difficult times such as, for example, the most
recent elections. It continues to be a very important part
of security in Haiti.

The prolonged institutional instability that has
marked the electoral process in Haiti seems finally
to be over. The completion of the process has enabled
Haiti to elect a President transparently and credibly and
by an ample majority. The National Assembly has been
renewed, while a new Government has been formed
with a programme that has the Assembly's confidence.
We welcome the country's return to constitutional order
in accordance with the will of the electorate, despite the
enormous difficulties it has to deal with and its systemic
weaknesses. This is a vital ingredient in ensuring
that Haiti will be able to cope with its many political,
economic, social and environmental challenges.

As has been the case for the past few years, the efforts
of all concerned to ensure stability and security will be
crucial to the process of consolidating democracy. A
key element will be ensuring that consensus is reached
on thorough reform of the electoral system if Haiti is to
avoid new crises and regain the people's trust. In order
to see that happen, the European Union will continue
to be a faithful partner to the Republic of Haiti and
remains committed to supporting it in consultation
with its partners during this delicate phase, including
through the necessary reforms.

We acknowledge the closure of MINUSTAH and
its replacement by a smaller entity, MINUJUSTH,
which will focus on supporting the Haitian National
Police. In that regard, we have given serious attention
to Security Council members' comments at the 29 June
briefing on the Council's visit to Haiti a few days before
(see S/PV.7994). In our view, the security situation in
Haiti is still very fragile, and we therefore consider
it vital to complete the work of strengthening and
professionalizing the Haitian police. When the time
comes during the transition period, we must be sure
that the necessary continuity has been well prepared
for. The security and well-being of citizens, and the
stability of the country as a whole, depend upon it. In
that context, we welcome the special attention that the
Secretary General's report gives to rule-of-law and
human rights issues, and we urge that they be revisited
in greater detail with clarification of the stages and
responsibilities involved.

In conclusion, I would like to once again express
the European Union's appreciation for the contribution
that MINUSTAH has made to security and to building
democracy and the rule of law in Haiti. We also expect
to see some critical reactions to various aspects of the
Mission, since it is important to learn from the past if
we are to improve our effort in the future. We welcome
the preparations for the transition, which should be
carefully designed to ensure continuity for our joint
efforts. Now the sequence of events that will ultimately
leave the Haitian State fully responsible for the security
and protection of its citizens must be planned, detailed
and launched. Special attention must be given to respect
for human rights on the security front and to access to
impartial justice for all. It is essential to ensure that
the Haitian police and judicial system will be properly
prepared to take over all the tasks currently being done
by the United Nations Mission.

Together with the United Nations and the
international community, the European Union will
support the Haitian authorities in consolidating their
commitment and efforts to secure a better future, in
an atmosphere of peace, democracy and well-being, for
the Haitian people.

