The President (interpretation from Arabic): I should
like to inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Angola in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the discussion of the item on the
Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, I
propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite that
representative to participate in the discussion without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of
the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Do Nascimento
(Angola) took a seat at the Council table.

The President (interpretation from Arabic): The
Security Council will now begin its consideration of the
item on its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance
with the understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council deplores the serious
deterioration of the situation in Angola and calls for
an immediate cessation of hostilities. It reaffirms its
firm commitment to preserve the unity, sovereignty
and territorial integrity of Angola.

"The Security Council reiterates that the primary
responsibility for the failure to achieve peace in
Angola clearly lies with the leadership of the Uniao
Nacional Para A Independencia Total de Angola
(UNITA). The persistent violation by UNITA, under
the leadership of Mr. Jonas Savimbi, of its obligations
under the 'Acordos de Paz' (5/22609, annex), the
Lusaka Protocol (S/l994/l44l, annex) and relevant
Security Council resolutions, in particular those
obligations related to the complete demilitarization of
its forces and the extension of State administration
throughout the national territory, has seriously
undermined the peace process.

"The Security Council demands that UNITA
comply immediately and without conditions with its
obligations and reiterates that only a political
settlement, on the basis of the relevant agreements
and resolutions, will bring a lasting peace to Angola.

"The Security Council, in this context, urges
the Government of Angola and UNITA to cooperate
fully with the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, including by facilitating his
contacts with all those key to reviving the stalled
peace process and to implementing the Lusaka
Protocol. It expresses concern at the public
statements blaming the United Nations for the recent
aggravation of the security situation in the country.
The Council reiterates its full support to the United
Nations Observer Mission in Angola (MONUA),
whose mandate has been extended until 26 February
1999, and emphasizes that both the Government of
Angola, which concurred with the extension of this
mandate, and UNITA have an obligation to
guarantee the safety and freedom of movement of
MONUA personnel.

"The Security Council expresses its deep
concern at the worsening humanitarian situation in
Angola and emphasizes the responsibility of the
Government of Angola and the leadership of UNITA
to facilitate humanitarian assistance efforts,
guarantee the safety and freedom of movement of
humanitarian workers and permit an independent
assessment of the needs of the civilian population, to
be carried out swiftly in any part of the country as
necessary. The Council also expresses concern at the
plight of those most vulnerable groups, such as
children, women, the elderly and internally displaced
persons, who are particularly at risk and need special
protection.

"The Security Council urges the Government of
Angola and the leadership of UNITA to ensure full
respect for international humanitarian, refugee and
human rights law.

"The Security Council underscores the need for
the full and immediate implementation of the
measures against UNITA contained in resolutions
864 (1993) of 15 September 1993, 1127 (1997) of
28 August 1997 and 1173 (1998) of 12 June 1998.
It expresses deep concern at recent reports of
violations of these measures, particularly those
 

related to arms and diamonds, and expresses its
intention to follow up on these reports.

"The Security Council expresses its grave
concern at reports that aircraft were shot down over
UNITA-controlled areas and demands full cooperation
by all concerned, especially UNITA, in the
investigation of these incidents, including of the fate
of the crews and passengers.

"The Security Council remains actively seized of
the matter."
This statement will be issued as a document of the

Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/1998/37.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present

stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The Security Council will remain seized of the

matter.

The meeting rose at 4 pm.

