Mr. Cabactulan (Philippines): The Philippines
congratulates Brazil on the outstanding leadership of
the Security Council this month. My delegation also
commends His Excellency Antonio de Aguiar Patriota,
Minister for External Relations of Brazil, for his
initiative in spearheading this open debate on the
maintenance of international peace and security and the
interdependence between security and development.

Security is a precondition for development, and
without sustained development, security cannot be
achieved. It may seem a play on words, but the reality
is that these two issues are intertwined and symbiotic.

The founding fathers of the United Nations
realized this when they established this Organization.
The Security Council itself recognized this through its
1997 presidential statement (S/PRST/1997/46), which
resulted in the Secretary-General's 1998 landmark
report (S/1998/318) on the causes of conflict and the
promotion of durable peace and sustainable
development in Africa.

Peace and security cannot be maintained and
sustained without socio-economic development being
pursued in parallel. This idea provided the rationale for
creating the Economic and Social Council as one of the
main pillars of the United Nations and other
specialized agencies to precisely address the issue of
poverty and underdevelopment. We now call this the
soft power approach to promoting peace and security.

We cannot overemphasize the importance of this
soft power approach in our collective efforts to prevent
the surge of violence, lawlessness and armed conflict
in certain parts of the globe. In our interdependent and
highly networked world, any tension and conflict in a
country or region can easily spill over to others,
negatively affecting not just the peace and stability of
distant countries but also their economy and livelihood.

The presence of security in a country or region
does not necessarily spawn development, but pursuing
development without security is virtually impossible.
In extreme cases, underdevelopment and the lack of
security is a recipe for chaos and disaster.

This assertion is clearly supported by the World
Bank's report on conflict, security and development,
which has a direct bearing on our discussions here
today. The World Bank's annual World Development
Report always provides valuable insights into key
issues of global importance, and this year's edition will
undoubtedly fuel much discussion and, hopefully,
result in better international policymaking, including
within the Security Council. From my initial
understanding of the report, it appears that the World
Bank has tackled the issue of security in a slightly
broader sense than is the custom in the Security

Council. The prism of analysis looks at conflict,
fragility, terrorism and organized and transnational
crime as the sources of violence that gravely affect
development.

Just to cite a concrete example of transnational
crime as it relates to development, the current state of
affairs in Somalia is now a major concern for the
international community and the Philippines. The
breakdown in peace and order and the inability of the
Somali Government to manage security and foster
socio-economic development in that strategic and
resource-rich country triggered the intensification of
maritime piracy, not just in the country's coastal waters
but also in the Gulf of Aden and the wider Indian
Ocean. Pirate attacks on cargo ships have increased in
volume and violence in recent months. As we speak,
138 Filipino seafarers on board 12 ships are being held
captive by Somali pirates. We pray for their early and
safe release so that they can return to their beloved
families and resume normal lives.

The Somali case clearly demonstrates that
security and development go hand in hand. The failure
to address that country's security and development
needs will have a negative impact on East Africa and
the wider world. In our region of the world, the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN),
whose members are all developing countries, has long
recognized the detrimental impact of transnational
crime on development. Consequently, an ASEAN Plan
of Action to Combat Transnational Crime was
developed on the basis of discussions that began in the
early 1970s.

The challenges that lie ahead of us are many and
daunting. The world expects the Security Council to
lead the way and to take the necessary steps to tackle
and resolve the major root causes of unrest and conflict
in our times. Preventive diplomacy and the soft-power
approach are in most instances more effective than
military engagement. But that will require a totally
different perspective and innovative approaches to
peace and security, such as the ongoing peacebuilding
architecture review that we all support.
Once again, the Philippines commends you,
Madame President, and the Security Council. Our open
debate today has planted the seeds for a greater
understanding of the subject and has laid the
foundation for a more comprehensive and synergistic
approach to the interdependence between security and
development - the twin issues that will continue to
dictate the agenda of the United Nations in the years to
come.

