Mr. Syihab (Indonesia): Allow me first to join
others in expressing our appreciation to the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. James
Swan, the Special Representative of the Chairperson
of the African Union Commission for Somalia,
Mr. Francisco Madeira, the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Ms. Pramila Patten, and
Ms. Amina Arale for their very comprehensive
and insightful briefings. My statement will focus
on three issues, namely, the political, security and
humanitarian situations.

First, I wish to commend the Somali Government
for its determination in executing its comprehensive
reform agenda. We welcome progress in preparing for
the inclusive 2020 or 2021 elections, promoting internal
reconciliation and putting Somalia on a clear path to
debt relief. In that regard, we concur with Special
Representative Swan that the next meeting of the
Somalia Partnership Forum, to be held in October, will
provide an opportunity for Somalia and international
partners to agree on priority areas for action on
Somalia's State-building priorities between now and
2020. Encouraging development is also evident in the
Federal Parliament, as both houses announced the
resumption of their cooperation.

However, Somalia continues to face persistent
challenges on multiple fronts, many ofwhich require the
continued engagement of the international community.
In the meantime, we must not allow the political impasse
between the Federal Government and the federal
member states to jeopardize the many hard-won gains.
The two must engage in a sustained and constructive
dialogue to resolve their outstanding differences and
accelerate progress in key political processes. Any
dispute, including on the regional electoral process,
must be resolved in a peaceful manner.

My delegation reaffirms its support for the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia (UNSOM) in
promoting a Somali Government-led inclusive political
settlement and providing advice for peacebuilding
and State-building efforts. We are pleased to see
a collaborative relationship between the Somali
Government and UNSOM, in line with their mutual
commitment to strengthen cooperation.

Secondly, the ongoing threat from Al-Shabaab,
including its enhanced use of improvised explosive
devices and other asymmetrical attacks, remains
the most serious security challenge for Somalia. My
delegation condemns the recent attacks by Al-Shabaab.
We are very concerned that Al-Shabaab continues
to maintain its capacity to recruit, train and deploy
fighters, while raising considerable financing. The
continued presence of the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM) and the need for predictable and
sustainable financing cannot be overstated.

We recognize the gains made from the joint
operations by the Somali National Army and
AMISOM. in Lower Shabelle, including the capture
and establishment of forward operating bases and the
delivery of stabilization efforts in recovered areas.
Accelerated and coordinated international assistance
is essential to support force generation and build a
well-trained and well-equipped Somali security force
that will eventually be able to take over security
responsibilities. We look forward to the joint threat
assessment by the African Union and the United
Nations, in line with resolution 2472 (2019), to inform
AMISOM's reconfiguration plan.

Thirdly, efforts to promote peace and stability
in Somalia are taking place against the backdrop
of a troubling humanitarian situation and resource
constraint. Around one third of the population requires
humanitarian assistance. There are 2.2 million people
who are facing acute food insecurity. With 2.6 million
internally displaced persons, Somalia has one of the
world's largest displaced populations. Humanitarian
assistance is a daunting but essential task. Yet only
40 per cent of the 2019 Somalia humanitarian response
plan is funded. We call on the international community
to contribute more. The operating environment for
humanitarian actors in Somalia continues to be
challenging and dangerous. All sides must respect
international humanitarian law, protect civilians and
provide access for humanitarian assistance.

Let me also emphasize that our collective efforts
should always be aimed at saving human lives. In that
regard, we commendthe efforts ofSpeciaI Representative
Patten in engaging with national authorities and other
stakeholders with a view to assisting the Government
of Somalia in developing a national action plan to end
sexual violence in conflict.

I should like to conclude by reaffirming Indonesia's
solidarity with our Somali brothers and sisters in their
quest for peace and stability, as well as our respect
for Somalia's sovereignty and territorial integrity. We
pay the utmost tribute to UNSOM, the United Nations
Support Office in Somalia, AMISOM. and all actors
working to bring about peace and stability in Somalia.

