Mr. Alsaidi (Yemen) (spoke in Arabic): Allow
me to begin by congratulating you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of October. We are confident that your
well-known wisdom will help the Council reach the
objective for which this meeting has been convened.
Allow me also to express our sincere thanks to Sir
Emyr Jones Parry, the Permanent Representative of the
United Kingdom, for the wise manner in which he
conduced the deliberations of the Security Council last
month.

Israeli forces committed an unprecedented act of
aggression this morning in an attempt to drag Arab
States into military confrontation and to mask the
heinous crimes perpetrated by the Israeli Government
against Palestinians, in the hopes that such an action
would draw the region into further conflict. This is an
act of aggression whose like we have not seen against
the Syrian Arab Republic in 30 years. Israel has failed
to suppress the Palestinian intifada, so it has tirelessly
endeavoured to export its internal crisis to
neighbouring States. What is truly regrettable,
however, is that Israel has not yet understood that a just
and comprehensive solution, the establishment of a
Palestinian State with East Jerusalem as its capital and
Israeli withdrawal from occupied Syrian and Lebanese
territory constitute the solution that will prevent any
further bloodshed and war in the region. Israel's act of
aggression against the Syrian Arab Republic is a
challenge to international law and to internationally
binding resolutions calling on Israel to withdraw from
the occupied Arab territories. The Republic of Yemen
therefore condemns that act of aggression. Yemen also
expresses its solidarity with its brothers in the Syrian
Arab Republic and in the Lebanese Republic.

We call upon the international community, and
primarily upon the Security Council and the United
Nations, to condemn this senseless act of aggression.
We also call upon them to adopt resolution to deter any
further premeditated escalation by Israel. In our View,
such escalation would pose an ominous threat to peace
and stability in the region.

