Mr. Diarra (Mali) (spoke in French): At the
outset, allow me, Madame, to express my delegation's
pleasure at seeing you personally presiding over this
meeting. Your presence here - in addition to the fact
that your country, Chile, is a member of the Human
Security Network, on behalf of which I have the
honour to speak - attests to your interest to human
rights in general and in the rights of the child, in
particular.

I have the honour to speak on behalf of the States
members of the Human Security Network, namely
Austria, Canada, Chile, Greece, Ireland, Jordan,
Norway, the Netherlands, Slovenia, Switzerland,
Thailand and my own country, Mali - which holds the
chairmanship of the Network - and South Africa in its
capacity of observer on the item under review, entitled
"Children and armed conflict".

Allow me to congratulate the Secretary-General
of our Organization, as well as his Special
Representative, Mr. Olara Otunnu, on the high quality
of the report published in document S/2003/1053,
pursuant to Security Council resolution 1460 (2003). I
should also like to thank Ms. Carol Bellamy for her
statement.

Resolution 1460 (2003), adopted just under a year
ago, noted with alarm the persistence of the
phenomenon of children's recruitment and use by
parties to armed conflicts. The Security Council invited
the Secretary-General to enter into dialogue with those
parties with a view to putting an end to such practices.
To that end, the parties were to provide information on
steps they had taken to halt the recruitment or use of
children in armed conflicts. The Council also expressed
its intention to consider taking appropriate steps to
resolve this issue it if deemed that insufficient progress
had been made upon the review of the next Secretary-
General's report.
It is evident, however, that, a year since that
warning was issued, little has been achieved in the way
of results. In fact, the recruitment and use of children
have persisted over the course of the period under
review. The Secretary-General's report even mentions
new parties that have taken up those criminal practices.

Of course, there have been perceptible advances
in recent years in terms of the scope of international
instruments. I refer, notably, to the nearly universal
Convention on the Rights of the Child and to the
Optional Protocol to the Convention on the
involvement of children in armed conflict.

The Rome Statute and the International Labour
Organization's Convention No. 182 (1999) on the
worst forms of child labour also merit mention, as do
regional conventions, such as the African Charter on
the Rights and Welfare of the Child. The Geneva
Conventions and their Additional Protocols are a
reference point for international humanitarian law on
the subject. This legal arsenal is supplemented by the
Plan of Action - best known under the name "A
World Fit for Children" - adopted in 2002 by the
General Assembly at its twenty-seventh special
session, as well as by Security Council resolutions, the
latest of which is resolution 1460 (2003). The Human
Security Network's member countries encourage those
States that have not yet done so to ratify the
instruments aimed at protecting children exposed to
armed conflict.

The development of international standards is not
an end in itself. The ultimate objective and major
challenge lie in their implementation. To that end, in
2002 the Secretary-General proposed the ushering in of
an era of application. The report submitted to the
Council highlights some of the concrete measures
adopted, such as the inclusion of children's concerns in
peace accords; civil society involvement in actions
aimed at raising public awareness and advocacy; the
adoption of guidelines and plans of action, such as
those adopted by the Economic Community of West
African States in 2000 and by the European Union in
2003; the establishment of national commissions for
the benefit of war-affected children; the adoption of
measures aimed at curbing the illicit exploitation of
natural and other resources in war zones; the
consideration of children's specific needs in
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programmes; and the deployment of child protection
advisers in peacekeeping operations.

Those measures, however systematically applied,
should not make us lose sight of the particularly
egregious violations and abuses committed against
children over the past year. I call to mind not only the
phenomenon of child soldiers - an occurrence further
aggravated by the illicit proliferation of small arms -
but also the massacre and mutilation of children,
particularly of girls, that have taken place. Armed
groups have continued to abduct children, either to
forcibly enlist or sexually exploit them, as is often the
case for young girls, or to press them into forced
labour. Children also fall victim to landmines and
unexploded ordnance.

In the face of these overwhelming facts, the
Human Security Network has endorsed the
recommendations contained in the Secretary-General's
report. Its members are particularly convinced that
credible deterrence can be achieved in particular
through action by the Security Council, which we
invite to take measures targeting parties and their
accomplices, including the imposition of travel
restrictions on their leaders, their exclusion from any
governance structures and amnesty provisions before
the International Criminal Court, and a ban on the
export or supply of small arms. The recommendations
require, finally, addressing the key factors that
facilitate the occurrence and recurrence of conflicts -
their root causes.

The Human Security Network also urges
widening the scope of the list of parties that recruit or
use children in armed conflict to cover all situations
where these parties exist. Wherever they occur,
international crimes committed against children in a
situation of war merit the attention and action of the
international community, in particular those of the
Security Council.

The Network is committed to pursuing concrete
action in order to prevent violations of children's rights
where conflict situations emerge, in the course of a
conflict or post-conflict, and in terms of assistance to
child victims of armed conflicts. This was inspired by
the overall goal of bridging the gaps between universal
human rights standards and their implementation and
between programmatic concepts and systematic
response on the ground. With this in view, the Human
Security Network has developed a support strategy that
identifies a set of operative principles, including
enhanced follow-up and training and an alarm function
in cases of child rights violations.

The Network has also developed a child rights
training curriculum which serves as a comprehensive
check list that contains relevant principles, guidelines
and references, as well as exemplary training modules,
so as to be adaptable to specific situations on the
ground and to target groups to be trained. The
programme has been made available to the Secretary-
General and to intergovernmental and non-
governmental organizations. We express the hope that
it will be used effectively in training courses held by
all the agencies and programmes of the United Nations
and other interested organizations and Governments.

In this regard, in its medium-term work plan for
2003-2005 - adopted in Graz, Austria - the Human
Security Network has committed itself to working with
United Nations bodies, Governments that share its
vision, regional and subregional organizations and civil
society towards the implementation of current
commitments, which for the most part are integrated
into the Secretary-General's report.

Finally, the Human Security Network welcomes
the reaffirmation, contained in paragraph 15 of the
report under review, of its commitment to children in
armed conflicts.

