Mr. Thoms (Germany): Let me first of all express
my sincere condolences and heartfelt sympathies to
Foreign Minister Timmermans and the people of the
Netherlands, to Foreign Minister Bishop and the people
of Australia, and to all others who had nationals,
relatives, family or friends on Flight MH-l7. Two
hundred and ninety-eight lives have been tragically lost.
We are mourning the loss of four of our citizens. My
Government is profoundly grateful for the condolences
offered by so many delegations during the past few
days.

Germany is shocked over increasing evidence that
the airliner was, indeed, shot down. This would be an
outrageous crime. What is happening currently at the
crash site is unacceptable and shameful. The world
is horrified to witness the abominable circumstances
prevailing there.

We welcome the adoption of resolution 2166 (2014)
and we call on all actors to ensure that unhindered
access and security for Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe monitors and international
experts are guaranteed; that there are no further
impediments to the recovery of the bodies of victims
and their transport to Kharkiv, as proposed by the
Netherlands; that any further tampering with possible
evidence is ruled out; and that an international
investigation is started as soon as possible, leading to a
full and thorough examination. We welcome the efforts
undertaken by the Government of Ukraine to this
effect so far. We also applaud President Poroshenko's
announcement today of a unilateral ceasefire around
the crash site - a step that must be reciprocated
immediately by the separatists.

The downing of MH-l7 has added a global
dimension to the conflict in eastern Ukraine. It renders
a peaceful and negotiated resolution of the crisis even
more urgent. The conflict in eastern Ukraine must be
brought to an end. We urgently need a bilateral ceasefire
and the beginning of real negotiations. Germany
has constantly worked to further such a peaceful
solution, as demonstrated by innumerable talks and
meetings between Chancellor Merkel, Foreign Minister
Steinmeier and other senior leaders.

Unfortunately, the Russian leadership has so far
failed to discourage the separatists from their illegal
acts and to stop the infiltration of weapons, fighters
and ammunition. We expect Russia to finally bring its
influence to bear on the separatists, to prevent Russian
citizens fromjoining them, and to immediately take all
necessary measures to ensure effective control of the
Russian-Ukrainian border. We also expect Russia to
fully support the investigation concerning the causes
of the crash, particularly by exerting the necessary
pressure on the separatists to immediately stop
destroying evidence and to give full and unfettered
access to Ukrainian and international investigators.

