Mr. Omaish (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): The
Jordanian delegation expresses its warmest gratitude
for the opportunity to discuss the very important topic
of the protection of j ournalists in conflict situations. We
thank the Deputy Secretary-General and Mr. Christophe
Deloire and Ms. Marianne Pearl.

Significant progress has been achieved in developing
legal criteria on the protection of journalists and media
professionals in armed conflict since the adoption ofthe
Hague conventions of 1899 and 1907, the 1949 Geneva
Conventions and their two Additional Protocols of 1977,
and General Assembly resolution 2677 (XXV) of 1970.
Those actions comprise decisive steps in ensuring the
protection ofjournalists in situations of armed conflict.

However, in spite of such efforts, we continue

to witness unprecedented increases in the number of
victims among international journalists and media
professionals. The year 2014 witnessed the deaths of
67 journalists and the abductions of 119, as well as the
exile of 139 journalists and the imprisonment of 221.
In 2015, 25 journalists have already been killed. Many
womenjournalists have been victims of the worst forms
of sexual and physical violence.

Such organized and methodical targeting of
journalists and other media professionals is a violation
of international humanitarian law. The reason for such
attacks is the very nature of journalists' work and their
attempt to cover conflicts and wars, most of which are
no longer traditional conflicts and in which at least one
of the parties is a non-State actor. That has led to a
significant increase in the level of violations committed
against journalists and has strengthened impunity for
those responsible.

One of the most significant challenges the international
community faces is ensuring accountability and fighting
against impunity for those responsible for violence and
crimes against journalists and media professionals and
their headquarters during a conflict. We would like
to reiterate, in this context, the need for the United
Nations to help the States experiencing armed conflict
to establish and rebuild national legal institutions
and witness-protection programmes so that States
can prosecute those responsible for attacks against
civilians, including journalists. In certain conditions,
and to guarantee accountability and protection for
such individuals, the international community must
set up commissions to investigate, monitor and gather
information on crimes committed against journalists
and media professionals during armed conflict.

Jordan believes that the time has come to consider
once again a draft international convention on the
international protection of journalists and those in other
dangerous professions. Such a convention would include
provisions and mechanisms to protect journalists
and media outlets during armed conflict in order to
ensure that they are provided with the highest possible
protection. In the same vein, in terms of combating
violations and crimes against journalists and media
professionals, those responsible for such acts who have
enjoyed impunity must be prosecuted. That must be a
priority for the United Nations. Peacekeeping operations
should therefore also work with State institutions and
parties to the conflict to raise awareness among them of
the legal protection that journalists benefit from during
armed conflict and the risks that such attacks pose
for them. More pressure needs to be exerted to ensure
greater protection for journalists and prosecution of
those responsible for attacks against them.

The goal of the journalists and media professionals
working in conflict zones is to have direct access to
events as they unfold in order to shed light on the
facts and communicate them in a frank, objective and
complete manner. We would like to reiterate what
has already been stated today, namely, the need for
media organizations to offer training programmes for
journalists and media professionals who are covering
events in conflict areas. It is essential to bolster their
ability to deal with the kind of dangerous situations that
they could face and to ensure their physical protection
in carrying out their job. Along the same lines, efforts
must be promoted to ensure the highest quality medical
service to journalists and media professionals who are
victims and to offer them the necessary psychological,
social and legal support when they are wounded in the
course of their work.

Finally, allow me to reiterate Jordan's support for
the protection of civilians, including journalists and
media professionals in armed conflict. We pay tribute
to those who have paid the ultimate sacrifice in trying
to shed light on the facts during armed conflict and
thus promoting international peace and security.

