Mr. Gayama (Congo) (spoke in French): The
delegation of the Congo thanks you, Sir, for allowing
the Council today to make an initial assessment of the
work of the Peacebuilding Commission, which held its
first meeting on 23 June 2006. We welcome the
participation in this important debate of the President
of the Economic and Social Council, the Chairman of
the Organizational Committee of the Peacebuilding
Commission, and representatives of the World Bank,
the International Monetary Fund, bilateral partners of
the Commission and, of course, the Peacebuilding
Support Office, headed by Ms. Carolyn McAskie.

The creation of the Peacebuilding Commission
was a major step taken as a result of a joint effort and
as the expression of a desire clearly identified by world
leaders at the 2005 World Summit, in accordance with
the purposes and principles of our Organization. When
we recall that the official launch of the Peacebuilding
Fund took place as recently as 11 October 2006, we
must note along with many others who have spoken
here today that the Peacebuilding Commission is just a
little child that has not yet reached adolescence. If a
useful assessment is to be made at this stage, it should
focus on the level of attention and assistance that the
Commission enjoys from those who created it, rather
than on the Commission itself, which is still seeking to
define itself.

This debate is timely nonetheless. It allows us to
consider potential interaction and synergies between
the various partners and stakeholders in this common
undertaking. Such a collective and constructive
commitment should be made on the basis of adherence
to a few simple rules, including respect for the
Commission's mission, as established under resolution
1645 (2005); appropriate distribution of work among
the partners involved in order to avoid duplication; and
open and transparent debate within the Commission in
order to promote concerted action to mobilize all local,
regional and international actors.

Of course, such a comprehensive approach to
addressing issues should take into account the elements
associated with integrated strategies for peacebuilding
and the re-establishment of peace. But it should also
take into account those related to conflict prevention.

In order to gain full credibility, the Peacebuilding
Commission must not give the appearance of being just
another body cut off from reality. The Commission has
the advantage that its main area of operations is in the
field, where it is called upon to be a catalyst that can
mobilize all the necessary elements to ensure the
success of its mandate.

Two countries are currently on the agenda of the
Peacebuilding Commission: Burundi and Sierra Leone.
Country-specific meetings devoted to those countries
began on 13 October 2006. In that regard, concerns
arose in connection with the mobilization of financial
resources - a matter that has now become a central
issue. Moreover, it is clear that there continue to be
social and political obstacles, which pose real threats to
stability in those two countries.

The high level of youth unemployment and the
critical state of social infrastructure in both Burundi
and Sierra Leone can lead to popular unrest, which
could give rise to unforeseen problems. In addition, the
security services do not yet have the necessary means
to ensure public order. However, in order to build
peace it is clear that we will need to enhance the
capacities of those countries, especially their economic
and social capacities. We must also help them improve
the administration of public resources, combat
corruption, ensure respect for human rights, promote
good governance and the rule of law and launch and
nurture national dialogue.

Economic progress and improved living
conditions for the people concerned are therefore
essential to the stability we seek. The 2005 World
Summit Outcome (General Assembly resolution 60/1)
correctly recalled that development, peace and security
and human rights are interlinked and mutually
reinforcing. Thus, a situation that may appear to be
back to normal can always conceal threats that can
emerge if we ignore certain unforeseen elements. The
experience in Timor-Leste has been a good lesson for
us all in that regard.

It is clear from its first experiences in Burundi
and Sierra Leone that the Peacebuilding Commission
needs sustained support from the international
community. To that end, we will have to put in place
strategic options adapted to each situation. Of course,
the areas for intervention must be identified in
partnership with the Governments concerned and with
civil society, while at the same time endeavouring to
establish a hierarchy of priorities.

Experience in these first cases should provide a
basis for improving the Commission's intervention
mechanisms. Success in those cases will make it
possible for us more clearly to consider future cases,
such as Timor-Leste, Haiti the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and others. We should not lose sight of the
fact that, to be reliably successful, all peacebuilding
efforts should have the support of the relevant national
authorities, provided progressively beginning at a
specific stage of the undertaking.

The Peacebuilding Fund is certainly not a
development fund as such, but it should be able to
assist us in finding solutions to various urgent
problems in a holistic way. It is therefore important to
ensure that the Fund has predictable resources. The
appeal made by the Secretary-General at the launching
of the Fund - in which he emphasized the vital
importance of donor support, without which the
objectives of the Peacebuilding Commission will not
be achieved - should be repeated today, and that is
what we are doing.

The new Commission will of course not replace
existing bodies. The principle of complementarity is at
the very heart of the interaction between the various
bodies of the United Nations system. In order to
benefit from that, however, the Security Council, the
General Assembly and the Economic and Social
Council should all continue to adapt to ensure that they
too achieve a level of effectiveness that meets both
their Charter objectives and general expectations. In
other words, to use the metaphor of parent and child,
the existence of the Peacebuilding Commission should
ease the conscience of those who established it, just as
parents pass on to their children the dreams and
ambitions that they themselves could not realize. The
Commission would otherwise be just another body in
an insufficiently reformed international institutional
framework. Of course, that is not what we want.

We believe that the establishment of the
Peacebuilding Commission is a promising beginning as
regards the reform of the entire United Nations system.
In conclusion, we therefore appeal for enhanced
coordinated efforts to ensure the continued growth of
the Peacebuilding Commission in the spirit of
coherence so badly needed by the United Nations
system today.

