Sir Emyr Jones Parry (United Kingdom): It is
very good to have Mr. Covic with us today. I would
like to pay tribute initially to the work he has done in
southern Serbia and in working with Kosovo in the
past.

I think that we have to recognize that a series of
violent incidents have been occurring over the past
month and longer. We must condemn the attack at
Gorazdevac, the killing of the Serb fisherman on 11
August and, indeed, all the acts of violence and
extremism. Every effort must be made to track down
and bring to justice those responsible.

The United Kingdom, too, would like to offer its
condolences to the families of those who have died.

We are very glad that the new Special
Representative, Mr. Holkeri, has taken up the initiative
to set up an inquiry, and we wish him every success as
he takes on his mission.

I welcome the prompt action by the Kosovo Force
(KFOR), which deployed 300 men as a strengthened
and visible presence. It is vital that all Kosovo citizens
should be able to feel safe and secure. Minority
communities need and are entitled to credible,
guaranteed and full protection.

Having listened to Mr. Covic, I would, however,
like to reject any sense of inertia by the international
community. I think that charge is unfounded and unfair.
We welcome the condemnation of the attacks by the
Provisional Institutions of Self-Government, the
Kosovo Assembly and the President. Although trust
between the two communities is at a particularly low
level, isolated acts of extremism must not be allowed to
polarize Kosovo society any further. We welcome the
statement of the Serbian Prime Minister, Mr. Zivkovic,
encouraging Kosovo Serbs to stay in Kosovo. But the
rash of inter-ethnic incidents shows only too clearly the
potential for localized violence to spread. So we urge
all parties to show restraint. The extremists must be
defeated and cannot be allowed to undermine Kosovo's
future.

We support the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) in its
clamp down on terrorist activity in Kosovo. The United
Kingdom supports the reform and the development of
the Kosovo Protection Corps (KPC) as a civilian
emergency organization. We are clear too that further
action will and should be taken against any members of
the KPC who are involved in terrorism. But the United
Kingdom does not share the view that the time has
come to wrap up the KPC, because it fulfils a useful
function.

Let us be clear that the attack on terrorism and
extremism is without favour. The United Kingdom has
always emphasized that the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) must
prosecute those responsible for serious crimes, without
discrimination, and must bring to justice all those
involved.

I share with Mr. Covic the wish that we should all
bring perpetrators of war crimes indicted by ICTY and
ensure their extradition to The Hague. That applies
equally to those indicted who may happen to be living
in Serbia today.

The Thessaloniki Summit announced the
Belgrade-Pristina dialogue on technical issues, and it is
important for that dialogue to continue. But let us face
it; that dialogue is not helped by a background, a
barrage of positions on Kosovo, with rounds of
accusation and counter-accusation between Belgrade
and Pristina. Public pre-positioning of this sort is only
likely to fuel violence. Those in responsible positions
must ensure that their rhetoric matches the gravity of
the situation.

The discussions now envisaged between Belgrade
and Pristina are not to be confused with the final status
negotiations set out in resolution 1244 (1999). Like
Germany, the United Kingdom strongly supports
"standards before status". While we welcome what is
being achieved on standards, we must all acknowledge
how much still needs to be done. Our goal is a stable,
peaceful and multi-ethnic Kosovo that will reduce its
dependence upon the international community while
moving towards prosperity.

The international community has made clear its
rejection of ethnic cleansing in Kosovo. The conflict in
Kosovo in 1999 was not intended to produce a mono-
ethnic Kosovo. The goals for Kosovo are the same as
the goals for the countries of the region. Normal
European democratic standards must prevail. The road
to Europe cannot be built on terrorism and extremism.

Mr. Covic asked - rhetorically, I hope -
whether the international community was committed to
justice and determined to succeed in Kosovo. The
answer is self-evident. The commitment today, which
has already been alluded to by the Pakistani
Ambassador, in terms of the number of KFOR troops,
the involvement of the Organization for Security and
Co-operation in Europe (OSCE) and the part played by
the European Union - all these reflect a determination
within the United Nations umbrella to produce the
outcome we seek.

Progress in Kosovo, in Serbia and Montenegro
and in the region will be driven by Europeanization and
must advance Europeanization. There can be no violent
or unilateral attempts to dictate final status. At this
stage, the parties should be prepared to tackle technical
issues in a constructive, flexible manner, showing a
willingness to listen and to argue in a rational manner.
This is now key, particularly given the escalated
tension. We must engender goodwill, show good faith
and be transparent. That entails, in part, concrete,
credible and guaranteed full protection, in law and in
practice, for minority communities.

The right of refugees and displaced persons to
return to their homes must be accepted in theory and in
practice. Political norms and human rights must be
developed in Kosovo on a par with the best European
standards. In the view of the United Kingdom, only
then can Kosovo move forward in a stable, peaceful
manner, developing coexistence on its territory and
better relations with its neighbours.

