Mr. Shah (India): I begin, Mr. President, by
congratulating you on your assumption of the presidency of
the Security Council for the month of December 1995.
Your acknowledged diplomatic skills and experience will be
a great asset to the Council's work under your presidency.

The Council is considering today an issue that has
assumed particular importance following the increased
involvement of the United Nations in recent years in peace-
keeping operations all over the world. The growing
complexity of the operations authorized by the Council
requires effective consultations between the Council and
troop-contributing countries if the Council's mandates are
to be successfully implemented.

The system of consultations, set in motion following
the Council's statement of 4 November 1994, were the
first concrete manifestation of this requirement. This
process has now been in operation long enough for us to
review its effectiveness and to consider improvements. As
one of the principal troop-contributing countries of the
United Nations since its birth, our views would, I trust, be
taken into account in a spirit of cooperation and
constructive contribution.

With regard to the modalities of the system of
consultations with troop contributors, my delegation has
found the existing mechanism, involving meetings with
troop contributors being co-chaired by the President of the
Security Council and the representative of the Secretary-
General, quite satisfactory. The Security Council and the
Secretary-General are two important agents responsible
for the implementation of the Council's decisions.
Without the presence of the Secretary-General's
representative as Co-Chairman, along with the presidency,
the existing balance between political responsibility and
operational control, which is so necessary to make such
consultations effective, will be missing. We do not
believe that granting this task to a subsidiary body of the
Council or keeping the Secretary-General' s representative
on the sidelines will enhance the effectiveness of such
consultations.

Notwithstanding our satisfaction over the present
modality of consultations, we believe that certain
improvements and streamlining will greatly enhance the
effectiveness of the Council's decision-making capacity.
In our View, consultations should be held on a regular
basis and not necessarily just before the mandate is about
to expire or needs extension. They should be preceded by
the timely provision of detailed reports by the Secretariat.
The Secretary-General's report should be available to
troop-contributing countries at the same time as it is to
members of the Council, and consultations between
Council members and potential troop-contributing
countries should take place before the mandate of any
new operation is finalized.

It would also be useful to engage in the practice of
reviewing, updating or amending mandates of individual
peace-keeping operations in a fully transparent manner.

Before concluding, may I take this opportunity to
reconfirm India's commitment to continued participation

 

in United Nations peace-keeping operations as part of our
traditional support for and continuing commitment to the
maintenance of international peace and security, through the
United Nations.

