Mr. Takasu (Japan): I too would like to thank
Ambassador Heraldo Mufioz for his presentation of the

annual report of the Peacebuilding Commission
(S/2009/444).

I am very pleased that the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC) has continued to make steady
progress during its third year. Under the able
leadership of Chairman Mufioz the PBC has deepened
its partnership with many organizations outside the
United Nations, such as the World Bank, the European
Union and the African Union, in particular. Each of the
four country-specific configurations advanced
peacebuilding efforts, yielding good results on the
ground. For example, the Sierra Leone country-specific
configuration organized a special session in June to
help mobilize resources for that country's new
development plan. In the Central African Republic the
first strategic framework has been adopted, focusing on
the areas of security and development.

It is gratifying that the PBC is a success story of
United Nations reform. Its work is going very well, and
it has established itself as a reliable body and partner to
support countries in post-conflict recovery, linking
security and development in an integrated manner. It
enjoys the continued support of Member States and

international organizations. The Commission's strength
derives largely from the personal commitment and
engagement of the members of the Commission itself.
We therefore applaud the dedication and commitment
of the various chairs: the Permanent Representatives of
Belgium, Brazil, Canada, Chile, of course, El Salvador
and Switzerland. We are very grateful to all the
ambassadors for their work.

The Peacebuilding Fund is also becoming an
essential tool for countries emerging from conflict. I
hope the Fund will play a catalytic and strategic role to
attract multiplying resources for peacebuilding.

The Secretary-General's July report on
peacebuilding in the immediate aftermath of conflict
(S/2009/304) addressed the challenges of recovery at
the very beginning of the post-conflict stage. It
complements the work of the Peacebuilding
Commission and the Peacebuilding Fund. I commend
the Secretariat's efforts to implement the
recommendations contained in the report and look
forward to regular updates on its progress.

The year 2010 will be critical for the
Peacebuilding Commission, as it will undergo its five-
year review, as envisaged in the original founding
resolutions (Security Council resolution 1645 (2005)
and General Assembly resolution 60/180). I would like
to cite four points I consider essential, particularly in
connection with the work of the Security Council -
and, of course, they would be useful input for the
General Assembly, too, but I would like to emphasize
these four points from the Council's point of view.

First, the review should focus on increasing the
effectiveness of the Peacebuilding Commission in
achieving positive results and concrete outcomes on
the ground. It is important to reflect on the good
practices of the past three years and to maximize their
strengths and added value to mobilize non-traditional
political and financial support.
Secondly, the Security Council should increase its
substantive interaction with the Peacebuilding
Commission. Regular consultations between the Chair
of the PBC and the President of the Council, and now
briefings by the country-specific configuration Chairs
at the Council's relevant meetings, are now established
practice. But we should probably do more. I believe the
Security Council should make better use of the PBC's
capacity and potential as its advisory body. For
instance, the Council could ask the Commission to
examine in depth some specific issues that the Council
has been struggling with but cannot fully address due
to time constraints - such as security sector reform,
electoral assistance and job creation for youths after
conflicts - and report back to the Council with
findings and recommendations.

Thirdly, the Security Council should begin
considering adding new countries to the Peacebuilding
Commission's agenda. It has four countries now, but as
it makes progress in its work and the workload for
some country-specific configurations is gradually
reduced and could be streamlined, the Commission will
have capacity to take on additional countries, even in
parts of the world beyond Africa. The Council might
also consider asking the Commission to deal with
certain peacebuilding issues that are a priority for a
particular country, instead of what has been the
practice up to now of covering a country's entire range
of challenges. In doing so, the Commission might be
able to play a role more strategically complementary to
the Council.

Fourthly, we should play close attention to the
relationship between the needs of peacekeeping and of
peacebuilding. The requirements of both are fully
country-overlapping and complement each other.
Overlapping is not a bad thing; it is good, because in
recent years, the mandates of peacekeeping operations
increasingly include peacebuilding tasks such as
security sector reform, democratic governance,
electoral support, enhancing the rule of law, and
capacity-building.

Obviously the PBC does not need to be engaged
in every activity of that nature, but successful
peacebuilding efforts are essential to regulate the
strategy of peacekeeping operations smoothly. The
Commission can take charge of a country once the
main focus shifts from security to stability and
development. We need to develop a coherent strategy
to bridge gaps between peacekeeping, early recovery
and nation-building.

Lastly, with regard to the review of the
Peacebuilding Commission, it may be useful for the
Council, as one of its founding organs, to organize an
Arria Formula meeting bringing in the perspectives of
experts and interested parties to enrich our work. It
might also be appropriate to nominate a facilitator to
guide the Commission's review process, someone with
extensive knowledge of peacebuilding and capable of
forging consensus in this area. As a peace-fostering
nation, Japan is committed to contributing proactively
to the work of the Peacebuilding Commission and to its
review process.

