First of all, we would like to wish a speedy recovery to Deputy Special Envoy Khawla Matar, who was injured in an unfortunate incident in Lebanon. We are glad to hear that she is on the way to recovery. We thank Special Envoy Geir Pedersen for his briefing. We wish him and the Syrian delegation success in resuming the work of the Constitutional Committee in Geneva, starting on 24 August. We hope that the epidemiological situation will not interfere with those plans. Together with Turkey and Iran, Russia will continue to provide the Special Envoy and the Syrians with the necessary support, including within the framework of the Astana format. At the same time, we note that this is a Syrian-owned and -led process that must be safeguarded from any external interference. We consider it important to resume the political dialogue, which will facilitate the consolidation of Syrian people around a patriotic national platform and, accordingly, help to bolster the sovereignty and independence of the Syrian Arab Republic. The main obstacles to the normalization of the situation in Syria are well known - the presence of terrorists, foreign occupation of parts of the territory, attempts to overthrow the Government by means of sanctions and the playing of various ethno-confessional groups against each other. In the Idlib de-escalation zone, terrorists are sabotaging joint Russian-Turkish patrols. The shelling of positions of Government forces and nearby settlements and attacks on the Khmeimim air base are increasing, as are provocations along the M4 highway. On 17 August, an explosive device was detonated along the patrol route, which damaged a Turkish vehicle. Terrorists remain present in other parts of Syriaas well. On 18 August, a Russian military convoy was attacked while it was carrying out a humanitarian operation to deliver aid to the Deir ez-Zor area. As a result, Major General Vyacheslav Gladkikh, of the Russian Armed Forces, and Syrian military representatives died. Two Russian soldiers were wounded. All attacks by militants will be resolutely suppressed. It is obvious that lasting calm in Idlib and other Syrian provinces is possible only if the terrorists of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Shams (ISIS), Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham and their affiliates are neutralized and their support from abroad is stopped. The situation in Syria is further aggravated by the continued occupation by the United States of areas in the north-east. In addition to the problems in the United States-controlled areas related to the activities of ISIS and the dire humanitarian situation, those areas witnessed wide protests of the Arab population against the Kurdish authorities and the American occupation. We again point to the illegal extraction and smuggling of Syrian oil, which poses a threat to the environment not only in Syria but also in Iraq. We took note of the contract signed by the American company Delta Crescent Energy for the production and processing of oil in the Kurdish regions, the fact of which was confirmed by Secretary of State Pompeo. We would like to have more information about this company from our American colleagues, as well as an explanation of how this agreement complies with international law and the sovereignty of Syria. We deem this deal illegal. It is not only about the purposeful plunder of Syria's national natural resources, but also about undermining the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Syria. After all, we were reassured that the United States army would only protect oil from the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham. But it is worth mentioning that, for the sake of trading oil from Syria, the United States made an exception to its own sanctions imposed on the Syrian oil and gas sector. It is a testimony for the whole world to see how those so-called humanitarian exemptions from sanctions work. I read an article that recently appeared in the magazine Foreign Affairs with the characteristic and telling title, "The Pointless Cruelty of Trump's New Syria Sanctions". Indeed, the coercive measures have one goal: to strangle the Syrian economy and increase the suffering of ordinary Syrians with a view to inciting social protests. Humanitarian exemptions do not work, according to humanitarian non-governmental organizations themselves. We draw the attention of our Western colleagues - who speak of the need to implement resolutions 2254 (2015) and 2532 (2020) and the call of the Secretary-General for a ceasefire - to the fact that they are very picky about the statements of the Secretary-General. They remain deaf to calls to waive sanctions amid the coronavirus pandemic and refuse to include some provisions of resolution 2532 (2020) in the resolution on the extension of the mechanism for cross-border humanitarian supplies. But what sort of ceasefire is this, if the United States, which, again, illegally occupies parts of Syria, strikes at Government forces? On 17 August, United States troops fired at a Syrian army post near the settlement of Tel-Dahab in the Al-Hasakah governorate, killing and wounding Syrian soldiers. We are also concerned about the situation in the internally displaced persons camps, primarily in Al-Hol camp, where the first coronavirus cases were recorded. There are never-ending reports of riots in prisons and the escape of terrorists. Drawing a conclusion from all this, we once again call for an early end to the foreign occupation of Syria and attempts to divide the country. The only way to bring peace to Syria is to return all its lands to the control of Damascus and promote a political settlement through a comprehensive and inclusive Syrian dialogue.
