Mr. Amayo (Kenya): We are indeed honoured
to participate in this important discussion, which
highlights the role of Member States, regional
arrangements and the United Nations as important
stakeholders that need to collaborate in the prevention
and resolution of conflicts within their respective levels
of responsibilities and mandates.

My delegation wishes to congratulate you,
Mr. President, and the Republic of Cote d'Ivoire on
your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of December, and for convening
this important open debate, including the concept note
(S/2018/1063, annex) that has been circulated to guide
our discussions today.

We also welcome the briefings of Secretary-General
Guterres; Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat, Chairperson
of the African Union Commission; and Mr. Jean-
Claude Kassi Brou, President of the Commission of the
Economic Community of West African States.

At the outset, let me indicate that Kenya aligns
itself with the statement delivered by the representative
of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela on behalf of
the Non-Aligned Movement.

When it comes to the prevention and resolution of
conflicts, the roles of the various stakeholders - be
they States, regional and subregional organizations or
the United Nations - are inextricably linked. In the
pursuit ofpeaceful diplomacy, a nation State's quest for
its own sustainable peace and security can be drawn
from properly functioning, well-resourced security and
judicial and development institutions. Those institutions
also need to be inclusive. Additionally, given the
changing nature of conflicts in our contemporary
world, with many internal crises that often become
transnational, the State is forced to look within and
beyond its borders and be equipped in the areas of
mediation and conflict resolution. All of those tools,
if properly utilized, are important in strengthening
internal and bilateral relations, as well as regional
cooperation and enhanced multilateral engagements.

However, for conflict-affected countries in Africa
and beyond, those instruments of peace are not always
readily available. Therefore, during the reconstruction
phase, a State's efforts to internally build and
restructure both its institutions and its society should
be encouraged and supported within the framework of
national ownership.

Regional and subregional organizations have
proved to be important vehicles for effective and
preventive diplomacy and conflict resolution. Their
role is becoming increasingly important and should be
strengthened. Regional and subregional arrangements
have the comparative advantage of proximity in
understanding the context and layout of conflicts,
including the background and dynamics of the cultural,
economic and political processes involved. It is worth
noting that Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United
Nations recognizes the important role of regional
arrangements and agencies in the pacific settlement of
local disputes.

Unless those regional arrangements are reinforced
with sustainable and predictable funding, the efforts
of some of those entities will always be threatened by
fragility and the risk of relapse into conflict, leading
to a lack of consolidation of sustainable peace and
development. An example of that is the funding
challenge that the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) continues to face. Funding for AMISOM
remains unpredictable and unreliable. In order for the
Government of Somalia to fully establish its authority
over the entire country of Somalia, AMISOM. requires
assured resources, including funding and personnel.

It is on that principle of sustainability that my
delegation supports the African Union initiative and
the proposed Security Council draft resolution on
the financing of African peacekeeping operations
to ensure predictable and sustainable financing for
peace operations in Africa, as well as the Secretary-
General's Action for Peacekeeping initiative, which
is aimed at renewing States' political commitment to
peacekeeping operations.

The next aspect I would like to address is the
role of the United Nations. While recognizing that
the primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security lies with the Security
Council, the entire United Nations system needs to
work collaboratively through its various organs and
subsidiary bodies to ensure that the roles of States and
regional arrangements are enhanced. That support to
States and regional arrangements can be in the form
of facilitating action-oriented discussion platforms,
such as our meeting here today, or through facilitating
comprehensive peace processes, peace operations,
mobilization, the provision of resources and through
forging strategic partnerships.

Kenya continues to pursue peace diplomacy
by drawing on its own experiences in mediation,
conflict resolution and peacekeeping through bilateral
and multilateral engagement with the East African
Community (EAC), the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development, the International Conference on the
Great Lakes Region and the African Union, including
the African Peace and Security Council and the
Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa
(COMESA), among other arrangements.

The EAC is an important regional arrangement for
fostering and maintaining a conducive peaceful and
stable atmosphere, which is a prerequisite to social and
economic development. On COMESA, it is particularly
important to note that regional arrangements have
the potential to reconfigure themselves, based on
the contextual circumstances, to be more effective.
For example, COMESA is a regional economic
arrangement within Africa, with a programme on peace
and security that contributes to preventive diplomacy
and peacebuilding in the subregion. The United
Nations should therefore explore the ways in which it
can better strategically partner with those subregional
arrangements to enhance preventive diplomacy in the
region, including the Horn of Africa.

In conclusion, Kenya wishes to reiterate its full
commitment to the promotion of preventive diplomacy
through a strengthened multilateral framework that is
aligned with the norms of international law and the
principle of national ownership for a peaceful and
stable world. Indeed, that will be achieved only through
closer cooperation and good will among States, regional
arrangements and the United Nations.

