The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as President of the Republic of Azerbaijan.

Terrorism is a serious threat to international
peace and security and to the enjoyment of human
rights, fundamental freedoms and democracy, political
independence, sovereignty, territorial integrity and the
social and economic development of all Member States.
Azerbaijan strongly condemns terrorism in all its forms
and manifestations. We consider that all terrorist acts
constitute serious crimes and must be condemned and
prosecuted. Terrorists must never be allowed to try to
establish a pretext for their actions. All terrorist acts
are unjustifiable regardless of their motivation.

Terrorism has a changing nature and character. In
many instances, it is inseparably linked to aggressive
separatism, extremism and organized crime. Areas
affected by armed conflict - especially territories
under foreign military occupation - create conditions
conducive to networking between terrorists and those
acting in such territories.

Azerbaijan has been affected by terrorism in
several ways, including as the direct target of
externally sponsored terrorist activity. The Republic of
Armenia committed dozens of terrorist acts against the
civilian population and infrastructure of Azerbaijan, as
a result of which over 2,000 Azerbaijanis have lost
their lives. Armenia orchestrated those acts with the
direct involvement of its security agencies and by
using international terrorist groups. During the active
phase of the Armenia-Azerbaijan Nagorno-Karabakh
conflict, Armenia widely practiced the use of terrorist
acts against the civilian population, in conjunction with
military aggression, to achieve ethnic cleansing. Those
acts of cruelty culminated in February 1992 in the
annihilation of the population of the town of Khojaly,
where 613 innocent people perished, including children,
women and elderly people. More than 100 women and
63 children were killed. Armenia also targeted civilians
far beyond the conflict zone, by masterminding
terrorist acts against public transport and critical
infrastructure, such as the bomb explosions in the Baku
metro in 1994 and others.

Although today we have largely been able to
neutralize the terrorist threat coming from Armenia, the
risk of terrorism posed by that country remains high.
We still encounter statements openly made endorsing
certain terrorist acts as a legitimate military tactic,
including the targeting of civilian infrastructure,
especially Azerbaijan's water reservoir dams and oil
pipeline networks. Such attacks will definitely result in
hundreds of thousands of casualties among the civilian
population. Elements of international terrorist
organizations have been integrated into Armenia's
security and defence sector. It is appalling to see a
country that claims to share European and universal
values venerating operatives of international terrorist
organizations as heroes, and even erecting monuments
to them.

The policy of the ethnic cleansing of Azerbaijanis
has resulted in the occupation of 20 per cent of the
internationally recognized territory of Azerbaijan,
creating more than 1 million refugees and internally
displaced persons, who have been forced to leave their
homes. The Security Council has adopted four
resolutions demanding the withdrawal of Armenian
troops from the occupied territories. Unfortunately, for
almost 20 years those resolutions have been ignored by
Armenia.

The occupied territories of Azerbaijan represent a
source of grave concern in terms of the linkage among
terrorism, separatism, extremism and organized crime,
including drug trafficking, money laundering and the
illicit supply of arms to the occupied territories of
Azerbaijan. In addition to the terrorist threat from
Armenia, Azerbaijan continues to face the risk and
threat posed by international terrorist groups. The
proximity of our country to volatile regions makes the
threat even more imminent for us. It is, therefore, no
coincidence that Azerbaijan has been undertaking
comprehensive national measures and actively
contributing to international efforts to curb terrorism.
Being a proponent of the indivisibility of security,
Azerbaijan has been an active contributor to the
international counter-terrorism coalition.

Although the international community has made
remarkable achievements in countering terrorism, more
should be done to prevent and combat the scourge. The
absence of a clear definition of terrorism in
international law hampers the efforts of the
international community to bring to account not only
individual terrorists and organizations but also States
that promote, support or finance terrorist activities. In
that regard, Azerbaijan stresses the importance of
reaching agreement on a comprehensive convention on
international terrorism to serve as an effective
instrument to combat terrorism. Achieving agreement
on a definition of terrorism and a convention on
international terrorism could effectively address some
outstanding issues, including the issue of getting States
to refrain from organizing, financing, encouraging,
providing training or otherwise directly or indirectly
supporting terrorist activities.

Such an agreement should precede open and
holistic discussions on the root causes of terrorism. We
need to pay due attention to that issue within the
ongoing international efforts, including through United
Nations mechanisms, to address issues of social and
economic development and education. Low levels of
education, coupled with economic hardships, are
factors that facilitate the work of terrorist propaganda,
which is often promulgated through misinterpretations
of religions.

The war on terrorism should not be used to target
any particular religion or culture. Today, we are living
at a time of heightened religious awareness, which in
certain instances takes on exaggerated forms and
sometimes is maliciously exploited to fuel conflicts on
ethnic, religious or cultural grounds. In recent years,
the unacceptable "Islamophobia" emerging in some
countries confirms the vital necessity of joint efforts
and dialogue to counter instances of defamation and
misconceptions.

Azerbaijan does its best to contribute to the
dialogue among civilizations. Our country hosts
numerous events aimed at creating a better
understanding among representatives of various
religions. Azerbaijan is a multinational,
multi-confessional country, where people of many
nationalities and practitioners of all religions live
together in peace and harmony. The multicultural
dialogue we enjoy in our country can serve as an
example of the peaceful coexistence of people of
differing religious backgrounds. Azerbaijan is a
country of tolerance, and we highly value our varied
heritage and the multicultural legacy of our past. Today
we are increasingly working to create a spirit of
partnership and fraternity among our many
nationalities and religions.

Economic development is one of the most
important aspects of the fight against terrorism,
promoting good governance and improving living
conditions for populations. Over the last decade
Azerbaijan has made great economic progress. Our
country has been independent for only 20 years. But
those years have been years of reform, transformation,
development and progress. In less than 10 years our
economy has tripled. Poverty has been reduced from
nearly 50 per cent to 7 per cent. One million jobs have
been created. Many social programmes are being
implemented. The international financial institutions
recognize what we are doing. Three major international
organizations, Fitch Group, Moody's Corporation and
Standard and Poor's, recently upgraded our credit
rating. That is good sign of development, especially in
the midst of the financial and economic crisis.
Combating poverty, creating new jobs, developing
solid legislation, strengthening the rule of law, battling
corruption - all those help countries' development and
consolidate efforts to combat terrorism.

We must all join our efforts to combat terrorism.
The nature of terrorism today and its increasing
connection with other threats to international peace and
security require close international cooperation among
States, including through the establishment of a more
coordinated, coherent and systematic United Nations
approach. However, the existence of conflicts among
States, foreign military occupation and aggressive
separatism provide fertile ground for terrorism. The
international community should, therefore, facilitate
the resolution of conflicts on the basis of the generally
accepted norms and principles of international law,
particularly those relating to respect for territorial
integrity and inviolability of the internationally
recognized borders of States, and help countries restore
sovereignty over their own territories.

I would like to use this opportunity to thank all
the States Members of the United Nations for their
support of Azerbaijan's candidacy. Last October, for
the first time in our short history, Azerbaijan was
elected as a non-permanent member of the Security
Council. This is a big responsibility, and we are ready
to assume that responsibility. Azerbaijan will defend
the ideals of justice, international law and peaceful
cooperation between all countries.

We have done considerable work within our
region in order to bring countries together. Our
initiatives are aimed at the expansion of regional
cooperation in the spirit of friendship, partnership and
good neighbourliness. We definitely intend to
contribute much during our presence in the Security
Council, and I can assure our friends in the United
Nations - all Member States - that Azerbaijan will
be a reliable and friendly partner to all countries. We
want to expand our cooperation and partnership, and
we are very grateful for this support.
Our country has had a great history, culture and
traditions, but as an independent State, it has had only
20 years of experience. These recent years have been
years of transformation, development and presentation
to the world. The very fact that 155 countries
supported our candidacy showed that we managed to
present ourselves in a positive way. That demonstrates
that the international community trusts us, believes in
us, and is willing to confer this responsibility on us.

I can assure the Council that Azerbaijan is ready
for this responsibility. We will not let down those who
have trusted us, and we will do everything in order to
create a more predictable, safer world for all of us.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

The Council has before it the text of a statement
by the President on behalf of the Council on the subject
of today's meeting. I thank Council members for their
valuable contributions to the statement. In accordance
with the understanding reached among the members of
the Council, I shall take it that members of the Security
Council agree to the statement, which will be issued as
a document of the Security Council under the symbol
S/PRST/2012/17.

It is so decided.

There are no more names inscribed on the list of
speakers. The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 12:25 p.m.
