Mr. Cardi (Italy): I thank the Uruguayan
presidency for this open debate, which marks the first
anniversary since the adoption of resolution 2286
(2016) on the protection of medical and humanitarian
personnel and facilities.

I would also like to thank the briefers - first of all,
the Secretary-General for his participation in this open
debate and the introduction of his report (S/2017/414),
as well as the Vice-President of the International
Committee of the Red Cross, Ms. Christine Beerli, and
the Deputy Executive Director for Advocacy of Human
Rights Watch, Mr. Bruno Stagno Ugarte, for their
interesting and insightful thoughts and presentations.

Italy aligns itself with the statements to be delivered
by the observer of the European Union and by the
representative of Switzerland on behalf of the Group of
Friends on the Protection of Civilians.

Last year's adoption of resolution 2286 (2016) by
consensus and with a very large number of sponsors
was a landmark achievement by the Security Council. It
sent a powerful message to the international community
by calling on all parties to conflicts to give special
protection to medical and humanitarian personnel and
facilities, and to ensure accountability for violations and
ensure the concrete implementation of the resolution's
provisions, including the need to share best practices.

Italy supports the provisions of resolution 2286
(2016) as a tool to implement and increase respect for
the cardinal principles of international humanitarian
law and the 1949 Geneva Convention. We must recall
the obligation enshrined in Common Article 1 of the
four Geneva Conventions and the first 1977 Protocol,
not only to respect the Conventions, but also to ensure
respect for the Conventions in all circumstances. In that
regard, we are committed to the full implementation
of resolution 2286 (2016) and its provisions on the
protection of civilians and health-care facilities and
personnel. We will also contribute to the important role
of advocacy to that end. Today's open debate forms a
part of that effort, as well.

Since the adoption of the resolution on 3 May 2016,

we have, unfortunately, witnessed further deterioration
of the situation, with increasing attacks in which
civilians have been sacrificed in the name ofthe warring
parties, whose destructive strategies and objectives
demonstrate that the well-being and safety of their own
populations are clearly not the top priority. It happens
everyday - in Syria, in Yemen, in South Sudan, as
well as in many other places. It is time to translate
words into actions. We urge that not only must health-
care facilities and personnel not be targeted in the
context of conflicts, but also that safe and unimpeded
humanitarian passage be guaranteed to them in order to
ensure the quickest, most effective delivery of relief to
the populations in need.

Those that suffer the most devastating effects
from conflicts are often children. For that reason, Italy
condemns, in the strongest terms, attacks directed
against schools, as well as any military use of schools,
recalling in that regard the Safe Schools Declaration,
which we hope that more Member States will sign.

Conflicts bring about a vicious cycle of forced
migrations, refugee flows and human trafficking,
which all involve many children. We reiterate our deep
concern over the smuggling of migrants and human
trafficking, which endanger the lives of thousands of
people in the Mediterranean Sea. Italy will continue
to spare no efforts to combine security, solidarity and
development in order to dismantle the business model
of the traffickers and save lives at sea. That effort also
involves protecting the lives of civilians, most of whom
are fleeing conflict.

Italy supports the three protection priorities outlined
by the Secretary-General in his report (S/2017/414),
namely, to enhance respect for international law,
with particular attention to urban warfare; to protect
humanitarian and medical missions and prioritize
the protection of civilians in United Nations peace
operations; and to prevent forced displacement and
pursue durable solutions for displaced persons and
refugees. We also support the recommendations of the
Secretary-General in that regard, addressed both to
Member States and to the Council, including the need
for systematic data collection, analysis and reporting.

We would like to point out two other important
priorities regarding the effective protection of civilians.
The first is upstream, namely, prevention, and the other
is downstream, namely, accountability. Preventing
conflicts through a holistic, comprehensive approach
that addresses root causes is the best way to protect
civilians. That is why we particularly appreciate the
reference in the report to the necessity of strengthening
early warning and early-action mechanisms.

At the same time, prevention would be largely
ineffective if not coupled with downstream
accountability. Violations of international humanitarian
law and human rights principles must be investigated,
and the perpetrators must be brought to justice,
including, where appropriate, by making fuller use of
referrals by the International Criminal Court. Let us not
forget, in that respect, that the primary responsibility
for protecting their own population lies with the States
themselves and their national judicial systems.

Finally, Italy was among the first signatories and
promoters of the Kigali Principles on the Protection
of Civilians and the Responsibility to Protect, rightly
recalled in the Secretary-General's report. In that
connection. Italy contributes to capacity-building
through specific courses for peacekeepers on the
protection of civilians, which are carried out by the
Italian Carabinieri's Centre of Excellence for Stability
Police Units in Vicenza. We hope that more Member
States will subscribe to the Kigali Principles, which are
crucial, in our view, for the protection of civilians by
our peacekeeping missions.

