Mr. Soomauroo (Mauritius): I commend the
Dominican Republic for the initiative of convening
this open debate focused on addressing the impacts
of climate-related disasters on international peace
and security. We are particularly appreciative of the
concept note (S/2019/1, annex), containing pertinent
questions that have guided our discussion today. We
are very pleased to see a fellow small island developing
State chairing this important meeting.

Mauritius aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the representative of Belize, Ambassador Lois
Young, on behalf ofthe Alliance of Small Island States.
I also wholeheartedly thank the participants for their
enlightening testimonies and briefings this morning.

Bringing climatic change discussion to the Security
Council has been a major challenge, but taking decisions
that will require Member States to take proactive
decisions is an even greater challenge. We therefore
welcome this opportunity to sincerely hope that the
President's summary will lead to a concrete action plan
that Member States will eventually implement.

For small island developing States, climate
change represents an existential challenge because
of their specific vulnerabilities. However, no country
is immune to the perils of climate change. The
wide participation of countries large and small in
today's meeting is testament to the importance that
we all attach to the subject. Addressing climate
change is everyone's responsibility. It is not only an
environmental or development issue but also a complex
threat to the peace, stability and sustainability of our
planet, causing humanitarian disasters, contributing
to political violence and undermining the capacities
of Governments. The potential of climate-related
migration and displacement to cause conflict and pose
a threat to international peace and security cannot be
overstated. Such a threat can only be properly addressed
through greater cooperation, global leadership and
shared responsibilities. The Security Council is
therefore the appropriate platform to address this threat
to the security and prosperity of the globe.

We all watched with great hope the historic
breakthrough of the Paris Agreement on Climate
Change. We must, however, concede today that progress
has been largely inadequate. Climate-related events all
over the planet are worsening and becoming apocalyptic.
The era ofunprecedented global warming is upon us. A
recent report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change has confirmed that the climate-related risks to
health, livelihoods, food security, water supply, human
security and economic growth are projected to worsen
with global warming of only 1.5°C.

As far as my country is concerned, all the
climate-related indicators are showing signs of
deterioration. Rising air temperatures and sea levels,
falling levels of annual rainfall and precipitation,
the erosion of beaches - a major pillar of our
economy - grim projections of water stress and the
possible decline of our agricultural production may all
imperil our livelihood and stability.

We cannot agree more with the Secretary-General
when he says that climate change is a defining issue of
our time. Unfortunately, we see that humanity is losing
the race against climate change. Now the time has come
for us to go beyond words. For us, the Security Council
remains part of the solution to such a vexing problem.

