Mr. Jenie (Indonesia): Let me begin by
expressing my delegation's appreciation to Mr. Alvaro
de Soto, the United Nations Special Coordinator for the
Middle East Peace Process and the Secretary-General's
Personal Representative, for his comprehensive
briefing.

Just two days ago, the Indonesian delegation to
the substantive session of the Economic and Social
Council delivered a statement deploring the deepening
economic and social hardship endured by the
Palestinian people in the face of Israeli policies and
practices in the occupied territory. Against the
backdrop of recent developments in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem, in
particular the deterioration of the situation on the
ground, the convening of this meeting upon the request
of the Arab Group and the Arab League is indeed
timely and highly relevant.

We are particularly alarmed by the continued and
accelerated construction of Israel's unlawful wall in the
territory, including in and around East Jerusalem. It is a
blatant violation of international law, including
international humanitarian and human rights law, and
also a flagrant sign of disrespect for the relevant
advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice,
as well as of General Assembly resolution ES-10/15 of
20 July 2004.

Clearly, the construction of the wall violates the
economic and social rights of the Palestinian people
and is having a grave impact on their economic and
social conditions. We cannot ignore the resource
problems, including the lack of water distribution and
water pollution deriving from infrastructure and
environmental damages as the result of that policy. The
restrictions imposed by the wall have caused
waterborne diseases, not to mention the food insecurity
that will certainly affect the health of the Palestinian
people.

The Israeli plan to extend its wall around the
illegal settlements located east of Jerusalem will lead
to the confiscation of even more Palestinian land. That
will place further restrictions on the freedom of
movement of Palestinian civilians to and from
Jerusalem. As noted by Mr. Alvaro de Soto this
morning, Israel continues to build settlements in the
occupied territory in an extensive manner. Indeed, the
settlements are causing geographical fragmentation
that will eventually threaten family life and affect the
most vulnerable of the population, primarily children,
who are facing greater difficulties in accessing
education.

As we speak, more Palestinian homes, factories,
public infrastructure and agricultural land continue to
be destroyed for illegal settlements, transforming more
Palestinians into refugees in their own land. If such
Israeli policies and practices are allowed to go further,
the final status of occupied East Jerusalem in future
peace negotiations will be threatened. It may also
threaten the prospects of the two-State solution and
even the very existence of the Palestinian State.

That situation needs urgent attention from the
international community. It is my delegation's fervent
hope that the Council will take immediate action to
prevent the situation from deteriorating and compel
Israel to respect its international obligations under
international law, including international humanitarian
and human rights law.

My delegation is deeply disturbed by reports of
continuing atrocities committed by Israel in the
occupied territories, of which the majority of victims
are Palestinians, including women and children.
Violence can never provide the solution to a conflict,
as it seriously undermines the prospects for peace.

In our view, the only necessary and sustainable
option for improving the situation is an end to Israeli
occupation of Palestinian territory, including East
Jerusalem, and of the Syrian Golan. Israel must
withdraw fully from Gaza as well as from the rest of
the occupied Palestinian territories, including East
Jerusalem. That should include withdrawal from land,
sea and air spaces and it should immediately be
followed by negotiations on the final status issue.
However, the ongoing process of Israeli disengagement
from Gaza, while it is an encouraging sign, should not
be used a pretext for continued colonization of the rest
of the occupied Palestinian territories, including East
Jerusalem.

In conclusion, let me say that Indonesia remains
fully committed to the struggle of the Palestinian people
to achieve its inalienable rights and to realize its
aspiration to a secure and prosperous independent
homeland.

