Mr. Liu Zhenmin (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation thanks the French delegation
for organizing today's thematic debate. I welcome
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and thank him for his
statement. I also welcome the presence of the
Executive Representative of the Secretary-General
Michael von der Schulenburg, Under-Secretaries-
General Le Roy and Malcorra, and Special
Representatives Doss and Loj and thank them for their
briefings.

After more than six years of continuing
development, peacekeeping operations have become
the most important of United Nations measures for
maintaining international peace and security. In recent
years, rapidly changing situations have raised the bar
to success for peacekeeping operations and the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO) has
faced severe challenges. Tensions between scale and
efficiency, resources and demand, and mandates and
capacities have hindered the development of
peacekeeping operations, and there is a widening gap
between peacekeeping operations and the expectations
of Member States. It is imperative that experiences be
comprehensively assessed in order to overcome
shortcomings and improve peacekeeping operations.

In these circumstances, it is urgent and necessary
for the Security Council to discuss peacekeeping
reform, addressing transition and exit strategies as a
starting point. Transition and exit strategies not only
involve improved management of peacekeeping
operations, but are also important for the overall
coordination of peacemaking, peacekeeping and
peacebuilding. Therefore, when devising transition and
exit strategies, the Council must work from the
perspective of a peacekeeping strategy.

I would like to focus on the following points.
First, coordination between peacekeeping and
peacebuilding must be strengthened. Important as they
are, peacekeeping operations are not a panacea. The
Security Council should attach equal importance to the
political settlement of armed conflicts and the
deployment of peacekeeping operations. We can
eliminate post-conflict destabilizing elements only by
strengthening the promotion of political dialogue and
reconciliation processes, thus establishing a peace to
keep and laying the foundation for transition and exit
strategies. In addition, the Security Council must bring
into full play the good offices of the Secretary-General
and his special envoys, and support the peace
initiatives of the regional and subregional
organizations concerned.

Secondly, the division of labour between
peacekeeping and peacebuilding must be further
improved, and coordination and cooperation between
the two strengthened to ensure implementation of the
transition and exit strategies. In order to smoothly and
successfully transition from peacekeeping to
peacebuilding, the Security Council should consider
peacebuilding issues when it takes decisions on
peacekeeping operations, and at the same time clarify
the division of labour. In the transitional stage,
peacekeeping operations should create conditions
conducive to peacebuilding and facilitate
implementation of exit strategies, without duplicating
the work of either peacekeeping or peacebuilding.

The parties concerned should take the
opportunity of the upcoming comprehensive review of
the work of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) to
further consider the role of the PBC; mobilize the
participation of all United Nations operational
departments, the international financial institutions and
the relevant regional organizations; and strengthen
exchange and interaction between the PBC and the
Security Council in order to fundamentally assist the
countries concerned to end conflicts and establish
lasting peace and stability.

Thirdly, the Security Council and the Secretariat
should strengthen cooperation at the mandate,
deployment, planning and administrative levels of
peacekeeping operations. In deploying peacekeeping
operations, the Security Council must comprehensively
consider the host country's situation and the available
peacekeeping resources, formulate a clear and targeted
mandate, identify priorities and set goals for the
various stages.

The Security Council should closely monitor and
follow up implementation of the mandate and
formulate an exit strategy in a timely manner. In the
implementation of a mandate, attention should be paid
to capacity-building of the host country so as to avoid
the overdependence on the peacekeeping operations
that could make implementation of the exit strategy
impossible.

Fourthly, strong partnerships must be established
to ensure the participation and cooperation of all
parties concerned.
Continued adherence to the Hammarskjold
principles of peacekeeping is an important foundation
for the success of United Nations peacekeeping
operations at the deployment, transition and exit
stages. The host country's opinion must be accorded
important consideration, while fully taking into
account the active participation of the countries
concerned. The support and cooperation of troop-
contributing countries, donor States and regional
organizations are also very important, and their roles
must be fully integrated to strengthen coordination and
cooperation and to pool their strengths in order to
ensure the success of the peacekeeping operation.

This year marks the tenth anniversary of the
Brahimi report (see S/2000/809) and the fifth
anniversary of the founding of the PBC. The Security
Council, the Secretariat, the major troop-contributing
countries and all of the other parties have quite high
expectations for the reform of United Nations
peacekeeping operations. China is willing to join
efforts with all parties concerned in engaging in in-
depth consultations to seek consensus on the question
of the reform of peacekeeping operations and to
promote the improved organization and efficiency of
peacekeeping operations.

