I would like to thank Acting Assistant Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs Ramesh Rajasingham for his frank and insightful briefing on the humanitarian situation in Syria. I also extend South Africa's sincere gratitude and appreciation to the United Nations humanitarian agencies, partners and personnel for their tireless efforts in ensuring that the people of Syria be provided with the essential assistance they so desperately require. In that regard, we call on the international community to assist in this effort by contributing to the humanitarian programmes aimed at helping the Syrian people. I would also like to pay tribute to those humanitarian workers who have given their lives in the course of assisting the Syrian people. Since the beginning of this year, 20 aid workers have been killed, making Syria the most insecure country for aid workers for the third year in a row, with national aid workers being the most affected. More must be done to ensure the safety and security of humanitarian aid workers. As we heard this morning, the humanitarian situation in Syria continues to be of concern, with Syrian civilians, particularly children, many of whom have known nothing but conflict, continuing to endure the worst aspects of this dire situation. The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has further significantly impacted the economic and humanitarian situations. The effect of over nine years of conflict on critical infrastructure, including the health, education, water and sanitation sectors, has eroded Syria's capacity to fully respond to this pandemic. The risk to refugees and internally displaced populations are of particular concern, given their cramped quarters and limited access to necessary water and sanitation services. In this regard, the continued disruption of service at the Allouk water station is deeply troubling, as the station is the primary source of clean water for over 460,000 people in the Al-Hasakah governorate, including Al-Hol camp. South Africa therefore calls on the parties to ensure that water services are fully restored and a long-term sustainable solution found to ensure that shortages and disruptions no longer occur. Additionally, South Africa calls on all parties to respect their obligations under international humanitarian law and international human rights law for the protection of civilians and civilian infrastructure, such as schools, health facilities and water-reticulation facilities. It has now been over a month since the cross-border humanitarian assistance programme was reduced to just one border crossing, at Bab Al-Hawa. We appreciated the lengths gone to by the United Nations and its partners in making every effort to ensure that people in need feel minimal impact as a result of this reduction. However, we must also remain cognizant of the increased challenges this has brought about, making humanitarian operations in the north-west more costly, risker and less timely. South Africa calls on all actors, in particular the Syrian Government, to increase cooperation with humanitarian agencies and work towards the improvement and enhancement of all modalities, including cross-line assistance programmes. We note with appreciation the efforts for increased cross-line deliveries in the north-east and north-west of Syria, and call on all parties to continue these efforts. South Africa reiterates its call for the safe, unimpeded and impartial delivery of humanitarian aid and assistance to all who require it, in line with the provisions of international humanitarian law. In the light of the continuing humanitarian situation and the significant impact of the COVID-19 pandemic in all parts of Syria, the imposition of unilateral sanctions only further worsens the economic and humanitarian situation in the country. In this regard, we request the Secretary-General to include in his bi-monthly reports to the Security Council an overview of the effects and impact of unilateral sanctions on the humanitarian situation in Syria. In conclusion, the situation in Syria can be resolved only through negotiations and mediation. South Africa calls on all parties to exert every effort towards the full implementation of resolution 2254 (2015). In this regard, we are pleased to hear that the discussions of the Constitutional Committee in Geneva, suspended due to positive COVID-19 cases among a few of the participants, will resume today.
