Mr. Mahugu (Kenya): May I begin by saying how
honoured we feel to have Mr. Momodou Lamin Sedat
Jobe, Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs of the
Gambia, presiding over this important meeting. We also
recognize the presence of the Secretary-General among us
this afternoon.

Today's meeting is for us a recognition by the
Security Council of the tireless efforts of the
Secretary-General, whose excellent diplomatic skills
culminated in the Memorandum of Understanding we are
formally endorsing today. My delegation was acutely
aware of the difficult circumstances and extremely
challenging international atmosphere in which the
Secretary-General operated, and that is why his
achievements are so profound. My Government issued a
statement supporting the mission of the Secretary-General
on the eve of his departure and another one upon his
return endorsing the outcome of his mission. Indeed, the
Chairman of the Organization of African Unity, President
Robert Gabriel Mugabe, in a message to the Secretary-
General stated,

"The agreement you reached with President
Saddam Hussein, we all hope, will contribute
significantly to the peaceful conclusion of the

 

implementation of United Nations Security Council
decisions on the issue. The success of your mission
has brought relief and joy to all those who wish to
ensure completion of the United Nations Special
Commission's mandates and avoid further military
confrontation in the Middle East region."

The text we are about to adopt reflects a joint effort to
address the situation we are faced with. In that regard, we
are appreciative of the work done, and the flexibility
shown, by the delegations of the United Kingdom and
Japan, the sponsors of the draft resolution, in
accommodating the various views and positions.

The concerns of my delegation, which included in the
first instance the firmest possible endorsement of the
achievement of the Secretary-General, have been reflected
in operative paragraph 1 of the current draft. To us, this is
a sign of our full support and total confidence in his ability
to implement the Memorandum of Understanding in the
shortest possible time, and we are glad to note that the
Secretary-General has already embarked on this exercise.

It is also our understanding that paragraph 3 recalls the
commitment given by the Government of Iraq in the
Memorandum of Understanding with respect to according
immediate, unconditional and unrestricted access to the
United Nations Special Commission (UNSCOM) and the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) and strongly
warns against any reneging on that undertaking, which
would lead the Security Council to take further action in
line with paragraph 5.

Our concern regarding paragraph 4, on the lifting of
sanctions in accordance with paragraph 22 of Security
Council resolution 687 (1991), has also been addressed by
casting the paragraph in a more positive light, thus bringing
it more into conformity with paragraphs 6 and 7 of the
Memorandum of Understanding. Indeed, we are sensitive to
the importance of this issue to the people of Iraq, and we
believe it should be measured against the level of
compliance by the Government of Iraq. In that connection,
we hope that UNSCOM. will expedite and complete the
final phase of its work to enable the Council to reach an
early agreement on the lifting of sanctions.

As we have continually stated, we expect the
Government of Iraq to fulfil all its obligations under
relevant resolutions and to cooperate fully with UNSCOM
and IAEA. It is our fervent hope that following the signing
of the Memorandum of Understanding there will be a new
spirit of understanding that will facilitate the smooth
conclusion of all outstanding issues fully, fairly and
without delay, as the Secretary-General said.

Finally, we should like to place on record our
conviction, based on assurances we have been given by
the sponsors, that the draft resolution contains nothing
that could open the door, in any eventuality, for any kind
of action without the clear authority of the Security
Council. When all is said and done, the primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international peace
and security remains with the Security Council.

We hope that dialogue and the use of diplomatic
means will lead to constructive cooperation between the
United Nations and Iraq. It is on the basis of the above
understanding that my delegation will vote in favour of
the draft resolution before us.

