Sir John Weston (United Kingdom): The signature of
the Peace Agreement in Paris this week, following the
London Peace Implementation Conference last week, and
the imminent adoption of the draft resolution before us
sound the clarion call for the most comprehensive operation
to reconstruct a European country to be mounted by the

 

international community since the Marshall Plan half a
century ago. Sustaining that process will be vital if the
promise of peace is to become a reality.

One important aspect of that task is military in
nature. British troops have been in Bosnia from the
beginning of efforts to reach a political settlement, first of
all as part of the United Nations Protection Force
(UNPROFOR), facilitating the humanitarian aid effort to
hundreds of thousands of people and keeping alive the
chances for a negotiated settlement, even when at times
that appeared to be no more than a remote possibility.
Now British troops will take part in a multinational force
to help provide the security necessary to allow the
rebuilding of Bosnia. Out of the overall total of 60,000
troops that will make up the Implementation Force, the
United Kingdom is sending over 13,000 for approximately
one year. This is the clearest possible indication of our
full-hearted commitment to European security.

The Implementation Force's role, which has been
accepted by all the parties, will be even-handed and
limited in scope and duration. The force is not imposing
the peace settlement, but it will take the necessary action
to ensure compliance. And let me at this point also make
it clear that should it be decided that, in the execution of
its assigned tasks, the Implementation Force should detain
and transfer to the appropriate authorities any persons
indicted by the Tribunal who come into contact with it in
Bosnia, then the authority to do so is provided by the
draft resolution before us, read together with the
provisions of the Peace Agreement.

The Implementation Force will indeed be a joint
endeavour, involving troops from 32 North Atlantic
Treaty Organization (NATO) and non-NATO countries.
It will also be the first time that NATO and Russian
forces have worked together side by side for a common
purpose - a fitting way in which to mark the end of the
United Nations fiftieth-anniversary year. This gives me,
as the former British Ambassador to NATO, particular
satisfaction.

But implementation is not simply a military
operation. The multinational military force is a necessary,
but not a sufficient, condition for rebuilding the civil,
political and economic institutions and structures that
must form the basis of any society that wishes to remain
unified, stable and prosperous - for, in a word, making
peace stick. The scale of the task is daunting. It involves
providing for the safe return of some 2 million refugees
and creating the conditions by which multiethnic

 

communities can once again flourish; it involves ensuring
that the human rights of all the Bosnian people are fully
and equally respected; it involves encouraging the
emergence of an open and dynamic market economy to
underpin peace with prosperity; it involves the holding of
free and fair elections in the next six to nine months; and,
last but not least, it involves convincing not only the parties
but also other countries in the region that they must work
earnestly and urgently towards a regional arms-control
regime.

We are fortunate that this work, involving a number
of different organizations and agencies, including the
United Nations, will go forward under the able coordination
and guidance of Mr. Carl Bildt, with the backing of the
Peace Implementation Council recently established by the
London Conference. It is perhaps appropriate here to note
in particular the important continuing role for the United
Nations and its agencies, as set out in the
Secretary-General's report, in such areas as humanitarian
relief and refugees, civilian police, human rights protection,
rehabilitation of infrastructure and advice on elections and
on information networks and databases in the field of de-
mining. This shows that the United Nations remains very
much a part of the picture.

I agree with Mr. Jovanovic that the most pressing task
in the immediate future is to convince the Serb population
of Sarajevo that its future is secure and that its rights will
be respected. The same, of course, applies to all other
ethnic minorities elsewhere in Bosnia. That is why it is
essential that this Council take urgent action to get the
International Police Task Force recommended by the
Secretary-General up and running as soon as possible. The
action foreshadowed in paragraph 30 of this draft resolution
on the International Police Task Force and on the United
Nations civilian office needs to follow promptly next week.

All this adds up to a huge commitment from the
international community. That commitment now needs to be
matched by a similar determination from the Bosnian
people, and also from the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
and the Republic of Croatia, to make peace work. Failure
to do so can only jeopardize the progress painfully achieved
so far. In particular, failure by the Bosnian Serbs to
cooperate could only lead to the continuation of economic
sanctions. The challenge for each one of the Bosnian parties
is formidable. But the international community is ready to
help them face up to that challenge. The United Kingdom
intends to remain in the vanguard of that effort.

 

With the English poet, let us be optimists this time.

"And not by Eastern windows only
When daylight comes, comes in the light,
In front the sun climbs slow, how slowly,
But Westward, look, the land is bright!"

