Mr. Sardenberg (Brazil): I would like stress my
delegation's appreciation for the consensus adoption of
the resolution extending the mandate of the United
Nations Mission of Support in East Timor, in line with
the presentation of a presidential text.

The delegations of Brazil and Angola were proud
to have had the opportunity to draft the present
resolution, which guarantees the presence of the United
Nations peacekeeping force in Timor-Leste for another
six months with a view to extending its mandate for a
further six months. We are particularly glad that the
international community, through the Security Council,
could provide an adequate answer to the request of the
Timorese authorities.

More than that, the resolution adopted is a clear
commitment of the international community to peace
and security in a country that is only two years of age
and that can take pride for so many historic deeds. We
praise the people and authorities of Timor-Leste for
their tremendous achievements in so short a period of
time. We also praise the international community for
its great support for the building of this new nation. We
are sure that this one-year consolidation phase of the
United Nations presence in Timor-Leste will be of the
utmost importance to the development of Timor-Leste,
its own capabilities and self-sufficiency.

I would also like to take this opportunity to thank
all delegations for their valuable contributions during
the negotiations that ended with a rewarding consensus
on the adoption of this resolution. Strong support was
always displayed for the efforts undertaken by the
Timorese Government and people with a view to
bringing peace and prosperity to that country.

Finally, I would like to thank once again
Ambassador Kamalesh Sharma for his outstanding
work in Timor-Leste. We wish him all the best now
that he is concluding his term as Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for East Timor

and returning home for what we hope will be many The President: The Security Council has thus
good years of happiness with his family and friends. concluded the present stage of its consideration of the
item on its agenda.

The meeting rose at 12.50 p.m
