Mr. Michon (France) (spoke in French): | would first like to warmly thank our briefers for their briefings on the threat posed by Da'esh. I would also like to salute the courage of Ms. Freij, who spurs us to pursue our efforts to eliminate the terrorist threat, particularly Da'esh. The military defeats suffered by Da'esh show that the collective efforts in the fight against terrorism have made it lose its territorial foothold. But it is clear that this struggle will bear fruit only if we act everywhere and at all levels, because the Da'esh threat has not been eradicated. The group is still present underground in the Levant and has spread through its franchises all over the world. In that connection, I would like to stress four priorities that must guide our efforts to combat the influence of this terror organization. First, the Secretary-General's report (S/2020/95) notes the ongoing threat, particularly in Syria and Iraq, where Da'esh has been beaten but not completely defeated. The collective priority for the region must therefore be to continue the efforts of the Global Coalition against Da'esh in the Levant to prevent the resurgence of the terrorist group. In that context, France wishes to remain militarily engaged in Iraq, at the request of the Baghdad authorities and in full respect for its sovereignty. The fight for security, however, will not be enough so long as terrorist ideology continues to recruit adherents. It is therefore critical to prevent terrorist radicalization. That will require the commitment of all stakeholders, including on the Internet, which can be used to spread terrorist propaganda and connect terrorist groups and those who wish to join them. France is at the forefront in that fight. We are proud to have launched the Christchurch Appeal, along with New Zealand, which has already brought together about 50 countries, organizations and major Internet companies. France also supports the European Union's draft legislation requiring Internet companies to remove terrorist content within one hour. Without undermining our commitment to the freedom of expression, the aim is not to let the Internet become a sanctuary for, or tool used by, terrorist groups. While prevention is necessary, we must also adapt our legislation and mechanisms in order to prosecute and provide support for those lured by the false promises of terrorist groups. That is a complex undertaking, given the diverse profiles of the men and women concerned. For several years now, France has taken several measures to address such situations and attaches particular importance to the care and monitoring of minors who have returned or been repatriated from Syria and Iraq. Our second priority is to combat terrorist financing. As the report of the Secretary-General (S/2020/95) mentions, terrorist groups, even if cut off from their territorial base, continue to prosper, thanks to resources derived from ordinary crimes, organized fraud, kidnapping, extortion and trafficking in weapons, drugs and art, to name but a few examples. They need money to conduct their activities, recruit new candidates and spread their hate speech. Efforts made over the past 20 years to dry up those resources must continue, in line with resolution 2462 (2019). Our third priority is to work tirelessly to ensure that the reprehensible crimes committed by Da'esh do not go unpunished. Too many civilians, including women and children, have been the victims of crimes that, in addition to qualifying as acts of terrorism, might constitute, among other things, war crimes or crimes against humanity.We supported the establishment of the United Nations Investigative Team to Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed by Da'esh/Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant, through resolution 2379 (2017), and the International Impartial and Independent Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation and Prosecution of Persons Responsible for the Most Serious Crimes under International Law Committed in the Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011. That is the first step in the fight against impunity. We will continue to support those efforts so that victims can receive reparations. Lastly, our fourth priority is to ensure that the fight against terrorism is conducted with full respect for human rights law and international humanitarian law. That fight must not be used as a pretext for discrimination against any religious group. Respect for human rights, the freedoms of expression, religion and belief, and the rule of law, as well as inclusion and social cohesion, are the sine qua non of any strategy to prevent and combat terrorism. The efforts of actors, including non-State actors, constitute another condition for success in that fight. I have already mentioned actors such as companies, including Internet companies, but I would also like to recall the importance of civil society actors, whose contribution to countering hate speech and strengthening the resilience of societies is essential. In conclusion, I once again welcome Ms. Freij to our discussion today and thank her for her briefing on today's topic. France will remain committed to combating terrorism, on all fronts, in order to eradicate the threat.
