Ms. Eckels-Currie (United States of America):
First, I would like to take this opportunity to thank
Ismail Ould Cheikh Ahmed for his tireless commitment
to resolving this conflict. The United States appreciates
his leadership and advocacy for peace and security,
especially his efforts on behalf of Yemeni women and
children, the most innocent victims of this conflict.
We wish him all the best in his future endeavours and
appreciate his commitment to stay engaged in this issue.
We also thank John for his sober and sombre assessment
of the situation on the ground. We are grateful for
the work that the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs and the United Nations agencies
are doing to alleviate human suffering in Yemen.

Now more than ever, it is critical that the United
Nations continue its work towards resolving the
situation in Yemen. Yemen is witness to the world's
worst humanitarian crisis today, After three years of
brutal civil war, 75 per cent of the population is now
in need of humanitarian assistance. The most basic
Government services are missing in many parts of
the country. Houthi aggression, with the support of
Iran, threatens stability in the region, and terrorist
groups such as Da'esh and Al-Qaida have exploited
this opportunity to pursue their twisted agendas. Only
a political solution will provide the enduring peace
and stability that the people of Yemen deserve, so
we must do all we can to achieve that outcome. The
leadership of the United Nations is absolutely essential,
and the Council must give it full support to facilitate a
successful political process. But as we work towards a
political solution, it is imperative that we do everything
we can to ensure that the humanitarian needs of the
people of Yemen are met.

First, the people of Yemen must have access to
and be able to afford essential goods. Since Mr. Ould
Cheikh Ahmed's last briefing, we have been heartened
by the arrival of the four mobile World Food Programme
(WFP) cranes funded by the United States. Now that
they are in place at Hudaydah port, it is imperative
that we work to reduce the time to offload much-
needed supplies. The United States welcomes the
continued efforts by the Saudi-coalition to address the
humanitarian situation in Yemen, including a pledge to
provide $930 million by 31 March to the United Nations
and humanitarian organizations.

We will continue to coordinate with the Saudi-led
coalition, the United Nations, our international partners
and humanitarian organizations to refine the Yemen
comprehensive humanitarian operations plan, in order
to ensure that it is thorough and coordinated with the
international humanitarian response. The United States
has provided more than $760 million in lifesaving
humanitarian assistance since September 2016. We will
continue to do our part to fund those urgent needs, as
the United States always has. Similarly, we are pleased

that the Saudi-led coalition has agreed to keep the port
of Hudaydah open to all commercial and humanitarian
goods, including fuel. The most efficient and effective
way to get food and fuel to those in need is through
that port. The United States will continue to work
with countries in the Saudi-led coalition to achieve
additional improvements in humanitarian access.

In addition to addressing Yemen's humanitarian
concerns, however, we must also recognize the very real
security concerns of Saudi Arabia. As we discussed in
the Council yesterday (see S/PV.8190), it is incumbent
on the Council to directly address verifiable threats to
peace and security in the region, and the main culprit
behind them. As the Panel ofExperts report (S/2018/68)
makes clear, Iran is violating the targeted arms
embargo laid out in resolution 2216 (2015). Specifically,
the Panel found that missiles fired by Yemen's Houthi
rebels into Saudi Arabia last year were ofIranian origin
and introduced into Yemen after the imposition of the
targeted arms embargo.

We saw the Russian delegation wield a veto
yesterday to prevent the Yemen sanctions resolution
from including a mention of Iran's activities in
Yemen. However, the evidence shows quite clearly that
ballistic missiles were Iranian in origin. Last month
in Washington, DC, Council members saw at first-
hand some of the evidence implicating Iran. Eleven
Council members agreed with us that such concerns
merited mention in the sanctions resolution, and
only two Council members voted against it. We will
continue to stand up and remind the Council that we
have an obligation to call out malign and destabilizing
behaviour whenever and wherever we see it. Iran cannot
violate Security Council sanctions with impunity. The
Council must hold accountable those that, like Iran,
violate sanctions, and ensure that Iranian military
technologies, ballistic missiles, waterborne improvised
explosive devices, sea mines, military unmanned
aerial vehicles and other weaponry are prevented from
reaching designated individuals and entities in Yemen.

Doing more to address the severe humanitarian
needs of the Yemeni people, while taking measures
to prevent the free flow of weaponry into Yemen, is
essential to paving the way for the political solution
that we all agree is necessary. We need to see genuine
engagement from the parties, and we are prepared to
support all efforts to that end. In that regard, we look
forward to working with the newly appointed Special
Envoy for Yemen, Mr. Martin Griffiths, and hope that
we will see real progress in 2018 towards a lasting and
peaceful solution to the conflict in Yemen.

