Mr. Butagira (Uganda): Let me take this
opportunity to thank Under-Secretary-General Holmes
for his statement and for the good work that he and his
team are doing.

Uganda's commitment to the protection of
civilians is and will remain a priority. Our experiences
with regard to the reception and protection of refugees,
for example, date back as far as 1959 and have
continued as recently as December 2008, when over
40,000 refugees crossed into Uganda due to instability
in the region. Today, Uganda is host to approximately
145,000 refugees from various parts of the region.

Uganda is a country that has had to endure the
hardship of having a large segment of our population
become internally displaced persons and is a troop-
contributing country within the region and beyond
Africa, and the level of commitment that it attaches to
the implementation of all the relevant resolutions on
the protection of civilians cannot be overstated.

In countless forums, Uganda has decried the
actions of the so-called Lord's Resistance Army, led by
Joseph Kony. The activities of the Lord's Resistance
Army have been characterized by crimes under
international law, violations of international
humanitarian law and countless human rights abuses.
In this regard, Uganda condemns the renewed activities
of the Lord's Resistance Army in Orientale Province of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo as well as the
continuous forced recruitment of women and children,
massacres of civilians and wilful acts of rape and
torture, looting and destruction of civilian property.
Not only do these acts constitute a permanent threat to
security in the region but they are also in direct
contravention of relevant Security Council resolutions.

Long before the international community got
involved in northern Uganda, our Government made
several attempts to put an end to the senseless activities
of the Lord's Resistance Army; those attempts ranged
from combat operations and cross-border agreements
to offers of amnesty. At the same time, the Government
created protected areas in which the population in
northern Uganda could assemble for easier protection
as well as for the distribution of humanitarian
assistance, leading to the hitherto unrecognized
phenomenon of internal displacement. All this
notwithstanding, the Government of Uganda continues
to welcome an influx of refugees from within the
region, which has put an undeniable strain on our
limited resources.

Something should be done about non-State actors.
These rebel groups who have terrorized civilians have
no legitimate reason to be protected. These marauding
groups of gangs must be dealt with. They have no
respect for international humanitarian law. Uganda at
one time was being threatened with being placed on the
agenda of the Security Council simply because we
were fighting these gangs. They said we should talk
peace. We pointed out these rebels were not interested
in peace. Eventually, we agreed to talks. But what has
happened? We have been vindicated. The Lord's
Resistance Army has refused to sign the final peace
agreement. The rest now is history. As I have said, they
are now terrorizing the region, killing civilians. The
international community has now realized that these
gangs must be fought.
What lessons can we draw from this history?
These rebel groups must not be appeased. Sometimes
we give them encouragement by expressions to the
effect that there is no military solution, and this has
given them a pretext to continue their heinous crimes.

As far back as 2004, Uganda developed a
national policy on internally displaced persons in order
to guide all actors in the protection of and assistance to
internally displaced persons. With this policy in place,
there was improvement in the standing of the rights of
internally displaced persons and in the Government's
meeting its responsibilities with regard to protection
and assistance, as well as living conditions.

It is against that background that Uganda
reiterates its commitment to the protection of the most
vulnerable groups of civilians, especially women,
children and persons with disabilities. The Government
of Uganda has always ensured that it provides
unhindered access to humanitarian personnel to
provide assistance to civilians in armed conflict. The
Uganda People's Defence Force has always provided
protection to humanitarian workers.

As part of Government efforts to implement
resolution 1612 (2005) and to instil respect for the
rights of civilians among armed groups, Uganda has
spared no effort in setting up educational programmes
to curb the incidence of rights abuses. The Government
of Uganda has periodically carried out human rights
education programmes for the Uganda People's
Defence Force and has participated in joint activities
with UNICEF and the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights in the
development of a national action plan against the
recruitment of children in armed conflict.

Uganda welcomes the presidential statement and
the aide-memoire to be adopted by the Security
Council today, particularly because regional
organizations like the African Union have recently
taken up peacekeeping mandates in certain areas of
conflict in the region. The actions of the Council are of
great importance to Uganda as country whose troops
make up a large percentage of the current deployment
of the African Union Mission in Somalia. These
documents serve as a reliable blueprint for us,
especially as we venture into situations of uncertainty
that are characterized by quickly evolving
circumstances.

In conclusion, I would like to pay tribute to the
various United Nations agencies and international non-
governmental organizations, such as the International
Committee of the Red Cross, the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and the Office of
the High Commissioner for Human Rights, that have
protection mandates and have worked closely with our
Government in times of instability and hardship.

