Mr. Adamu (Nigeria): I thank Ambassadors
Murmokaite, Van Bohemen and Oyarzun Marchesi for
their insightful briefings.

Nigeria notes with appreciation the wide range of
actions taken in the past six months by the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001),
concerning counter-terrorism, with the support of other
United Nations counter-terrorism bodies, particularly
the Executive Directorate of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee. Such efforts have bolstered international
capability and capacity to fight the menace of terrorism.
Indeed, the three reports rendered by the Committee
this year will not only enhance ongoing efforts by
Member States in the implementation of resolution
2178 (2014), but will also help combat the disturbing
phenomenon of foreign terrorist fighters.

Nigeria remains steadfastly committed to United
Nations counter-terrorism efforts. That is why President
Mohammedu Buhari, in his capacity as the Chair of the
African Union Peace and Security Council, on 13 June
underscored Nigeria's commitment to comprehensively
address the scourge of global terrorism. He also
provided assurances that the campaign against the
menace of the Boko Haram insurgency would be
conducted in consonance with extant human rights and
humanitarian law.

We welcome the country visits undertaken by
the Counter-Terrorism Committee, which have not
only provided vital information but have also ensured
effective gap assessments. Indeed, we expect that they
will contribute immensely to the work ofthe Committee.
We look forward to the Committee's proposed follow-
up visits in October.

With regard to the non-proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction, we reiterate the need for all States
to continue to take resolute and effective measures
to prevent the proliferation of nuclear, chemical or
biological weapons and their means of delivery, in
consonance with the essence of resolution 1540 (2004).

In our collective quest for the maintenance of
international peace and security, we must intensify
our efforts to ensure that non-State actors, including
terrorists, are prevented from acquiring weapons
of mass destruction. We believe that the goal of
non-proliferation will be incrementally attained when
requests for assistance are matched by commensurate
offers. The decision of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) to strengthen its
cooperation with other Committees, as well as with
international, regional and subregional organizations,
will no doubt enhance the achievement of its mandate.
A multidimensional approach, as exemplified in the
collaboration with the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate, will serve as a viable means for
achieving the objective of the resolution.
In our view, reporting remains a vital element of the
Committee's work. As it commences its comprehensive
review of the implementation of resolution 1540
(2004), we expect that concrete steps will be taken to
achieve the goal of promoting the universality of the
submission of first reports by States that have yet to do
so. In addition, we want to encourage the Committee
to explore other forms of assistance that would
ensure reporting under the resolution. That would be
accelerated by the continuing collaboration between
its Group of Experts and the United Nations Office
for Disarmament Affairs. Through regional offices, it
is possible to engage and assist Member States on the
submission of their initial reports.

