Mr. Sardenberg (Brazil): First of all, I would
like to express how pleased my delegation is to see
you, Mr. Minister, presiding over the work of the
Security Council today. Algeria's views on the crucial
issues under consideration in the Council are always a
valuable contribution. They broaden the perspective of
analysis, thus adding value and credibility to the work
of the Security Council.

May I also emphasize my delegation's sincere
appreciation to Ambassador Abdallah Baali for his
performance as President of the Security Council for
this month.

Protecting civilians in armed conflict is one of the
most challenging tasks facing contemporary
international life, so I would also like to express my
delegation's appreciation to Under-Secretary-General
Jan Egeland for his comprehensive and thought-
provoking statement.

It has been one year since Mr. Egeland presented
to the Security Council his ten-point platform on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict. Today's
debate is a welcome opportunity to revisit this critical
topic, address some of the most pressing issues and
focus on concrete steps forward. As we are well aware,
problems relating to protection have reached
distressing dimensions, and, in paragraph 231 of the
report of the High-level Panel on Threats, Challenges
and Change (A/59/565), the diagnosis on the subject of
protecting civilians is precise:

"In many civil wars, combatants target
civilians and relief workers with impunity.
Beyond direct violence, deaths from starvation,
disease and the collapse of public health dwarf
the numbers killed by bullets and bombs.
Millions more are displaced internally or across
borders. Human rights abuses and gender
violence are rampant."

Actually, it could even be said that, in some wars,
civilians seem to be the belligerents' preferred targets.
The work of humanitarian actors has, in many cases,
been hindered or prevented by denial or obstruction of
access, poor security conditions and lack of resources.
These are key challenges for the United Nations as a
whole and for its humanitarian partners.

The Council itself has achieved quite a lot in
pushing forward the agenda for the protection of
civilians. The time has come to reaffirm our
commitment and agree on comprehensive, coherent
and action-oriented approaches. The resolutions
already adopted by the Council offer much potential
for our work to advance.

More effective use must be made of the set of
rules that seek to limit the effects of armed conflict.
Law must be translated into concrete action. The
primary responsibility to abide by law and to protect
civilians from the ravages of war lies with belligerents.
They must comply fully with international
humanitarian law; but in contemporary conflicts,
humanitarian law seems mostly neglected or
deliberately breached. There is an ever-widening gap
between existing international norms and respect for
such norms.

A concrete possibility that deserves careful
attention and study is that of establishing a framework
within which the United Nations could more regularly
engage with regional organizations on humanitarian
issues related to protection and access, as
recommended by the Secretary-General in his latest
report. In this respect, my delegation will focus
attention on possibilities such as the mechanism to
provide better facts and statistics on protection, as
mentioned by Under-Secretary-General Egeland this
morning.

The Security Council has an important role to
play in the fight against impunity, with a View to
ensuring that the gravest international crimes do not go
unpunished. The Rome Statute calls for a close and
cooperative relationship between the International
Criminal Court (ICC) and the Council, and it provides
that the Council may refer to the Court cases of
genocide, war crimes or crimes against humanity. By
bringing perpetrators to justice, the Court will be able
to provide long-term deterrence, thus playing a
fundamental role in protecting civilians in armed
conflict.

In discussing peacekeeping mandates, the
Council has included provisions on the protection of
civilians on a case-by-case basis. We are advancing in
this area, and we must continue to do so, especially in
order to ensure the protection of women, children and
other minority groups. While peacekeeping operations
have been broadened, they have not been provided with
adequate resources for the protection of civilians. For
instance, disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration (DDR) programmes, a key component of
the protection agenda, remain continuously under-
resourced, especially in the rehabilitation and
reintegration phases. In countries emerging from
conflict, disarming and demobilizing activities need to
be matched with actions to reintegrate and rehabilitate
ex-combatants into society through employment
support and other income-generating projects.

The core components of DDR programmes must
be funded from the assessed peacekeeping operation
budget in order to guarantee adequate and predictable
funding. The lack of support for the so-called forgotten
emergencies is an issue that needs to be addressed
properly. If the horrors of some wars are quite often
highlighted by the mainstream media, other crises
appear, unfortunately, to be forgotten or ignored. We
must ensure that humanitarian aid is allocated in a non-
discriminatory, balanced and proportionate manner.
Humanitarian assistance must be afforded on the basis
of need; it should not depend on political preferences.
In his report, the Secretary-General has encouraged the
Council to consider the links between peace and
security and inadequate funding in certain crises.

In conclusion, we have to work with all the
required means to adopt concrete measures in order to
alleviate the suffering of civilians who are trapped in
situations of armed conflict. The most urgent task
ahead of us should be implementation in the field.

