Mrs. Perceval (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
First of all, Madam President, I would like to convey
the solidarity of the people and the Government of
Argentina to the people and the Government of your
country, Nigeria. Humankind has no right to suffer.

Argentina does not sponsor draft resolutions for
reasons of technical or timely factors that may or may
not be present in a given draft resolution. As in this case,
we do so when the goal of the draft resolution entails
reaffirming the absolute validity and unquestionable
force of the purposes and principles of the United
Nations, in particular the promotion and protection
of human rights and the individual freedoms of all
without distinction of any sort. We also do so because
that is State policy in our country. We do so when, as
in this case, we have no doubt that the international
community must set aside its feint-heartedness to raise
its voice in the certainty that only memory, truth, justice
and reparations will prevent the repetition of massive
crimes of atrocity such as the genocide that took place
in Rwanda in 1994 - and not just in Rwanda, but
throughout the entire world. We do so when not doing
so would run counter to the legal and moral imperative
we have as Members of the Organization and of the
Security Council, but especially as men and women
who share a common humanity.

In the face of the horror he faced, an Argentine
thinker said that genocide was the context in which,
with dark and monstrous evidence, one could see the
absolute evil that naked power was able to do to other
human beings. All genocide raises the most important
of questions: where lies the ever-present, dark abyss
of humankind, wherein the roots of our own society
are found? At the same time, we know that all human
tragedy is, collectively and individually, an impetus for
a new beginning. Rwanda knows that, as do we peoples
who have suffered genocide, State terrorism, massacres
and mass killings. We know that tragedy means a new
beginning. It demands one. It is an opportunity to think
anew about what it means for us to build a society. We
know that transitions are not easy or the same, nor
do we undergo them in the same way. Here, too, one
cannot impose on a people that it build memory in a
single way. One question leads to another and it seems
there are no definitive answers. Like victims, memory
is unique. Memory is creative.

That is why remembering genocide does not mean
shedding light on a set of fragmentary experiences or a
list of horrors and random events. It would be obscene
to do so. Remembering genocide is to seek meaning,
for there exists a horrendous abyss within society as
well as within ourselves. That abyss separates us from
the past that horrifies us and the idea that the future
demands that we think, believe and trust that the life to
which we want to do justice and the world we deserve

to live in can be different. We need to make the world
different, beginning today. We can do so with truth,
memory, justice and reparations, because for our people
the future means the present that exists in our memory.

As has been pointed out, Argentina was a member
of the Security Council in 1994. On 16 May of that
year, following the introduction of the report of
the Secretary-General on the situation in Rwanda
(S/1994/565), we had no hesitation in saying (see S/PV.3377) that, since the events of 6 April - the
atrocious violence, abuse and systematic slaughter
that had been unleashed - Rwanda had found itself
plunged into a humanitarian crisis of enormous
proportions and a situation of horror for which there
was no justification whatever. At that time, Argentina
claimed that systematic and widespread Violations of
humanitarian law in Rwanda, as well as all human
rights violations that had stunned the world, should be
thoroughly investigated. In July of that same year, when
mass slaughter of communities and families - not
only majority Tutsi, but also Hutu and others who had
denounced the violence and horror - confirmed that
the atrocities committed in Rwanda qualified as crimes
of genocide, Argentina unequivocally affirmed that
crimes of such magnitude must not be covered up or
minimized, or enjoy impunity.

In that context, and in the memory of the Victims,
this commemoration represents a valuable opportunity
to reflect on the three dimensions that we must bear in
mind when we speak of genocide.

First, the protection of populations from genocide,
war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against
humanity - including incitement to hatred - has only
one name: prevention.

Secondly, we must strengthen human rights
norms and international humanitarian law, democratic
institutions and a social culture in which the recognition
and respect for differences and diversity alienate us
definitively from an ideology of hatred that is not of
the left, right or centre. The ideology of hatred is the
ideology of hatred, in which hell is other people. We
must therefore strengthen not only substantive law but
our ethical conscience and the legitimate foundations
of national and international democratic society.

Thirdly, with respect to the fight against impunity,
I recall that my mother used to cite Saint Theresa,
saying that more tears have been shed over prayers that
have been heard than over those that have not. We live
with that reality every day. Every single day, we hear
the prayers being said and we see the tears being shed.
What matters is our decision to listen, because these
are the voices of the victims. It is not only a question of
having a good normative architecture or solid and just
legal institutions. We need to fundamentally change the
concept of power that is still hegemonistic. We need to
change social practices that are still discriminatory. We
need to change political cultures that are still based on
humiliation.

Yesterday, I noted that many need to see to believe,
as Saint Thomas said. But in the case of genocide, we
need to believe in order to see. We can come here time
and time again with our prayers and our tears, we can
point to the suffering of the victims, but people may not
believe that these things constitute genocide. They may
believe that no massacre has occurred. That is why we
feel that reality is based on a genuine consciousness.
When we truly feel abhorrence towards violence as a
means of resolving conflict; when we rebel peacefully
against the overwhelming use of power to resolve
conflict with weapons or through economic means
of humiliation, the Convention on the Prevention and
Punishment of the Crime of Genocide will not only be
an excellent legal text, compelling and committing us
to act, but also a reality for all humankind.

Among the three dimensions of prevention, the
strengthening of norms and the culture of human
rights and international humanitarian law, and the fight
against impunity, I wish to stress that of prevention.
The Secretary-General and Mr. Eliasson, whom I thank
for his presence at this meeting, have convened us
under a theme that is not a slogan; it is a call to place
rights up front. Since it is not a slogan and these are not
just words, we must heed this call. To put rights up front
is a synonym; it is the antonym of placing disputes over
power first. It is to place the human rights of all human
beings first.

To prevent is to assume responsibility to protect. To
prevent is to listen to indviduals, regional organizations
and the people of every nation State who can give
voice to their experience and not to papers issued from
ivory towers that merely imagine what others may be
going through. To prevent is to continue to strengthen
international human rights law. To prevent is to ratify
the International Convention for the Protection of
All Persons from Enforced Disappearance, which we
drafted with France. To prevent is to recognize the right
to truth as a right. To prevent is to strengthen, not to
destroy, the International Criminal Court so that it is
fairer, more consistent and more effective.
I should like to conclude by emphasizing prevention
in societies that have experienced genocide. What can we
do in its aftermath? How do we imagine the future? How
can we believe in the future? How does a society - not
individuals, but society as a whole - emerge from this
once it has fallen victim? Does it survive by exacting
further punishment or by enforcing more human rights?
Through more repression or more freedom? Through
more discrimination or more equality?

If the prevention of the recurrence of genocide in all
societies that have lived through it is based on a political
and social scenario in which the culture of fear persists
and is perpetuated by the mass media, and in which
we are overwhelmed by a culture of suspicion against
the dark-skinned, the young, the poor or the immigrant,
it may be that punitive tendencies will flourish and
massacres recur. Let us look at the populations of the
prisons in all our countries and how they got there.
To the extent that repression is a response to what we
perceive as a potential threat, we may be justifying new
genocides.

Chesterton says in one passage that policemen
should be philosophers. It is notjust a matter of looking
for criminals in their hideouts, he says; it is not a matter
simply of arresting thieves so as to live in peace. One
must go into the elegant halls to detect the pessimists.
Who are the pessimists? Those who entertain the
frightful thoughts that lead to fanaticism, intolerance
and the conviction that hell is others. There is no useful
moral relativity when we speak about human rights.
It is only on the basis of human rights that we can tal
about cultural relativism. There can be no impunity
when we speak of Violations of human rights, because
they are not a matter of opinion. We have talked about
this often.

Allow me a gesture in commemoration of the
genocide in Rwanda and in thanks to the Ambassador
of Rwanda. I have brought for the Ambassador and
for the people of Rwanda, on behalf of human rights
organizations and of my country and Government,
a symbol of our fight against the pessimists, because
therein lies our hope. I have here a handkerchief of the
mothers and grandmothers of the Plaza de Mayo. But
it is not really a handkerchief; it was the diaper of the
babies who had been kidnapped or who were born in
the concentration camps.
We were never victims; we were never pessimistic.
We will always work so that power does not humiliate
us and so that the world may be ours.

