Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
thank the French presidency of the Security Council
for convening this open debate to address an issue of
key importance, given that children - the future of
humankind - are one of the most vulnerable segments
of our populations. They are affected in many ways by
the devastation that accompanies armed conflict. We
also thank Mr. Mubin Shaikh and Ms. Virginia Gamba
for their valuable briefings.

Conflicts and violence severely affect the lives
of children in many parts of the world. In addition to
suffering the direct consequences of war and armed
Violence, they are also affected by displacement, loss of
family members and associated trauma.

Peru highly appreciates the latest report of the
Secretary-General on the subject (S/2017/821), in which
he expresses his great concern about the magnitude and
gravity of the violations committed against children in
2016, including murders and mutilations, recruitment
and, in certain situations, denial ofhumanitarian access.

This debate is being held as we commemorate
the tenth anniversary of the adoption of the Paris
Commitments to protect children from unlawful
recruitment or use by armed forces or armed groups
and the Paris Principles and Guidelines on Children
Associated with Armed Forces or Armed Groups, which
seek to protect children from recruitment and use by
armed forces or groups and to promote their liberation
and social reintegration. Peru calls on countries that
have not yet done so to endorse that instrument.

Our country has been implementing various
measures to guarantee the rights of children and
adolescents, in line with our international obligations
and commitments, including the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development. Those measures are being
implemented for the sake of children in consideration
of their needs and specific vulnerabilities.

Specifically, in relation to conflict and post-conflict
situations, Peru has been making significant efforts to
ensure that its policies, programmes and decisions focus
on preventing the recruitment of children - bolstering
their protection and well-being, facilitating their
reintegration and promoting development based on
human dignity.

Additionally, Peru has welcomed the Canadian
initiative on the Vancouver principles on the
maintenance of peace and the prevention of the
recruitment and use of child soldiers, which we hope
will be adopted very soon.

As one of the incoming non-permanent members of
the Security Council, as of 1 January 2018, my country
is committed to continuing to take concrete actions
to comply with the mandates established by Council
resolutions on this issue.
Peru is gratified that the children and armed
conflict agenda continues to occupy a central place in
the work of the Security Council, alongside additional
integrated efforts in the field of human rights with a
View to achieving sustainable peace.

Finally, Peru wishes to reiterate its support for the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict and for the institutions
of the United Nations system that work to promote the
rights of children in armed conflicts around the world.

