Ms. Tachco (United States of America): Iwould like
to thank Ambassador Llorentty Soliz for his briefing on
the work of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) - a landmark
resolution in its day, which has become one of the pillars
of the international non-proliferation architecture.

Given the ongoing and evolving threats posed
by the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction,
today's briefing reminds us of the critical importance
of fully implementing resolution 1540 (2004) for the
sake of international peace and security. The shocking
use of chemical weapons in Iraq, Malaysia, the United
Kingdom, as well as the egregious and systematic use
of chemical weapons in Syria, show that the threat
posed by weapons of mass destruction (WMDS) is all
too real today.

Furthermore, the continued proliferation of WMDs
by irresponsible actors increases the likelihood that
those heinous weapons or the capacity and knowledge
to develop them will fall into the hands of non-State
actors who carry out terrorist attacks. Given those
persistent threats, the United States will continue to
prioritize efforts to strengthen our counter-proliferation
measures in line with our national security strategy
and the Nuclear Posture Review. Our efforts are
aimed at ensuring our security and the security of the
international community in order to prevent WMD
proliferation by non-State actors.

The full and universal implementation of resolution
1540 (2004) is integral to achieving that goal. The
United States will continue to provide strong support
to a broad array of international organizations
contributing to non-proliferation and provide extensive
bilateral assistance to States seeking to implement
their obligations under the resolution. The United
States has already provided more than $4.5 million in
grants to the 1540 Trust Fund, which helps encourage
States to address gaps in the implementation of their
1540 obligations. We also continue to invest hundreds
of millions of dollars in our partner countries for
cooperative threat reduction and other non-proliferation
and export-control-related assistance programmes
around the world to reduce the threat of WMDs.
We commend that Chair's plan to hold a regional
conference in Latin America next month. Improving
implementation and exchanging best practices to
strengthen national obligations across Latin America is
very important. As a testament to our commitment to
the region, we have helped fund a grant for the regional
coordinator project of the Inter-American Committee
against Terrorism of the Organization of American
States (OAS), which is now helping OAS members to
develop 1540 national implementation action plans and
will promote the implementation of the resolution.
Turning to the many tasks that lie ahead for the
Committee, it is clear that the Committee must redouble
its efforts to implement its programme of work to
enhance the global implementation of resolution 1540
(2004). While we regret that it took nearly three months
to adopt the programme of work, we are pleased that
we can finally begin moving forward again. Now is the
time for the Committee to address real and evolving
challenges. In particular, the United States believes
the Committee should prioritize four areas in the
coming weeks.

First, the Committee must meet more regularly and
develop a clear strategy for achieving the many elements
of its programme of work. Last year, after holding one
formal Committee meeting, the Chair promised to
convene more meetings and get the Committee back to
work. We look forward to seeing him follow through on
that promise.

Secondly, since the Committee has selected new
experts, it should now turn to initiating a formal process
for appointing a coordinator. That will also help keep
the Committee on track for continued progress. We
look forward to working with the incoming experts,
who are critical to helping the Committee carry out its
very important mandate.

Thirdly, the Committee must also seek to develop
best approaches to enforce appropriate and effective
laws to implement resolution 1540 (2004), including by
developing national control lists.

Finally, in 2016, the Council adopted resolution
2325 (2016) and said it would focus on the challenge
of controlling access to transfers of technology and
the evolving nature of the risks of proliferation due to
rapid advances in science, technology and international
commerce. We hope the Committee can take advantage
of a wide array of civil society and industry resources
to examine ways to combat those threats.

In conclusion, the United States recalls that
resolution 1540 (2004), a Chapter VII resolution, is
binding on all Member States. The implementation of
its provisions is not optional for any Member State.
In particular, in today's context, we see no greater
risk of chemical weapons falling into the hands of
terrorists than a chemical-weapons programme that
is unverified and unaccounted for. For our part, the
United States will continue to fully support the work of
the 1540 Committee to stop the spread of weapons of
mass destruction.

