Mr. Allam-mi (Chad) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I should like to thank the Council for giving us
the opportunity to express the position of our country
with regard to the report under consideration and in
particular to the question of extending the mandate of
08-51167
the United Nations Mission in the Central African
Republic and Chad (MINURCAT) and the European
Union-led military force (EUFOR), and its replacement
with an extended MINURCAT operation with a
military component.

We have asked to take the floor to provide some
clarification, because it seemed to us that to some
extent our viewpoint was not sufficiently reflected in
the Secretary-General's report (S/2008/60l). Hearing
media comments here and there, we have some details
to give Council members.

First, however, we wish to reiterate the readiness
of the Chadian Government to cooperate and to
facilitate the international community's access to the
eastern part of our country so that it may assist and
protect refugees and displaced persons, as well as
welcome them home. We sometimes forget that they
are victims of the situation.

At one point, at the highest level we questioned
the usefulness and effectiveness of the operation. There
was some tendentious speculation to the effect that we
regretted EUFOR's neutrality, while others say EUFOR
was there to protect the N'Djamena Government
because many of its staff were from a friendly country.
That is not so. EUFOR-MINURCAT has a very
specific and very clear mandate. The question is one of
effectiveness and a clearly defined mandate. A clearly
defined mandate will obviously be more effective in
confronting what the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Angelo, called insecurity,
which remains a source of concern. It is also a question
of the tenuous fate of the displaced and migrant
populations, the high cost of living caused by a
significant international presence, reconstruction and
the return of the displaced to their places of origin.

I recall the President of Chad's assertion that he
would accept EUFOR's arrival precisely to enable the
reconstruction and relocation of the displaced to their
places of origin, but that did not happen. Perhaps it has
only just begun. Humanitarian staff is being targeted
and equipment stolen and damaged. Who is to blame?
Not the Government of Chad, which is often put
forward as a scapegoat.

The international community's task is a lengthy
one that needs much time to develop a truly secure
framework for a true neutralization and securitization
of the zone under the protection of the international
Mission. The goal is to neutralize and secure that zone

to prevent any insurgents, be they Sudanese or
Chadian, from exploiting the situation by entering the
security zone and the refugee camps to recruit children
and stocking up on supplies. The objective is to protect
the people from abuse. That is truly the case, yet as
soon as a Sudanese insurgent is seen exploiting the
situation and moving through the region, the
Government of Chad is accused of supporting the
Sudanese insurgency.

That is not accurate. Chad had to help the
Government of the Sudan to resolve its crisis and even
to fight the rebellion, in particular the Justice and
Equality Movement. In return, however, we
experienced the situation of which all are aware. We
therefore wonder what the idea of "protection" means.
Does it rule out armed intervention to confront any
military incursion in the protected zone? If so, we in
Chad feel that that would be akin to asking a
bodyguard not to react in the face of aggression
towards the object he is protecting. We therefore insist
on the need clearly to define the mandate of the
international Mission, in particular its military
dimension. We are facing soldiers who are armed to the
hilt, whom the police or gendarmes would not be
capable of stopping. The troops of the Chadian
Government are concerned about the border situation.
Their role must be clearly defined to avoid
misunderstanding.

We must bear in mind that this is a very special
mission - one that is essentially humanitarian in
nature but not a classical peacekeeping operation. We
must not disappoint the populations concerned: the
displaced, the refugees and those who host them. We
must serve them and not the N'Djamena Government.
Since the operation was accepted as humanitarian from
the outset, we should like to avoid any subtle deviation
that would add confusion by giving it a political
mandate advocating particular good offices. Mediation
and political agreements exist in other frameworks. Let
the parties observe those. We talk of armed opposition,
but in our country there is a democratic opposition and
a democratic political life. We are trying to build and
consolidate our rule of law and democracy. We would
have preferred to talk about "armed groups", "rebels"
or some other term, but the term "armed opposition",
which I think I read in the report, is not appropriate in
our view.
The Government of Chad is implementing the
Sirte agreement with the armed groups in the context

of the 13 August agreement that we signed with the
political parties. Contrary to what is being said,
however, that agreement is not simply a technical one
to organize elections. It also has a political, economic
and social content that takes all of Chad's problems
into account and recommends solutions. There is a
tendency to present it as a mere technical electoral
agreement, which it is not.

I also wish to say that Chad and the President of
the Republic are ready to accept the replacement of
EUFOR by a military force of the United Nations. But
we are requesting further consultations precisely
because of those questions, so that we can together
define the concept of MINURCAT and the success of a
military operation, without having the feeling that our
hand is being forced, as well as specify the mandate.

We welcome the fact that, thank God, the Council
has interested itself in the issue and that it is
already expressing its intention to authorize, at the
appropriate time - as I read in the Secretary-General's
proposal - the deployment of a MINURCAT military
component. We hope that things remain at the level of
intentions as we wait for the Secretary-General and
Chad to come to a preliminary understanding on the
operational and practical aspects of the issue. I would
certainly not like to give the Council the impression
that the operation is useless; it is supported by the
Government of Chad and is useful for the populations
concerned. The EUFOR-MINURCAT operation must
be maintained. It is a question of improving it and
ensuring that its follow-on is carried out by the United
Nations under the best possible conditions. That is our
objective.
8

It is true that the international community's
presence in the eastern part of our country has a
deterrent aspect - which we perhaps do not often
see- and thus, even if it is not a peacekeeping
operation, that it could contribute to the establishment
of conditions for a return to peace in the region.

Before concluding, I must refer to our relations
with our neighbour the Sudan. Yes, we signed
agreements in Dakar, and since then we have had
several meetings in the context of the follow-up
committee. During the most recent committee meeting,
the Sudanese Government and ourselves, we pledged,
in the presence of the international community, to re-
establish diplomatic relations between our two
countries, it being understood that the Sudan was the
country that had broken them and that Chad could not
fail to agree to their re-establishment.

As in the past, Chad has the political will to help
the Sudan resolve its crisis in Darfur by peaceful
means. Thus, we are willing to assist our Sudanese
brothers. We hope that this squabble - which is
destabilizing the eastern part of our country and
threatens security in the subregion - will end. We
believe that, once the Darfur issue is resolved, we
will no longer be speaking of insecurity in eastern
Chad.

