Mr. Al-Kidwa (Palestine) (interpretation from Arabic): Allow me at the outset to thank Secretary-General
Kofi Annan for his presence here today.

I wish to convey my deep thanks to the Arab member,
members of the Non-Aligned Movement and all other
members of the Council who voted in favour of the draft
resolution contained in document S/ 1997/ 199. I also wish
to pay a special tribute to the sponsors of the draft
resolution: France, Portugal, Sweden and the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland. There is no
doubt that the European sponsorship has great political
significance and we certainly appreciate Europe's positive
role here in the Council and in the peace process as a
whole.

Furthermore, I wish to extend our appreciation to all
the States that spoke before the Council on this matter to
express a clear and unified international position critical of
the Israeli decision to build a new settlement in J abal Abu
Ghneim in East Jerusalem, demanding that Israel refrain
from construction and any other settlement activity in the
occupied territories, including Jerusalem, and supporting the
peace process and the implementation of the agreements
reached between the parties. In this context, the
international community has indeed sent a clear message to
the Government of Israel, the occupying Power. It is our
sincere hope that that Government will receive this
message with the requisite wisdom.

The central importance of Jerusalem and the grave
danger posed by the Israeli decision required the
Palestinians and Arabs to insist that the Council adopt a
clear draft resolution on this question. It was impossible
for them to accept a fluid position incommensurate in
content and form with the gravity of the situation.
Nevertheless, we displayed the flexibility expected of us
by accepting the European proposal as submitted in the
hope that the Council would fulfil its obligations and its
members achieve consensus.

However, despite the moderation and flexible timing
of the text and our response to and accommodation of
certain requirements, the Council has been unable to
assume its responsibilities for the maintenance of
international peace and security or to adopt the draft
resolution because one permanent member exercised its
right of veto. Given the central importance of Jerusalem
to the Palestinian people, to the entire Arab and Muslim
nation, to the followers of the three monotheistic religions
and to the international community as a whole, the
Council's inaction stands in stark contrast to the collective
position of the international community, as reflected in
the Council, the great potential damage of Israel's
decision, its impact on the Middle East peace process, and
the great harm wrought by the failure of the Council to
adopt this draft resolution.

On 17 May 1995, the delegation of the United States
of America exercised its right of veto against a draft
resolution - also on the question of Jerusalem - that
was favoured by 14 members of the Council. This
occurred following Israel's expropriation of land owned
by Arab Palestinians in Jerusalem. As far as I recall, that
was the first exercise of the veto since the end of the cold
war.

Today, on 7 March 1997, less than two years later,
a second veto has been cast in regard to Jerusalem. We
believe that this position will complicate the peace
process and will not help advance it. Israel's failure to
reverse its decision and to live up to its agreed
commitments will be very harmful to the peace process
as a whole.

We believe that the Security Council remains
responsible for international peace and security, including
in the Middle East region, and that the United Nations
will have an ongoing responsibility regarding the question

 

of Palestine until it is resolved in all its aspects. The peace
process and the Palestinian-Israeli agreements are in no way
reasons for ending the responsibilities of the United
Nations, nor are they reasons for the Security Council not
to intervene - especially when those agreements have been
violated.

In addition, the approach proposed by some States
seems to suggest that Israel has the right to take unilateral
steps and impose new realities on the ground, while at the
same time, the Palestinian side should commit itself to
resolving through negotiations the problems resulting from
those steps. Of course, this has not been and will not be
acceptable to us, and I hope that this will not be acceptable
to the international community as a whole either.

Jerusalem is a central issue to us. We will not change
our positions vis-a-vis Jerusalem - that is, Vis-a-vis our
historical rights in Jerusalem. Therefore, it is our duty to
come before all the organs of the United Nations to present
our legitimate cause. Accordingly, despite our deep
appreciation for the efforts of all, in View of the Council's
failure to fulfil its obligations, we will request the members
of the United Nations to agree to an emergency meeting of
the General Assembly, to be held in response to these
developments in order to take appropriate action.

Let us hope that the international community as a
whole will be able to fulfil its responsibilities and
obligations to preserve the peace process and to provide
further momentum to ensure implementation of the
agreements reached. We hope, God willing, that we will
achieve just, lasting and comprehensive peace in the Middle
East.

