Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I too
wish to thank Ms. Bokova, Mr. Feltman, Mr. Fedotov
and Brigadier General Parrulli for their enlightening
briefing this morning.

My delegation congratulates the French and Italian
delegations for their initiative leading to the adoption of
resolution 2347 (2017), which Uruguay co-sponsored.
We consider it to be a useful tool in the maintenance of
international peace and security.

On previous occasions, Uruguay has expressed
its principled position rejecting all forms of terrorism
and armed conflict and supporting any initiative aimed
first and foremost at protecting people, as well as
those goods that form part of a nation's heritage and
cultural tapestry. International cooperation is crucial to
preventing the traffic in cultural works or objects and
the use of such criminal activity to finance terrorism.

Uruguay deplores the destruction of cultural
heritage, particularly involving religious sites and the
pillaging and smuggling of goods out of archeological
sites, carried out in situations of armed conflict by
terrorist groups. We acknowledge that UNESCO
should play a leading role in the protection of cultural
heritage and draw attention to the Unite for Heritage
initiative, which seeks to create a world movement
of young people raising their voices to safeguard
threatened cultural heritage, which should be preserved
as a common goods. We would also point to the key
role played by the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime and INTERPOL in the prevention of all
trafficking in cultural goods.

The establishment of a network of safe havens, as
referred to in resolution 2347 (2017), should meet the
needs and requirements of the affected countries, in
accordance with domestic legislation and applicable
international conventions. Priority must be accorded to
preserving cultural goods in the event of conflict in the
territory of the affected country, only when the option
of foreign safe havens is not available.

In such cases, UNESCO could provide coordination
assistance between the affected State and the safe
haven. Such coordination could include establishing
agreements on modalities for the restitution of cultural
works and heritage and, upon request, technical
support and cooperation in transferring and preserving
such goods. The second preambular paragraph of the
UNESCO constitution establishes that "since wars
begin in the minds of men, it is in the minds ofmen that
the defences of peace must be constructed".

Cultural heritage is one of the ways in which we
can truly forge peace among nations. In the light of
the new threats to States, including terrorism, we
must continue to harmonize joint efforts to protect our
cultural heritage, which is the symbol of the collective
human identity and links us to our history. It is our duty
to pass it on to succeeding generations.
