Mr. Dahlgren (Sweden): Let me first say that I
fully associate myself with the statement made earlier
today by the representative of Austria on behalf of the
European Union.

More than 19 years of warfare has not brought the
Afghan conflict or the suffering of the Afghan people
closer to an end. On the contrary, the continued and
escalated fighting poses serious and growing threats to
international peace and security and has caused extensive
human suffering, large-scale material destruction, and
refugee flows and other forcible displacements of large
numbers of people. The conflict also provides fertile
ground for terrorism and illegal drug production and
trafficking, with repercussions far outside Afghanistan's
own borders.

The Afghan conflict has no military solution. Only
a political settlement accommodating the rights and
interests of all Afghan ethnic, religious and political
groups can provide the basis for a durable solution to the

 

conflict. That is also how the necessary conditions can be
created for the much needed reconstruction and
development of Afghan society. The draft resolution before
us demands that all Afghan factions stop fighting, resume
negotiations without delay or preconditions, and cooperate
with the aim of creating a broad-based and fully
representative government which would protect the rights
of all Afghans and would observe the international
obligations of Afghanistan. We fully support that demand.

The Afghan conflict continues to be fuelled by arms,
ammunition and other military supplies from abroad, as
well as by the apparent involvement of foreign military
personnel. As the Secretary-General has stated, the key to
ending the Afghan tragedy lies in whether or not the
international community has the resolve to address its
external aspects. Foreign interference has to end. The
regional Powers need to talk to each other and build mutual
confidence. Only then can the tireless efforts of the
Secretary-General, his Special Envoy and the United
Nations Special Mission to Afghanistan to facilitate a
peaceful solution bear fruit. The draft resolution before us
calls upon all States neighbouring Afghanistan and other
States with influence in that country to intensify their
efforts under the auspices of the United Nations to bring
the parties to a negotiated settlement. We firmly support
that call.

My country remains greatly concerned at the
humanitarian situation in Afghanistan. All parties to the
conflict must comply fully with their obligations under
international humanitarian law. They must take full
responsibility for the safety and security of all international
and humanitarian personnel, and must ensure safe and
unhindered access. Impeding the delivery of humanitarian
assistance and using this obstruction as a weapon against
the civilian population is a Violation of international law. Of
equal concern to us are the continued violations of human
rights, and especially the discrimination against Afghan
girls and women.

For many years, Sweden has been one of the largest
donors of humanitarian assistance to the Afghan people. We
are ready to continue this assistance when conditions on the
ground make that possible. The decision by the Taliban
authorities to close the offices of international non-
governmental organizations in Kabul, and other restrictions
on access, have forced the suspension of assistance, with
grave consequences for the population of Kabul itself and
beyond. Sweden fully supports further efforts by the
Secretary-General and his representatives to reach an
agreement with the Taliban in order to make possible the
continued delivery of necessary humanitarian aid.

Sweden will vote in favour of the draft resolution
before us.

