Mr. Amieyeofori (Nigeria): I would like to thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this important
meeting to consider the work of the International
Criminal Court (ICC) in relation to the situation in
Libya. We are also indebted to Mr. Moreno-Ocampo,
Chief Prosecutor of the ICC, for his insightful briefing.

The fight for justice and the battle against
impunity are at the heart of the values shared by most
Member States, including those committed to the aims
and objectives of the ICC. As a State party to the Rome
Statute, Nigeria reaffirms its support for the work of
the ICC in ensuring accountability for the most serious
crimes of international concern. The situation in Libya

presents an immediate test not only for the ICC as an
indispensable tool in our collective conflict resolution
efforts, but also for our collective determination to
maintain international peace and security. Indeed, the
very first Article of the United Nations Charter charges
us to take effective collective measures for the
prevention and removal of threats to peace and to
achieve peace through pacific means.

In that respect, we welcome the Chief
Prosecutor's first report to the Security Council. The
report shows a measured, logical and comprehensive
approach to the conduct of preliminary examination of
allegations of human rights violations in Libya and the
subsequent launching of an investigation, in
accordance with resolution 1970 (2011). The initial
factual analysis, in line with the thresholds of
admissibility, gravity and jurisdiction, provides us with
a better understanding of the nature and extent of the
violations that the people of Libya have endured and
continue to endure.

The prima facie evidence of crimes against
humanity makes the case for an ICC investigation even
stronger and demonstrates that such a step is necessary
to satisfy the interests of justice. In addition, the
systematic nature of the attacks on civilians, the
routine use of imprecise weaponry and the evidence of
attempts to conceal crimes warrant rigorous
investigation to establish criminal responsibility.

However, the political situation in Libya is
complex and the security environment fragile and
mutable. In resolving the Libyan crisis, resolutions
1970 (2011) and 1973 (2011) must be read and
implemented together. The resolutions are
complementary and mutually reinforcing. Indeed, they
are anchored in the desire for a peaceful and politically
based solution to the Libyan conflict. That is why the
efforts of interlocutors, such as the Special Envoy of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Al-Khatib, the Libya
Contact Group and the African Union Ad Hoc High-
Level Committee on Libya are recognized. All such
activities are central to facilitating dialogue between
the parties with a view to cementing a lasting peace.

For those reasons, it is important that the
activities of the Prosecutor be carefully calibrated to
support the ongoing political efforts to find a peaceful
solution. Ignoring that pivotal dimension may threaten
the prospects for peace not just for Libya, but also for
the region at large. Thus, it is essential that justice be
pursued in a manner that does not jeopardize efforts
aimed at promoting lasting peace and stability in the
country.

That observation underscores the need for the
prosecuting team to uphold high standards of evidence
and to remain impartial in the face of compelling and
disturbing evidence. In that regard, I would highlight
the fate of those sub-Saharan Africans detained by the
authorities in Benghazi and stress the need to ensure
that their cases are handled according to due process.

We must not underestimate the heavy
responsibility that the Prosecutor bears in that regard.
It is difficult to see how the interests of justice can be
served without the cooperation of the international
community. As is clear from the report, the
Prosecutor's work thus far has benefited from
international cooperation, which must be encouraged to
continue. It is our firm belief that the ICC's
involvement should further our collective efforts to
achieve lasting peace in Libya and to see the
aspirations of the Libyan people realized.

