Mr. Akahori (Japan): Japan is deeply committed
to the rule of law and fully supports the activities of
the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
(ICTY) and the International Residual Mechanism for
Criminal Tribunals. We highly value their important
role in the fight against impunity.

We appreciate the Tribunal's efforts in delivering
the Appeals Chamber's judgment on Prosecutor v. Mic'o
Stanisic' and Stojan Zupljanin in June, which handed
down 22-year prison sentences to those responsible
for crimes against humanity and violations of the laws
or customs of war. Japan hopes that the judgment will
help to bring justice to the region. The judgment was
delivered in line with the projected timeline despite
serious staff attrition. We commend the leadership of
President Agius and call upon the ICTY to maintain
its judicial timeline as it approaches closure at the
end of 2017. The Tribunal requires full cooperation
from Member States to carry out its mandate. We are
therefore concerned by instances of non-cooperation.
We recall that Member States are required to cooperate
fully with the ICTY. The relevant States must meet
their obligations.

We thank the Office of Internal Oversight Services
(OIOS) for its report (S/2016/441) and recommendations.
Japan takes note of implementation efforts by the
Tribunal, which resulted in a code of conduct. While
the implementation of the OIOS recommendations
is important, we must not forget that the Tribunal's
priority should continue to be the completion of its
judicial work by the end of next year.

Turning to the Mechanism, we first offer our
congratulations on the Mechanism's opening of its
new premises in Arusha in November. We request the
Mechanism, which is now in the phase of handling the
retrial and appeals from the ICTY, to work effectively
and efficiently to deliver its judgments as projected
and, if possible, to shorten its time frame. Arresting
remaining fugitives is a priority for the Mechanism,
and we take note of the overall review by the Prosecutor
of efforts in that area. We hope that new steps based
on such a review will bring positive results, and once
again call upon all the relevant States to cooperate fully
with the Mechanism.

Japan expresses its gratitude to the dedication of
both the ICTY and the Mechanism. We strongly hope
that the work of both bodies will help victims see the
justice that they have long awaited.

