Mr. Annabi: I am pleased to introduce to the
Security Council the first progress report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Mission of
Support in East Timor (UNMISET) (S/2004/669) since
the extension of UNMISET's mandate for a
consolidation phase on 20 May this year. UNMISET
has now been downsized following the modification of
its mandate, and the Government of Timor-Leste has
assumed responsibilities for external and internal
security since 20 May. I am happy to report that, except
for a few minor incidents, the situation in Timor-Leste
remained stable and largely peaceful during the
reporting period.

The demonstration that took place on 19 and
20 July raised some concern. While the reconciliatory
initiatives taken by President Kay Rala Xanana
Gusmao and Prime Minister Mari Alkatiri immediately
following the incident have helped to defuse the
situation, it is symptomatic of the underlying tensions
in Timorese society. Veterans, along with former
combatants, are among the groups that feel
marginalized and neglected. Remedial measures should
be taken to address those concerns.This was also the
conclusion of the day-long national dialogue on unity,
peace and development organized by President Xanana
Gusmao's Office last Saturday, 21 August, with the
encouragement of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Sukehiro Hasegawa, and with
support from UNMISET and the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP).

Progress is being made towards formulating a
policy on veterans. The National Parliament is
currently considering the report of the President's
commissions on veterans and ex-combatants. It is
essential that legislation on this matter be expedited
and action taken to implement both short-term
measures and long-term projects to address their needs
for respect and recognition as well as other grievances.
Bilateral and multilateral assistance will be required to
implement concrete projects to address the most
deserving and the most needy cases, including those
who participated in the independence struggle from the
outset as well as their widows and orphans. The
Special Representative of the Secretary-General has
urged all parties, including Timorese institutions of
State sovereignty and civil society groups, such as the
associations of veterans and former combatants, to
reach a consensus and present concrete projects to the
development partners at the earliest possible juncture.
UNMISET will maintain regular and close contact with
all concerned to facilitate their efforts.

The recent resurgence of fights between martial
arts groups is worrisome, even though there does not
seem to be any evidence of political motivations
behind these incidents. Four serious incidents have
taken place in the last ten days, from Viqueque and
Baucau in the eastern part of the country to Ainaro and
Ermera in the west of the country. UNMISET has urged
the Government to develop a legal framework for the
activities of those groups and channel their energies
into more constructive endeavours. However, socio-
economic development and the creation of employment
opportunities will remain essential to tackle the root
causes of those problems.

Those events have also underlined the continued
need for the promotion of a culture of political
dialogue. It is heartening that the Government has
resumed its Open Governance Programme, which had
been suspended since the beginning of the year. The
national dialogue, held on 21 August, was also a good
example of the commitment of the people of Timor-
Leste and their leaders to a culture of broad-based,
participatory decision-making seeking to resolve all
issues through discussion, compromise and consensus.

With regard to the function of the democratic
process, the smooth conduct of the registration of
voters for Timor-Leste's first elections since
independence is also an encouraging development.
Some 400,000 people have registered for elections of
village chiefs and village-level bodies. We also
commend the Government for taking steps towards
establishing the legal and institutional frameworks for
important Government institutions through the
adoption of key legislation.

The law to establish the Office of the Provedor
for Human Rights and Justice, provided for under the
Constitution, was promulgated in May. However, the
appointment of the Provedor by the National
Parliament has been delayed since none of the three
candidates who came forward could obtain the required
majority in the two rounds of balloting held on 16 and
17 August. The process has now been reopened for
nominations, and it is hoped that the National
Parliament will be able to select a candidate after it
reconvenes from recess on 15 September. The timely
establishment of the Office of the Provedor would
enable UNMISET to assist its development during the
remaining months of the Mission's mandate.
While Timor-Leste is making steady progress
towards achieving self-sufficiency, it will continue for
some time to require international assistance - both
financial and human resources - to implement the
legislation it has adopted and to enhance the
effectiveness of key institutions of State and
Government. The flow of revenues from energy
resources will be a key factor. In that context, reports
of the agreement at the recent meeting between Foreign
Minister Ramos-Horta and the Foreign Minister of
Australia, Mr. Alexander Downer, on a framework for
negotiations are encouraging.

Since the Secretary-General's last report to the
Security Council, progress has been made on the
finalization of the land border between Timor-Leste
and Indonesia. Agreement on 90 per cent of the border
has largely been achieved, and it is expected that
agreement will be reached at the political level on the
remaining 10 per cent in the coming weeks, as
indicated by Foreign Minister Mr. Ramos-Horta and
Indonesian Foreign Minister Mr. Wirayuda following
their recent meeting on 15 August. We hope that this
process can be completed expeditiously.

I would like now to refer to the progress made in
the three programme areas of UNMISET's mandate.
With regard to the 58 civilian advisers to be provided
for the most critical positions in public administration,
UNMISET has now completed the recruitment process
with the participation of the Government. Thus far, 51
of those 58 advisers have been deployed in the field, an
additional four advisers will be deployed next month,
and a decision by the Government on the three
remaining positions is awaited.

As for the 102 critical posts - as they are
referred to - that are to be funded bilaterally,
regrettably, resources have been received for only half
of that number. Support from the international
community for those positions will therefore be crucial.
On the whole, the public administration still lacks
experienced and skilled personnel, in particular mid-
level managers to perform substantive and supervisory
functions. This also impedes the delegation of authority
to appropriate levels and the decentralization of public
services. It is incumbent on the Government to recruit
the counterparts of the advisers as expeditiously as
possible if they are to benefit from the advisers'
expertise and skills in the remaining months of
UNMISET's mandate.

The civilian advisers have been informed of the
importance of preparing and implementing exit
strategies. They will focus on institutional capacity
development through well-targeted, formalized training
programmes. Fostering a culture of transparency,
accountability and respect for human rights will be
among their tasks.

The justice sector continues to be affected by a
shortage of qualified personnel and limited
infrastructure, which has contributed in turn to a
continued backlog of cases, detentions on expired
warrants and violations of human rights. Nevertheless,
progress has been achieved. The number of detainees
held on expired warrants has been considerably
reduced after a judicial review by the President of the
Court of Appeal following a formal request from the
Special Representative.

UNMISET is also providing 15 advisers out of
the 58 most critical positions in the justice sector,
including judges for the district courts. It is hoped that
with their assistance and the contributions of bilateral
donors and other agencies, such as the UNDP, the
system can be made more functional.

The serious crimes process in Dili has made
progress in prosecuting perpetrators of serious crimes
committed in 1999. However, many of the indicted
persons are still outside Timor-Leste and have not been
brought to justice. As reflected in the last report of the
Secretary-General, the serious crimes process may not
be able to fully respond to the desires for justice of
those affected by the violence in 1999 within the
limited time frame and resources that remain available.
We look forward to continuing our discussion with the
Security Council on the way forward for dealing with
this issue before the completion of UNMISET's
mandate in May 2005.

The UNMISET police component has continued
to assist the national police service, the Policia
Nacional de Timor-Leste (PNTL), to develop into a
professional and impartial police service through
mentoring and monitoring, while seeking to coordinate
UNMISET's efforts with other bilateral and
multilateral assistance programmes. The police
component has prepared a skills development plan for
the PNTL based on a needs assessment of areas in
which continued assistance is required. The focus is on
training the trainers. The PNTL has assumed all
operational policing responsibilities since 20 May. The
response of PNTL to the recent Violence between
martial arts groups in four different parts of the country
has been largely adequate.

However, the PNTL continues to cope with
problems such as insufficient professional skills and
misconduct. Although corrective measures have been
taken, more needs to be done. At UNMISET's
suggestion, the Government has established a high-
level body of ministers to examine the allegations
related to abuses and violations of human rights of
demonstrators and bystanders in Dili on 20 July. Swift
and exemplary action after due process and diligent
investigation of complaints would strengthen the
morale and image of the PNTL.

Meanwhile, the response of the anti-riot rapid
intervention unit to the 19 and 20 July demonstrations
in Dili also suggested the importance of further
training for this particular unit. After the incident,
Prime Minister Alkatiri formally requested the Special
Representative to ensure that further instruction is
offered to the PNTL, particularly in the areas of
leadership and command and control, with a view to
redressing the deficiencies identified on that occasion.

Human rights training will constitute an integral
part of this process. The training began on 9 August
with the involvement of trainers and middle and senior
commanders of the anti-riot rapid intervention unit, to
ensure capacity development and sustainability of the
training process even after completion of UNMISET's
mandate. UNMISET's police component continues to
train other special units of the PNTL. The second phase
of training for the police reserve unit, formerly known
as the rapid deployment service, began on 21 June.
Eighty-four PNTL officers are being trained by
UNMISET police trainers over a nine-week period.
While the basic training of the police reserve unit was
completed on 23 August, it is estimated that at least
three more months of extensive in-service training and
supervision will be required.

I am happy to report that since the assumption of
responsibility for external security by the Government
of Timor-Leste, the security situation in the border
districts, and indeed in all of Timor-Leste, has
generally been calm and peaceful. The majority of the
personnel of UNMISET's reduced military component
are deployed in the western border districts, while one
platoon of the international response unit is deployed
in Dili. As reflected in the Secretary-General's report
(S/2004/669), UNMISET's military component
continues to facilitate contacts between the security
forces of Timor-Leste and Indonesia. The military
liaison officers continue to monitor security-related
developments along the border. A military liaison
arrangement between UNMISET and the Indonesian
security forces was signed on 24 June.
UNMISET's military component has also made
efforts to foster close collaboration between the
Timorese national security forces. Regular meetings
with both the Timorese defence forces and the police
have been held to discuss issues related to the security
and stability of the country. Development of the
defence forces, which continue to suffer from a lack of
experience and skilled personnel, proper training and
equipment and a very limited logistical capability for
deployment, will continue to depend on external
support through the provision of equipment and
training.

In conclusion, let me say that while progress has
been made in all areas of UNMISET's mandate, much
remains to be done. UNMISET will strive to achieve as
much as possible in the remaining months of its
mandate. At the same time, Timor-Leste will have to
work closely with other multilateral and bilateral
partners to meet its continuing requirements beyond
May 2005. The situation will be reviewed later this
year with a View to determining whether modifications
can be made to the mission's size, composition and
tasks. This review, which will take place in October,
will be based on the prevailing security situation and
the extent of progress made towards reaching the
threshold of self-sufficiency by key institutions of State
and Government in Timor-Leste.

