I wish to thank you, Mr. President, for this opportunity to brief the Council, and I also thank the Government of the Niger for having organized today's Security Council meeting. For decades, the discussions on humanitarian challenges centred around the consequences of either armed conflict or disaster. Each had its specific and distinct laws, protocols and procedures that informed humanitarian action, and there was little crossover between the two. Accordingly, the Security Council maintained its focus on conflict-related humanitarian challenges. It focused on security issues and on mitigating impacts on vulnerable populations, including civilians, women, children and displaced communities; on protected places such as hospitals or schools; on the availability of weapons and their use; and on the need of belligerents to comply with the law. The International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) has increasingly noted that communities living on the front lines of war, violence and devastation are more frequently - and more urgently - citing climate shocks as a key issue of concern, alongside poverty, injustice, exclusion and weapons availability. For decades now, environmental dimensions have been incorporated into the ICRC's humanitarian response: on, for example, explosive remnants of war and land contamination; the management of waste; and the ensuring of safe drinking water. Our operational response has paved the way for more in-depth policy reflections on the links between environmental degradation, climate risk, humanitarian needs, and peace and security. While some of the concerns reported by the populations affected are fears of future disasters such rising desertification or displacement from extreme-weather events, others are living those horrors today. Communities living in the Sahel and Lake Chad region are among the most resilient in the world. But in the face of the cumulative pressures of conflict, climate change and environmental degradation, they now walk a tightrope of survival. Last week I visited the Niger and Burkina Faso, where people told me about their experiences of rising violence and displacement. Yes, they are displaced, first, because of conflict and violence as well as violations of laws and principles. But they also recognize the increasing tensions between communities because of changing rainfall patterns and scarcity of land for agriculturalists and pastoralists. They talk about the erosion of traditional conflict-resolution mechanisms in communities and the manipulation of tensions by armed groups and irresponsible leaders. At the same time, those same communities are being hit by damaging floods and drought. More than | million people have been forced to flee their homes in Mali, the Niger and Burkina Faso because of conflict and violence over the past year, leaving them highly vulnerable to the next shock, such as the deadly floods of the past weeks. How can the Security Council, and how can we, as front-line humanitarian organizations, support those who have been chased out of their lands and are surviving in precarious conditions; those who have lived for months or years in leaking shelters or cramped rooms shared with host families; and those who are now flooded by torrential rainfalls? For too long the world has neglected the Sahel, leaving vast humanitarian needs unmet. Yet climate change and environmental degradation are felt more dramatically there than in many other places around the world. Years of conflict, underdevelopment and criminality have led to fragile social and economic systems and enormous humanitarian needs. The ICRC sees those patterns repeated across many of the conflict zones in which we work. It is starkly evident that people affected by conflict are also disproportionately impacted by climate shocks. This also includes those living outside of regular governance systems. It is the ICRC's estimate that today approximately 66 million people worldwide are living in areas controlled by non-State armed groups and thus are outside adequate governance efforts to deal with the complexities of the issues. Urgent action from members of the Security Council - from all States as well as from legal experts and development, climate and humanitarian actors - is critical. But what action should be taken? Let me share one predominant message that I bring home from visits to the ICRC's operations. The populations affected do not want handouts, even if they may need them temporarily. It does not matter if the cause is conflict or disaster, or both, people demand an independent future, one in which they can feed their families without our help. With that in mind, the ICRC's focus today is twofold. First, I turn to the issue of providing humanitarian action that mitigates the impacts of conflict and protects communities from harm. We are invested in helping to build strong and resilient communities that can withstand environmental degradation and successive climate shocks. We work at the levels of systems, communities and individuals: from building walls that protect communities from floods, to supporting new microeconomic enterprises and introducing waste-management systems and practices, to vaccinating livestock and distributing drought-resistant seeds. The second area of focus for the ICRC is respect for international humanitarian law. In the light of the climate crisis and the extensive environmental degradation resulting from war, the ICRC is accelerating its outreach to States and next week will release its updated guidelines on the protection of the natural environment in armed conflict. The guidelines will assist States and others in interpreting and applying international humanitarian law and in incorporating its rules in military manuals as well as in national policy and legal frameworks to enhance the protection of the environment. From the Sahel and Lake Chad region to war zones around the globe, millions are suffering on the front lines of environmental degradation, climate change and conflict. Peace and security will not be established by focusing on military and security measures to curb conflict and violence. We must ensure that those most at risk are our urgent priority. Building resilient communities alongside efforts to protect those communities from violence is critical. Robust action needs to be well framed and executed in strict respect of laws and principles in order to avoid fuelling further cycles of violence. While many of us may agree in general terms on the linkages between peace, security and our climate and environment, the "how" of our response still needs more critical analysis and sharing of experiences. The ICRC would welcome regular and systematic discussions on today's issue. That would allow us to learn from one another, to design contextual and innovative responses and critically to ensure a greater impact over time. I thank you, Mr. President, for the opportunity to bring the humanitarian perspective into this discussion today.
