Ms. Rice (United States of America): I wish to
thank you, Mr. President, and Foreign Minister
Espinosa for your leadership in hosting today's very
important debate. I want to begin by also thanking the
Foreign Minister for her very timely comments on
Mexico's handling of the swine flu crisis. Here in the

United States our hearts are with the people of Mexico
in this time of trial, and we very much applaud
Mexico's efforts to confront and contain the crisis. My
Government stands hand in hand with our friend and
neighbour, Mexico, as we work together to deal with
what is a shared challenge, one that is affecting both
our countries and, indeed, many other parts of the
world.

I also wish to welcome Mexico as the new chair
of the Security Council Working Group on Children
and Armed Conflict and to thank France for its
leadership as chair of that group over the last several
years.

I also wish to thank Special Representative
Coomaraswamy for her briefing and for her steadfast
advocacy on behalf of the world's children. She
continues to have our fullest support. I wish to say also
how moved I know we all were by the testimony of
young Grace Akallo, whose story and experience
remind us of our obligations and of the importance of
what we are discussing here today.

The United States is deeply committed to the
welfare of children, and that includes protecting
children from the scourge of war. Every day hundreds
of thousands of children find themselves caught in the
clutches of armed conflict, unprotected, exploited,
abused, raped and terribly vulnerable. The Security
Council and its Working Group have telegraphed
strong political will to help those children and have
helped shine the international spotlight on their
suffering. Therefore the United States welcomes the
Secretary-General's report (S/2009/158). It includes
valuable monitoring and reporting information that
highlights both real progress and ongoing tragedies. It
outlines thoughtful recommendations for future action.

Before turning to the rest of the report, allow me
to comment on a few specific situations.

There is good news from Uganda. As the report
notes, we have no evidence at present that the Uganda
People's Defence Force has recruited child soldiers
since August 2007. Uganda's strictly enforced laws and
regulations now prevent the recruitment and use of
child soldiers. We commend the Government of
Uganda for its efforts and for signing an action plan
last December. We urge other Governments and non-
State actors to follow Uganda's example by
developing, signing and implementing action plans of
their own.

However, in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, the situation remains dire. During the reporting
period, the United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC)
documented 554 new cases of children recruited by
armed groups, 26 of them girls. We are also deeply
troubled by what the Secretary-General's report calls
"widespread sexual violence" by armed groups in that
country. In particular, two foreign armed groups
operating in the Democratic Republic - the
Democratic Forces for the Liberation of Rwanda and
the Lord's Resistance Army - continue to abduct
children to serve as soldiers, porters and sex slaves,
and some of those innocents have been murdered in
cold blood.

We are also deeply concerned by the situation in
Sri Lanka, where fighting between Government forces
and the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE) has
led to a growing, and grave, humanitarian crisis.
Unconfirmed reports that the Government continues
heavy shelling in the conflict zone, causing large
numbers of civilian casualties, are alarming indeed.
The LTTE has reportedly increased its forcible
recruitment of children, and the Tigers are said to
threaten families who seek to disclose information
about their children to the United Nations. The LTTE
also uses civilians as human shields, putting children at
even greater risk.

Both the Government of Sri Lanka and the LTTE
must abide by their commitments to prevent further
loss of civilian life. We remain frustrated and
concerned that the Government of Sri Lanka has not
yet allowed a United Nations humanitarian team into
the conflict zone to facilitate relief operations and the
safe evacuation of civilians, including children.

We also continue to be deeply troubled by events
in the Sudan, where close to five hundred children,
some as young as 12, have been recruited since
February 2008 by a range of armed groups, including
Government forces. Moreover, attacks and restrictions
on humanitarian workers have hindered the delivery of
humanitarian aid to children. The recent expulsion by
the Government of the Sudan of 13 international
humanitarian non-governmental organizations (NGOs)
has put the children of Darfur and the three areas at ever
more grave risk. My Government is also extremely
concerned by the 53 verified cases of child rape by
armed Government elements in Darfur - something
that I hope we can all agree is utterly unacceptable.

The situations in the Sudan, Sri Lanka, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and elsewhere
remind us how much more remains to be done. One
worthwhile step would be to expand the list of triggers
for the monitoring and reporting mechanism authorized
by Council resolution 1612 (2005) to include rape and
sexual Violence against children, as well as killing and
maiming. As the Secretary-General's report shows, the
rate of such crimes against children in combat zones
has increased alarmingly. The United States fully
supports such an expansion of these triggers. We
applaud the Security Council for its coming
endorsement of today's presidential statement pointing
towards the same goal, and we look forward to the
Council's further action on this matter.

Finally, the Secretary-General's report reminds us
that some Governments and militias are repeat
offenders - entities that persist in illegally recruiting
and using child soldiers in defiance of the will of the
international community. Where armies and militias
that depend on children to fill their ranks do not change
their ways, this Council has the authority and the
responsibility to consider taking appropriate measures.
The United States is determined to do its part. Our
support for international organizations such as the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees (UNHCR), UNICEF and the International
Committee of the Red Cross helps meet the needs of
refugees, children and others whose lives have been
uprooted by conflict, including the youngest victims of
war. We are also working with our NGO partners to
provide education and other programmes to meet the
needs of children and adolescents in conflict zones and
to give them hope for a better future.

The Security Council and the international
community have made noteworthy progress together,
but we must not stop now. We share the responsibility
to protect all of the world's children and to provide
them with a future of promise and opportunity, not one
of war and abuse. We have heard the moving stories of
such former child soldiers as young Grace, who was
here today, Ishmael Beah and Emmanuel Jal. Let their
escapes from terror and despair become the rule for
children in armed conflict, not remarkable exceptions.
Let their survival and success motivate us all and spur
us to do more.

