Mr. Widodo (Indonesia): Let me begin by
extending my delegation's felicitations to you, Sir, for
presiding over the deliberations of the Security Council
in this month of January. It is also a pleasure for my
delegation to congratulate Bulgaria, Cameroon,
Guinea, Mexico and the Syrian Arab Republic, which
became members of the Security Council on 1 January
this year. We are fully confident that the new members
will provide valuable contributions to the work of the
Council.

I should also like to join previous speakers in
welcoming the presence in our midst of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Sergio
Vieira de Mello, and of the Senior Minister for Foreign
Affairs and Cooperation, Mr. Jose Ramos-Horta.

Having listened with keen interest to their
insightful briefings on the challenges and opportunities
that have arisen during East Timor's transitional
period, leading up to the historic moment of
independence and preparations for a successor mission
to the United Nations Transitional Administration in
East Timor (UNTAET), my delegation would like to
emphasize how important it is for the international
community, including Indonesia, to focus its concerted
attention on the future of East Timor as it embarks on
its journey to nationhood in May this year, and beyond.

Indonesia's commitment and support in this
regard need no further reiteration. Indonesia and
UNTAET have jointly engaged in various productive
bilateral talks since the last meeting of the Council.
Seizing the initiative once again, we have now
scheduled talks at the ministerial level with the
representatives of UNTAET and East Timor, to be held
in Bali on 25 February 2002, and to be followed the
next day by a trilateral ministerial meeting between
Indonesia, UNTAET and East Timor, and Australia. In
my Government's view, these talks provide the most
appropriate forum for exploring ways and means to
resolve the outstanding and wider issues of interest to
the parties.

Since October last, there have been encouraging
developments with respect to the issues of refugees,
security, justice and reconciliation. With the prevailing
atmosphere of calm and stability in the border area, the
number of refugee returns has been steadily rising
since October 1999, to date totalling more than
190,000 East Timorese. Motivated by this environment
of normalcy, Indonesia's Regional Military
Commander in Udayana decided to withdraw two
battalions of the army from the East Nusa Tengara
province.

My Government has consistently called for
resolving the refugee issue once and for all, because
not only has the refugees' prolonged presence caused
disharmony with the local population in East Nusa
Tengara, but also because, as time marches on, the
issue will become increasingly complex and harder to
deal with. More important, however, is the fact that to
leave the refugees to an uncertain fate is indeed a
violation of their fundamental human rights. Bearing in
mind the upcoming presidential election and the
nation's subsequent independence, it is a matter of the
highest priority that they become active participants,
along with the rest of their countrymen, in these
momentous and fundamental processes and thereby
determine the future of their own country.

It was with this in mind that the Government of
Indonesia and the United Nations launched a Joint
Appeal on East Timorese refugees on 27 November
last, in Jakarta. It is expected that through this
endeavour around 60,000 refugees could be repatriated
this year. Through this body, my delegation appeals to
donor countries and institutions to contribute
generously to these efforts. Indeed, support for the
Joint Appeal is singularly urgent, as my Government
has, as of 1 January this year, discontinued the
assistance which had been provided since September
2000.

Nonetheless, Indonesia will continue to make
provisions, within its modest means, for vulnerable
groups and emergency situations until 30 April 2002,
when the camps will finally be closed. Hence, this is a
crucial period, during which the refugees will have to
finally decide on the options offered by my
Government: whether to accept repatriation before
their country's imminent independence or to join
Indonesia's resettlement programme.

Moreover, Indonesia and United Nations agencies
continue to enhance coordination on voluntary
repatriation such as encouraging a "go and see" visit. A
special fund has also been established to alleviate any
insecurity relating to the pension benefits of former
Indonesian government employees who have returned
to, or will live in, East Timor. Within its limited
capabilities, Indonesia will make a contribution of $2
million towards that fund.

Simultaneously, reconciliation is an important
component in post-conflict circumstances, including in
encouraging the repatriation of refugees. In this
respect, we were gratified by the dialogue session held
by Mr. Xanana Gusmao with some 1,000 East
Timorese, predominantly pro-autonomy supporters, on
3 November last. Just last week, Mr. Gusmao reiterated
that the new Government of East Timor would ensure
their safety if they returned to their homeland. My
delegation can only underscore the importance of such
reconciliation initiatives, and it earnestly hopes that the
international community will lend this process its full
support.

It is also pertinent to note that the Indonesian
military and United Nations peacekeeping forces have
been working in close cooperation and coordination,
leading to more favourable conditions along the border.
The third meeting of the East Timor-Indonesia Joint
Border Committee took place from 19 to 21 November
2001 in Dili, and negotiations are expected to continue
in the near future. Meanwhile, both sides have agreed
to a joint border reconnaissance next month. My
Government will continue to provide the assistance
deemed necessary in this regard and hopes that all
parties will support this effort in the same spirit as it is
being given.

Pursuant to Indonesia's assurances that justice
would be upheld, Presidential Decree No. 6/M/2002
was issued on 12 January 2002 regarding the
appointment of 18 judges to the Ad Hoc Human Rights
Court as a follow-up to the Presidential Decree issued
last year to expand the jurisdiction of the Ad Hoc
Human Rights Court. The Ad Hoc Court is expected to
commence its work next month.

With regard to the Atambua cases, Indonesia's
Supreme Court has overruled the decisions of the
District Court of North Jakarta, as well as those of the
High Court of Jakarta, with regard to the six
perpetrators, and their sentences ranging from 10 to 20
months have been reset at from 5 to 7 years. While
welcoming this development, my Government fully
respects the independence of the national judicial
system.

To conclude, this significant meeting of the
Security Council merits profound introspection
regarding the future of East Timor and the new
objectives of the successor mission following the end
of UNTAET'S mandate in May 2002, provided the new
Government consents to this.

