Mr. Tumysh (Kazakhstan): We thank the Bolivian
presidency of the Security Council and Secretary-
General Guterres as briefer for drawing our attention
to how natural resources have led to intense conflicts,
political unrest and even the overthrow of Governments
and to the urgent need to take action to maintain not
only regional but also international peace and security.

As a Central Asian State, we express our
appreciation to the Secretary-General for including
in his briefing the comment that our part of the world
stands as a good example of progress being achieved
through consultations among neighbouring States
with the support of the United Nations. As a member
observer of the African Union (AU), we fully support
and associate ourselves with the statement made by
the representative of cote d'Ivoire on behalf of the
African troika. In that regard, we underline the crucial
importance of the Arria formula meeting on silencing
the guns in Africa and on how the AU partnership can
contribute to a continent free of conflict, to be convened
on 19 October under the sponsorship of nine Council
members, including Kazakhstan. We also emphasize
the significance of our President's initiative on building
a world free of violent conflicts by the United Nations
centenary in 2045, as mentioned in the presidential
statement adopted in January (S/PRST/2018/1).

In modern international relations, the lack or
abundance of natural resources - food, water, energy,
oil and minerals - has taken a high human toll and
prolonged tensions through the illegal exploitation
of and trafficking in natural resources as well as
their illicit trade, which are exacerbated not only
by Governments but also by extractive industries of
foreign or multinational origin, wealthy exploiters and
even armed groups and militias to the detriment of
local populations, as well as causing dire humanitarian
consequences. Natural resources often lie at the heart
of wars and civil unrest. The growing scarcity of
resources can become an increasingly serious problem
in the coming decades. In addition, the potential
consequences of climate change for water availability,
food security, the prevalence of disease, coastal
boundaries and population distribution may aggravate
existing tensions and generate new conflicts. The high
demand for energy carriers to serve an expanding global
population of more than 9 billion people by 2050 may
raise the issue of accessibility to global energy supplies.
Such a situation may provoke tensions between States,
which will inevitably keep our world from becoming
a better and safer place for succeeding generations, as
evoked by the Charter of the United Nations.

The exploitation of natural resources must be
accompanied by increased capacity-building of
populations and contribute to the development of
the economy in general. Otherwise, it will lead to
the impoverishment of populations and the struggle
for control over resources as a means of profit. This
perspective applies to both local and foreign companies.
In this context, Kazakhstan is a good example of a
responsible State. Because we have sovereignty over
our natural resources, we attract foreign investors on
mutually beneficial terms and diversify the economy
to fully meet the needs of the population. Changing
this equitable paradigm would lead to instability
and conflict.

As mentioned today by the Secretary-General,
and according to the United Nations Environment
Programme, more than 40 per cent of internal
conflicts over the past 60 years have been linked to
the exploitation of natural resources. In this vein,
Kazakhstan views energy security as an instrumental
factor in international stability. In our opinion, there
are numerous and complex factors, including political,
social and economic aspects, that remain key drivers
of conflict. Natural resources alone are not the only
determinant in the sorrowful equation of war and
conflicts on the one hand and people's lives on the other.

The dispute over the control of natural resources has
always been on the international agenda. The advantage
we have today, in comparison to past millenniums, is
the United Nations.

My country strongly advocates respect for the
sovereignty of States over their natural resources, which
is of crucial importance for the African continent,
above all, as we witnessed during our recent visit to
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. However, since
the international community is also concerned by
environmental degradation and the illegal exploitation
of natural resources, a coordinated global approach is
also required. Member States, together with the United
Nations, must be at the forefront of the preservation of
peace and the fair use of natural resources under the
pillars of the United Nations - peace and security,
sustainable development, humanitarian action -and
in accordance with international law. We need to
catalyse new thinking, reform and processes in each of
the pillars, which, together with technical analysis and
capacity-building, could become self-sustaining, and
which partners and beneficiaries could scale up.

As with sustainable development generally,
addressing issues of natural resources also requires
a collective management system. This point was
stressed in the high-level independent reports on
peace operations and the peacebuilding architecture.
Nowadays, contributing to the conservation of natural
resources is an important part of the mandates of
peacekeeping operations. We therefore support the
wise vision that win-win solutions to today's conflicts
should be found through development.

It is also highly necessary today to strengthen
coordination among United Nations specialized
agencies and programmes so as to render their work
more efficient and practical and help them improve
State mechanisms for managing natural resources
in countries affected by conflict. The capacity of the
United Nations to provide technical information on
the status of natural resources and the environment, as
well as to make recommendations on their sustainable
use during mediation processes, should be further
strengthened.

Since we have only one planet, we think that, as an
integral part of its peacekeeping mandate, the Security
Council needs to address the issue of natural resources
and environmental impacts in the light of their great
potential for fuelling conflicts. Environmental
issues can therefore serve as an effective platform or
catalyst for enhancing dialogue, building confidence,
taking advantage of shared interests and broadening
cooperation between divided groups, as well as
among States.

Finally, we must always remember that it is people
who are vulnerable and who suffer disproportionately
in conflicts of any size or of any cause. International
impunity nurtures this problem. Kazakhstan believes
that a more equitable and balanced global partnership
will provide a solid foundation for overall sustainable
peace and development.

The meeting rose at 11.50 a.m.
