Nana Effah-Apenteng: At the outset, allow me
to convey to you, Mr. President, my delegation's
pleasure at the convening of this timely thematic
debate of the Security Council on cooperation between
the United Nations and regional organizations in
stabilization processes. We also thank you for gracing
the occasion with your presence. It is heartening to
note Romania's remarkable presidency of the Council
so far, and we wish you the best for the remainder of
the month.

The Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) would like to place on record its gratitude
for having been invited to participate in this debate. I
must, however, apologize for the inability of
Mr. Mohamed Ibn Chambas, Executive Secretary of
ECOWAS, to participate in this meeting, due to other
pressing engagements.

The Security Council will recall, that, beginning
with the conflicts of the 1990s in Liberia and Sierra
Leone, ECOWAS has both witnessed and participated
in the transition from the traditional concept of
peacekeeping - involving the interposition of troops
between consenting belligerent parties - to the
contemporary, evolving concepts of peace operations
that are informed by such concepts as peace-
enforcement, peace-building and so on. The latter is a
feature that has characterized the post-cold-war era,
where most of the conflicts involve Governments
fighting anti-government armed factions, or factions
fighting their way to power or the complete normative
collapse of States, as we saw in Liberia. Those low-
intensity conflicts are often very brutal and destructive.
They create terrible humanitarian catastrophes, as in
Liberia and Sierra Leone. The potential for a similar
eventuality exists today in Cote d'Ivoire. External
interventions to stop such violence quickly have
therefore become increasingly imperative. The reality
is that such interventions cannot be tidily done, and are
sometimes done against the expressed wishes of one
party to the conflict or the other.

It will be recalled, for example, that the human
carnage that accompanied the outbreak of the Liberian
conflict in 1989 led to what was rightly foreseen as
having potential implications beyond the borders of
that country. That compelled ECOWAS to establish the
ECOWAS Monitoring Group (ECOMOG) in order to
intervene militarily. Before ECOMOG was deployed,
on 7 August 1990, 225,000 Liberians had flooded into
Guinea, 150,000 into Cote d'Ivoire and 69,000 into
Sierra Leone. About 5,000 people had been killed, and
about 3,000 Nigerian, Ghanaian and Sierra Leonean
citizens were being held hostage by the National
Patriotic Front of Liberia rebel movement. It may be of
interest to note that the legal instrument available to
ECOWAS at the time were the Protocol on Non-
Aggression and the Protocol on Mutual Assistance in
Defence Matters, which were both strongly anchored in
the prevailing view that there should be no interference
in the internal affairs of member States.

I have begun with that recollection because, in
ECOWAS's experience at the time, our expectations
that the United Nations would quickly intervene in
Liberia, and subsequently in Sierra Leone, to help halt
the escalation of those conflicts at their outset, in the
spirit of Chapters VI and VII of the Charter of the
United Nations, were not met quickly enough.
ECOWAS consequently undertook to commit itself to
resolve those conflicts without the requisite experience
and structures - with the attendant mixed results.

As a result of those experiences, we have
wholeheartedly identified with efforts to focus on an
enhanced strategic partnership between the United
Nations and regional organizations to coordinate efforts
aimed at ensuring stability. We welcome all forms of
assistance to develop the capabilities of ECOWAS. To
that end, we have, over the years, shown that regional
organizations such as ours should quite appropriately
be the primary focus in the management of conflict in
their respective regions, but not without the support
and active collaboration of the international
community. I will therefore briefly outline the concrete
framework of both ongoing and envisaged efforts to
promote cooperation between the United Nations and
our regional organization, within which ECOWAS
deems cooperation with United Nations in the area of
peace and security capable of yielding the best results.

It is important to point out that ECOWAS, as its
name denotes, was established to promote cooperation
and development in all fields of economic activity for
the purpose of raising the standard of living of its
peoples, of increasing and maintaining economic
stability, of fostering closer relations among its
members and of contributing to the progress and
development of the African continent. Those purposes,
however, cannot be achieved in an unstable
environment. Cognizant of that fact, ECOWAS is
therefore desirous of working with the United Nations
in the spirit of Chapter VIII of the Charter to create a
political, economic and social environment in its
member States that is stable and secure. The
partnership between the United Nations and ECOWAS
would be most enhanced if the United Nations were to
provide the support required to enable ECOWAS to
build the structures associated with the implementation
of the ECOWAS Mechanism for Conflict Prevention,
Resolution, Peacekeeping and Regional Security.

I shall now turn to the subject of a framework for
cooperation. Several initiatives have been undertaken
in the past, or are in the process of implementation, to
establish an appropriate framework for cooperation
between the United Nations and ECOWAS in areas
such as information sharing, capacity-building and
fundraising. The overall objectives are to promote
conflict prevention, conflict management and
resolution and peace building.

In order to actualize the stated objectives,
ECOWAS has signed various memorandums of
understanding with United Nations bodies, such as the
United Nations Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA), the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and the West
African Network for Peacebuilding. A draft
memorandum of understanding with the United Nations
Office for West Africa (UNOWA) is expected to be
signed soon. The relationship with UNOWA is
particularly important because this memorandum is
designed to strengthen cooperation between the parties
with a View to contributing to improving the capacity
of ECOWAS in conflict prevention; enhancing the
preparedness and capacity to respond to emerging
crises; encouraging a regional approach to conflict
prevention, crisis management and post-conflict
stabilization in cooperation with other partners in the
subregion, including women's organizations; better
addressing cross-border issues, in particular the plight
of child soldiers and the use of mercenaries, human
trafficking and the proliferation of small arms and light
weapons; involving civil society participation in
conflict prevention, resolution, peace-building and
post-conflict recovery; and mobilizing the international
community's support for peace and security in West
Africa.

ECOWAS is focused on the promotion of its
Protocol on Democracy and Good Governance as a key
aspect of its conflict prevention policy, because the
absence of those two components has served as a major
contributory factor in the various conflicts in the
region. Since ECOWAS started implementing the
Mechanism for Conflict Prevention, Management,
Resolution, Peacekeeping and Security, the various
organs of the Mechanism have enabled it to act in a
more coordinated manner to prevent or mitigate the
effects of emerging conflict. Examples of such action
include ECOWAS's recent response to the situations in
Cote d'Ivoire, Guinea-Bissau and Liberia. There is a
lot of scope for coordination with the United Nations to
strengthen the activities of ECOWAS's mediation and
conflict resolution organs.

Another important pillar of ECOWAS conflict
prevention efforts is its early warning system. The
organization's priority is to broaden its sources of
information on conflict indicators. It is desirous to
share information with OCHA and relevant non-
governmental organizations with established
information networks. It would be most helpful for a
formal link to be established between the ECOWAS
early warning system and that of the United Nations
Headquarters and it agencies. Areas of collaboration
could include, first, a regular and structured exchange
of information and documentation on respective
policies and activities, subject to the rules of
confidentiality existing in the respective organizations;
secondly, a regular exchange of visits and the
organization of working sessions between the heads
and senior management of ECOWAS and United
Nations agencies; thirdly, the designation by both
organizations of dedicated focal points that would be
responsible for monitoring and facilitating the
implementation of cooperation arrangements between
the two organizations; fourthly, the organization of
regular follow-up working visits by focal points; and
fifthly, attendance at meetings and seminars organized
by each organization, by invitation and as appropriate.

The Council of Elders, which is composed of
eminent personalities in the region, is another
component of ECOWAS's preventive diplomacy
mechanism. So far, it has been engaged in election
monitoring and special missions. ECOWAS believes
that the relevance of that body could be enhanced and
its preventive diplomacy efforts given added impetus if
a formal process were established between the United
Nations and ECOWAS to use their expertise.

ECOWAS's policy on conflict resolution and
management is geared towards creating rapid response
and sustained peacekeeping capabilities. One of the
organs established in the ECOWAS Mechanism to
provide such capability is ECOMOG. It is a structure
composed of several standby multi-purpose modules -
civilian and military - in their countries of origin and
ready for immediate deployment. ECOWAS's
peacekeeping vision to

"define, build, organize and maintain a standby
regional military capability in peacekeeping and
humanitarian assistance to a level of self-
sustenance in the area of troops and logistics
support to enable it to respond to internal or
external regional crises threatening peace and
security, including terrorists and/or environmental
threats"

was approved with the setting up of a task force by the
organization's Defence and Security Commission on 18
June, 2004.

The approved establishment of the envisaged
peacekeeping force, based on the creation of stand-by
units, would consist of two models: a task force of
1,500 soldiers for rapid stabilization or pre-emptive
deployment, to be known as the ECOWAS task force,
and a brigade of 5,000 soldiers for a more sustained
operation. Such a task force, as in Cote d'Ivoire or the
vanguard force in Liberia, would set the stage for
subsequent United Nations intervention. In this
connection, we seek further cooperation with the
United Nations Department of Peacekeeping
Operations (DPKO) because of the latter's enormous
experience and better developed structures to conduct a
thorough needs assessment of member States' armed
forces to prepare them to play their envisaged roles.
ECOWAS would also welcome the opportunity to work
with DPKO and the Standby Force High Readiness
Brigade to develop the structures of the force
headquarters and logistics bases. Most importantly, the
doctrinal documents used by DPKO would greatly
assist the recently established ECOWAS Mission
Planning and Management Cell in planning operations,
developing the appropriate formats for standard
operating procedures and other operational documents.

The establishment of the ECOWAS Mechanism
has made military interventions much easier in recent
years than they were in the previous decade. The
mechanism was put to the test in Cote d'Ivoire and
Liberia. In both cases, the collaboration of the United
Nations, in terms of assistance, was very valuable.
Both interventions were classical hybrid operations in
which ECOWAS stabilized the environment as a
prelude to United Nations deployment. It is therefore
important to note the existing paradox that, while
ECOWAS deployments are characterized by a lack of
adequate administrative and logistics infrastructure, the
United Nations peace operations have on occasion been
described as too expensive. It stands to reason that the
United Nations and ECOWAS need to find a middle
ground and work out modalities to enhance the full
benefits to be derived from ECOWAS capabilities by
maximizing advantages in such areas as those of
regional expertise, rapid response potential, over-the-
horizon capabilities and a coherent headquarters.

In the area of peace-building, ECOWAS finds
itself seriously handicapped in executing peace-
building programmes. Protocols and memorandums
have been put into place to provide the structures
necessary to address such issues as the proliferation of
small arms and light weapons, election monitoring, the
promotion of trade and economic activities. We are
positive that the implementation of these
memorandums would contribute to creating the
required synergy between both organizations.
ECOWAS and the United Nations need to work
together on disarmament, demobilization, rehabilitation
and reintegration in trouble spots, such as Cote d'Ivoire
and Liberia. Other major challenges to be addressed are
security sector reforms in most member States and
consolidating gains made in the process of
consolidating good governance in countries with weak
political systems.

In conclusion, I wish to emphasize that there is a
lot of scope for improving the interface between the
United Nations and ECOWAS. Mindful of existing
potentials for fruitful collaborative work between our
two organizations, ECOWAS looks forward to
enhancing relations with the United Nations in
providing the requisite leadership to promote world
peace, security and development.

