Mr. Ladsous (spoke in French): I thank you,
Mr. President, for this new opportunity to brief the
Security Council on the situation in Darfur and
the activities of the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID). The report
of the Secretary-General (S/2016/268), which you have
before you, Sir, provides an update and analysis of the
political and security situation in Darfur. The report
also charts the operational context in which UNAMID
is currently functioning, as well as the activities being
carried out by the mission within the framework of the
implementation of its mandate. I would like to limit my
remarks today to a few key points of this report, while
also addressing some of the major developments that
have occurred since its publication last month.

Since my previous briefing to the Council (see S/PV.7608), on 25 January 2016, the security situation
in Darfur has essentially been marked by fighting
between Government forces and those of the Sudan
Liberation Army/Abdul Wahid (SLA-Abdul Wahid)
in the Jebel Marra region, which straddles three
States of Darfur - North Darfur, Central Darfur and
South Darfur. The fighting, whose warning signs and
preparations were visible at the end of the rainy season
last year, in October, intensified in mid-January this
year following an apparent ambush by SLA-Abdul
Wahid rebels against a convoy of Government forces in
early January. In response to the attack, the Sudanese
Government launched a large-scale - it must be
said - military operation against rebel positions across
the entire Jebel Marra region.

(spoke in French)

In late February, the Government announced that
the military operation had been a success and made
possible the dismantling of most of the bases of the
Sudan Liberation Army/Abdul Wahid, the surrender of
hundreds of its fighters and some of its military leaders
and the taking of control by Government forces of the
Jebel Marra region, with the exception of some residual
pockets of resistance. For its part, the Sudan Liberation
Army/Abdul Wahid contradicted that assessment and
stated that its forces had repelled the Government
offensive and that it continued to maintain a strong
presence in Jebel Marra.

As noted in the report, it is difficult for us, at this
stage, to establish an objective assessment ofthe fighting
because of access restrictions imposed on UNAMID
in Jebel Marra. However, from various sources of
information we have received confirming this, what
we can say at present is that clashes and air strikes are
continuing. For instance, fighting was still reported to
be taking place on 11 March in various localities north
of Kass, South Darfur. Additional fighting took place
Sorong, Central Darfur, on 17 and 23 March, as well
as in Kadingo and Kwila on 19 March. We continue to
receive reports of Government troop reinforcements in
Golo and Guldo, Central Darfur, which by all accounts
is the epicentre of clashes.

(spoke in English)

The security situation in other parts of Darfur
remained fragile, with underlying tensions among and
between local tribes over access to, the use and the
management of land, water and other resources, leading
to persistent outbreaks of intercommunal conflict
despite the measures taken by the local authorities to
contain the clashes. UNAMID continues to support
the efforts by the Government to mediate these
conflicts and consistently advocates for comprehensive
measures that seek to address their root causes. But the
proliferation of small arms and the presence of various
militia groups have meant an increase in criminality
and various types of banditry against civilians. In spite
of some improvements, the general weakness of the rule
of law across Darfur results in such violations largely
going unpunished.

The escalation of fighting in Jebel Marra has led to
large-scale displacement, especially from mid-January
to late March. Humanitarian organizations estimate
that, as of 31 March, at least 138,000 people from Jebel
Marra had been newly displaced in North, Central and
South Darfur. Due to the access restrictions imposed
by the Government, the exact number of civilian
casualties from the recent wave of belligerence cannot
yet be ascertained. Those restrictions, particularly in
Central Darfur, have further prevented UNAMID and
humanitarian actors from responding to needs of the
displaced for protection and humanitarian support.

Despite the volatile security situation and the
considerable challenges described in the report,
UNAMID has remained steadfast in the implementation
of its strategic priorities and in addressing key
challenges to the implementation of its mandate. With
the new outbreak of fighting in J ebel Marra, the mission
has focused its efforts on ensuring the protection of
civilians and the displaced. In that regard, UNAMID
has established protective areas near displacement
sites in Sortony, Kabkabiya, Tawila and Nertiti, where
a total of approximately 103,000 persons have sought
refuge. That led UNAMID to reinforce its military
and police presence in the area and to intensify day-
and-night patrols in order to maintain security and law
and order. The mission has further been supporting the
coordination of, and provided security and logistical
support for, the delivery of humanitarian assistance,
while also engaging the parties to immediately cease
hostilities and for the Government to allow immediate,
full and unhindered access.

Concurrent to that volatile security environment,
the political process to settle the Darfur conflict remains
polarized. The referendum on the administrative status
of Darfur - to determine whether Darfur would become
a single region or retain the current five subregional
divisions as provided by the Doha Document for Peace
in Darfur 4 is scheduled to take place from 11 to
13 April. The criteria for voter eligibility have proved
to be controversial, as many stakeholders argue that
all Darfuris should be allowed to participate in the
voting. Some Sudanese political parties participating in
the National Dialogue Conference in Khartoum have
also expressed concern about what they describe as
the unsuitable timing of the process given the current
fighting and the additional displacement in Jebel Marra.

Despite several meetings that took place under
the auspices of the African Union High-level
Implementation Panel, progress in political efforts to
reach a sustainable resolution of the conflict through
inclusive dialogue remained elusive. While the SLA-
Abdul Wahid rejected the talks with the Government,
the recent informal meetings between the Government
and the Justice and equality Movement-Gibril Ibrahim
and the Sudan Liberation Army/Minni Minawi in
Debre Zeit, Ethiopia, ended without an agreement.
Following strategic consultations in Addis Ababa on
21 March on the cessation of hostilities in Darfur and
the two Areas and on the way forward on the national
dialogue, the Government signed a draft road map
presented by the High-level Implementation Panel,
while the representatives of the opposition refused
and asked for more time, arguing that the road map
endorsed the non-inclusive national dialogue taking
place by qualifying it as "national". On 28 March,
the Secretary-General welcomed the road map, which
would constitute a valuable step towards ending the
war, provide assistance to communities in need and
enhance the environment for an inclusive national
dialogue. Furthermore, the Secretary-General called
on the Government to fully abide by the road map and
urged the other parties to sign it as well.

Let me now turn briefly to the relationship between
UNAMID and the Government of the Sudan. I would
like to highlight the importance of a renewed partnership
in that context. Since their arrival in the Sudan, both
the Joint Special Representative and his Deputy have
actively engaged with the Sudanese authorities, who
have indicated their readiness to improve cooperation
with the mission and to re-engage in discussions on the
exit strategy.

On 22 March here in New York, the United Nations,
the African Union and the Government of the Sudan
held a strategic tripartite meeting, which I co-chaired
with the African Union Commissioner for Peace and
Security, Mr. Smail Chergui, and the Under-Secretary
of the Foreign Ministry of the Sudan, Mr. Abd Elghani
Elnaiem Awad Elkarim. In accordance with the outcome
of the meeting, concrete steps by the Government are
required in terms of lifting restrictions on the mission's
operations, including customs clearances, visas and
access to Darfur overall, including conflict areas. I can
report that some significant steps have been taken by
the Government of the Sudan since then.

Next week, the African Union, the United Nations
and the Government of the Sudan will resume
their engagement on the exit strategy based on the
parameters set by the Security Council and by the
African Union Peace and Security Council. A critical
step in that process will be the development of agreed
criteria for measuring progress towards UNAMID's
benchmarks as defined by resolution 2228 (2015) and
the communiques of the African Union Peace and
Security Council of 22 June and 31 July 2015.

It is important that the members of the Council
impress upon all the parties to the conflict in Darfur
that a political solution remains the only viable option.
The pursuit of political objectives through military
means over the past decade has only contributed to
the prolonged suffering of the civilian population. I
therefore reiterate the call of the Secretary-General to
the Government of the Sudan and the SLA/Abdul Wahid
to cease hostilities immediately in Jebel Marra and to
commit to peaceful negotiations, without preconditions.

The stability and recovery of the region is a
time-bound process, and it should be based on durable
solutions, including for the 2.6 million displaced
persons. Security is an essential element in addressing
this issue. Persistent insecurity, the presence of militia
groups and the threat of the closure of camps and forced
returns place internally displaced persons at risk of
violence and harassment. In that regard, I am concerned
by the Government's continued narrative that displaced
persons would need to leave their camps. Such is not
possible without durable solutions based on security
and the necessary socioeconomic prerequisites for the
internally displaced persons and returning refugees to
begin new lives in their areas of origin or in whatever
location they choose to settle. Within its protection of
civilians mandate, UNAMID remains committed to
supporting the Government of the Sudan in that regard.

