Mr. Kafando (Burkina F aso) (spoke in French): I
would like to tell you, Mr. President, how happy our
delegation is to see you personally chairing this
important debate on the strengthening of collective
security through the reduction of armaments and
general regulation, which is a pressing subject and goes
right to the heart of the Security Council's
responsibilities.

We are also grateful to your delegation,
Mr. President, for the concept paper that was drawn up
and for the draft presidential statement that was
proposed.

A safer world, forever rid of war, was the main
objective that guided the founders of the United
Nations. Today, this untiring pursuit of security for all
continues to be of our concern and States seek to join
efforts, in particular diplomatic and military efforts, to
preserve humanity from a new specter of war, which,
this time, could lead to a nuclear disaster.

For this, we must have rules that take into
account the control, reduction and regulation of
armament. With this in mind, we need to recognize
that, from its beginnings, the United Nations has
contributed to establishing the present disarmament
architecture, in particular, enabling the Conference on
Disarmament to negotiate and conclude the Nuclear
Non-Proliferation Treaty, the Comprehensive Nuclear-
Test-Ban Treaty, as well as the Conventions on
chemical and biological weapons.

However, we still face an unprecedented threat
that is due essentially to the excessive accumulation of
weapons of mass destruction, such as nuclear,
chemicals and biological weapons, as well as to the
constant increase in military budgets and the risk of the
militarization of outer space.

Additionally, cluster munitions, conventional
weapons, and small arms and light weapons continue to
cause enormous suffering to civilian populations as
well as significant material damage.

In view of this situation, we can only deplore the
lethargy in the two frameworks of multilateral
negotiation, that is, the Conference on Disarmament
and the United Nations Disarmament Commission.

We have not met with any further success with
regard to the efforts to strengthen the legal framework
of and cooperation on these issues undertaken by the
General Assembly, and so we must recognize that, in
spite of sustained action within the United Nations,
which has contributed to greater awareness of the need
to act, the United Nations has not been able to carry
out its mandate with necessary effectiveness. All of this
undermines the objective of collective security, of
which, in terms of the Charter, the United Nations in
general, and the Security Council in particular, are
guarantors.

Although we recognize that control and
regulation of armaments is a very complex task vis-a-
Vis the interests at stake, Burkina Faso is convinced
that the need to ensure effective security should give
that task priority over any other consideration.

Apart from the numerous victims they take, these
arms are a constant threat for flare-ups in entire
regions. That is why we need without delay to address
the challenge of their control and regulation. In the
hope of succeeding in this area, Burkina Faso believes
that we need to seek a new consensus around collective
security, with responsibility shared by all actors on the
international stage.

This is indeed possible, in the light of the
convincing results obtained by other actors outside of
the United Nations framework, such as the
achievements of the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS), in the areas of control,
limitation and regulation of armaments in the delicate
subregion of West Africa. In June 2006 the member
countries of ECOWAS established the Convention on
Small Arms, Light Weapons, Their Ammunition, and
Other Associated Materials with the purpose of
regulating small arms and light weapons within
ECOWAS and reducing their proliferation. Neither
should we forget the historic agreement reached in
Dublin on the Convention on Cluster Munitions. That
agreement was reached outside of the current United
Nations disarmament framework by a number of
States, civil society, the International Committee of the
Red Cross and the United Nations. Those two
examples Show how important a role can be played on
the international scene by other actors in the realm of
disarmament.

Burkina Faso adheres to the principles and
recommendations of the Programme of Action to
Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in
Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects, and
we are therefore setting out to effectively implement
these measures nationally through training and control
of weapons flows, carried out by our National
Commission against small arms and light weapons and
the High National Authority to combat the importation
and exportation of small weapons, their ammunition
and their use.

As a State party to the main legal instruments on
disarmament, Burkina Faso will continue to support all
relevant initiatives.

To conclude, in order to give fresh impetus to our
collective action to reduce and regulate armaments, my
delegation wishes to make the following specific
proposals: renew the disarmament architecture by
proposing new approaches; strengthen confidence-
building measures among producer countries; ensure
compliance with and strengthen the present legal
framework; strengthen and support the capacities of
regional and subregional organizations; and strengthen
international cooperation.

