Mr. Akram (Pakistan): Pakistan sponsored and
voted in favour of the draft resolution in document
8/2003/891. We did so because we believed that it was
important to send a message to all concerned that any
contemplated act of deportation of Mr. Arafat would be
illegal and inconsistent with the objectives of the
Middle East peace process. This message, clearly, was
transmitted yesterday in the open debate held by the
Council, with the participation of the wider
membership of the United Nations.

This draft resolution enjoyed the broad support of
the non-aligned members and was sponsored by the
Arab Group. The vote we have taken reflects the fact
that it also enjoyed the support of the majority of the
members of the Security Council. My delegation
regrets that it was not possible for the Security Council
to move forward in a united way. This will have
implications for our actions in other areas. Several
Council members tried up to the last minute to evolve a
text that would be acceptable to all sides. We thank all
those delegations that took part in these good faith
efforts.

Let me take this opportunity to reaffirm
Pakistan's opposition to terrorism in all forms and
manifestations anywhere in the world. This includes
State terrorism. At the same time, as stated by the
Secretary-General during the ministerial meeting of the
Council on 20 January this year, the issue of terrorism
should not be used "to demonize political opponents"
(S/PV.4688, p. 3) and to "delegitimize legitimate
political grievances" (ibid.). The Secretary-General
also noted that

"States fighting various forms of unrest or
insurgency are finding it tempting to abandon the
slow, difficult but sometimes necessary processes
of political negotiation for the deceptively easy
option of military action" (ibid.).

The Secretary-General advised us all to

"act with determination to address - indeed,
solve- the political disputes and longstanding
conflicts that underlie, fuel and generate support
for terrorism" (ibid.).

It is unfortunate that, rather than heeding the
Secretary-General's call, the States which were being
addressed are suppressing the right of peoples to self-
determination in the Middle East and South Asia and
are now joining together in what is advertised as an
alliance against terrorism, but what is more likely to
emerge as an axis of oppression.

We would strongly urge the Government of
Israel, rather than resort to extreme actions, such as
deportation or worse for Mr. Yasser Arafat, the
President of Palestine, to join in concerted action to
assist the Palestinian people in regaining their rights
and to facilitate the end of their dispossession. They
deserve to exercise the right of self-determination
promised to them by the Security Council. The
international community has a clear responsibility to
realize this as well.

Another unambiguous message that emerged
from yesterday's debate is the need for the parties to
rededicate themselves to the Quartet's road map and to
commence its implementation in good faith. We hope
that the parties will take cognizance of the desire and
determination of the international community.

For its part, Pakistan will continue to support
every effort that takes us closer to the fulfilment of the
vision of two States, Israel and Palestine, living in the
holy land in peace with each other and with an end,
finally, to the epic tragedy of Palestine.

