Mr. Cherif (Chad) (spoke in French): First of all,
I would like to thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon
and United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights Navi Pillay for their statements. I would also
like to take this opportunity to thank the United
Kingdom for organizing this debate and to congratulate
it for presenting the resolution on the maintenance of
international peace and security that we just adopted
unanimously (resolution 2171 (2014)). Chad took part
in the negotiation of the resolution and sponsored it.
Its adoption by the Council has refreshed our memory
on the relevant provisions of the Charter of the United
Nations on the topic of conflict prevention.

It is clear that a lack ofefficiency or a certain laxness
in utilizing conflict prevention mechanisms or the
inability to discern the elements that are precursors to a
conflict have often meant that the United Nations must
face a situation offait accompli. In many cases, the United
Nations - and the Security Council in particular, which
bears the primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security - takes action only
after the outbreak of hostilities. As highlighted in the
concept note (8/2014/572, annex), no one imagined
at the time that when a young Tunisian street vendor,
Tarek al-Tayeb Mohamed Bouazizi, set himself on fire
that he was going to unleash the Arab Spring. Yet the
early indicators and precursors were already visible
in that country five years before. There was therefore
plenty of time to prevent such an event.

Nothing can justify the silence, inertia and inability
ofthe Security Council to prevent a conflict when it has
the specific powers to do so. Cycles ofviolence imposed
on children, women and elderly people around the world
amply show that we have learned nothing from history,
even as we commemorate the most heinous crimes in
the history of humankind.

All of us have deplored the laxity of our institution
and the inaction of the international community in
the management of the Rwandan genocide. But that
did not prevent the onset or worsening of the violence
in Gaza, Syria, Iraq, Central Africa, Ukraine and
elsewhere. Faced with the many conflicts shaking the
world today, we are justified in thinking that the United
Nations is far from fulfilling its primary mission to
save succeeding generations from the scourge of war.
That sad fact should prompt the Security Council to
break out of its customary mode, which boils down to
adopting resolutions and sanctions, and use the powers
conferred upon it by the Charter of the United Nations
and use all the means at its disposal to better prevent
conflicts and maintain peace and security in the world.

Chad welcomes the Council's initiative to organize
missions made up of Permanent Representatives to
countries in conflict in order to take in the reality on
the ground. It is important that the Council develops a
new comprehensive and inclusive approach to conflict
prevention that takes the human development of States
as the focus of its actions, while as much as possible
avoiding possible outside interference that may cause
an artificial conflict with incalculable consequences.

We also believe that the weaknesses of the Council
are due in part to the frequent use of the veto by the
permanent members, as well as the lack of shared
vision in the deployment of peacekeeping operations.
We believe that the maintenance of peace and security
should not be seen simply in terms of a mechanism
to prevent imminent conflict, but rather as an early-
warning system that can detect causes of conflict.
The United Nations would not have to expend huge
efforts to manage crises around the world if good
conflict prevention policy were adopted. In a speech at
UNESCO in 2012, former Secretary-General Boutros
Boutros-Ghali rightly stated that

"These conflicts, whose settlement is often long,
difficult and complex, are not unpredictable. Most
of them simmer for a long time before exploding,
and those latent tensions are known to all. But it is
clear that the international community only rarely
mobilizes itself to contain them when there is still
time to do so."

The Security Council needs more than ever to
improve the current trend in conflict prevention and
maintaining international peace and security. The
contradictions in that regard are among the causes
of the Council's ineffectiveness. Strategic interests
have long defined the world into spheres of influence,
making it difficult or impossible to take decisions
in certain situations. That is the case whenit comes
to many conflicts in Africa, the Middle East and
elsewhere, where all the symptoms are evident. Abuses
and massive violations of human rights committed in
some countries have been well known but, for unspoken
reasons, they have been allowed to reach a climax.

Yet many initiatives have been taken at the United
Nations, especially by the Secretary-General. But
the results do not meet the expectations, owing to a
lack of synergy in the efforts of the various organs.
Furthermore, there is no real assesment tool to better
measure the effectiveness of the efforts made. We think
that the Security Council could increase is effectiveness
by developing close cooperation with regional and
subregional organizations in the area of conflict
prevention and maintaining peace and security.

With regard to Africa, the African Union is one
of the largest organizations after the United Nations,
with similar bodies, the most important being the Peace
and Security Security. And at the subregional level we
have, among others, the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development, the Economic Community of Central
African States, the Economic Community of the West
African. Under the auspices of the African Union, those
organizations promote the search for peace and security
by doing prevention work, which has sometimes proven
effective.

We commend the existing cooperation in the
framework of African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur. That model could also be extended
to other areas of tension in the world - for example,
cooperation with the League of Arab States, when it
comes to the problems in the Middle East, or with the
European Union and the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe.

The Council must use the sources of information
available to it to increase its effectiveness in a
country. To that end, the periodic reports of human
rights organization's, women's groups and other civil
society organizations provide indicators and warning
signs in the respecive countries that may help prevent
conflicts. United Nations agencies, such as the United
Nations Development Programme, the World Health
Organization and UNICEF, also inform the United
Nations daily on the situations in different countries.
As a principal organ of the United Nations system, the
Security Council can effectively assist the Secretary-
General, his Special Representatives and Envoys by
taking firm, impartial and relevant decisions.

The ineffectiveness of the United Nations is in part
rooted in the fact that the Secretary-General is simply
reduced to playing an administrative role with no real
means of coercion. In that regard, the Security Council's
support for the Secretary-General would allow him and
its team to better carry out his preventive diplomacy
role.

