Mr. Cohen (United States of America): I would
like to thank Assistant Secretary-General Keita for
her briefing on the latest developments on the ground
in Darfur.

We continue to evaluate the impact President Omar
Al-Bashir's announcement last Friday. We are deeply
concerned about the declaration of a national state of
emergency, and call on the Government of the Sudan to
respect the rights of all individuals in the Sudan, bring
an immediate end to the violent repression of peaceful
protests and seek accountability for those responsible
for violations and abuses. Rather than taking steps to
expand the ability of the security services to target
peaceful protesters and opposition, what is needed are
steps to create an environment for an inclusive political
process that truly addresses citizens' legitimate
grievances and that will lead to sustainable peace and
democracy in the country.

Just over two months ago, the Security Council
agreed on a presidential statement (S/PRST/2018/l9) in
which it noted some progress in the security situation in
Darfur and expressed support for the eventual transition
from peacekeeping to peacebuilding and development.
That expression of support also included a call for clear
and achievable benchmarks and indicators to assess
progress on critical areas in advance of the eventual exit
of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur (UNAMID). We believe the existing
benchmarks must be refined to align with the mission's
mandate and strategic priorities. Chief among them
should be the cessation of hostilities, the protection
of civilians and a mutually acceptable comprehensive
political agreement. We await the Organization's
strategic assessment and its recommendations on the
pursuit of critical benchmarks and indicators ahead of
that transition.

Again, we urge the Government of the Sudan to
end the use of violent measures to address the protests,
and to hold all responsible for human rights abuses and
violations accountable. We call for an inclusive political
process towards elections where all Sudanese citizens
can exercise their rights to the freedom of expression,
association and peaceful assembly; the immediate
release of all journalists, political opposition leaders,
human rights activists and other protesters who have
been arbitrarily detained; and for the Government of
the Sudan to afford those facing charges full access to
legal representation.

