First, I would like to thank Special Envoy Pedersen and Under- Secretary-General Lowcock for their briefings. The situation in Syria has continued to deteriorate due to the despicable war by the regime against the people and the spread of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic in the country. The Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and the World Health Organization report that the highest number of COVID-19 cases in the country have been detected in the north-west. This is not surprising given the densely populated settlements for internally displaced persons and a devastated health system in the region owing to relentless aggression imposed on the population. Since we discussed the humanitarian situation in Syria last month (see S/2020/1147), approximately 300 convoys have channelled aid items from Turkey through the single crossing point at Bab Al-Hawa into the north-west. We continue to facilitate and fully support United Nations cross-border humanitarian assistance. Yet it is clear that the current restricted humanitarian space in the north-west results from the failure of the Security Council to maintain the Bab Al-Salam crossing point in the cross-border mechanism. The General Assembly today adopted the Third Committee draft resolution on the situation of human rights in Syria and urged the Security Council to re-authorize Bab Al-Salam for cross-border humanitarian operations. We join that call and request the Security Council to fulfil its responsibility as a matter of priority by re-opening that gate before the humanitarian crisis turns into a tragedy threatening the whole region and beyond. Last week, the Allouk water station once again faced disruption challenges with the electricity power being deliberately cut by the Kurdish Workers Party/ Kurdish People's Protection Units (PKK/YPG) terrorist organization. Despite our repeated initiatives before all interested parties and the constructive approach displayed by the Syrian opposition and Turkey, the problem remains to be solved. It is unacceptable that terrorists continue to exploit water and electricity for their separatist agenda. While the COVID-19 pandemic has elevated the need for electricity in the region to a critical level, these repeated power cuts have serious repercussions on health services in the region. Urgent steps must be taken to put an end to this inhumane practice and ensure the resumption of electric power to the water station and the whole region. Let us also not forget about the serious shortages of potable and agricultural water supply in Al-Bab and surrounding areas, affecting around 200,000 people. Due to the ongoing and deliberate blockage by the regime of the water supply lines, sanitation services are undermined and the public health is seriously compromised, at a time when an effective response to the COVID-19 is most crucial. On the political track, the Constitutional Committee is currently the sole functioning mechanism. In the period ahead, its work should be advanced in an accelerated and productive manner. We will continue our efforts to that end, within the Astana framework and in collaboration and coordination with the United Nations and other relevant actors. In that regard, we welcome the convening of the fourth round of the small body of the Constitutional Committee in Geneva two weeks ago. We believe that meeting was useful in enabling the Syrian parties to express their views and expectations under the agenda item "National foundations and principles". With the fifth round scheduled for January, we expect the Committee to start focusing on the constitutional principles, entering a phase of results-oriented substantial work. We would like to once again underline the importance of complying with the Terms of Reference and Core Rules of Procedure of the Committee. The Astana process is a critical element of overall efforts for finding a political solution to the Syrian conflict. Our joint work within that framework towards resolving the conflict on the basis of Syria's unity and territorial integrity continues despite the challenges posed by the pandemic. The 5 March additional protocol plays a crucial role for preserving the calm on the ground. The ceasefire in Idlib enabled return of hundreds of thousands of Syrians to their homes. Having said that, the regime continues its ceasefire violations. Those violations and attacks against civilians, coupled with winter conditions, could unleash a new humanitarian crisis and yet another wave of migration. In line with the additional protocol and previous agreements, we continue our technical engagement with the Russian Federation, as well as our efforts to overcome the obstacles to a lasting ceasefire. Determined to counter all terrorist threats emanating from Syria, Turkey continues its resolute fight against Da'esh on the ground. Turkish armed forces, which have eliminated 4,000 Da'esh elements in Syria and Iraq to date, neutralized 29 Da'esh members in Syria during only the course of the past month. The PKK/YPG constitutes another major threat to the security of Syria. The deplorable terrorist attack carried out by the PKK/YPG on 10 December in Ras Al-Ayn resulted in the deaths of two Turkish soldiers and injured eight others. We thank our friends and allies who extended messages of condolences. We call on everyone to explicitly state the obvious perpetrators of this heinous terrorist attack. Ayn Issa and Tal Tamar, east of the Euphrates River, and Manby and Tal Rifat, on its west, have become PKK/YPG launching pads for their planned attacks against innocent Syrian civilians, our country, our security forces in Syria and the Syrian national army, as well as for their infiltration and harassment activities. Turkey will not compromise on its steadfast fight against the PKK/YPG, which launched over 300 terrorist attacks in just the past 12 months. Turkey maintains its firm stance against attempts by the PKK/YPG to gain legitimacy under the guise of so-called "Syrian Democratic Forces" (SDF) and its efforts to consolidate its domination over the north-east through oppression and economic incentives. The international community should refrain from actions that would violate international law and serve the separatist agenda of the PKK/YPG hiding behind the name of so-called "SDF". This illegitimate entity east of the Euphrates has been releasing Da'esh members and their families, as well as suspected affiliates when it serves its interests. It is reported that this terrorist entity is also working on illegally trying Da'esh members with the help of some countries and civil society organizations. This is a very worrisome development for the unity and territorial integrity of Syria. Clearly, such a brazen act constitutes an egregious violation of international law. We reiterate our strong call to the international community to be vigilant and not to become accessory to this terrorist propaganda. I would like to conclude by emphasizing the importance of education and bringing safety to children in Syria, who will be the ones to redesign their country. It is estimated that half of the children who were going to school in northern Syria before the pandemic have now dropped out. While more than 750,000 of the over 1 million school-age Syrian children in Turkey are enrolled in education, we need to create opportunities for children in Syria as well to avoid the risk of a lost generation that could blight Syria's chances of recovery for years to come. The brutal war launched by the Al-Assad regime has displaced millions and killed thousands of children. The Secretary-General reports that shelling by the regime on 4 November caused damage and killed children in schools located in Arihah and Kafriya, in the north-west. We should not let Syrian children down. The Al-Assad regime continues to pursue medieval tactics such as "starve and surrender" and hurls false accusations at those standing by the Syrian people. The regime still aims at military victory. We will not let this happen. And we will hold them accountable for the war crimes and crimes against humanity they have committed throughout Syria. As to the statement made by the Syrian regime's representative (annex 20), I repeat: I do not consider him as my legitimate counterpart; His presence here is an affront to the millions of Syrians who have suffered countless crimes at the hands of the regime. I will therefore not honour his delusional remarks with a response.
