The President: I thank the Secretary-General for
his statement.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council has heard the
Secretary-General's statement and has considered
the briefing by the Executive Director of the Iraq
Programme on the termination on 21 November
2003 of the United Nations humanitarian
programme for Iraq (the Programme) and the
transfer of the responsibility for the
administration of any remaining activity under
the Programme to the Coalition Provisional
Authority in Iraq in accordance with Security
Council resolution 1483 (2003).

"The Security Council underlines the
exceptionally important role of the Programme in
providing humanitarian assistance to the people
of Iraq under the regime of sanctions imposed by
the Security Council on the previous Government
of Iraq. Under this unique programme the value
of humanitarian goods delivered to Iraq during
the period from December 1996 through March
2003 amounted to about $30 billion. Those
deliveries made it possible to provide to the Iraqi
people essential foods and medicines, as well as
to supply various equipment and materials for the
key sectors of the Iraqi economy. Purchases under
the Programme will in the next few months play a
key role in the economic reconstruction of Iraq by
providing vital goods in the amount of more than
of $6 billion.

"The Security Council expresses its deep
gratitude to the Secretary-General, to the Office
of the Iraq Programme, to United Nations
personnel who worked on the ground in Iraq, and
to all other United Nations agencies and
structures involved and applauds their
commitment and professionalism. It also thanks
the Chairmen and members of the 661
Committee, for their dedicated efforts to
implement the Programme since its inception and
in implementing resolution 1483 (2003).

"The Security Council emphasizes the need
for continued international efforts aimed at the
reconstruction of Iraq and, in this context, took
note with satisfaction of the statements made by
the representatives of the United States and the
United Kingdom on the measures which the
Coalition Provisional Authority intends to take in
order to continue the payment mechanisms and
deliveries under the Programme.

"The Security Council recognizes the
important role of the United Nations in
coordinating the termination of the Programme,
including the transfer at the earliest possible time
of all surplus funds in the escrow accounts to the
Development Fund for Iraq.

"The Security Council recalls the vital role
foreseen for the United Nations in resolutions
1483 (2003), 1500 (2003) and 1511 (2003), as
circumstances permit, inter alia, in the areas of
humanitarian assistance, facilitation of economic
rehabilitation and reconstruction."
This statement will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol
S/PRST/2003/24.

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 5.30 p.m.
