Mr. Kafando (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French):
At the outset, let me congratulate you once again, Sir,
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council. For reasons that I need not enumerate here,
we are sure that your presidency will have an important
impact on our work this month.

I would also like to thank Mr. Lynn Pascoe,
Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs, and
Ambassador Maria Luiza Ribeiro Viotti, Chairperson
of the Guinea-Bissau configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission, for their informative
briefings.

Today's Security Council review of the situation
in Guinea-Bissau is taking place at an important stage
in the political evolution of a country that is facing
numerous challenges. Indeed, since the last report,
notable progress has been made in many areas, but not
enough to allow us to forget entirely that Guinea-
Bissau is still the major convalescent of West Africa. It
is still facing the same old evils of political instability
and the drug trade, the two main sources that allow
insecurity to flourish. Long-term political instability -
particularly since the simmering crisis between the
army and the central Government, against the backdrop
of the threat of an army coup - was further
complicated by the withdrawal of the Partido Africano
da Independencia da Guine e Cabo Verde from the
governmental coalition.

It will be impossible to rebuild the country if it
does not enjoy sound national reconciliation as a factor
of unity, stability and progress. The Security Council
must therefore call on all political actors to share
responsibility and to commit resolutely and jointly to
advancing the political process. To that end, it is
essential that the new Prime Minister of the caretaker
Government, Mr. Carlos Correia, be able to seamlessly
carry out the commitments made with regard to
convening parliamentary elections in November 2008.
Those elections will be the decisive test of whether
democracy and good governance has taken root in
Guinea-Bissau. In that regard, my delegation pays
tribute to the support and involvement of the
international community in assisting Guinea-Bissau to
move towards credible and transparent elections.

As I pointed out, one way of ensuring the success
of the elections and the reconstruction of the country is
to improve the security situation, which unfortunately
remains precarious given the surge in the drug trade and
organized crime. For that reason, we look forward to
the holding, on 28 and 29 October, in Praia, Cape
Verde, of the Economic Community of West African
States Ministerial Conference on Drug Trafficking as it
Affects West Africa. Whatever the outcome of that
conference, however, the international community must
continue to give the necessary support to national
authorities in the struggle against that phenomenon,
particularly in the framework of the anti-drug operation
plan.

At the same time, the Guinea-Bissau Government
must pursue the comprehensive implementation of
security sector reform according to the guidelines set
out in the security sector reform document. In support
of that effort, it is Vital that a broad information and
awareness-building campaign be launched among
military personnel and administrative and political
officials.

I have described all the serious obstacles to
national reconstruction efforts in Guinea-Bissau. First
and foremost, however, the only definitive solution to
those difficulties is the economic reconstruction of the
country. We cannot hide from the fact that in Guinea-
Bissau, as in any country emerging from conflict, the
only major challenge upon which all else depends is
economic development. In that context, the Security
Council should welcome the efforts of the Government
of Guinea-Bissau towards macroeconomic recovery
and urge it to pursue its reforms by strengthening
economic management and improving financial
transparency and responsibility. Furthermore, the
financial partners must continue to support the national
authorities in their efforts to alleviate the food crisis
and to meet basic social needs, such as education and
health.

I cannot close without paying tribute to the work
of the Peacebuilding Support Office in Guinea-Bissau
and the Guinea-Bissau configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission including the
implementation of four short-term projects for youth
employment, electoral support and the rehabilitation of
prisons and military barracks; and the adoption on

lOctober of the Strategic Framework for
Peacebuilding in Guinea-Bissau. It is vital that all
players meet their commitments, and particularly that a
mechanism for the monitoring and evaluation of the
recommendations be established in that regard. It is
important, too, in this critical phase that there be
improved cooperation between the international
partners in giving substantial support to the
Government's efforts. With regard to the establishment
of a panel of exports for Guinea-Bissau, as
recommended by the Secretary-General in his report,
we call for caution and prudence. Above all, we
consider that we need to delve deeper into that issue.

The stabilization of the situation in Guinea-
Bissau is vital for the West African subregion. For that
reason, the Security Council and the international
community as a whole must remain mobilized to
ensure that peace is consolidated permanently in
Guinea-Bissau. To that end, my delegation has drafted
a presidential statement that is still being negotiated.
We hope that the Security Council will be able to make
a decision on that draft statement as soon as possible.

