Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I would like to welcome His Excellency
President Touadera and express our deep gratitude for
his presence among us today. I also thank him for the
important messages in his statement that reflect the
great challenges that the Central African Republic is
facing and that at the same time affirm the determination
of the people of the country and their strong will to
overcome all their difficulties.

The preservation of the unity, sovereignty and
territorial integrity of the Republic and the restoration
of the constitutional order through the adoption of
legislation establishing a constitutional court and other
institutions were some of the successful steps taken in
the recent period. Today, we are at a criticaljuncture, in
which the crisis that began at the end of 2012 together
and the violence and recurring crises that have shaken
the country since its independence are settled and in
which sustained peace has been achieved. Accordingly,
we would like to refer to a number of priorities,
as follows.

First, national reconciliation is the main priority
for establishing solid grounds for peace. We therefore
support all the efforts of President Touadera and
affirm the importance of the inclusivity of the process,
whose aim is to restore the social fabric and address
grievances, particularly those of marginalized parties,
including refugees and internally displaced persons.
We also affirm the importance of all regional and
international partners rallying in support of these
efforts. Accordingly, we welcome the African mediation
initiative launched at the latest Summit in Addis Ababa,
particularly in that it includes the African Union (AU),
African regional organizations and the main countries
of the region, all of which have offered critical support
to the Central African Republic, without which it would
have been impossible to emerge from the transitional
phase. These regional partners are the most qualified
to sponsor the national reconciliation and empower
President Touadera's efforts, assuming that it enjoys the
necessary international support. We also welcome the
ongoing dialogue between the Security Council and the
African Union to decide on the best way to support the
initiative and guarantee the coherence of efforts among
the partners.

Secondly, we affirm the importance of putting an
end to the violence of armed groups, which exacts a
great price from civilians and exacerbates the country's
already difficult circumstances. In this regard, I
note the great responsibility of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA), which
requires us to empower the Mission to carry out its
mandate. The strategic review of the mandate was
an important step in this regard. It affirmed the need
to halt the activities of armed groups. Accordingly,
the voluntary engagement of armed groups in the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration process
is one of the important pillars of reconciliation, and
the international community must avoid making the
mistakes that led to previous failures in the history of
the Central African Republic. We must mobilize the
resources necessary to rebuild the national security
and defence forces on the basis of professionalism,
pluralism and discipline in order to regain authority
over the country's territory in its entirety.

Thirdly, sustained peace requires a long-term
vision to rebuild the State institutions and lay the
foundation for economic recovery and development.
We therefore welcome the important measures taken
by the authorities, including the National Recovery and
Peacebuilding Plan, in which national priorities for the
next five years are identified. In this regard, we welcome
the support of partners for the Plan expressed at the
Brussels Conference and the African Union Solidarity
Conference that was held following the latest AU
Summit with a view to promoting the contributions of
African nations in peacebuilding in the Central African
Republic. In this regard, I stress the Peacebuilding
Commission's importance as a platform that brings
together many international, national, regional
partners. The Commission has an important role to play
in coordinating efforts in support of national priorities
and has the necessary expertise and relationship with
the Security Council to ensure the Plan's success and
realize the concept of sustained peace.
