Ms. Wilson (Australia): Like others before me,
I would like to express Australia's condemnation
and condolences following the heinous and cowardly
terrorist attack that took place in Kabul on 8 March. We
extend our condolences to the families of the victims
and the Government of Afghanistan.

Australia thanks the Secretary-General for his most
recent report (S/2017/189). Despite declines in a number
of indicators in the report, Australia believes that 2017
could be a year of substantive progress in Afghanistan
if the successes of Warsaw and Brussels are able to be
capitalized on. The performance indicators have been
agreed and Afghanistan has the sophisticated plans and
funding in place to achieve them.

Challenges remain, including ongoing concerns
about corruption, and access to Government services
fuelled by insecurity and political instability. To that
end, we welcome the Afghan Government's commitment
to countering corruption and to reaching out to opinion
leaders within and beyond the Government. We
encourage the Afghan Government to recall its social
contract with the Afghan people and continue progress
towards the holding of elections in the coming year.

A stable Afghanistan remains central to stability
in the region. Violent extremism has never respected
national boundaries and we encourage all countries
in the region to continue building on the Heart of
Asia-Istanbul Process by engaging in dialogue and
cooperation to advance peace and stability. Australia
remains committed to helping the Afghan security
services rise to the challenge presented by the
insurgency, and at Warsaw we extended our deployment
of approximately 270 personnel to the NATO Resolute
Support Mission. We remain in the top five donors
contributing to the sustainment of Afghan forces.

We were deeply distressed to see civilian casualties
rose by 3 per cent last year, to the highest level recorded
since 2009. Australia calls on all parties of the conflict
to enact measures that protect the vulnerable, especially
women and children. Long-term stability will require a
successful Afghan-owned and -led peace process. We
are encouraged by progress made towards implementing
the agreement with Hezb-i-Islami in 2016. We urge
the Afghan Government to continue engaging with
empowered negotiators, including women, to bring an
end to the insurgency.

Insecurity is fuelling a humanitarian crisis, with
a record level of conflict-induced displacements and
unprecedented numbers of people returning from
Pakistan and Iran in 2016. Australia's humanitarian
assistance to Afghanistan - of almost $19 million
last year - helped provide support that included
critical shelter, food and health care to over 6.9 million
Afghan people.

Australia remains committed to working with
Afghanistan to address its development challenges.
We have provided community-based education classes
to more than 19,000 children since 2001. More than
70 per cent of the children were girls. Such classes are
just a small part of our development programme in
Afghanistan, and at the Brussels Conference Australia
pledged to maintain current levels of aid funding
through to 2020.

In conclusion, Australia sees a real opportunity
for progress in Afghanistan this year. We call on the
Afghan Government to build on the successes of 2016.
We urge continued international cooperation to improve
country and regional stability. We congratulate the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan for
its important contribution. On his retirement, we would
like to acknowledge the efforts of the United Nations
Deputy Special Representative of the Secretary-
General and Resident and Humanitarian Coordinator,
Mr. Mark Bowden, who has made a great contribution
to Afghanistan.

