Mr. Covie (Yugoslavia) (spoke in Serbian; interpretation provided by the delegation): It is a
pleasure to address the Council today and to emphasize
the improvements that we have made in solving various
problems in Kosovo and Metohija.
The Kosovo and Metohij a multi-ethnic Assembly
has been formed and the Government has been elected,
while members of the Serbian national community
have been appointed to the positions of the Minister of
Agriculture, Forestry and Rural Development, Special
Adviser in the Office for Return and Communities of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General, as
well as the Inter-Ministerial Coordinator for Returns in
the Office of the Premier of Kosovo and Metohija.

Furthermore, an agreement on appointing judges
and public prosecutors has been reached, the
memorandum of understanding on police cooperation
has been signed, as well as the Technical Agreement
between the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) and Serbian Railways,
and the Protocol on the Movement of Registered
Vehicles. With the goal of making an honest dialogue
possible, the Serbian side responded positively in the
exchange of cultural treasures by handing over the
6,000 year old figurine, the "Goddess on the Throne",
to the Special Representative of the Secretary-General.

UNMIK and KFOR operations take place in very
complex circumstances, which is precisely why their
efforts and results deserve particular praise and respect.
I would like to emphasize that the exceptional level of
cooperation with Mr. Steiner, to whom I continue to
give my full support, is contributing to the process of
building confidence and mutual understanding between
UNMIK and KFOR, on the one side, and the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia and the Republic of Serbia on
the other.

The process of cooperation is slowly moving
forward, but there are many things that still need to be
done in order to create the conditions for building civil
society in Kosovo and Metohija. Its full
democratization necessitates not only time but also the
support of the international community and of all the
progressive forces within Kosovo and Metohija, along
with full cooperation with the democratic leadership in
Belgrade.

Our principles are unambiguous: to build a multi-
ethnic society in Kosovo and Metohija with the full
respect for and implementation of Security Council
resolution 1244 (1999), the Constitutional Framework
and the common documents of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia and UNMIK. The Serbian and the Albanian
people, despite their changing roles in the past, must
achieve reconciliation and make an effort to create and
sustain conditions for the implementation of multi-
ethnic, multicultural and multi-confessional principles.
The reality in Kosovo and Metohia obliges me to
share with you some very disturbing facts: the
deployed international peacekeeping forces, members
of the International Police Task Force (IPTF) and the
United Nations administration in Kosovo and Metohia
are still incapable of preventing the violations of basic
human rights. The remaining non-Albanian population
and the few returnees to Kosovo and Metohia continue
to be subjected to terror, murders and robberies on a
daily basis.

Let me remind the Council of my expose of 24
April 2002, in this very place, when I presented to you
the Principles of the Programme for the Return of
Internally Displaced Persons from Kosovo and
Metohia. On 25 May 2002, the UNMIK administration
produced their Concept of Rights to Sustainable
Return. Both documents are based on the conviction
that return is a voluntary act; that everybody has the
right to return to his or her home across Kosovo and
Metohia; that return also has to begin in urban areas;
that the provisional institutions of the local self-
government must direct considerable budgetary funds
towards return and reintegration; and, above all, that
return has to be made sustainable by the fulfilment of
basic preconditions of personal and professional safety,
freedom of movement and realization of property
rights. Despite the indisputable uniformity of principles
and goals that were presented in both documents, the
process of return unfortunately remains more of a dead
letter in writing than an action realized in the field.

It has been three years since the massive
expulsion of Serbs and other non-Albanian
populations- 280,000 people - from Kosovo and
Metohia, and this process has in smaller proportions
continued up to the present day. The patience of the
displaced persons has been exhausted, which is why
the realization of planned and organized return must be
handled in a determined manner, without denying the
right of individual return, either.

The report of the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) quotes the
numbers of displaced persons who have returned to the
area of Kosovo and Metohia in the period from 2000 to
2002 as: 2,888 Serbs, 384 Romas, 769 Egyptians, 74
Bosniaks, 31 Gorans and 59 Albanians, which makes a
total of 4,205 individuals. What the report fails to show
is how many returnees came back to central Serbia and
Montenegro after they were unable to get their
previously held jobs. There are no Serbs left in public
services, industry, agricultural farms or the electric
power supply system, which is currently also suffering
the consequences of an accident in mid-July in the
Thermoelectric Power Plant Kosovo B. By and large,
those were the cases of spontaneous return to the
predominantly Serbian communities, and in most of
these cases the participation of the international
community was reduced to the mere organization of
escort and transport services.

According to the report by our Commission for
Refugees, during the year 2001 the Commission
received 10,000 new applications for ID cards for
internally displaced persons, and the same trend has
continued in this year, which means that even with the
return of a limited number of Serbs, their expulsion
from Kosovo and Metohia continues.

If we do not most urgently grasp the seriousness
of this moment, as well as the difficult situation and
vital conditions of the displaced persons, and if we fail
to take decisive measures towards fulfilling the
programme for their return, the international
community will have to bear the heavy responsibility
for neglecting basic human rights.

The fact of the matter is that the Serbs have
become a minority in one part of their territory and that
they are deprived of their basic human rights in Kosovo
and Metohija. Nobody disputes the right of the States
in the region to look after their communities in the
neighbouring countries, but at the same time our
country is deprived of that right in part of its own
territory.

Examining the destinies of abducted and missing
persons, the Coordination Centre has collected
eyewitness accounts and information on over 250
kidnappers, who would be able to shed light on the
destiny of 74 abducted citizens. This information has
been submitted on more than one occasion to the
international security forces and the investigators of the
Hague Tribunal, but up to now no action has been
taken and no kidnappers have been arrested.

True international reconciliation will be possible
only if and when all criminal suspects, regardless of
their nationality or current position, are brought to
justice. We owe this both to the innocent victims and to
the coming generations, who ought to be stepping into
the future without a heavy burden from the past.

The Government of the Republic of Serbia has
taken initial steps towards fulfilling its obligations
related to this matter. So far, we have initiated court
proceedings against a number of individuals charged
with crimes and violence committed in Kosovo and
Metohia, or against Kosmet Albanians since 1999. A
number of those individuals are now serving prison
sentences. This process will continue under all
circumstances, but we are also inviting the authorities
in Kosovo and Metohia to fulfil their obligations in this
respect.

Furthermore, it is necessary to respect the
deadline of 31 December 2002 to investigate all the
graves in Kosovo and Metohia and resolve the destiny
of 4,000 missing persons from all communities.

In order to create the necessary conditions for a
multi-ethnic Kosovo and Metohia, the international
community has to show the same degree of
determination as it did in the implementation of the
Ohrid Agreement in Macedonia, and to implement all
the pressure mechanisms at its disposal. This would
guarantee the actual implementation of principles of
impartiality and equality before the law, equal
employment in public services and State enterprises,
and the right to receive business development funds.

Economic aid from the international community
is often not to be found in the right place and at the
right time. An economic revival of production and
exchange and new employment opportunities, as well
as the stimulation and engagement of the experts who
used to live in this area, rather then the employment of
foreign workers, would be an additional guarantee for
the multi-ethnic character of Kosovo and Metohia.

Experts and analysts may discuss the future status
of Kosovo and Metohia as well as its degree of
autonomy, but politicians should take into
consideration the stability of the region and should
reach the decision on the final status only after a truly
multi-ethnic society has been established in Kosovo
and Metohia.

The pacification of the region of Kosovo and
Metohia will be in vain if mountain passes in Kosovo
and Metohia continue to be used as passageways for
new supplies of modern and sophisticated weaponry.
One of our priorities is compliance with paragraph 2 of
chapter 8 of the Constitutional Framework for
Provisional Self-Government in Kosovo and Metohia,
which stipulates that the international peacekeeping
troops should exercise their duties in monitoring the
border, regulating arms possession and providing
public law and order.

The way we understand demilitarization, and the
way we believe the international community
understands it, does not imply that new national armies
ought to be created in the region. The existing Kosovo
Protection Corps (KPC) should completely and fully
adjust their functions to their stipulated duties. If it is
possible for the members of the former warring parties
in Bosnia and Herzegovina to participate today in joint
peacekeeping operations in the world, then it should be
possible in our case as well. We will approach this goal
much faster if we are given a chance to cooperate on
security issues through the Partnership for Peace
programme and other forms of security liaisons in
South-Eastern Europe.

In the area of individual and property security,
police task forces must reflect the composition and
distribution of the population in the municipalities, and
there must be equal representation in courts.

What are seen as parallel structures in Kosovska
Mitrovica should be carefully re-examined. Equal
attention should be devoted to electing the city's
administration, and measures should be taken to open
up prospects for coexistence in that environment.

During migrations, Serbs have always gravitated
towards urban centres, which is why Kosovska
Mitrovica is so important to them. In those few cities
which are still inhabited by the Serbs, the latter occupy
only a few buildings, in which children play behind
locked doors, since the streets are too dangerous for
them.

Kosovska Mitrovica, which is central in terms of
education, health services and economic links with
other parts of Serbia, is therefore of vital importance
for their survival. The local population of Mitrovica
should assume responsibility in areas in which
language and religious beliefs may present an obstacle,
such as local self-government, health services and
education. This is not an attempt to divide a city. Local
communities in other parts of the world have similar
rights and obligations.

The local population of Mitrovica should also
assume responsibility for its own safety. Taking into
consideration our contacts with the representatives of
the Institute of Peace and of the International Crisis
Group, as well as my active dialogue with Mr. Steiner,
we believe that the main prerequisite for the process of
integration to take place in a positive climate is the
inclusion of bridge watchers in the Kosovo Police
Service, once they have completed the necessary tests
and training. Let me quote the following statement:

"Except for passers-by and busy citizens of
Kosovska Mitrovica, the majority of people on
the bridge used to be homeless beggars. When I
was studying for one of my last exams at the
Faculty of Civil Engineering, my mother would
tell me: 'Keep studying, my son, so that you do
not end up on the bridge.' Today, I am one of the
bridge watchers."

This is but one of many statements.

There is deep distrust between the Serbian and
Albanian people today. However, they must ask
themselves whether the differences between them are
unbridgeable and whether joint actions can be taken in
the context of an economically backward society.

These questions are of particular importance at
this time, when local elections in Kosovo and Metohija
are approaching. In these elections, Albanians should
demonstrate that their goal is a tolerant society and safe
coexistence among all ethnic communities. I expect the
international community to exercise its right to dispute
the participation in the elections of those parties
without a clearly defined democratic orientation.

In the field of information, it is necessary to give
minorities a presence in public electronic media, and
not only in certain special programmes. Paragraph 4 of
chapter 5 of the Constitutional Framework, on the
prevention of defamation and hate speech in the
Kosovo media, should be respected. This is vital in
view of the forthcoming elections.

Political and security stability in Kosovo and
Metohija requires the formation of stable institutions.
The establishment and strengthening of local
democracy is a precondition for the accomplishment of
that goal. The decentralization of power, which is now
centralized in Kosovo and Metohija at the level of
UNMIK - i.e., the creation of conditions for building
the institutions of local, communal and regional self-
government - is an issue of vital importance. The
process of the transfer of power, taking into
consideration all the relevant documents, and, above
all, Security Council resolution 1244 (1999), the
Constitutional Framework for provisional self-
government in Kosovo and Metohija, and the joint
document between the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
and UNMIK, will promote general and local
democratization, as well as raise general awareness of
individual and communal responsibilities.

In order to accomplish decentralization
efficiently, it is necessary to provide convincing
security, political, economic and cultural guarantees for
the Serbs, the Albanians and the other national
communities in Kosovo and Metohij a.

Let me briefly add that the Council has at its
disposal an addendum to my presentation entitled
"Construction and Development of Local Self-
Government in Kosovo and Metohija", contained in
Attachment 1.

