Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri (India): Like others, I
want to thank Under-Secretary-General Lynn Pascoe
for his briefing. I would also like to place on record
our appreciation for the Secretary-General's initiatives
to depute an integrated technical assessment team to
study the impact of the Libyan crisis on the Sahel
region for the mission's comprehensive report (see S/2012/42).

Military operations carried out ostensibly for the
protection of civilians have clearly resulted in millions
of civilians in West and Central Africa and the
Maghreb being adversely affected. The report has
brought out in considerable detail the multidimensional
adverse impact of the conflict in the security, economic
and humanitarian areas. In a relatively short period of
time, the countries of the Sahel region have had to
contend with an influx of nearly half a million
returnees, as well as with a large inflow of arms and
ammunition. Given that each returnee supported in
excess of seven individuals back home, some 3 million
people have lost their source of livelihood. The loss of
remittances and high unemployment among young
people have further exacerbated food insecurity and the
nutrition crisis.

As the report notes, in some areas terrorist groups,
including Al-Qaida, are filling the humanitarian vacuum.
Additionally, the loss of tourism, the suspension of
investment, increased expenditure on defence and the
strain on basic social services such as health and
education have all stretched the resources of
Governments in the region.

Most of the countries in the Sahel region have
limited institutional capacity and resources to deal with
such a multitude of problems. In addition, several
problems, such as the proliferation of arms, terrorism,
illicit drug trafficking, border management and others,
have a regional dimension and need to be tackled
through regional cooperation.

We therefore support the recommendations made
by the assessment team and believe that a
comprehensive strategy needs to be developed and
implemented at the national, regional and international
levels. The primary focus of such a strategy should be
to support the capacity-building of national institutions
in the security and socio-economic fields. The
countries concerned should implement all legal and
administrative measures to combat terrorism and
organized crime in accordance with resolution 1373
(2001) and other relevant regional and international
instruments. United Nations agencies, including the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
and the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force,
should extend technical and financial support for the
implementation of those measures.

At the same time, development assistance to and
cooperation with the countries of the region should be
expanded to support the Governments' multisectoral
reintegration initiatives, with a strong focus on conflict
prevention, social cohesion and protection, as well as
on livelihood support for returnees. Employment-
intensive development programmes will go a long way
towards reintegrating returnees with the local
communities and preventing them from becoming an
easy catch for terrorist groups.

It is also necessary to support the regional
initiatives of the Economic Community of Western
African States (ECOWAS) and the Economic
Community of Central African States. Technical

support should be extended to them to develop
coherent strategies for transnational problems. In that
connection, we welcome the steps being taken by
regional and subregional organizations such as
ECOWAS, which include regional plans of action to
address illicit drug trafficking, organized crime and
drug abuse, and we believe that their reach should be
expanded to cover all countries in the Sahel that have
been affected by the Libyan conflict. The African
Centre for the Study and Research on Terrorism should
also be strengthened to provide for cooperation among
member States and regional mechanisms.

The African Union (AU) was sidelined in the
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001). The
consequences of that conflict are, however, being
suffered by the countries of Africa. The lesson to be
learned from this is clear. The United Nations must
partner with the AU in the resolution of African
conflicts. With respect to the strategy for addressing
the impact of the Libyan crisis on the Sahel, the United
Nations must integrate its plans with the efforts of the
AU. The relevant United Nations agencies should
support the regional and subregional organizations and
should assist them with capacity-building and in
monitoring their implementation. The United Nations
offices in the region, including the United Nations
Office for West Africa, the United Nations Regional
Office for Central Africa and the United Nations Office
to the African Union should look into practical and
concrete ways to strengthen the efforts of national
Governments and regional institutions in order to
enhance coherence and coordination.

The onus is on the Council to ensure that the
Libyan crisis does not further exacerbate the fragile
security and socio-economic conditions in the Sahel
region.

