Mrs. Carrion (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset, we join with others in extending condolences to
our Chinese colleagues.

We welcome today's briefing on an issue that is
key to the work of the Security Council. We also thank
Ms. Maria Luiza Ribeiro Viotti, Mr. Chergui and
Mr. Kaberuka for their briefings.

Uruguay notes the development, over the past 15
years, of the partnership between the African Union
and the United Nations in the area of peacekeeping
operations and of the vital role played by the African
Union in responding to the challenges posed by armed
conflicts on the continent. In that regard, my delegation
would like to share some views on three specific issues,
namely, the process of planning and establishing joint
mandates for African Union peace support operations
authorized by the Security Council; the financing of
peace support operations; and the capacity-building of
African Union staff deployed in those operations.

Close cooperation between the United Nations and
the African Union in the planning and establishment of
joint peace support mandates is essential for ensuring
the efficiency and effectiveness of those operations.
It is therefore especially important to continue with
efforts to improve the joint work of both organizations
throughout the life cycle of the missions, that is, from
the initial assessment ofthe crisis and thejoint strategic
evaluation, to the launch of the mission, the joint
assessments of mandate compliance and accountability.

The joint review carried out by the United Nations
and the African Union revealed that the determination
of the African Union to act and respond to difficult
situations by deploying peace support operations has
been hampered by a lack of capacity in key areas,
including the lack of capacity in financing and support,
which are not always predictable and sustainable.
Uruguay believes that the different financing models
presented in the report (S/2017/454) offer viable
alternatives to the use of voluntary contributions.

As a country that has actively participated in
United Nations peacekeeping operations for many
years, Uruguay attaches particular importance to
the responsibility of troop- and police-contributing
countries in their actions on the ground and in
implementing the mandates. In that context, we stress
that any United Nations force authorized by the Security
Council, including an African Union peace support
operation, must comply with the same standards as
those required of United Nations peacekeeping staff in
terms of capacity, performance, conduct and discipline,
and accountability.

The joint review carried out by both organizations
has made it abundantly clear that the African Union
must continue to boost its ability to plan, finance,
sustain and oversee its own missions if it is to be in
a position comply with their mandates, to meet the
expectations of its membership and partners, and to
strengthen its partnership with the United Nations.

By the same token, Uruguay recognizes the
efforts made by the African Union to finalize its
human rights and conduct and discipline standards
compliance frameworks in order to ensure that its
peace support operations are carried out in accordance
with international human rights law and humanitarian
law standards and to thereby ensure oversight
and accountability.

In conclusion, we also underscore that the African
Union's development of those frameworks will bode well
for the success of operations, will further strengthen its
partnership with the United Nations and enhance the
invaluable contribution that the African Union makes
to peace and security on the continent.

