Mr. Osman (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): I would
first like to say that the records of this meeting should
reflect an important truth, namely, that our
participation in this meeting should in no way be
interpreted as Sudan dealing with the International
Criminal Court (ICC). As the Council is aware, the
Sudan is not a party to the Rome Statute and we are in
no way affected by the Court's proceedings. Our
participation in this meeting is based on the need to
shed light on the truth of what is taking place in
Darfur. The baseless accusations in the report given to
the Council today stand in complete contradiction to
the situation in Darfur. Moreover, they contradict the
report (S/2011/643) of the Secretary-General on Darfur
and the various statements made by senior officials of
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations.

Paragraph 20 of the Secretary-General's latest
report on the situation in Darfur, which Mr. Herve'
Ladsous, Under-Secretary-General of the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations, presented to the Council
on 25 October (see S/PV.6638), refers to the decrease
in violence in Darfur resulting from clashes between
Government and movement forces, including a drop in
the number of deaths from 1,039 in 2010 to 342 thus
far in 2011. Paragraph 38 of the report refers to the
ongoing voluntary return of internally displaced
persons and refugees to their places of origin. With
regard to the protection of civilians, paragraph 49
refers to a decrease in protection incidents this year
over the last one due to the intervention of the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID).
11-63973

Who are we to believe, then, the reports and their
precise statistics or the usual lies and false
accusations? Are we to believe the report of UNAMID,
the mission actually on the ground in Darfur, or the
information provided by the Prosecutor? We do not
know where that information came from. What kind of
justice are we talking about here? Those who act in this
way must answer to their conscience. History will not
forgive them. Such false accusations run counter to
reason and to the basic standards of a professional
attitude. I am quite certain that the Council will
dismiss them.

This time, the Prosecutor focused mainly on the
case of the Prosecutor versus the national Minister for
Defence, after having attempted to alter reality to
justify his allegations by saying that it was the Minister
for Defence who had appointed Mr. Ahmad Harun.
However, he reveals the true motives behind those
proceedings in paragraph 12 of the report before the
Council, in which he notes that Mr. Hussein has been
Minister of Defence since 2005, when the Sudanese
Armed Forces were engaged in armed conflict in
various regions of the country, including Southern
Kordofan and Blue Nile states. Therefore, an important
question arises. If the armed forces of any country
were facing armed rebels who were jeopardizing the
security and stability of that country, would the
Prosecutor issue an arrest warrant against the Minister
of Defence?

Members may have noted that the Prosecutor
deliberately ignored the most important historic event
regarding the situation in Darfur, namely, the signing
of the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur. There can
be no doubt that those who are aware of those events
know why the Prosecutor ignored the Doha Document.
He did so because chapter V of the Document, entitled
"Justice and Reconciliation", stresses national justice
procedures, which means refusing the prerogatives of
the ICC, which has no competence in the Sudan
because the Sudan is not a party to the Rome Statute
and therefore under no obligation to deal with the
Court. I need not recall that the Vienna Convention on
the Law of Treaties confirms that States not parties to a
convention are not bound to comply with it.

Were we to be asked why we have not acceded to
or ratified the Rome Statute, we would reply that like
many other sovereign States, including members of the
Council, we have various reasons, which we have
shared on other occasions. I shall merely mention one
11-63973
that appears to me to be sufficient to illustrate the
reasons we have not acceded to the Rome Statute. The
Statute places the Prosecutor above accountability, and
there is no guarantee of the Prosecutor's compliance
with the principles of neutrality and professional
integrity.

Allow me to put forward an argument made by
Ms. Condoleeza Rice, former Secretary of State of the
United States. On page 188 of her book entitled No
Higher Honor: A Memoir of My Years in Washington,
she states:

(spoke in English)

"[We] opposed the ICC on the grounds, among
others, that its prosecutor is not accountable to
any Government. For us this was an issue of
sovereignty and a step that looks a bit too much

a"

like 'world government .
(spoke in Arabic)

There is no doubt that members of the Council
agree with me that the principle of sovereignty is one
and indivisible, whether with regard to a super-Power
or a small State. Therefore, we have freely not ratified
the Statute, like others who did likewise. Consequently,
we are not bound by the Rome Statute. The reservation
that we have mentioned with regard to the lack of
accountability on the part of the Prosecutor, in the
event that he does not abide by the principles of
professional integrity and impartiality, has been
justified. I would like to share with the Council several
examples providing evidence in that regard.

The International Commission of Inquiry on
Darfur, under the chairmanship of the late Judge
Antonio Cassese, submitted its report to the Secretary-
General of the United Nations (S/2005/60, annex),
pursuant to Security Council resolution 1564 (2004).
On page 4 of its report, the Commission concluded that
the Government of the Sudan had not pursued a policy
of genocide.

In addition, the report has proven the absence of
the main element of the charge of genocide, namely,
the intention to commit acts of genocide. The
Commission, which was chaired by Mr. Cassese, an
outstanding international jurist, also stated that the
crucial element, namely, genocidal intent, appeared to
be missing, at least as far as the central Government
authorities were concerned.
5
Another source, an official of an internationally
credible organization, Dr. Mercedes Taty, a former
Deputy Emergency Director for Me'decins sans
frontieres, stated in an MSNBC interview on 16 April
2004 that she did not think that the word 'genocide'
should be used to describe the conflict in Darfur.

Another example, taken from outside the Sudan,
which refutes the allegations of the Prosecutor, who
has considerably compromised his professional
integrity and impartiality, was given by Dr. J ean-Herve
Bradol, past President of Medecins sans frontieres in
France, who said:

(spoke in English)

"Our teams have not seen evidence of the deliberate
intention to kill people of a specific group" and that the
use of the term "genocide" was inappropriate.

(spoke in Arabic)

Dr. Bradol worked in Darfur and was a member of a
credible volunteer organization in a country that
respects the values of justice.

(spoke in English)

Dr. Bradol subsequently described the claims of
genocide propagated by a certain circle as "obvious
political opportunism". I refer here to an article that
appeared in The Financial Times on 6 July 2004, and a
news article by Agence France Presse. I would also
mention another article by Dr. Bradol, entitled "From
one genocide to another", dated 28 September 2004.

I can provide more details for all the sources that
I have cited, just to show that our sources are credible,
while the other party simply propagates unfounded
allegations without referring to even a single credible
source, let alone factual information.

(spoke in Arabic)

Another source is the European Union (EU) fact-
finding mission that was dispatched to Darfur in 2004,
at the zenith of the conflict. The official spokesperson
of that mission stated:

(spoke in English)

"We are not in the situation of genocide there". He
added that the EU saw abuses, but not genocide, in
Darfur. 1 refer here to a Reuters news article of
9 August 2004.
6
(spoke in Arabic)

Speaking to Al-Jazeera on 10 August 2004, the
spokesperson of the EU fact-finding mission stated that

(spoke in English)

"the EU mission finds no evidence of genocide in
Darfur". I would note that he actually travelled to
Darfur and did not simply carry out his assignment
from some unknown remote location.

(spoke in Arabic)

Another source is Mr. John Danforth, who at the
time was serving as the Special Envoy for Peace in the
Sudan of former President Bush. On 3 July 2005, in a
BBC Panorama interview, he stated that

(spoke in English)

the use of the genocide label "was something that was
said for internal consumption within the United
States". He is a credible source who is from the United
States itself.

(spoke in Arabic)

Another source is former Nigerian President
Olusegun Obasanjo, the then President of the African
Union and host of the Inter-Sudanese Peace Talks on
the Conflict in Darfur held in Abuja. He stated,

(spoke in English)

"What we know is that there was armed rebellion,
and the government repelled them. That does not
amount to genocide from our own reckoning."

Another example is Mr. Jan Egeland, former
Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs, saying
ethnic cleansing did not "fit [the legal definition of]
events in Darfur".

The last example is Mrs. Asma Jahangir, the
United Nations Special Rapporteur on extrajudiciary,
summary and arbitrary executions, at the height of the
conflict in Darfur told the BBC on 8 June 2004: "I
would not categorize it as ethnic cleansing at the
moment because that is not the impression that I am
getting."

(spoke in English)

The reference is BBC News, 8 June 2004. Here again, I
ask the person who spoke before me just to provide a
single source for his allegations.
(spoke in Arabic)

I have cited examples that refute the allegations
of the Prosecutor and show the lack of authenticity in
the most serious accusation, that of ethnic cleansing,
with which he charged President Ahmad Al-Bashir. If
that is his approach, which I have just disproved before
the Council - not on the basis of Sudanese arguments
and contentions, but by examples from a range of
credible heads of international and voluntary
organizations, senior United Nations officials and
senior politicians, such as Mr. Danforth, President
Bush's special envoy to the Sudan - then what are we
to make of all those false allegations and charges that
he has made against a number of Sudanese officials?
The most recent was the current Minister of Defence,
Mr. Abdelrahim Mohamed Hussein, who had
previously fulfilled his national duties as Minister of
Interior when he contained the armed rebellion. His
current actions as Minister of Defence, protecting the
country against armed rebel movements that threaten
the peace, stability and security of the country, and the
considerable efforts he has made have led to the
establishment of peace, security and stability in the
Sudan from Darfur to the Nuba Mountains and as far as
Blue Nile state.

We challenge anyone to say that there is now one
single outbreak of Violence or battle happening
anywhere in the Sudan. Life has returned to normal. It
is a source of pride for those who have been falsely
accused by the Prosecutor that they were a central part
of the Government of the Sudan that negotiated and
implemented the Comprehensive Peace Agreement,
which ended the longest war in Africa and led to the
peaceful establishment of the South Sudan. How can
those who have tried to make peace for more than
60 years be falsely accused by those who do not
respect the principle of impartiality and have no
professional integrity, as defined in the provisions of
the United Nations Charter?

With regard to the responsibility of the military
State to ensure peace and security throughout the
11-63973
country, the Government of the Sudan opens the doors
wide to the rebels in the various regions of the country
and calls on them to have the sense to come and
negotiate with a View to reaching peaceful solutions.
The Doha Document for Peace in Darfur is the most
credible example of our Government's eagerness to
achieve peace. All leaders of the 11 rebel factions who
came from outside the country were originally from
Darfur. Having signed the Doha Document, they
returned to the Sudan and engaged with the
Government and our people in Darfur to implement the
Agreement in order to achieve development, peace and
justice.

The situation in Darfur has improved
considerably. Only a blind person cannot see that. The
contents of the most recent report of the Secretary-
General (S/2011/643) are clear proof of it. I therefore
appeal to the Council, which is entrusted with the
maintenance of peace and security, to assist the
Government of the Sudan in our efforts to complete the
drive for peace and, through its commendable efforts,
to encourage and urge the remaining rebel movements
in Darfur, the Blue Nile and Southern Kordofan to
come and negotiate with us so that we can all live in a
homeland for us all. I am confident that the Council
will not heed those who propagate the culture of war.

In conclusion, it is clear that the Prosecutor
intentionally ignored the most important historic event
in Darfur, namely, the Doha Document for Peace. That
was acknowledged in a previous resolution (2003 (2011). I am confident that the Council will continue to
support that considerable effort, which is about to
conclude and of which we are in the final phase.

