Mr. Mahmassani (spoke in Arabic): I should like
at the outset to congratulate you, Sir, on your assuming
the presidency of the Council for this month. I am
confident that you will conduct its proceedings with
efficiency and wisdom. I take this opportunity to
congratulate Ambassador John Negroponte for ably
steering the deliberations of the Council last month.

The Council meets today to deliberate on the
development of the situation in Ramallah, in the
aftermath of the Israeli aggression against President
Yasser Arafat at his presidential compound, following a
suicide operation inside Israel. The Israeli Government
announces daily, whether through its Prime Minister or
its public officials, that President Arafat is irrelevant
and that the Palestinian Authority is without authority.

If that is the case for Israel, why are the Israeli
forces laying siege to Arafat and punishing him by
demolishing his presidential compound? The fact of the
matter is that the policy of the Israeli Prime Minister
has become irrelevant, and that its logic of force and
violence over the logic of negotiations has failed. This
policy brings killing and destruction to the Palestinian
people without realizing peace and security for the
Israeli people. The Israeli opinion polls prove this fact.
General Amram Mitzna, the mayor of Haifa, expressed
this in a statement he made a couple of days ago:

(spoke in English)

"Mr. Sharon is leading Israel to disaster with a
policy of force, more force and yet more force".

(spoke in Arabic)

After 50 years of war and violence, when will the
Government of Israel be convinced that the policy of
force and war will not settle the Middle East crisis and
that negotiations and the implementation of the
resolutions of international legitimacy are the only way
for Israel, the State of Palestine and all the other
countries of the region to live in peace, security and
stability? Israel's violations of international
humanitarian law and the Geneva Conventions have
become commonplace, with the killing of women and
children, the demolition of homes, expulsions and
collective punishment continuing unabatedly as if they
were of no concern to anyone. It may be necessary to
cite some facts and figures to clarify the dimensions of
the heinous Israeli occupation. The following figures
might be relevant.

The number of Palestinian martyrs killed by
occupation-force bullets between 28 September 2000
and 23 July 2002 was 1,705, in addition to the tens of
thousands of people who have been wounded and
disabled. The number of detainees held during the
same period was 6,000, 1,700 of whom are under
administrative detention, meaning that they have not
been indicted. And the number of detained children,
according to the International Committee of the Red
Cross (ICRC) is about 600. Scores of houses have been
demolished. The total area bulldozed by the occupation
authority in Gaza is equivalent to 10 per cent of all
agricultural land.

Many new settlements have been established,
including 40 since Sharon came to power. Council
members recently heard a briefing by Mr. Terje Roed-
Larsen, United Nations Special Coordinator for the
Middle East Peace Process, about the humiliating
situation in the occupied Arab territories.

The crux of the Arab-Israeli conflict is Israel's
occupation of Arab territories and its refusal to
withdraw to the 4 June 1967 line in accordance with
the relevant Security Council resolutions, particularly
242 (1967) and 338 (1973), and the terms of reference
of the Madrid Conference. As long as the occupation
continues, strife will continue, and so will resistance to
occupation.

Here, we should be committed to preserving
United Nations resolutions and the rules of
international law, which make clear the legitimacy of
resisting occupation within national borders. The Arab
States have opted for peace as a strategic choice, and
thus presented the Arab peace initiative at the Beirut
Summit. Security Council members and all other States
welcomed the Arab initiative, while Israel rejected it
and chose the strategy of war.

We have questions for the Security Council. Why
are there double standards? Why is Israel allowed to
remain above international law and above the United
Nations Charter? Why are Security Council resolutions
on Israel not enforced as they are for other countries?
Israel has violated 28 of the Council's resolutions. Why
does the Council not shoulder its responsibilities? And
why does it not put an end to Israel's violations and its
defiance of international law? Those questions beg for
answers.

