Mr. Adechi (Benin) (spoke in French): We are
indeed pleased that the situation in Somalia is on the
agenda for our meeting. The process of national
reconciliation in Somalia was begun under the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD)
and has now made significant progress in the last few
months. That has brought back hope for a restoration
of the Somali State with the establishment of the
transitional federal parliament and the election of a
new federal President. Those two national institutions
can indeed fill the gap that has existed since the
collapse of the central Government in the early 1990s.
We also salute the appointment of the Prime Minister.
We fully agree with the content of the draft presidential
statement proposed by the delegation of China.
Accordingly, I shall confine myself to just a few
comments.

We pay tribute to the coordinated efforts of IGAD
and the international community, which have made
possible this positive development in Somalia within
the context of political discussions. However, the
developments on the ground have not followed at the
same rate, and we deplore the continuing clashes
among the various protagonists. The critical security
situation is indeed still disturbing. The same difficulty
applies when it comes to building the people's faith in
the institutions that are the necessary accoutrements of
any modern State.

In this connection, we urge strict compliance with
the arms embargo and the re-establishment of an
integrated national army. We also recommend
implementing a disarmament, demobilization
rehabilitation or reintegration programme, which could
indeed enhance security throughout the country. We
also encourage initiatives, such as that of the European
Commission, geared towards preparing demobilization
programmes supported by community development
projects so that former fighters will no longer have any
incentive to continue fighting.

It is important that the new Somali President be
able to establish as inclusive a Government as possible
so that it can take over the functions now being carried
out by the international community. We support his
efforts in that context, and we would urge him to step
up dialogue with local players to ensure that the
conflict continues to be resolved by peaceful means
and so as to restore the process of national
reconciliation, which is essential to any national
development.

We listened with great interest to the assessment
of the situation offered by the ministers and the
representative from IGAD. The prerequisites for
stepping up the process are international support for
security and increased humanitarian assistance in
Somalia to stop the violence and help stabilize the
country by ensuring better protection for human rights.

