Mr. Griffiths: I come before the Security Council
today with some good news and a message of hope.
After two and half years of missed opportunities, I
think it is fair to say that the political process to find
a comprehensive solution to the conflict in Yemen has
finally resumed. During our consultations in Sweden this
week, parties to the conflict reached several agreements,
included in the Stockholm declaration, which came
into force on 13 December upon the publishing of the
documents. That is no small achievement, which was
made possible first and foremost by the commitment
of the parties. The credit goes to them. I was extremely
impressed by their dedication: all made concessions and
all engaged, in-depth and at length, intensively and in
good faith. Last week's consultations saw the "highest
level of interaction between the parties ever seen in
consultations on Yemen", as said by representatives
of the different parties we heard during the week we
were there.

I am sure that all members ofthe Council will share
my sincere gratitude to the Government of Sweden for
hosting us. Ambassador Olof Skoog and his colleagues
understood better than any of us what was needed to
make the consultations a success. I know that feeling
was shared by all those present, including the leaders
of both delegations, and we thank them.

For members of the Council and members of the
international community, Sweden is also their success.
The agreements reached would not have been possible
without the extraordinary level of support from
world leaders. I certainly feel very privileged to have
been able to rely on them. I am thankful to Saudi Crown
Prince Mohammed Bin Salman Bin Abdulaziz Al-Saud,
who showed his personal support for the process at vital
times and for the agreements we negotiated in Sweden.

I am grateful to President Abdrabuh Mansour Hadi
Mansour, who followed our negotiations very closely,
returned to Riyadh during the process and whose
involvement was key on all files. It was President Hadi
himself who personally confirmed to the Secretary-
General, yesterday morning, his approval of the various
proposals before us, on behalf of his delegation.

I am also grateful to the leadership of Ansar
Allah, Abdulmalik al-Houthi, who demonstrated his
commitment to progress at the talks throughout the
consultations. I understand that he was in constant
communication with his own delegation. The heads of
both delegations, Foreign Minister Khaled Al-Yemany
and speaker Mohammed Abdul-Salam, had a very
difficult task, as is normally the case. But they led
their delegations with professionalism, discipline and
perseverance. It was not an easy exercise, but I thank
them both for their outstanding performance.

I also thank Foreign Secretary Jeremy Hunt, who,
as members of the Council know, made a flying visit
only yesterday to the talks at a crucial moment.

This outcome would not have happened without
the considerable support and logistical arrangements
to make the talks happen, and in particular from the
Sultanate of Oman, the Kingdom of Kuwait and the
Saudi-led coalition.

Last, but absolutely not least, allow me to place on
record here my personal thanks for the leadership ofthe
Secretary-General. As I have said to the Council before,
Mr. Guterres is very familiar with the issues on Yemen
and keeps us all very focused. We were in frequent
contact the past two weeks in particular. His meeting in
Buenos Aires at the Group of 20 with the Saudi Crown
Prince ensured the last-minute clearances essential to
move the 50 injured from Sana'a to Muscatjust two days
before the consultations. He took time out from his as-

ever arduous schedule in Europe to make a subsequent
visit to the consultations themselves in Sweden from
Wednesday night to Thursday night, for those vital last
24 hours, which was obviously instrumental in making
the agreements happen. Naturally, I am most grateful
for his leadership.

What did we achieve exactly? First, lest we forget,
both parties turned up on time. The Government of
Yemen had done that before, but they were now joined
by the delegation from Sana'a, and that was no small
achievement, given what had gone on before. Many
people and Governments can claim credit for that, and
I have already thanked them. But I am grateful also to
the two delegations for arriving ready to work.

Proceedings in Sweden consisted of eight days
of hard work. Meetings were punctual. The parties
laboured daily on texts, as well as principles. What
began as meetings ofa formal nature became, over time,
true engagements between people from both sides who
know each other and seek agreement over difference.
I would not want to overstate the level of confidence
reached between the two sides at that first encounter,
but they did business together, almost always in good
spirits. But then more than mere attendance, of course,
there were a range of agreements made - the details
of which have all been published and are available to
members of the Council. What are those agreements?

First, and most dramatically, the parties finally
agreed to end the battles in Al-Hudaydah. For months,
the Council has called for just such an agreement,
and I believe we now have it. It entered into force
upon publishing those papers on 13 December. It
includes phased, but rapid, mutual withdrawals of
forces from both the three Al-Hudaydah ports and
the city. That will be achieved in the context of a
governorate-wide ceasefire.

The United Nations was asked to monitor the
compliance of the parties to those commitments. I am
sure the Council will want to address that requirement.
A robust and competent monitoring regime is not just
essential, it is also urgently needed, and both parties
have told us they would very much welcome it and,
indeed, depend upon it. At the instruction of the
Secretary-General, speaking himself from Sweden,
I understand that the relevant departments in New
York and elsewhere are already active on the planning
for urgent deployment, subject to the decisions of
the Council.

I should add, too, that I spoke only this afternoon
to General Patrick Camrnaert, who all members of
the Council know, I am sure, for his exceptional
achievements. He has kindly dropped his other
responsibilities to lead the monitoring component ofthe
agreement. We hope to see him out here in the region
as soon as the middle of next week. Being present in
the field soon is an essential part of the confidence that
needs to go with the implementation of the agreement.

Al-Hudaydah has been the focus of international
attention this year for a reason - not merely because it
is the centre of gravity of the conflict, but also because
it is the vital lifeline, as Mark Lowcock will no doubt
remind us today, for the humanitarian programme upon
which millions of Yemenis depend. The ghastly prospect
of famine, of which Mr. Lowcock has reminded us, has
made solving Al-Hudaydah and its propensity for battle
both urgent and necessary.

For that reason, the precise nature of the design of
the agreed withdrawals revolve around humanitarian
needs and requirements. Therefore, allowing the United
Nations the lead role in the ports, as a first step, is a vital
response to that humanitarian requirement. We hope to
see that happen within days. The United Nations will
take on a leading role in supporting the Yemen Red Sea
Ports Corporation in the management and inspections
at the Al-Hudaydah, Saleef and Ras Issa ports, which
will include enhanced monitoring by the United
Nations Verification and Inspection Mechanism. The
United Nations country team, under the leadership of
my colleague and friend Lise Grande, has developed a
plan to seek specific support from Member States to the
port. Lise and her agency colleagues have been integral
to shaping the agreements on Al-Hudaydah, and two
of her colleagues were with us throughout the talks
in Sweden. I am very grateful to her and to them for
their presence. They will play a lead role in the civilian
aspects of the deal.

But I would like to stress one important aspect
of the Al-Hudaydah agreement. It is an outlier. Very
deliberately, the arrangements agreed on, particularly
as regards governance, and the temporary arrangements
of governance, in Al-Hudaydah, intend to set no
precedent for the future. They are time-bound. They do
not confer any new sense of legitimacy or sovereignty.
It is a humanitarian stop-gap to save lives and, we hope,
turn the tide of war towards peace.

The parties have also reached a mutual
understanding to ease the situation in Taiz, with the
prospect of opening humanitarian corridors to allow
the safe passage of goods and people across the front
lines, the reduction of the fighting in the governorate
and the deployment of demining operations. The
parties in Sweden agreed to the establishment of ajoint
committee between themselves and the United Nations
in the lead to secure negotiations on the agreements to
make those objectives happen as soon as possible. We
hope that the committee will meet soon and agree on a
plan to bring some respite to the people of Taiz from the
situation that they have suffered for many years.

Before arriving in Sweden, the parties, in the first
agreement between them in the course of the entire
conflict, had already agreed to the establishment of
a joint committee to provide and plan for the mutual
release of all prisoners. As I have said to the Council
before, this was the first injunction to me when I took
up these responsibilities by President Hadi Mansour,
who urged the United Nations to focus on the release of
prisoners, the important humanitarian nature of which
is so clear. The committee, which was established, met
frequently in Sweden, with the two sides exchanging
lists of up to 15,000 prisoners. They were very lucky
to have the full support and involvement and presence
in Sweden of the International Committee of the Red
Cross (ICRC). We hope, with the ICRC in the lead, for a
mass exchange, as soon as mid-January, of up to 4,000
prisoners released and able to return to their families.

We did not reach agreement on all the items that
were on the table in Sweden. We were not able to reach
an agreement on the opening of Sana'a airport, and
we were not able to reach agreement on the measures
needed to improve the operations and reach of the
Central Bank of Yemen as a condition for the full
payment of the salaries of all civil servants. However,
we will continue to work with the parties between
sessions to seek agreement on those issues, Finally, but
not least, the parties have agreed to reconvene at the
end of January. This was a particular point raised by the
Secretary-General with President Hadi Mansour when
they spoke yesterday.

In Sweden, the parties finally also discussed
my framework, elements of which I presented to the
Council in June. The key principle of that framework,
based on the three references - the Gulf Cooperation
Council Initiative and its implementation mechanism,
the outcomes of the National Dialogue Conference
and relevant Security Council resolutions, including
resolution 2216 (2015), is to restore State institutions
and the State monopoly of force by providing a clear
political future to all parties and to all those who have
a say in resolving this conflict, and indeed to return
Yemen to a state of civil politics and peace.

The parties have agreed to discuss this framework
at the next round of consultations - ideally, as I
have mentioned, before the end of January. I am very
encouraged by this commitment. I am very pleased by
the generally positive responses of the parties to this
framework. I think it is fair to say that Ansar Allah is
in agreement with the general tenor of all its elements.
The Government of Yemen has some reservations,
which I very much understand and respect. The next
step will be serious consideration of the document and
its implications. In this way, we hope to move from
the essentially humanitarian theme of Sweden to a
first serious consideration of the issues that need to
be addressed between these parties if the conflict in
Yemen is finally to be resolved.

I also come before the Council today with a call for
caution. Our collective achievements this week were -I
hope Council members will agree - a significant step
forward, but what is in front ofus is a daunting task. As
ever in the context of such negotiations, one realizes at
the end of negotiations that the hard work is only about
to begin.

People ask us whether we can trust the parties to
implement the agreements that they made together in
Sweden. All of us no doubt have different views on this.
My own is that this is not about whether we can trust one
or the other on this or that commitment. This is about
helping them both to make it happen, reporting on their
success and noting those areas where they fall short of
that. Therefore, verification is the key to building trust.
I personally hope that the Council will play a part in
keeping international attention on the minutiae of the
implementation of these agreements.

Having said that, I can also confirm the public and
private statements made to the Secretary-General by all
involved at those consultations that the promises will
not remain only on paper. We believe these statements.
We have reason to believe them, and we all hope to see
their promises reflected in the next days.

Before the consultations, I was asked by both sides
whether the other side was serious. This is a frequent
reference within the context of the conflict in Yemen,
but, frankly, I was not really sure until about two weeks
ago. Today, I am more confident. However, more than
this, what Sweden demonstrated each day was the
existence of an absolute international consensus on
the need for progress and on the simple proposition
that only a political solution can resolve this conflict.
Among us in Sweden were the representatives of those
Governments accredited to the Government of Yemen.
Their ambassadors were with us. They were in daily
contact with the parties - the permanent members of
the Council very prominent among them. Without their
help, we would not have reached the point where we
are today. This sense of international consensus and
commitment was of great importance not just for the
parties in Sweden, but also evidently for the people in
Yemen, who are finding some small signs of hope for
the future.

As the Swedish Foreign Minister said to the press at
the closing of those consultations, no longer can Yemen
be considered a forgotten war. Now we can begin to
hope for a track that may lead to its early resolution.

