Mr. J eremie (Serbia): I thank you, Sir, for having
convened this meeting of the Security Council pursuant
to resolution 1244 (1999).

I welcome the presence of Special Representative
Farid Zarif, and I thank him for his statement.

The United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) is a crucial pillar of
peace and stability in Kosovo. We support its important
work, and concur with the Secretary-General's
statement in the report before us today that "actions
undertaken by the international actors operating within
the framework of the United Nations and resolution
1244 (1999) need to be strategically aligned and
closely coordinated" (5/2012/275, para. 62). This
includes the possible reconfiguration of the European
Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX),
mentioned in annex I of the report.

Unfortunately, no details as to what these
structural changes might involve have been provided.
Our long-standing position on the engagement of the
European Union (EU) in Kosovo remains unchanged.
We believe that the EU should sustain its status-neutral
efforts in order to build the missing institutional
environment and improve the dismal societal
conditions in the province.

The Secretary-General's assessment is that
"tension and confrontation on the ground continue to
cause tangible risks to peace and stability in Kosovo
and the region" (ibid., para. 58). Such a precarious
state of affairs has disproportionally affected the
Kosovo Serb community. The report states that inter-
ethnic crimes, "including intimidation, assault, theft,
arson, vandalism and damage to Serbian Orthodox
churches and household property, [appear] to be on the
increase from the same period one year ago" (ibid., para. 21).

Serbia's Ministry for Kosovo records more than
180 separate attacks against Serbs, their possessions or
their holy sites that took place in the first quarter of
2012, at an average of more than two per day. Such
figures help explain what the report qualifies as the
12-33797
"continuously declining trend" of Kosovo Serbs
coming back to the province. According to the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, only 33 of them returned in the first three
and a half months of 2012. This is about half the
number who did so during the same period last year.

Since our last meeting in this Chamber, Pristina
has unfortunately continued to engage in a campaign of
intimidation against Serbs in Kosovo. For instance, in
late February, six of our nationals who reside in
Kosovo but work in central Serbia as clerks in an
Interior Ministry branch office were arrested on what
the report calls "political charges". They remained
incarcerated for several weeks, and are now under
house arrest. On five different occasions in less than a
month's time, Kosovo police arrested dozens of people
tasked with distributing pension checks to tens of
thousands of Kosovo Serb retirees, depriving them of
their only source of income. During the same period, a
number of prominent Kosovo Serbs were thrown in
jail, including several elected officials.

Another serious incident took place in Pristina on
4 April. The director of Serbia's Dialogue
Implementation Office was assaulted by militants of
the Self-Determination Movement parliamentary party.
That happened as he was leaving the building of the
so-called Kosovo Cadaster, which is located just across
the street from EULEX headquarters in the centre of
Pristina. He had travelled to the province at the
invitation of EULEX to discuss how to operationalize
previously reached agreements in the technical
dialogue facilitated by the EU.

The local policemen assigned to protect him and
his delegation completely failed to do so. Regrettably,
neither they nor any other Kosovo Police Service
personnel have been investigated for misconduct or
incompetence as a result of that attack - or, for that
matter, with regard to the assault on President Tadic's
convoy at Christmas near the monastery of Visoki
Decani.

In protest letters to United Nations and EU
officials, Serbia's Prime Minister, Mr. Mirko
Cvetkovic, wrote that the attack was yet another
attempt by extremists to intimidate the Serbian
population in the southern province and prevent
dialogue, the implementation of agreements and a
peaceful settlement of the problem. The Prime Minister
called for greater involvement of all the international
12-33797

missions in the field, as well as a more adequate
assessment of security risks and an appropriate level
protection.

The eighth anniversary of the pogrom against
Serbs in Kosovo took place during the reporting
period. On 17 March 2004, 35 churches and
monasteries, many dating back to the fourteenth
century or earlier, were damaged or destroyed. Dozens
were killed and hundreds were injured. Thousands of
homes and businesses were burned to the ground. More
than 8,000 Kosovo Serbs were ethnically cleansed
from their homes.

At that time, Human Rights Watch wrote that
"large ethnic Albanian crowds had acted with ferocious
efficiency to rid their areas of all remaining vestiges of
a Serb presence". Close to a decade later, the
Secretary-General tells us in his report that

"significant resistance remains in the Kosovo
Albanian population against legislative measures
and their implementation aiming at the protection
of Serb cultural and religious sites, and a gap
persists between the commitments made by the
Kosovo authorities in this area and their
implementation." (S/2012/275, para. 45)

Today the desecration of Orthodox churches and
graveyards in Kosovo continues unabated.
Unfortunately, the report does not list any of the
specifics concerning those attacks against our holy
shrines. For instance, two of the four UNESCO World
Heritage Sites in the province were targeted on the
same day. On 31 March, graffiti appeared at the
monastery of Visoki Decani, reading "Property of the
Kosovo Liberation Army". A few hours later, an
extremely hazardous submunitions device was
discovered on the grounds of the Church of the Holy
Virgin of Ljeviska, located in the old quarter of the
ancient Serbian capital of Prizren. It had been planted
just behind the eastern wall of the sanctuary, metres
away from the altar. That took place mere days before
the UNESCO-sponsored restoration of frescos
destroyed during the March 2004 pogrom was to
commence. Between 17 March and 19 April, parish
churches in a number of enclaves in south Kosovo
were desecrated, vandalized or, in one instance, fired
upon by an automatic weapon.

During the reporting period, not a single
perpetrator was arrested for committing hate crimes
against places that represent the core of Serbian
national identity. No senior ethnic Albanian official
spoke out against acts of desecration, either.

On 6 May, Serbian presidential and parliamentary
elections were held in both north and south Kosovo, in
accordance with the Constitution of the Republic of
Serbia and resolution 1244 (1999). I want to
acknowledge the efforts of both Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Zarif and Secretary General
Zannier of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) to help Serbs exercise
their democratic right to vote. I would also like to
thank Commander Erhard Drews of the Kosovo Force
for ordering several hundred additional troops to
Kosovo as a deterrent. That ensured that threats to use
force to prevent the elections from taking place, such
as the one made in mid-March by the Kosovo
Liberation Army's war-time spokesman and current
Chairman of the Kosovo Assembly, Mr. Jakup
Krasnigi, could not be carried out. The second and
final round of presidential elections will take place on
Sunday, 20 May. We expect that all the necessary
security measures will stay in place so that the vote can
be held in safety, as was the case on 6 May.

It was with regret that we took note of the letter
dated 22 March by Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Zarif addressed to Serbia's Minister
for Kosovo and Metohija, Mr. Goran Bogdanovie, in
which he indicated UNMIK's inability to organize
local elections in the province that comply with
resolution 1244 (1999). In response, we have proposed
to start jointly monitoring developments relevant to
conducting such elections, with the aim of revisiting
the issue over the next six months.

In late February, an agreement was reached in the
ninth round of the EU-facilitated technical dialogue
between Belgrade and Pristina on the sensitive matter
of regional representation and cooperation. Some of
the details are mentioned in paragraphs 13 and 14 of
the report before the Council. That status-neutral
arrangement, which is in accordance with resolution
1244 (1999), allows the Pristina authorities to
participate in meetings as a non-State actor in the
regional organizations whose aim, according to the
agreed terms, is to promote cooperation or integration
in the Balkan region. I want to be very clear that the
agreement does not extend to multilateral forums in
which membership is reserved for sovereign States,
such as the South-East European Cooperation Process,
the Council of Europe, the OSCE and any institutions
or agencies in the United Nations system.

The report states that the room for dialogue in the
coming months may be narrowed if calm is not
sustained, particularly if public responses to incidents
and provocations on the ground are imprudent. We
share the Secretary-General's apprehension, especially
as it appears that ethnic Albanian public opinion is
turning increasingly hostile to the continuation of any
sort of negotiations. I want to underline that Serbia
remains fully committed to the process.

Disagreements on status must not impede our
ability to act in concert on resolving practical issues.
Much work remains to be done in improving the lives
of the people through talks conducted in good faith.
Moreover, as President Tadic' has repeatedly said, we
must provide for ironclad, internationally guaranteed
assurances that safeguard our interests inside the
province by securing, first, a realistic solution for north
Kosovo; secondly, protecting our enclaves in south
Kosovo; thirdly, preserving Serbian identity and
religious heritage throughout the province; and,
fourthly, settling private and commercial property
claims.

Between the end of the reporting period and
today's Security Council meeting, disturbing
developments have set further back the cause of justice
in Kosovo. The most glaring instance is the case of
Fatmir Limaj, a former senior commander of the
Kosovo Liberation Army (KLA) and close associate of
the so-called Prime Minister of Kosovo, Hashim Thaci.
On 23 April, prosecutors failed to meet a 24-month
statutory deadline to file charges against Limaj for
money laundering and organized crime during his
tenure as the so-called Minister of Transport.
According to a prominent Pristina-based
non-governmental organization, Limaj can no longer
be indicted for the misuse and disappearance of about
€80 million in public funds. A few days later, on
2 May, Limaj was acquitted of war crimes for the 1999
torture and killing of Serbs in the infamous Klecka
prison camp. That came in the wake of the dismissal by
the court of all evidence provided by Mr. Agim Zogaj,
the only witness who lived long enough for prosecutors
to depose. He died under mysterious circumstances
while in a witness protection programme, two months
before the trial began.
12-33797

The not-guilty verdict shocked Serbian public
opinion. The families of the victims were outraged.
According to Serbia's War Crimes Prosecutor, the
judgement legitimately raised the question as to
whether the Kosovo courts will ever convict a single
person of war crimes against Kosovo Serbs. It is
encouraging, however, that the EULEX Special
Prosecutor's Office announced that it would appeal the
ruling.

We remain seriously apprehensive with regard to
another case purportedly involving Limaj, as well as
Thaci and several other KLA figures. We have
studiously followed the investigation launched by
EULEX into the allegations made in a December 2010
Council of Europe report entitled "Investigation of
allegations of inhuman treatment of people and illicit
trafficking in human organs in Kosovo". According to
that report, hundreds of Serbs were abducted in
Kosovo before, during and immediately after the 1999
conflict and were sent to secret detention camps in the
Republic of Albania, where many of them were singled
out for forced surgery before being murdered. Their
internal organs were extracted and sold on the
international black market. Annex 1 of the Secretary-
General's report states that the EULEX Special
Investigative Task Force has continued to develop its
capabilities and has progressed with its work in that
case. However, we believe that the lack of transparency
in the conduct of its inquiry should be a matter of great
concern for the Council.

During the current reporting period, many critical
questions, including those related to accountability,
mandate, jurisdiction and witness protection and
relocation, did not receive adequate answers.
Uncovering the full truth about those monstrous
allegations - unprecedented in the history of
warfare - must remain our top priority. As a recent
Amnesty International report concluded,

"More than 400 Serbian families are still waiting
for the bodies of their relatives to be found; many
believe that their son, father or brother may be
among the Serbs taken to Albania. They are still
waiting for justice".

The unilateral declaration of independence by the
ethnic Albanian authorities of our southern province of
Kosovo and Metohija, on 17 February 2008, continues
to divide the world. As the Secretary-General states in
today's report, we face "a widening perception that
fundamental resolution remains elusive for the
underlying issues of the conflict" (ibid, para. 4). At the
heart of all our difficulties lies the unresolved status of
Kosovo.

I would like to express my country's sincere
gratitude to the vast majority of States Members of the
United Nations, as well as to the majority of those
seated in the Security Council, that respect Serbia's
sovereignty and territorial integrity. I appeal to them to
continue to refrain from recognizing any solution to
Kosovo that is not the product of a clear agreement
between the parties. That is the only way to help us
reach an equitable negotiated settlement in accordance
with resolution 1244 (1999). Despite all protestations
to the contrary, any other outcome would, in effect,
constitute a deeply dangerous precedent that would
permanently threaten the stability and borders of many
States Members of the United Nations.

Serbia has put diplomacy at the forefront of its
peaceful efforts to undo the damage caused by the
unilateral declaration of independence. We took to the
task vigorously, as would any other dignified country
that found itself in our situation. But for the first time
in our region's history, the impulse for vengeance and
retribution was consciously suppressed. For the first
time, when faced with a threat of such magnitude, a
Balkan nation did not reach for its sword. Serbia's
resolve was not, nor will it be, bellicose or belligerent.
We shall, however, stand firm and unequivocal in
resisting attempts to partition our homeland, claim our
heritage and compel our citizens to live in a country
that they do not consider their own.

What we seek is a just conclusion to the Kosovo
conflict. No maximalist, one-sided imposition can
propel the Western Balkans past the point of no return
towards its European future. One of the principal
lessons of our history is that zero-sum outcomes never
fulfil their promise. Whenever one side got everything,
the other just bided its time, in anticipation of more
favourable circumstances that would allow for the
return of what was thought to have been wrongly taken
away. Again and again, today's victor became
tomorrow's vanquished. In the absence of true consent
by all, lasting harmony remained beyond reach. Thus
has the cycle of enmity continued unabated for
centuries.
Democratic Serbia is determined to bring that
bane to an end. Our hand is outstretched. But a

conscious choice to replace hostility with concord must
be made in unison by true leaders, compassionate in
their hearts and steady in their vision. Forging a
covenant of peace is the only way for Serbs and
Albanians to end up on the same side, at long last.

In pursuing that noble goal, we may draw
inspiration from the words of one of the founding
fathers of the Non-Aligned Movement who, not too far
from this Chamber, asked the world many years ago to
remember that peace was not a relationship of nations,
but a condition of mind brought about by a serenity of
soul. Lasting peace can come only to peaceful people.

