Mr. Chen Xu (China) (spoke in Chinese): As far
as the Security Council is concerned, December is
usually regarded as a relatively easy month. However,
this month we carried out a great deal of substantive
work. Although we are almost 10 days away from the
end of the month, we can now say with great
conviction that the work of the Council this month has
been full of results. In addition, your work,
Mr. President, and that of the Malian delegation have
been highly effective.

After the signing of the Bonn Agreement, the
Council adopted, within a relatively short period of
time, two resolutions on Afghanistan, which will surely
have a great impact on the smooth implementation of
the Bonn Agreement and the promotion of a durable
solution for the Afghanistan situation.

After the new wave of turbulence in the Middle
East, the Council held discussions in a timely fashion
on the conflict between Palestine and Israel. Although
no resolutions were adopted, the convening of the
meeting itself represented the importance the Council
attaches to this issue.

As other colleagues have noted, the focus of the
Council's work this month is on Africa and the volatile
issues there. Many of those issues have been featured
on the agendas of our deliberations, particularly the
issue of West Africa. I believe that such an exercise
will play a positive role in promoting a comprehensive
solution to the problems in Africa. In this regard, Mr.
President, the Chinese delegation would like to express
its appreciation of your tireless efforts and outstanding
performance, as well as those of the Malian delegation.

The world is far from being peaceful, and we are
still confronted with great challenges. As far as the
Security Council is concerned, how to enhance its
efficiency and enable it to better discharge its
responsibility to maintain international peace and
security are matters that warrant serious consideration
on our part.

With regard to the reform of the Council's
working methods and the enhancement of its
efficiency, the Council has held many discussions, and
many of the proposals are quite worthy of our
consideration. China believes that the views of non-
members of the Security Council should be solicited
more frequently. We are also in favour of improving
the working methods of the Council. However, the
question of whether such an objective can be achieved
simply by holding more public meetings deserves
further consideration.

In conclusion, the Chinese delegation would like
to congratulate Bangladesh, Jamaica, Mali, Tunisia and
Ukraine for their tireless efforts and for their
contribution to the Council's work. The Chinese
delegation intends to continue to work together with
other Council members, including the new members, in
order fully to discharge the Council's functions.

Finally, I should like to wish you, Mr. President,
and all of the other members of the Council the very
best for the holidays.

