Mr. Menan (Togo) (spoke in French): I should
like at the outset to thank Ms. Fatou Bensouda,
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court (ICC),
for her briefing on the seventeenth report of her Office,
pursuant to resolution 1593 (2005). As we all know,
it was in that resolution that the Council referred the
situation in Darfur since 1 July 2002 to the ICC, in the
conviction that it constituted a threat to international
peace and security. The Council recently reiterated that
conviction in resolution 2063 (2012).

Today's briefing reflected the progress that has
been made and the ongoing gaps in the judiciary
activities, ongoing investigations and cooperation with
States in the fight against impunity undertaken by the
ICC with respect to the situation in Darfur. I wish to
address the three issues I have just mentioned, but
before I do I recall that Togo is not yet a party to the
ICC Rome Statute.

With regard to judicial activities, especially
concerning the Banda and Jerbo case, in its statement
last December in connection with the Prosecutor's
sixteenth report (see S/PV.6887), Togo expressed the
hope that the outcome of pre-trial hearings would, on the
one hand, allow the parties to resolve their differences
and, on the other, make it possible for the pertinent
Pre-Trial Chamber to set without delay the date for the

commencement of the trial, so as to guarantee the right
of the accused to be tried without undue delay and to
meet the expectations of victims to speedyjustice.

Togo welcomes that that has in fact been the case
and that, as set out in paragraph 12 of the current
report, the date of the trial is set for 5 May 2014.
Moreover, Togo welcomes that the Prosecutor has met
the deadline of 2 May for communicating to accused
central elements in the cases against them, as well as
lists of witnesses to be called, so that the trial scheduled
to begin in June 2014 can take place in full respect for
the rights of defence.

As to cooperation among the United Nations, the
Security Council, Member States and the ICC, many
of the uncertainties and challenges mentioned in the
sixteenth report last December seem to persist. Others
had already been reported to the Council, as one can read
in the seventeenth report. As Togo also stated during the
wrap-up and assessment meeting held last week during
its presidency of the Council during the month of May
(see S/PV.6972), the Council could benefit greatly from
the way it handles its cooperation and communication
with the Court, if only by acknowledging receipt of the
notifications it receives.

In addition, Togo hopes that relations between
States and the ICC will strictly observe the principle
of complementarity, which, for the States concerned,
means having the primary obligation to prosecute and
try perpetrators. Togo therefore reiterates its regret
over the fact that there seems to have been no progress
since 2012 in connection with prosecuting suspects. My
country encourages the States concerned to give effect
to the principle of complementarity.

Also with regard to State cooperation, Togo would
like to point to paragraph 6 of the sixteenth report,
which refers to the difficulties encountered by the
defence in the Banda and Jerbo case, including gaining
access to exculpatory evidence and logistical support,
security concerns and securing entry into Darfur - as
a result of which the defence had to introduce a motion
to suspend the trial. Togo would like to believe that
the fact that the seventeenth report no longer mentions
those problems means that it is because solutions have
been found.

In the context of cooperation with the ICC, under
articles 86 and 87 of the Court's Statute, States often
seem less generous to the defence. Togo would therefore
welcome any initiative that the various organs of the
Court and the Assembly of States Parties could take, in
accordance with the basic texts of the ICC, to facilitate
cooperation between States and the defence so as to
ensure fair trials.

In terms of ongoing investigations, Togo would
like to reiterate its call for a halt to the violence and
violations of human rights and humanitarian law that
seem to be continuing. Togo also encourages the Office
of the Prosecutor to continue its monitoring and to
advance the investigation of crimes that continue to
be committed - aerial bombardments; indiscriminate
attacks on the ground against civilians, including
women and children, even in camps for displaced
persons; widespread sexual violence and gender-based
attacks; attacks against human rights defenders and
members of civil society and community leaders; the
recruitment of child soldiers; and intentional acts aimed
at the total or partial destruction of ethnic groups.

Togo reiterates its deep concern about attacks
and kidnappings of aid workers and members of
peacekeeping forces - attacks that have claimed
the lives of many brave peacekeepers of the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur.
Togo hopes that prosecuting the murders of African
Union soldiers in 2007 will make it possible to clarify
the circumstances of those attacks and to identify the
perpetrators at all levels of responsibility in order that
they may answer for their acts.

