Mr. Mansour (Palestine): On behalf of Palestine,
I congratulate the fraternal country of Bosnia and
Herzegovina on its presidency, confident of your wise
stewardship, Sir, of the Security Council. We express
appreciation as well to the United States of America for
its skilled guidance of the Council last month.
I also wish to extend Palestine's sincerest
congratulations to the new members of the Security
Council, the friendly countries of Colombia, Germany,
India, Portugal and South Africa. We express full
confidence in their commitment to upholding the
Charter, international law and the Council's
resolutions, and we wish them every success in
fulfilling their responsibilities. I also convey
Palestine's appreciation to the Council members whose
terms ended in December 2010, the friendly countries
of Austria, Japan, Mexico, Turkey and Uganda, who
served with skill and dedication in the pursuit of peace
and security, including with regard to the efforts to
address the question of Palestine.

I also thank Under-Secretary-General Lynn
Pascoe for his briefing and, through him, express our
appreciation to Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his
leadership on this important issue and his commitment
to upholding the principled positions enshrined in the
relevant United Nations resolutions.

While a new year should begin with hope and
optimism, the Palestinian people regrettably begin yet
another year facing serious challenges and hardship
under Israel's now nearly 44-year military occupation
of the Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem.

It is unimaginable that two years have passed
since the December 2008-January 2009 Israeli military
aggression in the Gaza Strip, and the Palestinian people
are still being prevented from reconstructing and
rehabilitating their communities and lives. There has
been no accountability for the crimes perpetrated by
the Israeli occupying forces and no justice reached for
the victims. Resolution 1860 (2009) remains
unimplemented, and the Israeli blockade of Gaza
continues. The debilitating effects of that military
aggression and the blockade continue to impair the
socio-economic and humanitarian conditions of the
Palestinian civilian population and to sow the seeds of
despair and hopelessness, with grave consequences for
Palestinian society now and in the future.

We continue to call for the immediate and full
lifting of the Israeli blockade and the sustained opening
of Gaza's border crossings for the movement of
persons and goods. This is vital to allowing the long-
overdue reconstruction process to truly get under way,
and to economic and social recovery through the
restoration of livelihoods, dignity and hope. We
deplore the escalation of violence, particularly the

recent Israeli military attacks in Gaza and the
perpetration of yet another extrajudicial killing of a
Palestinian in the recent period, raising tensions and
instability.

As all are aware, Israel, the occupying Power,
also continues to carry out illegal settlement activities
throughout the West Bank, including East Jerusalem, in
violation of international law, United Nations
resolutions and the Quartet Road Map obligation to
freeze all settlement activities, including so-called
natural growth. Israeli settlement construction and
expansion have feverishly intensified since the
expiration of the so-called partial moratorium, in
flagrant contempt of the united calls for a full cessation
of all such illegal policies and measures.

The confiscation of Palestinian land, the
construction of settlements and so-called outposts, the
transfer of more settlers, home demolitions and
evictions, the construction of the wall, the imposition
of hundreds of checkpoints and other colonization
measures have not ceased for a single moment. This
has included the approval of thousands of new
settlement units, in addition to the construction of
thousands of units already under way; the continued
construction of the so-called Jerusalem light rail; the
demolition of the historic Shepherd's Hotel; and
ongoing settler violence against Palestinian civilians
and properties - a phenomenon fostered by the
military, financial and physical support, and incentives
provided by the Israeli Government, including the
failure to hold the perpetrators accountable for their
crimes.

As indicated in recent letters to the President of
the Council, occupied East Jerusalem in particular
remains the target of an extremely aggressive campaign
to illegally alter its demographic composition, status
and distinctly Palestinian Arab character and identity,
and to isolate it from the rest of the Palestinian
territory. Such illegal actions in East Jerusalem, in
addition to provocative statements by Israeli officials,
including the Prime Minister and the Foreign Minister,
continue to be inflammatory, threatening further
destabilization and stoking religious sensitivities.

The cumulative impact of this illegal Israeli
policy on the contiguity, integrity, unity and viability
of the Palestinian territory has been destructive and had
an equally destructive impact on the drive for peace.
Once again, in the tortured history of the peace
process, we face an impasse and the further erosion of
trust and confidence between the parties. Israel
continues to demonstrate to the Palestinian people in
word and deed that it is not a credible peace partner
and remains unwilling to abide by the principles
underpinning the process and fundamental to reaching
any peace treaty.

It is widely recognized that Israel's settlement
campaign now poses the most serious threat to the
prospect of achieving the two-State solution for peace
on the basis of the pre-1967 borders. As such, it
constitutes a direct threat to the prospects for peace and
security in the Middle East region - a goal long on the
Council's agenda. Rather than progressing towards
actually bringing an end to the occupation that began in
1967, Israel's settlement campaign has entrenched the
occupation and continues to hamper all peace efforts,
to the grave detriment of the Palestinian people, the
region and the international community, which
continues to face the instability and crises caused by
the ongoing conflict, which remains at the core of the
Arab-Israeli conflict as a whole.

As has been repeatedly stated and widely
acknowledged, we are at a crossroads. After nearly two
decades of the peace process, we are rapidly facing the
demise of the two-State solution if nothing is done to
stop the unlawful and destructive colonization
campaign and to compel Israel to finally abandon its
expansionist agenda and abide by its legal obligations
and international commitments.

We come before the Security Council once again
to appeal to it to uphold its duties under the Charter to
address these ongoing Israeli violations in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem, and to
help us to overcome the current impasse in the search
for peace. We believe that Israel's intensification of
settlement activities, despite the global calls and
demands for cessation, requires an equally intense
response from the international community. A strong
message needs to be sent that we are entering a new era
and that Israeli defiance of the law and the will of the
international community will not be tolerated at the
expense of the realization of peace and security, to
which our peoples are entitled and for which they
continue to suffer and strive.

As early as March 1979, the Security Council, in
its resolution 446 (1979), had the foresight to declare
its determination:
"that the policy and practices of Israel in
establishing settlements in the Palestinian and
other Arab territories occupied since 1967 have
no legal validity and constitute a serious
obstruction to achieving a comprehensive, just
and lasting peace in the Middle East" (resolution 446 (1979), para. 1).

In that same resolution, the Council clearly called once
again upon Israel, the occupying Power,

"to abide scrupulously by the Geneva Convention
relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in
Times of War, to rescind its previous measures
and to desist from taking any action which would
result in changing the legal status and
geographical nature and materially affecting the
demographic composition of the Arab territories
occupied since 1967, including Jerusalem, and, in
particular, not to transfer parts of its own civilian
population into the occupied Arab territories"
(ibid. para. 3).

That resolution, and subsequent ones adopted by
the Council, reflected the political will of the
international community at that time, in line with
international humanitarian law. Those resolutions
remain valid today. They constitute the basis of the
international consensus rejecting Israel's unlawful
settlement campaign and deeming it the major obstacle
to the achievement of a just and lasting peace on the
basis of the two-State solution. Even back then, there
was global recognition that the settlements were
contrary not only to the law, but also to the aim of
ending the Israeli occupation that began in 1967.

While the legal positions, principles and concerns
remain exactly the same today, the situation on the
ground is far worse, owing to Israel's continuous
breaches and the failure of the Security Council to
implement its resolutions. The inability of the
international community to uphold its legal
responsibilities under United Nations resolutions and
the 2004 Advisory Opinion of the International Court
of Justice, and the failure of the high contracting
parties to uphold the obligation, under article 1 of the
Fourth Geneva Convention, to respect and ensure
respect for the Convention in all circumstances, have
allowed Israel to persist with its settlement activities
with impunity for years, including under the cover of
the peace process. The result is now 180 settlements,
100 so-called outposts and over half a million Israeli

settlers in the occupied Palestinian territory, including
East Jerusalem, including numerous Israeli
Government officials, which has deepened the
occupation and further compounded this problem.

The settlements are not, of course, the only final
status issue in the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, which
involves the core issues of Palestinian refugees,
Jerusalem, settlements, borders, security, water and
Palestinian prisoners - all of which must be justly
resolved in order to secure a lasting peace. However, it
is an established fact that the settlements represent the
major obstacle to peace because of the physical
destruction being caused to the two-State solution and
because the settlements are linked to and seriously
affect almost all other final status issues, in particular
Jerusalem, borders, security and water. The impact of
the settlements on those issues is vastly detrimental
and complicates their resolution by prejudicing the
outcome of negotiations, as those issues are being
illegally predetermined by the occupying Power in its
attempt to impose a fait accompli.

At this moment, it is clear that the settlements are
an existential threat to the two-State solution, based on
the relevant United Nations resolutions, the Madrid
principles, including the principle of land for peace,
the Arab Peace Initiative and the Quartet Road Map.
With every stone that is laid, the Palestinian territory is
further fragmented, the viability of the Palestinian
State is further impaired, and the potential for
achieving the two-State solution further dwindles,
giving increasing rise and lending credence to other
alternatives. Action by the international community to
reverse the deterioration of the situation and salvage
the prospects for peace is thus of the utmost urgency.

In that regard, international consensus on the
two-State solution is far greater today than it was in
1947, at which time there was in fact no consensus on
partitioning Mandate Palestine. Yet, the political will
was found to take that decision, propelling us on a
course of conflict and tragedy that remain unresolved
to this day.

It is high time that the international community
bolster its resolve to act on the consensus of the two-
State solution, in fulfilment of its responsibility towards
the question of Palestine. In the immediate period, this
requires acting on the consensus in rejection of Israel's
settlements in the Palestinian territory occupied since
1967, including East Jerusalem.

It is time to find the political courage to
implement the Council's resolutions towards the
achievement of a just, lasting, comprehensive and
peaceful solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict and
to the Arab-Israeli conflict as a whole. We cannot
continue to allow one State - Israel, the occupying
Power - to continue obstructing the realization of
peace and security in the Middle East. It cannot be
allowed to continue to oppress and colonize the
Palestinian people, denying them their inalienable
rights, including their right to self-determination and
independence in their homeland, and to defy the
international community without consequence.

In regard to the draft resolution presented to the
Security Council by Lebanon on behalf of its sponsors,
which number 122 thus far - and we hope that many
others will follow suit - I wish to thank our brothers
in Lebanon and all of the 122 countries that have
sponsored the draft resolution for their efforts and
support. The draft resolution, sponsored by a majority
of Member States, represents a constructive, collective
effort to address this burning issue and to positively
chart the way forward, in line with international law,
United Nations resolutions and the international
position in that regard.

After years of silence on illegal Israeli settlement
activities, the Security Council, mandated to address
issues endangering international peace and security, is
duty-bound to redress the matter at this critical
juncture. Israel must be compelled to cease completely
its settlement campaign in the occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem, and begin its
reversal, which would represent a serious reflection of
the Israeli intent to roll back the occupation and to
move towards ultimately ending it. There is no
justification whatsoever for allowing or accepting
continued settlement activities while we are trying to
negotiate an end to the occupation. We reiterate that
settlements and peace negotiations aimed at ending the
occupation that began in 1967 are diametrically
opposed and cannot coexist.

A cessation of Israeli settlement activities is
essential to improving the situation on the ground,
building confidence between the two sides and
promoting an environment conducive to the resumption
of direct peace negotiations that are fair, credible and
meaningful and that can be accelerated towards
achieving a successful outcome. That outcome is the
realization of the two-State solution with the
achievement of the independence of the State of
Palestine, with East Jerusalem as its capital, living side
by side with Israel in peace and security, and a just,
agreed solution for the Palestine refugee question
based on General Assembly resolution 194 (III).

The potential for resuming such a credible peace
process is rapidly disappearing. We must not allow the
efforts exerted internationally and regionally, including
by the United States, the other Quartet members - the
European Union, the Russian Federation and the
United Nations - the League of Arab States and all
other concerned members of the international
community, as well as by the Palestinian side, under
the leadership of President Mahmoud Abbas, to be in
vain or to continue to be arrogantly ignored and
undermined by the occupying Power.

We therefore reiterate our call on the Security
Council to shoulder its responsibilities and reaffirm its
strong position in rejection of Israel's illegal settlement
activities. We know there is unanimity among Council
members on this matter and we urge them to take
action aimed at removing this major obstacle to peace
and security in our region.

Israel must be compelled to cease all settlement
activities in the Palestinian territory, including East
Jerusalem; to abide by its legal obligations, including
under the Fourth Geneva Convention; and to truly
commit to the path of peace. Moreover, we firmly
believe that the time has come for the Council to
reassert its rightful role vis-a-vis the efforts to attain a
just, lasting and comprehensive peace settlement to the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict.

The Palestinian people and their leadership
remain committed to peace. They continue to work
hard to rebuild and develop their national institutions
and to heal and strengthen their society as they strive
to realize their right to self-determination in an
independent State. The State-building plan launched by
Prime Minister Salam Fayyad in August 2009 is being
pursued with determination and is moving towards the
final implementation stage of the second phase - the
"Homestretch to Freedom" - which we hope to
complete by August 2011, when we believe our
national efforts for independence will converge with
the international efforts in this regard.
We are grateful for the strong international
support for this initiative. We are also deeply grateful
for the principled position that has now been taken by

107 Member States - nine of them seated at this table,
not including Palestine - of extending recognition to
the State of Palestine on the basis of the pre-l967
borders. This effort is of course in line with the
relevant United Nations resolutions and the
international consensus on the two-State solution for
peace.

We are heartened by the political, humanitarian
and development support and solidarity extended to
Palestine from all corners of the globe. Thus, despite
our deep disappointment and frustration in the recent
period, we have not lost hope and will continue to
strive to realize our legitimate national rights, refusing
to allow the occupying Power to unilaterally determine
our fate and destiny as a people. We call on all
members of the international community, including the
Security Council, to uphold their responsibility to help
us end this long and tragic conflict and to finally usher
in an era of peace, security and coexistence for the
Palestinian and Israeli peoples and the Middle East
region as a whole.

