Mr. Duale (Somalia): I am honoured to be in the
Council Chamber and to see such enthusiasm - much
more today than in the past. As mentioned by all
speakers and duly noted, we are moving away from a
bleak forecast and starting to see the light at the end of
the tunnel.

I thank you, Sir, for giving me the opportunity to
participate in this debate on Somalia and to address the
members of the Council. First and foremost, allow me to
congratulate you on your assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council for the month of October, and
also to congratulate your predecessor.

My job has been made much easier today by the
briefing given by Mr. Augustine Mahgia, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Somalia.
We thank him very much for his untiring support to
successive Somali transitional Governments, and we
hope that he will also continue to support the new
Federal Government.

I regret that we could not hear a briefing from
Mr. Ramtane Lamamra. I nonetheless thank him, the
African Union and the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development for their continued support.

As the Council has heard, the road map has been
completed. A new Parliament has been elected, as have
a new Speaker and Deputy Speakers. On 10 September,
Mr. Hassan Sheikh Mohamud won the presidential
election, and he was inaugurated on 16 September. On
6 October, Mr. Abdi Farah Shirdon was appointed Prime
Minister, and he is now in the process of forming a new
Cabinet, which he said will be small but competent,
and will not tolerate corruption or mismanagement.
Furthermore, he stated that, as far as possible, he and
his Cabinet will follow the President's six-pillar policy,
which is the foundation ofa new beginning.

The six-pillar policy has already been referred to, but
I wish to give a little summary. Pillar 1 is full stability,
the supremacy of the law and good governance and the
rule of law, covering security, the judiciary and good
governance. Pillar 2 is economic recovery, focusing
on livelihoods and economic infrastructure. Pillar 3 is
peacebuilding, stressing social reconciliation through
building bridges of trust. Pillar 4 is service delivery
in the areas of health, education and the environment.
Pillar 5 is international relations, emphasizing building
collaborative relations and polishing the national image.
Pillar 6 is about the unity and integrity of the country,
and collective striving for a better future. That is a very
brief summary. I also took the liberty to attach more on
the six pillars to the documents I have distributed.

I am also pleased to state that significant progress
has been made in the security sector. The National
Security Forces, valiantly supported by the African
Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) and the Ethiopian
National Defence Forces, have succeeded in liberating
significant territory from Al-Shabaab in all four sectors.
While Al-Shabaab has been significantly weakened, it
still retains the ability to strike. Therefore, it is now
all the more necessary to pursue and completely flush
them out from all sectors and all corners of Somalia.

It is now very clear that the new Federal
Government urgently needs tangible, concerted ande
well-coordinated support from the Security Council,
all United Nations bodies and the international
community, to enable and empower the new
Government in implementing and achieving the end
goals of the six-pillar policy. Furthermore, AMISOM
also urgently requires the additional support they have
been requesting for a long time now, as mentioned in the
fourth progress report of the Chairman of the African
Union Commission (S/2012/764, enclosure). We concur
with and endorse that report.

We also wish - as has been mentioned by nearly
all members of the Council - that the Somali Security
Forces should be reinforced, trained and well equipped
as a matter of urgent priority. I also wish, on behalf of
the Government and people of Somalia, to express our
sincere appreciation for the continued and unwavering
support of AMISOM, the troop-contributing countries,
including police components, and the Ethiopian forces.
We are also grateful for all the support given by the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Somalia, Mr. Mahiga, and the United Nations country
team. We are very thankful for the support given by
the international community and we trust that, with the
assistance of all of our partners, Somalia will entirely
overcome the predicament it has been in for the past 21
years.

