Mr. Schaper (Netherlands): To begin with, I want
to thank you, Sir, for the opportunity to speak on behalf
ofthe group oflike-minded States on targeted sanctions.
The group has taken a specific interest in strengthening
fair and clear procedures for targeted sanctions with a
view to enhancing due process and making the United
Nations sanctions regimes more effective. Our group
consists of Austria, Belgium, Costa Rica, Denmark,
Finland, Germany, Liechtenstein, the Netherlands,
Norway, Sweden and Switzerland.

In previous years, the Security Council has taken
significant steps to enhance fair and clear procedures
within the relevant Committee. In particular, the
establishment and strengthening of the Ombudsperson
process by resolutions 1904 (2009) and 1989 (2011)
were important steps towards creating an independent
and effective sanctions review mechanism, rendering
more accurate and more legitimate the list maintained
by the Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999)
and 1989 (2011) concerning Al-Qaida and associated
individuals and entities.

Nonetheless, regional and national legal
challenges to the Al-Qaida sanctions regime and its
implementation persist and put the uniform application
of and full compliance with United Nations sanctions
at risk. Against that background, and with a view to
the adoption in mid-December of the follow-up to
resolution 1989 (2011), we sent a letter to the President
of the Council at the beginning of this month, outlining
several proposals that we believe would merit close
consideration by the Council in its continued efforts
to improve and strengthen the system. The letter is
being distributed as an annex to the written copy of
this statement as I speak. In the interest of time, I will
highlight only some of the proposals today.

First of all, we would like to call on all Member
States to enhance their cooperation with the Office ofthe
Ombudsperson for information-gathering by providing
her in a timely manner with all relevant information
on persons and entities applying for delisting, including
confidential and classified information or declassified
documents. In that regard, Member States should be
encouraged to conclude confidentiality agreements
and arrangements with the Ombudsperson and to
abide by the time limits, as set forth in annex II
of resolution 1989 (2011).

Secondly, in the view of the group of like-minded
States on targeted sanctions, improving the transparency
of the delisting process is of the utmost importance
to increasing its acceptance. Procedural transparency
could be increased if the Office of the Ombudsperson
were to inform the petitioner, upon request, about
the state of play of his or her request for delisting,
where necessary, to ensure the transparency of the
process. Material transparency could be enhanced if
all Committee decisions, regardless of whether they
maintain a listing or delist an individual or entity,
contained adequate and substantial reasons that could
be conveyed to the petitioner by the Ombudsperson.

Thirdly, we believe that to ensure the independence
and impartiality of the Ombudsperson process, the
length of the mandate of the Ombudsperson should be
extended to an unlimited period. To ensure its effective
functioning, the Office of the Ombudsperson should
promptly be provided with all resources necessary to
fulfil its mandate, including funds for translation and
interpretation.

Finally, regarding the scope of the mandate of the
Ombudsperson, only individuals and entities listed on
the Al-Qaida sanctions list currently have access to
the Ombudsperson process. Yet similar due process
concerns exist in other United Nations sanctions
regimes. In our opinion, the Security Council should
therefore consider the extension of the competence
of the Office of the Ombudsperson to other relevant
regimes on the occasion of their next mandate renewals.

