Mr. Nduhungirehe (Rwanda): I thank Ms. Fatou
Bensouda, Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court (ICC), for her briefing and for presenting the
seventh report on the activities of her Office and on the
implementation of resolution 1970 (2011) on Libya. We
agree with her statement that accountability for the most
serious crimes committed in Libya is not negotiable.

The precarious political and social context in which
Libya was left following the revolution reminds us of
all the difficulties that the Government still faces in
rebuilding its institutions. Only recently, on 28 April,
the Security Council, under the presidency of Nigeria,
organized a debate on security sector reform (see S/PV. 7161), at which many of us emphasized the link between
security sector reform and the rule of law and how
security sector reform should be an integral part of any
overall national strategy, which requires the concerted
commitment of the national authorities, as well as the
sustained engagement of international partners. That
is an important element that should be emphasized as,
with security in place, it is easy to sustain the progress
gained in other sectors - in this case, the judicial
sector. We therefore acknowledge the progress that
Libya has made in rebuilding its judicial institutions
and in establishing mechanisms to address the crimes
against humanity committed during the revolution.

Libya continues to face serious challenges in the
consolidation of its democratic system. The best way
for the international community to assist Libya in
overcoming such challenges is by strengthening the
capacity of Libyan institutions. Both the judicial and
security institutions need to be supported to enhance
their capacity and effectiveness.

We therefore note Libya's commitment as a State
party to the Rome Statute to fulfilling its international
obligations by cooperating with the Court. We
regret the fact that the continued deterioration of the
security situation in Libya was an impediment to the
ICC's investigation of crimes committed during the
armed conflict. At the same time, we believe that the
complementarity clause is of paramount importance
in the sense that the international community should
rather develop the capacity of Libya's security
and judicial institutions, which can better address
such cases. The agreement on the memorandum of
understanding on burden-sharing, signed at the end of
last year between the Office of the Prosecutor and the
Libyan Government, could serve as a good base.

The fact that SaifAl-Islam Al-Qadhafi and Abdullah
Al-Senussi have appeared before Libyan courts to face
the charges brought against them indicates that Libya
remains able and willing to uphold its duty in line with
the complementarity clause of the Rome Statute. It is
important that the Government of Libya continue to
do its part in ensuring that all perpetrators of crimes
committed during the armed conflict be brought to
justice. That involves ensuring that investigations into
the alleged crimes by all parties to the conflict, including
torture and illegal detention facilities, and the alleged
crimes in Tawergha are conducted. We encourage the
international community and the Government of Libya
to work together in ensuring that justice is rendered. In
that regard, we welcome the collaboration of the Niger
in extraditing to Libya Saif Al-Qadhafi, who faces
charges of crimes against humanity.

Lastly, while we recognize the important
contribution of international justice mechanisms to
fighting impunity for the most serious crimes, we
note from our own experience that national judicial
institutions have proved to be effective in reconciling
people and in addressing crimes against humanity
and mass atrocities. Fundamentally, we all stand
ready to accompany Libya as it strives, on the basis
of international standards, to rebuild its institutions,
which should ultimately be accountable to the Libyans
themselves.

The international community should therefore
extend its support in strengthening the Libyan judicial
system by providing technical capacity, which will
ultimately be essential to address the crimes committed
in Libya and for the reconciliation process. We stress
that accountability is a necessary foundation for
a unified and reconciled society committed to the
development of all its citizens and shall therefore not
be negotiable.

