Mr. Kovanda (Czech Republic): Since this is the first
time my delegation has spoken this month, allow me first,
Sir, to congratulate you on assuming the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of September and to express
our gratitude to Ambassador Nugroho Wisnumurti and his
team for the way they conducted the business of the
Council in August.

This evening, my delegation wishes to look into the
future rather than the past. My Government welcomes the
basic principles for a new shape of Bosnia and Herzegovina
that parties to the conflict agreed upon earlier today in
Geneva. This agreement does not mean an end to the war,
at least not quite yet. Nevertheless, it surely represents a
milestone on the way to its peaceful settlement. The news
from Geneva indicates the readiness of parties to the
conflict not only to accept a peace proposal, but also to
implement it in good faith. We applaud the recent efforts of
United States diplomacy and the continuous efforts of the
Contact Group members, which have contributed
tremendously to reaching this point.

We call upon the parties to embark on the process
sketched out in Geneva immediately, for time is of the
essence. The process of reaching a political settlement
should no longer be hostage to military extremists who
bully and prevaricate while massacring innocent civilians in
one Bosnian city after another. The Czech Republic stresses
that only unconditional and full implementation of all
relevant Security Council resolutions and of the Geneva
principles will guarantee a lasting settlement of this
conflict.

We wish to point out that not all areas of conflict have
been dealt with in Geneva so far. No points of agreement
have yet been reached on Eastern Slavonia. Even though
the parties intend to return to this issue shortly, we find this
worrying. It supports the view, which we share, that more
Vigilance, including a strengthening of United Nations
Confidence Restoration Operation in Croatia (UNCRO)
forces in the area, is appropriate.

In conclusion, let me emphasize the strong and
unequivocal support of my country for the role the United
Nations and the North Atlantic Treaty Organization
(NATO) have jointly played and the measures they have
taken in recent weeks to prevent further shelling of the
civilian population of Bosnia and Herzegovina and to
bring the parties to the bargaining table.

