Mr. Skoog (Sweden): We align ourselves with
the statement to be delivered by the observer of the
European Union later today.

I would like to start by thanking the Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process and
Personal Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Mladenov, for his briefing to the Security Council
and for his tireless efforts, including most recently to
de-escalate the situation in Gaza. In today's challenging
times, the strong presence and engagement of the
United Nations in Gaza is of paramount importance,
and we fully support Mr. Mladenov's efforts.

Over the past few weeks, we have witnessed the
tragic events in Gaza that have led to a regrettable loss
of life. Since the beginning of the events on 30 March,
34 Palestinians have been killed by Israeli security
forces and thousands have been wounded. Israeli
security forces have used live ammunition, including
when shooting at children. Like the six United Nations
Special Rapporteurs mandated by the Human Rights
Council, Sweden condemns the killings and expresses
its condolences.

Israel has the right to protect itself and its people
within its borders, but measures taken must always
be proportional. The lethal use of force should be
used only as a last resort. Such incidents raise serious
concerns about their compatibility with international
law and must be swiftly and fully investigated. We
support the Secretary-General's call for an independent
and transparent investigation.

We continue to urge Israeli security forces to
refrain from the use of force against unarmed protesters
and representatives of the media and to respect the
right to peaceful protest. We also stress that it is
imperative that all actors, including those who organize
demonstrations, put the protection of children first and
never make children the target of violence, put them
at risk of violence or encourage them to participate
in violence.

Such deplorable events do not take place in a
vacuum. Gaza - roughly half the size of New York
City * is on the verge of social and economic collapse.
Earlier today we heard Mr. Mladenov explain that
Gaza is coming apart as we speak, with very dire
consequences. We have the collective responsibility to
avoid a humanitarian disaster and further escalation of
violence in a very volatile region. There is an urgent
need for changes on the ground, and all actors have
responsibilities in that regard.

While understanding the legitimate security
concerns ofIsrael, Palestine and Egypt, restrictions must
be lifted and full and sustained access and movement
guaranteed. That includes an immediate end to the
Israeli policy of closure, which hampers reconstruction
and makes economic development impossible. We
underline the need for unimpeded access to Gaza for
humanitarian actors, which is far from being the case
today. Furthermore, Gaza constitutes an integral part
of the State of Palestine, and the Palestinian Authority
must resume its responsibilities in Gaza. We call on
Palestinian factions to redouble their efforts to achieve
reconciliation. Only reconciliation will lead to a unified
Palestinian leadership and the reunification of Gaza
and the West Bank, including East Jerusalem.

As others have done today, I wish to highlight the
difficult financial crisis of the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East (UNWRA). We must all support UNRWA,
financially and politically, to avoid additional severe
humanitarian consequences for the people of Gaza.
It is of the utmost importance that all members of
the international community meet their political and
financial responsibilities.

We are heading into a historically charged period
in mid-May, with important reference points for
both Israelis and Palestinians. It has been 70 years
since Israel declared independence, on 14 May 1948.
Sweden was among the first wave of States that
recognized the State of Israel, in February 1949. We
have a long history of friendship with Israel. We must
also acknowledge that the birth of one State, while
being a joy to many, brought suffering for others. The
Israeli declaration of independence coincides with the
Palestinian exodus, also referred to as the Nakba, when
hundreds of thousands of Palestinians were forced to
leave their homes.

In 1947, Sweden voted in favour of General
Assembly resolution 181 (II), which recommended the
creation of independent Arab and Jewish States, aimed
at fulfilling the national aspirations of both peoples.
While the establishment of the State ofIsrael led to the
fulfilment of its legitimate national aspirations, those

of the Palestinian people - a people living under more
than 50 years of occupation - are yet to be realized.

The events in mid-May will also coincide with
the planned move of the United States Embassy to
Jerusalem. The position of Sweden and of the whole
European Union on the status of Jerusalem as a final
status issue and as the future capital of both States,
including the location of diplomatic representations, is
clear and will remain unchanged.

With the current violence on the ground and the
upcoming period, we see a real risk that the situation
could spiral out of control. All parties must exercise
maximum restraint and avoid confrontation. All parties
must take immediate steps to de-escalate. The Council
should contribute to those efforts, including through an
appropriate public announcement.

While that must be our immediate priority, we
must also drastically increase our multilateral efforts
to advance peace. We must see the resumption of
meaningful negotiations on all final-status issues
leading to the two-State solution. President Abbas'
plans for an international conference with a View
to establishig a multilateral mechanism for peace
is well worth exploring. It is critical that any future
peace proposal have the ultimate goal of a two-State
solution and that all final status issues are resolved
based on international law, the relevant United Nations
resolutions, including resolution 2334 (2016), and
previous agreements.

Let me just make a few brief remarks on Lebanon,
where we welcome the holding of legislative elections
on 6 May. It is the first time in nearly a decade for such
elections, which constitute a milestone in Lebanon's
democratic tradition. More broadly, the elections are
vital for preserving the legitimacy of Lebanese State
institutions. We hope that a new Government can be
formed swiftly following the elections. We also hope
that more women will be elected to the next Parliament
and serve in the next Government. We reiterate our full
support for Lebanon's stability, security, sovereignty
and political independence.

Lastly, in response to the Israeli Ambassador
who, regrettably, has already left, we share the view
expressed by the United Kingdom and others with
regard to the virtue of the Joint Comprehensive Plan
of Action with Iran, as endorsed by the Council and as
a means to maintain international stability and resolve
the nuclear issue with Iran.

