Mr. Haniff (Malaysia): I wish to thank the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Chile for convening
and presiding over this open debate. I also wish to also
thank Assistant Secretary-General ad interim Toyberg-
Frandzen for his briefing.
We just left behind the year 2014, which the
United Nations declared as the International Year
of Solidarity with the Palestinian People. The
international community believed and hoped that 2014
would be a critical year for Israeli-Palestinian peace
and that it could further promote solidarity with the
Palestinian people and generate further momentum
and international support for the realization of their
inalienable rights, denied for too long.

Malaysia regrets the fact that the year 2014 ended
with yet another disappointing and crushing blow to
the Palestinian people and their aspirations, as the
window of opportunity once again slammed shut on
their dreams of self-determination. The peace talks
brokered by the United States stalled, another war
broke out in Gaza, with catastrophic consequences, and
the Security Council failed to adopt a draft resolution
(S/2014/9l6) aimed at setting a deadline for ending
the Israeli occupation. The year also marked the tenth
anniversary of the International Court of Justice's 2004
advisory opinion on Israel's construction of a wall in
the occupied Palestinian Territory, an opinion that for
the past 10 years has unfortunately been completely
ignored and remains unimplemented.

Malaysia wishes to reiterate and reaffirm its long-
standing support for a just and lasting solution to the
question of Palestine, based on a two-State solution
and the legitimate right to self-determination of the
Palestinian people in an independent State, living side by
side in peace and security with Israel, based on the 1967
borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital. We remain
committed to the implementation of internationally
recognized initiatives such as the Arab Peace Initiative,
the Oslo Accords, the Quartet road map, the Madrid
terms of reference and the relevant Security Council
resolutions. We commend the diplomatic efforts of the
United States to try to revive the peace talks. However,
little progress has been made with their resumption,
while the conditions on the ground worsen and move
further and further away from a two-State solution,
owing to increasing illegal Israeli settlements and the
continuing construction of a wall of separation in the
occupied Palestinian territory, among other actions.

Faced as we are with more than 60 years of
failure to resolve the conflict, the current deadlock in
negotiations and the increasingly unlikely future of a
two-State solution, Malaysia no longer sees the wisdom
in insisting that the only possible route to resolving
the Palestinian-Israeli conflict is through bilateral
negotiations, a position that serves only to perpetuate
the status quo. Let us not forget that the State of
Israel was created by the United Nations following a
General Assembly vote in 1947 (resolution 181 (II)).
The State of Israel did not come into being through
bilateral negotiations with its neighbours, and yet
we deny a similar path to Palestine and criticize any
attempt by Palestine to seek fulfilment at the United
Nations of its right to self-determination as unilateral
action. Considering the prolonged deadlock in efforts
to resolve the conflict through bilateral negotiations,
the Security Council should step in and shoulder its
responsibility under the Charter of the United Nations
to address the situation, which constitutes a threat to
international peace and security that extends beyond
the region's boundaries.

As the Council is aware, earlier this month
Palestine acceded to various international conventions
and treaties on issues such as cluster munitions, the
law of the sea, the International Criminal Court and
transnational organized crime. Such moves should not
be seen as undermining orjeopardizing the peace talks.
The international community should rather welcome
them as a step in the right direction. In Malaysia's
view, in acceding to such international conventions
and treaties, Palestine's actions will be constrained
by and evaluated against internationally agreed norms
and standards. Such actions will also help to deter the
commission of war crimes and to end impunity for the
parties on both sides of the conflict. They definitely
represent a preferable and more legitimate path to
achieving the legitimate right to self-determination
than that of resorting to violence and extremism. It is
thus in everyone's interest to embrace Palestine as a
responsible member of the international community,
bound by the rules and norms of international law.

We commend France's effort towards the end of
2014 in taking an initiative to try to bridge the gaps
between Council members on the issue of Palestine.
The parameters for the peace agreement proposed by
France and subsequently taken up by Palestine provide
a good basis for further negotiations. They demonstrate
that a Security Council resolution on Palestine, despite
allergic reactions from certain parties, is not necessarily
incompatible with peace talks. Instead, the parameters
and time frame could provide much-needed pressure on
both sides to return to the negotiating table in order
to arrive at ajust, lasting, comprehensive and peaceful
settlement to the Palestinian-Israeli conflict. Malaysia
wishes to see peace talks and negotiations between
Palestine and Israel continue. We repeat our call on
the international community, and the Security Council
in particular, to shoulder its responsibilities under the
Charter to resolve the conflict and act as honest brokers
to the conflicting parties in order to ensure long-term
peace, security and stability in the region. However,
negotiations should not take forever and should be
carried out within a reasonable time frame.

Moving on to Syria, Malaysia strongly supports
all efforts to find a diplomatic and peaceful solution
to the Syrian crisis through dialogue and negotiations,
especially through the Special Envoy of the Secretary-
General for Syria, Mr. Staffan de Mistura. We
will continue to support a comprehensive political
settlement of the Syrian crisis based on the Geneva
communique' (S/2012/522, annex). We note that there
will be a meeting of the parties in the very near future
and look forward to being apprised of developments by
the Special Envoy.

Malaysia welcomes the progress made by the
United Nations and the Organization for the Prevention
of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) on eliminating chemical
weapons in Syria. However, we are gravely concerned
about the use of chlorine for hostile purposes in Syria,
as described in the reports of the OPCW's fact-finding
mission. We also remain deeply concerned about the
massive and deteriorating humanitarian situation
in Syria. We urge all parties in Syria to respect
international human rights law and international
humanitarian law, and to implement the various Council
decisions and resolutions on humanitarian access. As
Chair of the Working Group on Children and Armed
Conflict, Malaysia is concerned about the scale, scope
and gravity of violations committed against children in
Syria. We strongly condemn the widespread incidence
of grave violations against children and call on all
parties to protect and uphold the rights of all children
in Syria. We also urge that the perpetrators of such
heinous crimes be held accountable.

With regard to the occupied Syrian Golan, Malaysia
reiterates its call for Israel's complete withdrawal from
the area, in line with the relevant Security Council
resolutions, as well as international law and the Charter.
We also call on Israel to cease its violations ofLebanese
sovereignty and withdraw its troops from the occupied
territories in Lebanon, in accordance with resolution
1701 (2006).

The Middle East has seen a deeply worrying surge
in extremism and terrorism, including in Syria, Yemen,
Lebanon and Iraq. It is no coincidence that extremism
and terrorism have gained ground against a backdrop
of prolonged political conflict and highly unstable
socioeconomic situations in those countries. Malaysia
condemns in the strongest terms the horrific atrocities
committed by terrorist groups such as Daesh, which
in no way represent the peaceful religion of Islam. We
must not let extremism and terrorism gain the upper
hand in the region.

For the past several years Malaysia has called for
an international platform for the silent majority - that
is, the voices of moderation - to enable them to come
together to counter the growth of extremist sentiments
in all their forms. That position is based on the belief
that the real divide in the world today is not between
East and West, developed and developing countries or
Muslims and non-Muslims. The fault line lies rather
between moderates and extremists of all religions and
beliefs, and in all areas and aspects. The disturbing
developments in the world today, and in the Middle East
in particular, reflect the urgent need for a comprehensive
approach to countering extremism and terrorism,
including by addressing the underlying contributing
factors, and not through the use of force alone. The
voices of moderation must prevail against those who
espouse hate, ignorance, violence and extremism. We
must summon the political will required to bridge
differences and restore stability to the lives of all the
peoples of the Middle East, regardless of religion,
ethnicity or nationality.

In conclusion, Malaysia sincerely hopes to be able
to play a constructive role in the Security Council
in maintaining international peace and security,
particularly in the Middle East. We look forward
to contributing to the maintenance of international
peace and security and to upholding the Charter of the
United Nations, including through our long-held value
of moderation as a useful tool to counter extremism,
reconcile differences and resolve disputes.

As Malaysia takes its seat on the Security Council, I
wish to reaffirm my delegation's readiness to cooperate
and engage constructively with all interested partners
and stakeholders on all issues before the Council,
including the Palestinian-Israeli conflict.

