Mr. Zagaynov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We have taken note of the twenty-second
report of the Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court on the Court's investigation of the situation
in Darfur, and we thank Ms. Bensouda for her
participation in today's meeting and her presentation of
the report. Unfortunately, the fact that it was distributed
to the Council so late - a day before our discussion,
basically - prevented us from studying it in detail.

We note the report's conclusion about the decrease in
the number of security incidents in Darfur in the second
half of the year, owing to the significantly weakened
military capacity of the Darfur rebels who have no
real support among the population. The main source
in the region of violence and humanitarian problems,
including increasing numbers of displaced persons, is
intercommunal clashes resulting from centuries-old
struggles for natural resources. We greatly appreciate
the efforts of the Sudanese authorities to stabilize the
situation and promote reconciliation among warring
tribes.

We note that the Office of the Prosecutor has
continued to investigate crimes related to the Darfur
issue. In that regard, we focused on the assertion that
two thirds of the incidents involved Government forces
and groups loyal to the authorities, while the rest are
the work of unknown persons and other unnamed
entities. We believe we should call a spade a spade. The
Darfur rebels are guilty of serious violations of human
rights and the norms of international humanitarian law,
including the recruitment and use of child soldiers. It
is the rebels as well as the authorities who are creating
obstacles to the work of the United Nations bodies and
non-governmental organizations in Darfur.

We also focused on the information on air strikes
in the Jebel Marra area, according to which 50 civilians
were killed during the reporting period. We are not
about to assess the reliability of those numbers in
conditions where there is no access for United Nations
personnel. But it is clear that combat operations are
being conducted in those areas by an armed opposition
that does not shrink from using civilians as human
shields.

We note the Prosecutor's comments regarding
States' cooperation with the ICC on the problem of
Darfur. There can be no doubt that States' support
plays an important role in helping the Court achieve
its goals. At the same time, however, it is clear that this
is a complex area and that the States themselves, as
well as the Court, have concerns about the situation.
We sympathize with the concerns voiced by African
States and the African Union regarding the ICC. We
would like to emphasize once again that States' specific
obligations regarding cooperation with the ICC can
vary, including those relating to the immunity of senior
State officials in the light of international judicial
norms.

Regarding the proposals for so-called follow-up
action by the Security Council in referring cases to
the International Criminal Court, we have repeatedly
stated our position on the matter in the Council and it
is well known.

In conclusion, we would once again like to call on
the Court and the Prosecutor to take a comprehensive
and balanced approach to administering justice
and achieving peace, including with regard to the
investigation of the situation in Darfur.

