Mr. Gillerman (Israel): Allow me at the outset to
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council for the month of July and to
express our appreciation for the leadership of the
Council by your predecessor.
Israel would also like to pay tribute to you for
your stewardship of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
(CTC) since your assumption of the chairmanship this
past April. The CTC, under your leadership, continues
to assume a vanguard role in the global campaign
against terrorism and in assisting and monitoring State
implementation of Security Council resolution 1373
(2001).

Israel knows, maybe better than any other
country, that there can be no peace with terror, and it is
our very commitment to peace that binds us to the war
against terrorism. In light of our unique experience,
Israel stands ready and willing to continue to share its
knowledge and expertise and to collaborate in joint
efforts aimed at coordinating and strengthening our
collective response.

New security challenges have thrust counter-
terrorism to the top of the international agenda and we
are now at a critical stage in our actions to enhance
international cooperation to prevent and eradicate acts
of terrorism. The fundamental need to combat this
menacing issue, as terrorists continue to pursue their
goal of creating world instability, has indeed become a
task that unites us all.

On the streets of New York and Washington,
DC, on 11 September 2001, and on the streets of
Mombassa, Kenya; Karachi, Pakistan; Tel Aviv and
Jerusalem, we have witnessed how the winds of hatred
and incitement can fan the flames of terrorism, igniting
violence and inflicting scars of grief on the families of
the victims. No part of the world is immune from the
scourge of this global threat - this plague, cultivated
by the support, inaction and complicity of regimes.

We need an international partnership - a
common resolve and a common purpose in the face of
a threat that renders all of us vulnerable. Every nation
that seeks peace faces a common enemy today in
global terror. We must make it known: When you
deliberately attack civilians, you are at war with the
entire international community. Anything less than
total cooperation by all States in international efforts to
counter terror is unacceptable. Zero tolerance for terror
is the only moral option.

The weakest link in our fight against terrorism are
those regimes which are able but unwilling to take the
necessary actions to put an end to the terrorist activity
on their own soil - the regimes that turn a blind eye to
the continuation of arms trafficking, financing and
recruitment to further their own agenda. Regimes
cannot publicly endorse peace while privately
condoning terror. We must hold States accountable for
criminal acts committed by terrorists operating from
their own territory.

Similarly, just as States cannot tolerate the
practice of terror within their own borders, States
cannot be expected to turn a blind eye when their
citizens are attacked. States have not only the right, but
also the duty to protect their citizens against the threat
of terror. We have no greater responsibility.

Our renewed vigour in the wake of 11 September
and strategic changes in the international landscape
have created an opportunity to pursue peace,
democratization and the complete elimination of
terrorism. That opportunity must not be missed. In the
Middle East, a part of the world where terrorism has
had devastating effects, there is a real chance for
marked improvements in the international security
situation, but we must be rigorous and we must be
uncompromising in our war to eliminate the terror
weapon.

There can be no genuine ceasefire among
organizations committed to the murder of innocents in
the pursuit of a fundamentalist agenda. A promise to
temporarily halt such brutal attacks is not a concession
to be used as a bargaining chip in negotiations.
Terrorism is always illegitimate and we cannot lend
legitimacy to these repugnant tactics or give these
organizations an opportunity to regroup under the
protective cover of hollow words. Ceasefires are not
and can never be a substitute for dismantling the
terrorist infrastructure in accordance with international
obligations.

But time is not abundant as we face this imminent
threat. The prominent Jewish-American comedian
Milton Berle once said, "A committee is a group that
keeps minutes and loses hours." We must not become
such a committee. We must serve as a springboard for
action. As we debate, innocent lives are at stake.
Mr. President, Israel welcomes your efforts as
Chairman to transition the CTC into an operative mode
in order to better combat this threat, and we are
prepared to expand our existing bilateral and
multilateral activities to strengthen both political will
and practical capabilities on the ground to that end.

Terrorism subsists in a webbed infrastructure of
evil, and it is time that we untangled that encroaching
web. The international community must step up its
efforts to prevent terrorist attacks with an eye towards
immediate stability and peace-building in the long
term. In the short term, we must act to close formal and
informal funding channels, put a stop to money-
laundering and drugs, and prevent access to illegal
weapons, as well as delegitimizing those regimes that
provide safe havens for terrorists. It is untenable that
certain countries should continue to enjoy the fruits of
international legitimacy while they actively pursue
policies designed to undermine peace and stability.

As we have stated before, we also believe that a
greater effort should be made by the counter-terrorism
community in combating the education infrastructure
that breeds incitement to hatred and violence. We must
ensure that information in the media and in
educational, religious and political institutions is used
to promote progress and tolerance, knowledge and
understanding, and not as a tool to subvert them.

No baby is born wanting to be a suicide bomber.
Terrorism is not instantaneous or accidental; it is
nurtured over time. If the education of our future
generations is left in irresponsible hands, we may sow
the seeds of destruction as we wage war against
terrorism in other realms. If incitement is not
eliminated, it will be impossible to move away from
terror and violence to the path of dialogue and the
building of a better future.

Disentangled from that web of hate, the terrorists
themselves must be stopped and brought to justice. In
the Talmud, Rav Muna said, "Where justice is done,
truth is done and peace is made. Every place there is
justice, there is peace." With the strong arm of the
international community, the terrorists must be
disarmed. And, with the unwavering strength of moral
clarity, the terrorists and their supporters must be
named and shamed. We will see no end to terror unless
we go after the terrorists. If we only go after the
terrorists and their supporters and do not address the
structures and foundations of evil, then we will never
achieve true peace and coexistence.

The challenge of combating terrorism is
especially great because terrorists are cunning in their
ability to develop innovative new techniques and to
exploit technologies to achieve their aims. One such
new threat should be of alarming concern to anyone
who flies in a commercial airliner. The dire threat
posed by man-portable air defence systems - also
known as MANPADs - also requires intensive
cooperation and coordination of the international
counter-terrorism community. On 13 December 2002,
Security Council resolution 1450 (2002) condemned, in
the strongest terms, the terrorist bomb attack on Arkia
Israeli Airlines in Kenya. Subsequent warnings of
planned attacks involving shoulder-launched surface-
to-air missiles capable of destroying civilian aircraft at
low altitudes underscore the necessity of States to take
urgent action to curb the proliferation of those weapons
and the access of terrorist groups to them. As the CTC
reviews its work during the past three months and
consolidates its agenda for the near future, Israel
strongly suggests redoubling efforts to combat the
threat of MANPADs - both strengthening
countermeasures and reducing the danger of
proliferation.

Our international security is similarly hinged on
the threat of weapons of mass destruction falling into
the hands of terrorists. That horrific nightmare is
perhaps more imaginable today than it has ever been.
Implementing initiatives to halt the illicit transfer and
proliferation of these weapons and setting standards for
their import and export will provide safeguards to
ensure that no weapon of any magnitude can be
supplied to clients who in turn may transfer them to
terrorists. On several occasions, Israel has expressed its
growing concern that such transactions could generate
an enormous humanitarian problem and could have an
unspeakable impact upon all levels of society. For
Israel, it is self-evident that the international fight
against terrorism must begin at home: it can succeed
only if every individual State makes a sincere
commitment to prevent terrorists from obtaining
weapons of mass destruction, MANPADs and other
arms. That is vital to international security and vital to
our future.

Terrorism not only destroys those who practice it,
but ultimately ravages the innocents in society. Poverty
does not breed terror; it is terror that breeds poverty
and instability. But with the eradication of this threat,
we can open the darkest corners of the world to the
hope of a better future. Freed from the shackles of
terrorism and dictatorial rule, any society can prosper
and live in peace with its neighbours. It is our hope
that, when the international community makes a
determined commitment to end violence and hateful
incitement and to fight terrorism wherever it breeds,
we will be able to realize that dream.

