Mr. Nteturuye (Burundi) (spoke in French): My
delegation is delighted to see you, Sir, presiding over
the work ofthe Security Council. We congratulate you.

My delegation listened with genuine satisfaction
to the presentation of the report of the Security Council
mission by Ambassador Jean-David Levitte. His
presentation was clear and complete. The report itself
really goes to the heart of the problems of the Great
Lakes region. It is an honest summary of the talks
between the members of the Security Council and the
various Burundian authorities. It makes
recommendations that are encouraging to the
population of Burundi, which has suffered for so long
from destructive warfare.

Six months have elapsed since the establishment
ofthe transitional institutions in Burundi. The record of
these institutions may be slim in terms of
accomplishments, but it is generally positive in terms
of the will to work together and the determination to
move forward despite the absence of a ceasefire and
international economic assistance.

The Security Council mission, which spent 24
hours in Bujumbura, on 5 and 6 May 2002,
undoubtedly understood - and we see this in the
report - that the peace process remains fragile
because of the continuing violence and the implacable
poverty afflicting the population. The most regrettable
danger to the peace process may indeed be the
country's disastrous economic situation.

I wish to recall the following. While the
Burundians are primarily responsible for the situation
in their own country, the role of the international
community is not negligible. The Peace Agreement
was signed with the support and pressure of the
international community. We were told at the time that
assistance would promptly unblocked. Then, in the face
of the refusal of armed groups to join the Arusha
process, further pressure was exerted on the
Government so that the transitional institutions might
be established without awaiting the ceasefire. Today
the institutions are there. But they are increasingly
being discredited, as is the Peace Agreement itself,
which brings neither the peace nor the resources
promised.

The Security Council may not have had the time
to gage the depth of frustration and disappointment of
the population and its leaders, or the extreme poverty
of 6 million Burundians, which is increasingly
swamping them in despair. Yet the subregion has the
means to prevent armed groups from taking the peace
process hostage; it is a region which for two and one-
half years imposed an economic embargo on Burundi
to force the authorities to enter into negotiations with
the armed groups. We wonder why today it is
displaying such patience in the face of the intransigent
attitude of armed groups, while the risk of seeing the
peace process crumble is becoming increasingly real.

The Burundian Government is going to continue,
and to even intensify, its bilateral contacts that have
positively developed recently with the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and Tanzania so that the
necessary pressure may be placed on the armed groups,
with a View to negotiating and signing the ceasefire as
soon as possible.

Even if some international financial institutions
set new conditions that are unacceptable to a country
that actually needs assistance to meet these conditions
and that has to struggle against a formidable rebellion
that kills innocent people, the Government of Burundi
is determined to move forward to implement wherever
possible the provisions of the Peace Agreement. It is
determined to initiate the administrative, political,
social and economic reforms that financial means and
security constraints may allow.

The Government will intensify its contacts with
the countries of the subregion and the facilitation so
that further talks with the armed groups can be
organized with the objective of arriving, if not at the
signing of a ceasefire, at the very least at the cessation
of hostilities before 1 July 2002, the fortieth
anniversary of Burundi's independence. As of that date,
those who have not rejoined the peace process should
be disqualified politically and be rendered unable to do
harm by all peace-loving Burundians and by the
countries of the subregion, which plan to hold a
summit on Burundi in the second half of June. After
all, applying the Peace Agreement also means taking
severe measures against the armed groups that refuse to
join the Agreement and want the Arusha process to
fail.

Article 2 of the Agreement provides what the
international community and Burundi must do to
thwart the enemies of the peace Agreement. In the
meantime, the Burundian population and its leaders are
placing their hopes in the initiatives promised by the
Security Council with the International Monetary Fund
and other donors, so that the country can be saved
before it is too late. This will be possible only if all
partners, within and without, fulfil their commitments
now, not tomorrow.

Peace in Burundi also depends on the situation in
the Great Lakes region, particularly in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. It is Burundi's hope that the
inter-Congolese dialogue will continue and will open
the doors to being as inclusive as possible. Burundi is
particularly interested in the demobilization and
disarmament of armed groups, including the Burundian
rebels. For that purpose, the proposal to establish a
buffer zone is an interesting solution, and Burundi is
prepared to support it. However, the Government of
Burundi also wants all parties to work in a positive
spirit to restore real peace and security to the two
Kivus, which border countries with serious security
concerns along their border with the Democratic
Republic ofthe Congo.

In conclusion, allow me to say how greatly the
Burundian authorities appreciated the exchanges and
the words of encouragement provided by the mission of
the Security Council and how deeply the long-suffering
Burundian population is touched by the expression of
care and solidarity reflected in the Security Council's
two visits in a twelve-month period.

