Mr. Gasana: I am pleased to present the report
(S/2012/70) of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC)
on its fifth session.

We have come a long way in appreciating the
imperative of complementing the investment in
peacemaking and peacekeeping with a long-term vision
for sustainable peace. Today, we know thatpeacebuilding
is more than a set of activities and tasks to be mandated,
undertaken and reviewed. Peacebuilding is, rather, a
state of mind - a culture of policymaking, planning,
funding and implementing activities in post-conflict
settings. Today, we know that peacebuilding is a term
used to describe the continuum that spans all efforts
to lay the foundations for sustainable development and
for resilient societies and institutions. Today, we have
a platform that could help the United Nations and the
international community to conceive such a long-term
vision for peace and to sustain attention on critical
priorities. Today, we have the PBC, whose full potential
we have yet to tap.

During the reporting period under review today,
the PBC responded to the request for advice and support
from the Republic of Guinea, thereby becoming the
sixth country to be placed on the PBC's agenda. The
decision taken by the Commission to respond positively
to Guinea's request for advice marked a new phase in
the evolution of the PBC. This is a country that has not
emerged from an armed conflict, is not on the agenda of
the Council and has no mandated mission deployed to it.
In Guinea, the PBC is up for a new challenge to support
the country in a crucial political and socio-economic
transition phase.

In the other five countries on the Commission's
agenda - Burundi, the Central African Republic,
Guinea-Bissau, Liberia and Sierra Leone - the PBC
has continued to support each country through the
different stages and challenges facing the peacebuilding
processes.

The reporting period also included the Commission's
initial effort to respond to the resolution 1947 (2010),
concerning the outcome of the review of the United
Nations peacebuilding architecture. At the beginning of
the year, the Commission adopted a road map of actions
as an implementation framework to take forward
relevant recommendations emanating from the review,
with special emphasis on enhancing the Commission's
impact in the field.

Allow me to highlight just three elements from the
annual report before us today.

First, the report underscores the activities undertaken
by the Commission's various configurations to reach
out to and engage a number of critical actors within and
outside the United Nations. In view of the complexity
of peacebuilding challenges and the multiplicity of
actors, the need for coherence and partnerships cannot
be overemphasized. Building and strengthening
partnerships with relevant actors has been identified as
a key area of potential added value for the Commission.
In that regard, the PBC devoted the majority of its
effort and time to engaging with the international
financial institutions, especially the World Bank and
the African Development Bank. In the particular case
of the African Development Bank, the reporting period
laid the foundation for a deep and diverse partnership
that promises to align the Commission's and the Bank's
engagement in the countries on the agenda.

Secondly, the Commission has an enormous
capacity to promote knowledge and experience-sharing.
To that end, the Government of Rwanda, together
with the PBC and in collaboration with the African
Development Bank, hosted a high-level meeting on the
theme "Post-conflict peacebuilding: the experience
of Rwanda", held in Kigali on 8 and 9 November
2011. The event represented an innovative effort by
the Commission to serve as a platform for promoting
experience-sharing between the six countries on
its agenda and other countries that have undergone
peacebuilding and State-building processes. There is
a real need to nurture that type of cooperation among
the countries of the South. The PBC is best suited to
become a platform for such cooperation.

Thirdly, the Commission has continued to
prioritize the need for strengthening the interaction
with, and its advisory role vis-a-vis, the principal
organs of the United Nations. Briefings by the Chairs
of the country-specific configurations to the Security
Council have become systematic ahead of the Council's
periodic consideration ofthe situations in, and mandate
involving, the countries on the Commission's agenda.
The year 2011 also witnessed the introduction by the
Council of the informal interactive dialogues on certain
country situations.

The 2010 review particularly highlighted the
potential for developing a dynamic linkage between
the Commission and the Council. Fourteen out of the
15 members of the Security Council are currently
members of the PBC in its various configurations. The
joint membership offers a natural interface that would
facilitate the Council's drawing more proactively and
regularly on the Commission's advice. I would like
to echo the Secretary-General's point on the need for
clarity from the Council regarding the specific areas
for which the PBC's advice could be sought.

The reporting period also witnessed the continuing
development of the Commission's relationship with the
Economic and Social Council. The jointly organized
special event on the Millennium Development Goals
in countries emerging from conflict testified to the
Commission's growing advocacy role for an integrated
approach to peacebuilding, including through a
well-deserved focus on the socio-economic dimension
of peacebuilding.

There is need to empower the PBC to become
the central United Nations platform for support to
countries emerging from conflict and aspiring to
sustained engagement as they undertake the arduous
task of building national capacity and institutions. The
challenge facing the Commission in demonstrating its
full potential, however, is to ensure that its work in
support of these countries is backed by a high degree
of political commitment from the Member States and
the senior United Nations leadership. This is our shared
responsibility and one that we are yet to shoulder with
full commitment.

As noted by the co-facilitators of the 2010 review
report, "the review should become a wake-up call
to strengthen the collective resolve to deal with
peacebuilding in a more comprehensive and determined
way" (8/2011/41, para. 107). I hope that today's debate
will take us a step further towards realizing the full
potential of the Commission.

