My delegation aligns itself with the statement delivered by the representative of the Republic of Azerbaijan on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries. My delegation would nonetheless like to make the following additional remarks in its national capacity. Nigeria is deeply concerned about the situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question. It is regrettable that all efforts of the international community to ease the tensions between the Israelis and the Palestinians seem not to be moving in the intended direction of finding a lasting and comprehensive solution to the peaceful coexistence of the two parties. The question of Palestine has been a lingering issue affecting international peace and security. Nigeria's position on this issue remains unambiguous. We call for a viable, contiguous Palestinian State, with East Jerusalem as its capital and based on the 1967 borders, in accordance with numerous United Nations resolutions, including those of the Security Council. We have severally called on States with influence over the concerned parties to encourage them to re-engage in dialogue on the basis of the relevant United Nations resolutions, the Madrid principles, the Quartet road map, the Arab Peace Initiative and other existing agreements. We once again wish to renew that appeal to the influential States to muster enough political will and bring the parties to the negotiating table. We also wish to reaffirm our unwavering support for a two-State solution, with Israel and Palestine existing side by side in peace. In order to contribute to the two- State solution, we must acknowledge the fundamental root cause of this conflict, that is, the occupation. To be able to reach a sustainable peace, humanitarian, economic and political actions are all needed, but their full engagement will not suffice if the occupation of Palestine does not end. In that regard, it is our expectation that this debate will offer more suggestions as to how best to address the prevailing challenges and gaps in the implementation of all relevant United Nations resolutions, including those of the Security Council, on this subject matter. To that end, we once again call on Israel to take concrete steps to freeze all settlement-related activities in the West Bank and occupied East Jerusalem as a confidence-building measure. We also call on the State of Palestine to play its role in building confidence by signalling, through enhanced efforts, its return to the negotiating table in order to forge unity and deal with acts of militancy towards a just solution. My delegation would once again state that the prolonged absence of a political horizon to resolve the broader conflict has coincided with a steady deterioration of the living conditions of Palestinians. The situation is further heightened by the coronavirus disease pandemic, with the Palestinian Authority reporting 155 confirmed cases of the virus and one death, as of 15 April. Nigeria therefore reaffirms its support for the rights of the Palestinian people, including the protection of their fundamental human rights and their right to free movement and self-determination. My delegation once again reiterates its call on the international community to continue to support and encourage Israel and Palestine to sheathe their swords and embrace the peace process as a means of resolving the lingering conflicts. In conclusion, it is my delegation's belief that achieving lasting peace in the Middle East will depend on the commitment and determination of both Israel and Palestine to make painful sacrifices. That would bring about the much-desired peace and justice, reduce the serious threat to regional and international peace and security and create more vistas of development for both States.
