Mr. Valero Bricefio (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): On behalf of the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, we would like to
express our gratitude to the delegation of the
Federative Republic of Brazil in its capacity as
President of the Security Council for the month of
February. As a friend of that delegation, we wish it
every success in its conduct of the Council's business.
Our delegation associates itself with the statement of
the Non-Aligned Movement, which largely reflects
Venezuela's concerns on this subject.

The concept note before us on interdependence
between security and development states that

"social, political and economic exclusion can
contribute to the eruption or protraction of or
relapse into violence and conflict" (S/2011/50, annex, p. 2),
and that therefore they are

"relevant to the Council in discharging its
primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security" (ibid., p. 3).

The note adds that

"[i]n some conflict and post-conflict situations,
the Security Council may determine that certain
socio-economic issues constitute a threat to
international peace and security in their own
right" (ibid., p. 4).

The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela agrees that
overcoming poverty, inequality and oppression is
essential to maintaining peace among and within
nations. However, there are elements in this note of
concern to my country. We are concerned, for example,
about the possibility that the language of this note
could be used by serial interventionists to argue that
countries with poor, socially or politically excluded
populations pose threats to international peace and
security that should be addressed through outside
intervention.

Our delegation believes that such an
interpretation must absolutely be questioned by those
of us who defend dignity, the richness of cultural and
religious diversity, the right of all peoples of the world
to self-determination, sovereignty, territorial integrity
and non-intervention in internal affairs, as steadfast
principles enshrined in the United Nations Charter,
which must be respected scrupulously.

For the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela,
security and development should remain separate
issues. The United Nations development agenda falls to
the General Assembly, the Economic and Social
Council and the relevant agencies, and depends and
must depend primarily on Member States. The Security
Council has already held debates on such issues as
climate change, migration, maritime transport and
access to potable water, among others, in order to
imbue them with a discourse of fear and security.

The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela calls on
the Security Council to limit itself to exercising the
powers entrusted to it by the United Nations Charter.
Inclusive and fully representative multilateralism is not
only the approach to addressing these issues, but also
the appropriate way to ensure that the Security Council
respects the competencies that have been defined by
the States Members of the United Nations. We
therefore regret that the Security Council intends to
securitize the entire multilateral agenda within the
concept of selective multilateralism.

If it is proposed that we address the structural
causes of poverty, we should consider what has been
called "structural violence" - inter alia, those policies
emanating from the world power centres that have a
decisive influence on creating poverty and on reducing
the quality of the lives of the peoples of developing
countries. Poverty is not a historical inevitability, but a
consequence of historical asymmetries between
developed and developing countries and the
concentration of wealth in the hands of a few. If the
Security Council is interested in attacking the root
causes of poverty by eliminating unequal power
relations between developed and developing countries,
it will enjoy the full support of the Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela.

