Mr. Ahmed (Bangladesh): The Bangladesh delegation
wishes to join others in expressing our sincere condolences
to the delegation of Tunisia on the sad demise of former
President Habib Bourguiba.

Let me also begin by joining previous speakers in
commending the Canadian presidency of the Council for
convening this open briefing on Afghanistan. Our sincere
thanks go to you, Sir, for your very warm words and to
previous speakers for the warm sentiments they expressed
towards Ambassador Chowdhury and his team and for
Bangladesh's presidency of the Council last month.

We also appreciate the briefing provided by the
Secretariat for a second time, further to the 10 March report
of the Secretary-General on the situation in Afghanistan.
We should also like to pay our compliments to Ambassador
Listre for his excellent presentation on the work of the
sanctions Committee established pursuant to Security
Council resolution 1267 (1999).

Bangladesh believes that there is no alternative to a
comprehensive political settlement of the existing situation
in Afghanistan and that will mean the formation of a broad-
based, multi-ethnic and representative Government. It is
regrettable, however, that not much progress has so far
been achieved as regards narrowing the differences among
the parties on the establishment of such a Government. We
commend the continued efforts of Mr. Francesc Vendrell,
the Personal Representative of the Secretary-General on
Afghanistan, to bring the warring parties to the path of
negotiation and to maintain consultations with the
Governments in the region, including the "six plus two"

group.

The threat of resumption of a large-scale military
offensive in Afghanistan, as confirmed by the assessment
of the United Nations Special Mission to Afghanistan
(UNSMA), remains a matter of serious concern. The
Council strongly deplored the outbreak of fighting last
month between the forces of the Taliban and the United
Front in the northern Kunduz province and north of Kabul
around the Bagram air base. The Secretary-General in his
report has mentioned that the flow of weapons and war-
making materials into Afghanistan has continued
throughout the winter, enabling both sides to prepare for
fresh spring offensives. The foremost need, therefore, is
to concentrate all efforts to persuade the parties to enter
into a process of dialogue that may lead to a verifiable
cease-fire and eventually to an agreement on the
establishment of a broad-based, multi-ethnic and fully
representative Government. Such an endeavour can be
effectively complemented by the immediate and complete
cessation of the flow of arms and military supplies to the
warring parties in Afghanistan from outside.

We are deeply disturbed that the United Nations had
to withdraw its international staff from the Kandahar
office following repeated incursions onto United Nations
premises by the Taliban security forces, in violation of
formal agreements between the parties. We join others in
expressing in clear and categorical terms our disapproval
of such violations of the safety and immunity of the
United Nations and its personnel. We demand that
conditions be created to enable the return of the
international staff of the United Nations office in
Kandahar.

The humanitarian consequences of the long, drawn-
out war in Afghanistan need no elaboration. We are
seriously concerned at the disastrous socio-economic
conditions in Afghanistan severely affecting its people,
due to and exacerbated by unending fighting. Civilians are
targeted deliberately, their assets destroyed, their homes
subjected to widespread burning and looting. Women and
children have become particularly vulnerable in such
worsening socio-economic conditions. There has been
little progress in the education sector in general and for
girls in particular.

The health conditions for many Afghans remain
extremely precarious, with reports of significant increases
in acute respiratory infectious diseases causing at least 25
per cent of child mortality in the war-ravaged country.
There are disturbing reports of a wide range of human
rights violations, such as summary executions, arbitrary
detention and forced labour for detainees.

The magnitude of the humanitarian problem is
overwhelming when we consider the more than 2.5
million displaced Afghans who still remain in Pakistan
and Iran. We hope the repatriation process that started
towards the end of last month will continue, with the
refugees returning voluntarily, in safety and with dignity.

 

We will also hope that the returning refugees will receive
the necessary international assistance.
The United Nations has and should continue to play a
central role in the international efforts to achieve a lasting
settlement of the Afghan crisis. We hope that this important
role will be further strengthened and complemented by the
other ongoing initiatives on the Afghan question. The
United Nations agencies are doing a commendable job in
reaching the affected Afghan people. The Secretary-General
has reported the severe food security situation in Kabul, the
central highlands, Badakhshan, Ghowr and Kandahar. We
hope that relevant agencies, such as the World Food
Programme and others, will intensify their efforts to address
this vital need and we call upon all concerned in
Afghanistan to provide unimpeded access to these agencies.
Similar access should also be ensured to the United Nations
Children's Fund (UNICEF) and the World Health
Organization (WHO) when these agencies launch a national
immunization drive for children against polio in
Afghanistan in early May and early June.

Bangladesh supports the draft presidential statement on
Afghanistan which will be adopted by the Council later
today.

