Mr. Onemola (Nigeria): At the outset, let me say
that Nigeria approaches all issues related to sanctions
with the utmost gravity and consideration. We
endeavoured to build consensus on this latest round of
sanctions, consistent with our history as a nation that
seeks to promote peaceful coexistence among nations.
In 2004, as Chair of the African Union, we brought
Eritrea and Ethiopia together in Algiers for direct talks
aimed at resolving several conflict issues between
these neighbours, including the undemarcated border
between them.

Two factors informed our decision to co-sponsor
resolution 2023 (2011): our unwavering commitment to
peace in the Horn of Africa and Nigeria's principled
position against global terrorism. We ourselves have
been victims of terrorism in the recent past. The
deteriorating situation in the region, especially the
devastating threat of terrorism that is illuminated by
the latest report of the Monitoring Group on Somalia
11-62209
and Eritrea (see S/2011/433), must not be left
unaddressed.

Beyond any sanctions, the opportunity for a
political settlement of the myriad challenges facing the
region should not be squandered. Eritrea and its
neighbours - Djibouti, Ethiopia, Somalia, the Sudan
and Yemen - must now repair and relaunch their
relationships. The current state of suspicion and
tension will only serve to undermine regional peace
and progress. The Horn of Africa will require, as a
matter of priority, the concerted participation and
contributions of every Member State, including Eritrea,
if it is to achieve comprehensive and lasting peace in
the region. In light of this, we encourage Eritrea to
comply with the provisions of all relevant resolutions
of the Security Council.

Much as the future depends on domestic and
regional political will, concerted bilateral international
support can also play an important part. Thus,
recognizing that in a globalized world the security of
all States is intertwined, the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development, the African Union, the
United Nations and bilateral partners must now deploy
the most serious and concerted efforts to end all
conflicts in the region, including border conflicts.

The resolution we have adopted asks no more
than that Eritrea fulfil its responsibility to its people as
a sovereign nation and live up to its obligations as a
State Member of the United Nations. We firmly believe
in that possibility.

