Mr. Amieyeofori (Nigeria): Thank you,
Mr. President, for having convened this open debate.
The briefings we have received from Under-
Secretaries-General Amos and Le Roy and Assistant
Secretary-General Simonovie add an important
practical focus to our discussion of this important
matter of principle, and we thank them.

Although the United Nations, and this Council in
particular, have been seized of protection issues for
several years now, as we have heard today, our actions
to date have not reversed the trend towards the
disproportionate suffering of civilians in situations of
armed conflict. It bears repeating that the primary
obligation to protect civilians affected by conflict lies
with national Governments and parties to conflict.
However, when they are unable or unwilling to fulfil
this obligation, the international community, in
particular the Security Council, must respond to the
plight of civilians in armed conflict.

In this regard, we recall the United Nations
efforts to implement resolution 1894 (2009), which
called for comprehensive information on protection of
civilians to be provided to the Security Council. While
improvements have been made, we still lack a
coordinated approach to information gathering and
monitoring to ensure that the full impact felt by
innocent civilians in conflict situations is appreciated.
This must be a priority, as forewarned is surely
forearmed.

Nigeria supports the use of the full range of
protection tools, including the provision of
humanitarian assistance, mediation and other
diplomatic interventions, arms control and the effective
rule of law. A thoughtful approach to understanding the
specific vulnerabilities of all civilians in a conflict
situation would lead us to the right combination of
these strategies, one reflecting the socio-economic
context of the conflict.

The protection of civilians goes to the very heart
of the Council's mandate. I am therefore proud to note
that the international community has not been content
to stand idly by while civilians are targeted and caught
in the crossfire of conflict.

Our response to the conflict in Libya is using a
range of protection strategies in a non-peacekeeping
context. Multiple actors are working hard to provide
humanitarian assistance in the face of targeted attacks
on civilians and aid workers. Blocking humanitarian
access is not only a deplorable act, it clearly violates
the Fourth Geneva Convention. The dreadful scenes we
are witnessing in Misrata and elsewhere in the country
demonstrate the disregard for such pre-emptory norms.
Notwithstanding the efforts of the multiple
international humanitarian actors, the spectre of a
major food crisis and refugee crisis now looms. We
therefore demand that the Libyan parties take steps to
honour resolutions 1970 (2011) and 1973 (2011) and to
commit to a comprehensive ceasefire and a viable
political track.

In C6te d'Ivoire, the Ouattara Administration has
done much to ensure that Ivorian civilians remain
protected. However, the circumstances in that country
prove that the responsibility to protect survives full-
scale conflict. The Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs has reported that armed militias
continue to attack the population in the west of the
country and that insecurity is hampering humanitarian
access to those in need, including internally displaced
persons. Nigeria believes that peace can be achieved in
Cote d'Ivoire through a process of reconciliation, and
we support initiatives in that direction. We also look
forward to the outcome of the high-level inter-agency
assessment mission on the United Nations Operation in
Cote d'Ivoire currently in Abidjan. We trust that
ongoing protection priorities will be at the forefront of
the final recommendations.

We can think of no better way to keep civilians
out of harm's way than to prevent conflict before it
breaks out. Prevention is infinitely better than cure. We

therefore urge the international community to lend
greater support to the preventive diplomacy initiatives
of civil society and regional and subregional bodies
and efforts, such as the Economic Community of West
African States Observation and Monitoring System.
Such measures encourage stability and thereby reduce
the vulnerability of women, men and children caught in
conflict. In this way, we might protect civilians beyond
those on the agenda of this Council.

Finally, we must challenge ourselves to be
objective in our assessment of situations where
civilians need our protection. We must try for
consistency in our approach to the protection of
civilians in all situations of armed conflict and not be
held back or propelled by national interest, but by
justice and principle alone.

