Mr. Jiirgenson (Estonia): First, I would like to thank Special Envoy Pedersen and Under-Secretary- General Lowcock for their briefings from the United Nations side. It is clear that the ceasefire agreements established by the Astana format have unfortunately failed. Instead of peaceful life, the de-escalation areas have turned into war zones, with daily bombardment from the Syrian regime and Russia. In that light, we remain extremely concerned about the possible full-scale military confrontation of Turkish, Russian and Syrian regime forces on the ground. That is why we will be glad to hear today our Turkish colleague in the Chamber inform us about the recent developments in detail. Nevertheless, we already heard from the briefers that the large-scale offensive in Idlib province has resulted in both the loss of 1,300 lives and the displacement of more than 700,000 people in the past four months. Is that really a ceasefire? At least six Turkish soldiers were killed in an artillery attack by the Syrian army on Monday. Is that what can be called a de-escalation? Estonia joins those countries here today that are demanding a nationwide humanitarian ceasefire to stop the unfolding catastrophe. The reason for that is not only the immense human suffering that the indiscriminate and disproportionate bombardment of the Syrian army and Russian aeroplanes bring to the Syrian people. It is also because of the intricate link between peace and the political process, which resolution 2254 (2015) highlights. Stopping the violence is the simple precondition for a meaningful dialogue. However, the continued military operations by the Syrian regime and its allies harm that prospect and undermine the trustof the Syrian people towards the Council, where we sit right now. Indeed, no one is denying that there are radical elements in Idlib but that does not justify indiscriminate attacks against a civilian population. The deliberate targeting of schools, hospitals and other protected civilian infrastructure is a violation of international humanitarian law and may amount to war crimes and crimes against humanity. Accountability mechanisms, such as the International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism, supported by the General Assembly, are crucial in that regard, as they help to collect evidence of such crimes. Syria is not only the presidential palace in Damascus but also the thousands of tents of ordinary people in Idlib. So, besides the representatives of the Syrian regime, we also hope to hear the voices of other Syrian parties here in the Council more often. We will work closely with Council members to achieve that goal. Let us not forget that the political process, and more precisely the Constitutional Committee, have in it an equal number of representatives from both the Syrian authorities and the legitimate opposition. Finally, the solution to the Syrian crisis can only be political through a genuine political transition in line with resolution 2254 (2015). That must start with a nationwide ceasefire and guaranteeing unhindered access for humanitarian aid to all those in need. What is happening in Idlib right now completely contradicts those aims.
