Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): As a co-penholder,
the United Kingdom would like to echo the words of
the Polish representative, Ambassador Wronecka,
and thank the Security Council members for their
constructive and thoughtful contributions during the
negotiation process. The United Kingdom would like
to express special thanks to the Polish delegation for its
commitment in this joint endeavour. Poland's initiative
last year to host the Arria Formula meeting on this
issue proved to be decisive in focusing the collective
attention of the Council.

I also thank Russia and China for voting in favour
of resolution 2475 (2019) despite the doubts they
expressed today. I agree with my Russian colleague
and friend that we should not be creating new legal
obligations, and we have been careful not to so. We
agree with the fact that all citizens and civilians should
be protected. We also agree that that should not just be
declaratory and that there should be concrete actions,
as indeed there are this resolution.

Empowering people with disabilities leads to better
decisions and more effective outcomes for communities,
nations and the world. Resolution 2475 (2019) is a vital
first step in the Council's role in mitigating and better
understanding the disproportionate impact that conflict
has on persons with disabilities. As we heard from the
inspirational Syrian Nujeen Mustafa earlier this year
(see S/PV.8515), active participation is essential to
improving the protection and safety of persons with
disabilities in situations of armed conflict, as well as in
humanitarian response plans and post-conflict recovery.

Resolution 2475 (2019) offers a clear statement
that persons with disabilities want to, can and must
participate and lead decisions that affect their lives.
It recognizes the protection needs of all affected
civilian populations and calls for safe, timely and
unimpeded humanitarian access to all people in need of
assistance. We look forward to increased information
and recommendations from the Secretary-General
in both his thematic and geographic reports to the
Security Council, along with the inclusion of data
disaggregated by disability. That will further improve
the evidence-based approach that we want to be taken
in response to the Council's decision-making.

This landmark resolution is recognition that there
should be nothing about us without us. We hope that the
actions agreed start the process of answering that call.

The meeting rose at 9.55 am.
