Mr. Requeijo Gual (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
Allow me to express our gratitude to you,
Mr. President, for having convened this open meeting
of the Security Council in response to the growing call
of the overwhelming majority of United Nations
Member States, who are concerned about the
continuation and the deepening of the crisis in the
Middle East.

Unfortunately, the situation that once again brings
us together today has not improved. To the contrary, it
has worsened despite the appeals made by resolutions
1402 (2002) and 1403 (2002) and the trip of new
envoys to the area.

The Israeli Government's disregard for
everything we have discussed here over recent days
fills us with indignation. Not even the little that is
recorded in resolutions, which are diligently prepared
to maintain so-called balance, is respected or taken into
account.

The massacres continue. Repression continues.
Threats to the physical integrity and the dignity of the
President of the Palestinian National Authority, Yasser
Arafat, continue. Arbitrary detentions, mistreatment
and humiliation continue. Attacks against temples of
different creeds continue. The tanks of the Israeli army
continue to destroy houses, offices and the
headquarters of the Palestinian National Authority in
Ramallah and other cities in the West Bank.
The images of hundreds of children and young
people with their hands bound, their eyes blindfolded
and their heads hooded being taken to detention camps
burst onto our television screens, despite the ferocious
censure and manipulation of what is happening there.
Hundreds of thousands of Palestinian citizens continue
to be surrounded by tanks while they are brutally
attacked from state-of-the-art helicopter gunships or
military equipment. And the Israelis still think that this
is how the determination of an entire people will yield,
a people who aspire only to living in peace in their own
free and independent State.

We are going to speak very clearly and frankly.
The credibility of the Security Council is on
tenterhooks. If the situation continues like this, the
Security Council must adopt broad and credible
measures and must assume the authority and
responsibilities assigned to it by the Charter of the
United Nations.

How long is the Government of Israel going to
mock Council resolutions and the calls and demands of
the overwhelming majority of the international
community? How long is it going to play
unscrupulously with the lives of millions of human
beings? If this situation continues to deteriorate, will
we have to come here one day to make speeches
condemning the use of weapons of mass destruction
against concentrations of Palestinian people or against
Arab neighbouring countries?

Of course, this disregard for what we do in this
forum on behalf of the overwhelming majority of
Member States is based on the absolute certainty and
confidence provided by the indecent umbrella of the
use or the threat of the use of the veto by one
permanent member. That member uses it
undemocratically every time something is supposedly
done - even if just the touch of a rose petal - that
might affect the Israeli regime: that country to which
some attach the label of democracy, despite so many
abuses that are committed in the illegally occupied
Arab territories and despite its flagrant and ongoing
failure to comply with many General Assembly and
Security Council resolutions, whose paper has
yellowed in archives where they await implementation.

Israel's disregard for what we do will persist
while the alleged mediators, who may be effective in
negotiations, continue to maintain deceitful and
unbalanced stands when they speak with the conflicting
parties. It is impossible to accept that somebody may
be an honest and credible mediator while being both
judge and party, when he or she gives unlimited
support to all the atrocities committed or supports
militarily, politically and economically, with enormous
subsidies estimated to be around $5 billion annually, a
military and political machine trained and ready to kill
and plunder with hatred and brutality, using the alleged
pretext of defending its nation and ensuring its national
security. Unfortunately, timid voices can still be heard
in the Council appealing to the parties as if they were
fighting on an equal footing. How much longer will
this despicable blindness continue?

I call on the members of the Security Council and
of the United Nations as a whole: let us do away with
hypocrisy and rhetoric; let us leave diplomatic
formalities on one side. These massacres must be
brought to an end. The Government of Israel must be
compelled to abide by the provisions of Security
Council and General Assembly resolutions and to
respect minimum rules of coexistence and behaviour
among States. Specific and effective action - not half-

measures - must be taken. This should include the
immediate dispatch of an impartial international
force - I stress the word "impartial" - mandated by

the Security Council to ensure compliance with a
ceasefire and to demand the effective withdrawal of the
Israeli army from the Palestinian cities. State terrorism
must be brought to an end. All - not just some - of
the human rights of the Palestinian people must be
respected, including their most precious right, the right
of which they are deprived every day: the right to life.

Cuba will not cease to denounce, strongly and
loudly, the crimes committed against Arab peoples,
especially against the Palestinian people. Cuba will not
cease to denounce the daily manipulation and distortion
of the situation. Cuba will continue to denounce the
double standards used in this Council - a Council that
is rendered impotent by the threat or the use of the
veto.

One day soon, justice will be done, and a just and
lasting peace will be achieved in the Middle East
region for the benefit of all the peoples who live there.
Meanwhile, we will continue to denounce and condemn
the failure to act and the impunity with which
resolutions, the principles of the Charter, international
law and international humanitarian law are violated.
We will also speak, fearlessly and frankly, with right on
our side, with total independence and with faith that
justice will overcome iniquity.

