Mr. Esono Mbengono (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): Let me first of all welcome the presence
of Secretary of State Hunt and the manner in which he
has been leading today's meeting, which has brought
us together to address the threat posed by Da'esh to
international peace and security. We are grateful he
has convened this meeting owing to the importance of
the issue.

I would also like to join previous speakers in
thanking Mr. Vladimir Voronkov, Under-Secretary-
General and Head of the United Nations Office of
Counter-Terrorism, Ms. Michele Coninsx, Executive
Director of the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate, and Ms. Joana Cook, Senior Research
Fellow of the International Centre for the Study of
Radicalization, for their informative briefings on the
threat posed by Da'esh.

The seventh report (S/2018/770) of the Secretary-
General on the threat posed by Da'esh to international
peace and security, which we are discussing at
today's meeting, confirms that, despite its diminished
financial resources and although weakened at its core
and less active, Da'esh remains a global threat with
repercussions on all continents and subregions. The
evolution of Da'esh from a proto-State structure into
a covert and decentralized network is facilitated by
its regional affiliates and its network of thousands
of foreign terrorist fighters, including women and
children, and by a new and deplorable phenomenon of
suicide attacks involving the use of entire families.

It should be stressed that the partial defeats that
Da'esh has suffered in both Iraq and Syria must not
be allowed to mislead us. The growing presence
in Africa of foreign terrorist fighters coming from
the Middle East is helping to strengthen the resolve,
strategies and financial means of their affiliates in
North Africa, the Sahel and Sahara regions, the Lake
Chad basin and East Africa. Its mobility will also
affect the growing collaboration between it and its
affiliates with other terrorist groups, such as Al-Qaida
in the Islamic Maghreb, Boko Haram and Al-Shabaab.
In Africa in particular, these circumstances, together
with unequal development among countries, poverty,
the inequitable access to opportunities, especially for
young people and women, the increased circulation of
small arms and ammunition as a result of the crisis in
Libya, and the existence of displaced persons, are the
causes of growing complexity of protracted conflicts
on the continent.

The Republic of Equatorial Guinea applauds and
encourages the various efforts being made to ensure
better coordination of the United Nations system in
the fight against terrorism, the implementation of the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Coordination
Pact, and the continued strengthening of collaboration
between the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate and the United Nations Office of Counter-
Terrorism, and among the Counter-Terrorism sanctions
committees, inter alia. We also appreciate the efforts
of Member States to counter terrorism to the best of
their ability, and reiterate the obligation to respect
national sovereignty, in accordance with the Charter
of the United Nations, so as to prevent and neutralize
the structural causes that led to the formation and
expansion of Da'esh in Africa and the Middle East. In
that regard, we would like to make three suggestions
that we believe complement the ongoing global efforts
against Da'esh and terrorism.

First, we believe that it is extremely important to
eliminate safe havens and "black spots" in the fight
against terrorism, in order to limit the movement of
foreign terrorist fighters and the expansionist plans
of Da'esh and its affiliates. It is critical to identify
regions and States where, for whatever reason, the
implementation of counter-terrorism resolutions is
limited, which includes preventing violent extremism,
establishing legal structures, protecting borders,
including sea borders, and stopping the financing of
terrorism, among other priorities. In that regard, we
commend joint actions undertaken this year in Central
Asia by the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate and the Office of Counter-Terrorism,
and encourage similar efforts and research projects
in Africa. We would also like to highlight the Arria
Formula meeting that Equatorial Guinea, C6te d'Ivoire,
the United States, Ethiopia and the Netherlands, with
the collaboration of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime, organized in June on the subject
of transnational organized crime at sea and how it is
currently taking place in different parts of the world,
which served to underscore how this phenomenon may,
in some instances, represent a threat to regional and/or
international peace and security.

Secondly, we believe it is crucial to recognize the
need to invest in addressing the root causes of conflict,
and therefore in sustainable and equitable development
and peace. In that context, a powerful counter-narrative
to the Da'esh narrative could be generated, especially
through, inter alia, the empowerment of women and
youth, investment in education and the creation of labour
markets. Accordingly, we welcome the Secretary-
General's report contained in document A/72/840,
on the activities of the United Nations system in
implementing the Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy,
which, thanks to its reaffirmation by consensus at the
sixth review of the Global Strategy in June, will enable
us to follow up on those activities and better understand
their collective impact.

Thirdly, we believe that strengthening existing
counter-terrorism partnerships, as well as coordination
among them, is key. This is a challenge we can solve
only if we are united and share information and
experiences, thereby strengthening alliances and their
effectiveness against Da'esh.

Equatorial Guinea is one of the main investors in
the Central Office of the Committee of Intelligence
and Security Services of Africa, in which the Heads of
African intelligence and security Services participate,
which assists the African Union and all its institutions
in matters of peace and security. We believe that
the importance of that forum is crucial to fostering
cooperation and brotherhood among countries against
terrorist groups, including Da'esh. In that regard, we
commend the success of the High-level Conference
of Heads of Counter-Terrorism Agencies of Member
States, held last June, and call for similar events to be
held in future. We also encourage support for the joint
efforts of the African Union and the United Nations in
the fight against Da'esh and terrorism in Africa.

Finally, the Republic of Equatorial Guinea
reiterates the position of the African Union, which
believes that terrorism and violent extremism represent
one of the most dangerous threats to peace, security
and sustainable development in Africa and the world.
In that regard, we reaffirm our commitment to the fight
against terrorism.

