I join others in thanking the briefers for their insightful overviews and welcome the Prime Minister of Somalia to today's meeting. The coming months will be crucial for Somalia, and allow me to reiterate Estonia's support for the country and its people. Estonia welcomes that an agreement has been reached on the modalities for the elections, and that it has been accepted by all key Somali stakeholders. Moving forward, we emphasize the importance of timely, secure, inclusive and transparent elections. Estonia urges the implementation of the 30 per cent female quota and that marginalized groups be included. In addition, as Somalia prepares for parliamentary and presidential elections, the freedoms of expression and the press must be protected, now more than ever. While we welcome the progress that has been made, Estonia regrets that the upcoming elections could not be based on a one-person-one-vote model, as previously envisioned by the Somali authorities and the international community alike. In order to ensure that Somalia is making progress in its democratization process, we strongly support the development of an agreed pathway to one-person-one-vote elections in 2024-2025. Furthermore, in order for the democratization process to proceed, we would strongly support the institutionalization of the consultations between the Federal Government and the federal member states as a means of avoiding another impasse. Estonia also underscores the need to put in place measures and institutions to protect human rights. In that regard, we reiterate the importance of establishing the Independent National Human Rights Commission, which has a key role to play in promoting and protecting human rights. We also remain deeply concerned about the sexual-intercourse-related crimes bill and reiterate our call on Somalia to respect its international human rights obligations and discuss the original sexual offences bill in Parliament. The security situation remains a major challenge, and I condemn in the strongest possible terms the continuing attacks by Al-Shabaab. The impact of conflict on civilians, including women and children, is devastating and a cause for grave concern. The coming months will be crucial in agreeing the way forward towards the end goal of Somalia taking full responsibility for its security. In that regard, we welcome the progress made by the Federal Government of Somalia in updating the transition plan, and we look forward to the final product, which should be realistic in its timelines, tasks and goals. We are also looking forward to the independent assessment and urge all key stakeholders to engage with the independent panel. Estonia emphasizes that a comprehensive approach to security is important - Al-Shabaab cannot be defeated through military means alone; institution-building and supporting activities alongside military operations therefore remain the key. Estonia is deeply concerned about the dire humanitarian situation. Following the serious humanitarian situation resulting from the triple threat of the coronavirus disease pandemic, locust infestation and flooding, Somalia is again bracing for potential drought conditions in 2021. The routine spikes in humanitarian needs call for a more strategic approach. Strengthening the resilience of the Somali people must remain a priority. I would like to conclude by expressing Estonia's gratitude to, and support for, the United Nations personnel in Somalia, the African Union Mission in Somalia and Somali security forces for their efforts, commitment and sacrifices to bring peace and stability to Somalia.
