We applaud the Russian Federation for convening this very timely and important discussion. We also thank all our briefers for their presentations this morning. Conflicts in the Middle East, by their nature, have a spillover destabilizing effect on the Gulf region. Inversely, the political and security dynamics across the Persian Gulf hold significant implications for regional and international peace and security. The Security Council carries on its shoulders the burden of not only unresolved, decades-long complex conflicts, but also emerging tensions. Political instabilities in Syria, Iraq, Yemen and Libya have been a breeding ground for terrorist activities. We condemn the atrocious crimes committed by terrorist groups and their affiliates across the region. The Palestinian plight remains a central component as a destabilizing factor in the Middle East. We remain committed to the international community's long- standing, principled support for the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people, including to self-determination, and for the two-State solution based on the pre-1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as the capital. We implore the State of Israel to adhere to international law and the provisions of all relevant United Nations resolutions, including resolution 2334 (2016). Also echoing President Abbas's call for an international conference on the Middle East in early 2021, we believe that such a conference can bring all parties together to discuss the negative trends on the ground that are imperilling the two-State solution and stability in the region. The only sustainable way forward for the region is through an urgent de-escalation of tensions and high-alert postures. That necessary action can only materialize if all regional and concerned international Powers refrain from aggressive rhetoric and unnecessary unilateral action. Peaceful strategies, such as mediation and negotiation, should take precedence over any form of militarism. We implore all parties to let good judgment prevail and allow for diplomatic efforts and confidence-building measures to take place. While we praise any initiative for peace in the region, we believe that such initiatives should be inclusive of all parties. In Yemen, for instance, we firmly believe in the need for an inclusive Yemeni- led and Yemeni-owned political process. That also applies to the situations in Iraq, Libya and Syria, which demand inclusion for reconciliation and reconstruction. Likewise, we must all recommit to ending impunity, which has an adverse impact on reconciliation processes. We reaffirm our support for the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA). Its preservation is critical to peace and stability in the region, and we urge all parties to commit to multilateral processes and refrain from actions that run contrary to the goals of resolution 2231 (2015) and the JCPOA. Multilateralism remains the most effective approach to solving complex issues. We therefore encourage the United States to rejoin that critical agreement. A practical approach would enable us to jointly address common threats, such as the pandemic, terrorism and climate change, and simultaneously reinforce existing partnerships and forge new ones. We certainly see hope in setting aside political differences, de-escalating tensions, engaging in diplomatic dialogue and refraining from interfering in the domestic affairs of States. Through collaborative and consolidated action, we can achieve peace and prosperity in the wider region.
