Mr. Ramirez Carrefio (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We thank Secretary-
General Ban Ki-moon; Mr. Peter Maurer, President
of the International Committee of the Red Cross; and
Ms. Joanne Liu, International President of Medecins
Sans Frontieres, for their valuable briefings. We would
like to echo the urgent call to those participating in
conflicts that they stop bombing hospitals, health-
care workers and patients. We would like to express
our thanks to and recognition for the thousands of
medical health workers, many of whom are working
anonymously but who are putting their lives on the
line every day to fulfil their noble task of saving lives
and alleviating human suffering in the cruel situation
of those conflicts. The work of humanitarian workers
is an extraordinary example of humanity and hope for
peoples who are so deeply affected by the violence and
the horror. Attacking health-care workers is a barbarity
that cannot be justified under any circumstances.

Once again, we welcome the adoption of resolution
2286 (2016), which represents a timely political
response to the systematic and serious violations of
international humanitarian law that are taking place on
a daily basis in the ongoing armed conflicts that have
led to so much bloodshed in various parts of the world,
particularly in the Middle East and Africa. What we
now have to do is to comply honestly, straight-forwardly
and without excuses with the mandate and purposes of
the resolution.

It is difficult for us to understand how it is possible
that, at a time when high-tech satellite- or laser-guided
weapons are capable of killing at any distance with
terrifying precision, such mistakes could be made and
that concentrated bombings are targeted on medical
facilities and personnel in areas of armed conflict,
despite the fact that hospitals are public facilities, whose
locations are well known by all parties to the conflict,
and where there are early-warning protocols in place to
avoid bombing situations. We cannot understand how
such things can be happening and how people can keep
claiming that they are simply mistakes. We therefore
repudiate the attacks that have taken place against
medical and humanitarian staff and facilities and
means of transport in Palestine, Afghanistan, Yemen
and Syria.

For us, it is unacceptable that Medecins Sans
Frontieres, the Red Cross and other health-care workers
and humanitarian convoys of the United Nations have
become military targets in war-torn areas. That is
something that we cannot tolerate - that hospitals are
being bombed and that doctors, the wounded and the
sick are being killed those hospitals.

It seems that for very many people life does not
have any value. We are seeing conflicts that are taking
humankind back to times where there were no rules.
Such violations not only endanger the well-being and
security ofmillions ofpeople, but they also worsen crises
and represent an enormous challenge for humanitarian
and health-care workers. It is increasingly difficult for
them to carry out their humanitarian work.

We believe that we must all make a special effort to
ensure that the situation is resolved and that the Security
Council plays its crucial role in that regard. We fully
endorse the Secretary-General's recommendations
of 8 August 2016, formulated in accordance with
paragraph 13 of resolution 2286 (2016), and we
decisively support the proposal that was made today by
Ms. Liu to the Council.

We believe that it is imperative that all countries
adhere to international treaties as they pertain to the
protection of health-care workers and facilities in armed
conflicts and that national legislative frameworks
be strengthened. We also think that peacekeeping
operations and special political missions of the United
Nations should play a more active role in the creation of
an environment conducive to the protection of health-
care workers and facilities. We also believe that both
United Nations missions and the Member States that
are able to bring influence to bear on the parties have
the obligation to advocate for respect for, and the full
implementation of, international humanitarian law.

There need to be greater efforts to document and
analyse all incidents that affect the security and well-
being of health-care workers and facilities and ensure
that impartial, independent and prompt investigations
are carried out and that those who are suspected of
perpetrating such acts are brought tojustice. Reparations
must be provided to the victims of the damage caused.

Finally, my country, the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela, has never attacked any other country. We
have never participated in any military coalition. Nor
do we have double standards on that issue. We also do
not have double standards when it comes to bombing
humanitarian workers in particular. We do not justify
some attacks and remain silent on others. We do not
denounce some and use others for political purposes.
Nor do we sell weapons to anyone or, much worse,
spend billions of dollars on the terrifying weapons
of death. That is to say that we have all the political
moral and ethical force to call upon countries that
participate in conflicts to cease the killing and violence
against humanitarian workers, and we, as a member
of the Security Council, will do everything necessary
to ensure that the horrors of war that we are seeing in
these meetings are at least brought under control. The
most important thing is for us to achieve peace and
for the extraordinary health-care workers to be able to
continue to be deployed and do their magnificent work
in favour of life and human beings.

