Mr. Seenz Biolley (Costa Rica) (interpretation from Spanish): My delegation is taking the floor in this
meeting on Tajikistan in order to reaffirm our resolute
support for the peace and reconciliation process in that
country.

Amidst the difficulties that we have experienced in
recent days on other issues, we feel that this occasion
demonstrates the usefulness and value of dialogue and
political negotiation as appropriate instruments of

 

diplomacy for resolving conflicts that affect, or may affect,
international peace and security.

It is clear that significant progress has been made by
the Tajik parties in executing the General Agreement on the
Establishment of Peace and National Accord and in
maintaining the ceasefire. The active international presence
has contributed to this progress. Here we would emphasize
the admirable activities of the United Nations Mission, the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and the
Commonwealth of Independent States peacekeeping forces.

While bearing in mind the progress that has been
made and the need to build on it, we should not ignore the
fact that there are still difficulties which make it necessary
for us to keep paying attention to the situation through the
United Nations presence in Tajikistan.

Costa Rica supports the extension of the mandate of
the United Nations Mission of Observers in Tajikistan
(UNMOT) for an additional six months as well as the
increase in its personnel, and we agree that the Mission
should, at this new stage, use its best efforts to assist in the
implementation of the General Agreement, which will be
fundamental and decisive with regard to certain political
issues, as well as of key importance with regard to other
vital questions, such as the investigation of ceasefire
violations and the monitoring of the cantonment,
reintegration, disarming and demobilization of United Tajik
Opposition (UTO) combatants.

As on other occasions, my country would like to draw
attention to the question of the T ajik refugees in northern
Afghanistan. We welcome the developments in the return
process. This demonstrates the readiness of the parties to
comply with what has been agreed, and we are therefore
confident that it will continue and be completed. That, of
course, will require clear resolve by the parties and the
continued humanitarian support of the international
community. This in turn requires a clear determination by
the parties to cooperate and to assume their fundamental
role in implementing what has been agreed. This is of
particular importance, among other things, when it comes
to guaranteeing the safety and freedom of movement of
international personnel.

At the same time, Costa Rica underscores the great
value of the Secretary-General's intention to convene a
donor conference to obtain the international support
necessary for the implementation of the General Agreement.
My country associates itself with all those who have
encouraged Member States of the Organization, especially
those that have links to and interests in Tajikistan, to
make a decisive contribution so that the process of peace
and reconciliation can reach a successful conclusion.

In conclusion, I should like to express my country's
gratitude for the outstanding role played by the Russian
Federation and the Islamic Republic of Iran in bringing
peace to Tajikistan. My delegation will vote in favour of
the draft resolution before us.

