Mr. Pressman (United States of America): I thank
the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for the
Sahel, Ms. Sellassie, for her briefing. The United States
welcomes her close engagement with regional leaders
and the broader international community to assist the
countries and the people of the Sahel region on their
path towards achieving effective governance, security,
development and prosperity.

The horrific attacks last week in Bamako, which
killed nearly 20 innocent civilians, including those
assisting Mali in its efforts to provide basic services
to its population, and yesterday's attack on a convoy
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali that was travelling near
Timbuktu, as well as the ongoing threat posed by
Boko Haram, especially in north-eastern Nigeria and
northern Cameroon remind us just how high the stakes
are for the countries of the Sahel.

The creation of the Multinational Joint Task Force,
with the participation of Nigeria, the Niger, Cameroon,
Chad and Benin, is the most recent example of the
deepening commitment by African countries to counter
terrorism. African forces, with support from the United
Nations and bilateral partners, also responded to the
crisis in northern Mali in 2013 by working with the
French to dislodge Al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb
and other groups that had established a safe haven there.
Our work in Mali is far from finished, and the problems
faced by Mali cannot be solved by military force alone.
The success of the Mali peace process rests on the
Malian parties committing to making hard choices for
the collective security of all Malians. We welcome the
steps taken by the parties in Mali to uphold the ceasefire
arrangements; however, we need to see more progress
by the Government on institutional reforms that will
better enfranchise northern Malians and improve
governance for all citizens, as well as more progress
by all the Malian parties to prepare for cantonment and
joint security patrols to pave the way for a return of
reformed security forces to the north. Progress in these
areas will enable Mali to, as President Obama said
recently, rid its country of terrorists and strengthen its
democracy - goals to which the Security Council is
deeply committed. I would like to highlight a few areas
in the region where I think we can do more.

First, we believe that enhanced focus on good
governance by the countries of the region is essential.
Appropriately, that is one of the pillars of the United
Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahe. Inclusive
and effective governance and improvements will serve
as the foundation for stability across the region. The
people of Mali and of other countries of the region
have expressed a clear desire for more responsive
Government institutions and for peaceful democratic
changes of power through inclusive, transparent and
free elections.

The recent events in Burkina Faso serve to further
demonstrate that legitimate, civilian-led Government
is the lifeblood of any democracy and crucial to
stability. When a faction of the military attempted
in September to seize power from Burkina Faso's
transitional President, the population responded with
a resounding "No!" Courageous civil society activities
helped Burkina Faso to overcome its governance crisis.
The people of Burkina Faso are expected to go to the
polls for elections on Sunday. We look to the Niger,
which is set to hold elections in early 2016 amid serious
security challenges at its borders, to continue to make
progress towards democratic consolidation and political
inclusion.

Secondly, we must work collectively to counter
the underlying drivers of violent extremism in the
Sahel. The United States welcomes the region's efforts
to create a new countering-violent-extremism youth
network for the region, which we hope will enable the
sharing of best practices. We welcome the fact that the
leaders in the Sahel are working to deepen cooperation
among themselves, including through the Group of Five
for the Sahel (G-S Sahel) and the Nouakchott Process,
by coming to agreement on a shared vision of the
region's transnational threats and the efforts needed to
address them.

The United States will continue to work with its
partners in the Sahel and the Maghreb region to build
their counter-terrorism capacity, so that they can
address the underlying drivers of radicalization and
build the long-term law enforcement architecture that
will preserve the many gains they have already made.
In this vein, we encourage the leaders of the Sahel
region to adopt a whole-of-Government approach to
countering violent extremism that reflects a common
understanding that terrorists will not be defeated by the
force of arms alone.

Thirdly and finally, we encourage further progress
by the United Nations system and its partners towards
the effective implementation of the United Nations
Integrated Strategy for the Sahel. We welcome the
Secretary-General's forthcoming strategic review of the
Office ofthe Special Envoy ofthe Secretary-General for
the Sahel and the consideration of its recommendations
on ways to improve the United Nations system's
capacity to deliver assistance effectively to the Sahel
region. We encourage Special Envoy Sellassie to
continue to pursue her good offices with the Special
Representatives of the Secretary-General for West and
Central Africa, as they all work to enhance regional
cooperation and strengthen international assistance to
the region.

