Ms.Wronecka (Poland):Iwouldliketothanktoday's
briefers for their respective informative presentations.

Poland supports the procurement channel
and the Procurement Working Group, as well as
the coordinating role of the European Union. We
believe that that transparency, non-proliferation and
confidence-building measure ensures the conformity
of relevant transfers with resolution 2231 (2015) and
contributes to supporting the non-proliferation regime.
We note, however, the decrease in the number of
proposals put forward in the latest reporting period.

Poland welcomes the latest report (S/2019/934)
of the Secretary-General on the implementation of
resolution 2231 (2015). We consider it a well-balanced
document. The Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action
(JCPOA), which constitutes an integral part of the
resolution, is an important achievement of multilateral
diplomacy - a key element of the global nuclear
non-proliferation architecture. However, the JCPOA is
at a crossroads, as has been rightly pointed out by the
Facilitator, Ambassador Marc Pecsteen de Buytswerve.
We regret that the future of the agreement has been
called into question as a result of the withdrawal of the
United States from the JCPOA and actions taken by the
Islamic Republic of Iran since May 2018.

We join other European Union partners in expressing
our concern over steps taken by Iran to reduce its
nuclear-related commitments under the JCPOA, as
reported by the International Atomic Energy Agency.
Those actions by the crucial stakeholder of the JCPOA
might not only endanger its further implementation,
but may also make it difficult for the international
community to defend the JCPOA in its current form.
Poland echoes the Secretary-General's call on Iran to
reverse those measures and refrain from taking further
steps to reduce its agreed commitments. We welcome
the International Atomic Energy Agency's efforts to
strictly monitor and verify Iran's commitments in
order to guarantee the exclusively peaceful nature of
the Iranian nuclear programme in line with the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and the
JCPOA. Poland has full confidence in the Agency's
professionalism and impartiality.

We call on Iran to uphold its commitment to the
Non-Proliferation Treaty and to never seek to develop
or acquire any nuclear weapons. We also call on Iran
to continue to apply the Additional Protocol to its
Safeguards Agreement and to formally ratify that
Protocol in the near future.

Poland is deeply concerned with the findings
of the Secretary-General's report concerning Iran's
engagement in ballistic missile tests and launches,
its continued illicit transfers of arms, missiles and
missile technology to actors in the region and its
on-compliance with travel-ban provisions - actions
that are inconsistent with annex B to resolution
2231 (2015). Dangerous trends associated with the
proliferation of missile-related goods and technologies
in the Middle East contribute to regional instability. We
encourage Iran to cooperate closely and constructively
with the international community in efforts aimed at
de-escalating tensions in the Middle East.

