Mr. Moubarak (Lebanon): Once again, Lebanon is
pleading before you, members of the Security Council, to
take action to stop the Israeli military aggression against
my country, its people, its territorial integrity, its
independence and its sovereignty. Military aggression is
a flagrant violation of the United Nations Charter,
international law and pertinent Security Council
resolutions, particularly resolution 425 (1978), and the
Armistice Agreement of 1949 between Lebanon and
Israel.

For five days now, Lebanon has been subjected to
continued Israeli aggression by land, sea and air. Israel is
killing and injuring Lebanese civilians, and at this time
there is an exceedingly large number of displaced persons
from South Lebanon and surrounding areas.

This situation cannot be tolerated. I am here today
to ask you, members of the Council, to take swift action
to stop this Israeli madness.

Contrary to the claims of Israeli officials and those
who are backing them, the current escalation is a result of
persistent Israeli attacks and bombardments deep in
Lebanese territory, killing men, women and children. This
is a violation of the so-called understanding of July 1993
and hence attracts reaction from the Lebanese resistance.

The records of the Security Council are replete with
my constant correspondence reporting to the Council a
long chain of misery inflicted by Israel against Lebanon.

Israeli military activities are escalating at an
alarming rate. Israeli military forces are bombarding, by
air, sea and land, an area extending from the south to the
north of Lebanon, causing the displacement of hundreds
of thousands of civilians. This new cycle of violence must
not be viewed apart from the overall situation in the south
and the western Bekaa. It is not a question of who
launched this or that rocket first. It is the result of the
occupation by Israel, in flagrant violation of Security
Council resolution 425 (1978). Furthermore, this new
cycle of large-scale violence has been triggered on
purpose by the Israelis to serve the electoral ambitions of
the Israeli Government. This is completely insane.

Israel is still engaged in its deadly assault against
Lebanon. The number of casualties is constantly
increasing and the destruction of property is devastating.

 

The outcome of this aggression since it started is as
follows.
On Wednesday, 10 April, the entire southern Lebanese
coast was subjected to an intensive sea blockade. Israeli
artillery heavily shelled most of the villages in the south
and the western Bekaa. The Israeli air force violated
Lebanese airspace by conducting extensive military
bombardments over most of Lebanon's regions.

On Thursday, 11 April, Israel raided the civilian
sections of the southern part of Beirut, targeting the A1
Sahel hospital and a Syrian army barracks near Beirut
airport. Moreover, it carried out other raids on many
villages in the south: Mlita, Ain Bousouar and Jibaa. The
sea blockade imposed on all Lebanese coasts is being
firmly maintained and artillery shelling on many villages in
the south and the western Bekaa - Tyre, Nabatiye,
Schhour, Zibqeen, Yater, Al Qlayle, Mlita, Dirdghaya,
Mayfadoun, Jibcheet, Khirbit Selem, Shouqeen, Majdal
Selem, Zibdeen and Al Hiniye - continues unabated.
Furthermore, Israeli rockets hit a civilian car in the town of
Jiye, killing all the occupants. The casualty results of that
day were 5 citizens dead, among them a soldier in the
Lebanese army, and 25 civilians injured.

On Friday, 12 April, Israeli artillery shelled many
villages in the south and the western Bekaa: Nabatiye,
Mansouri, Hiniye, Yater, Hariss, Baraachit, Chakra,
Mayfadoun, Souyaneh, Kfar Remen, Habboush, Arabsalim,
Kfar Melki, Touleen, Sohmor, Yohmor, Zillaya, Libbaya,
Machghara, Tibneen, Jmeijmeh, Hatcheet, Kfarsseer and
Kfar Tebneet. Furthermore, Israeli helicopters raided the
southern and the western Bekaa, bombarding Shouqeen,
Nabatiye, Maalliye, Tyre and Sarba, and Israeli forces
shelled the southern part of Beirut: Haret Hreik, Beer
Hassan, Tariq aI Matar and Hay al Solom.

The sea blockade is still in effect, and the Israelis
warned the Lebanese to evacuate their homes in 40
southern towns and villages, causing a massive migration
towards Saida, Tyre and Beirut. These villages are Klayleh,
Khirbet Selem, Jibcheet, Nabatiye, Yater, Mansouri,
Hinniye, Bazoulliya, Zibqeen, JebaI al Boutoum, Majdal
Zoun, Siddiqeen, Aiteet, Majdal Selem, Chakra, Kabrikha,
Touleen, A1 Ghandouriye, Al Sultaniye, Beer al Salassel,
Jmeijmeh, Safad al Bateekh, Zaoutar al Gharbiye, Zaoutar
al Sharqiye, Yohmor, Tibneen, Shouqeen, Kaaqayiat al
Jiser, Kfar Reman, Arabsaleem, Aita al Jebel, Kafra,
Mayfadoun, Adcheet and Kfarsseer. The casualty results of
that day were 6 civilians dead, 22 injured and 50,000 newly
displaced from the south.

On Saturday, 13 April, massive Israeli
bombardments continued at the rate of 40 mortar shells
per minute falling on many villages in the south and the
western Bekaa: Hinniye, Al Klayleh, Schaytiyeh, Al
Kneisseh, Qana, Siddiqeen, Baraachit, Chakra, A1
Souyaneh, Nabatiye, Tyre, Majdal Selem, Zibqeen,
Harrouf, Jibcheet, A1 Mansouri, Yater, A1 Doueir, A1
Kfour, Toumaat Nihaa, A1 Bazouriye, Ibaa, Ain Qana,
Habouch, Kfar Remman, Zibdeen, Maydoun, Ain al Tineh
and Beer aI Salassel.

Israeli helicopters continued their raids on the south
and the Bekaa, attacking Jebal al Boutoum, Al Klayleh,
Majdal Selem, Tibneen, A1 Souyaneh, A1 Remadiyah,
Siddiqeen, Kfra, Baraachit, Kherbet Selem, A1 Bazouriya,
Hariss, Chakra and Mahrounah. Israeli shelling hit a
Lebanese ambulance in A1 Mansouri, in the area of Tyre,
killing four children, and hit a house in the town of
Souhmor in the western Bekaa, killing a whole family of
five. More Israeli warnings have been issued to vacate the
area of Nabatiye and the western Bekaa. The casualty
results of that day were 12 civilians dead and 30 injured,
and the number of displaced from the south reached
200,000 more Lebanese citizens.

On Sunday, 14 April, Israel continued to bombard
all the Lebanese regions from air, land and sea. Israeli
warplanes shelled the southern part of Beirut: Beer-Abd,
Haret Hreik and Ghobeyri. Furthermore, Israeli warplanes
shelled the electrical power station in Jamhour, in East
Beirut. More warnings were issued by Israel to evacuate
Tyre and all surrounding villages. The following towns
were bombarded: Tyre, Hinniye, Al Azziye, Al Klayleh,
Siddiqeen and Bourg A1 Shemaleh. Israel also raided the
Palestinian refugee camp of A1 Baddawi in northern
Lebanon and Israeli forces prevented the flow of south-
bound traffic on the Beirut-Sidon line, citing any violation
as a provocation for direct shelling. The resulting
casualties were 5 dead and 30 injured, and the number of
displaced persons reached more than 600,000.

Today, Monday, 15 April, Israeli reinforcements
entered Lebanon. A systematic bombardment of Tyre and
its internationally protected archaeological sites is taking
place at a rate of 100 shells per minute. Bombardments
are continuing on all the towns and villages cited above.
Beirut's suburbs are the target of the Israeli air force and
another power station was hit at BsaIeem village, north-
east of Beirut. Israeli threats and intimidations are
intensifying. The sea blockade is being strongly
maintained.

 

Before coming to the Security Council, I received two
further pieces of information. First, the Israeli air force
bombarded the largest electrical plant in Lebanon, at Jiye.
Secondly, 484 Israeli air raids took place today alone. The
total number of persons displaced to date is 800,000.

The Israeli military actions against Lebanon are acts
of aggression. This aggression constitutes a grave threat to
international peace and security and a breach of the United
Nations Charter, international law and Security Council
resolutions.

In 1978 the Security Council deployed thousands of
United Nations soldiers, in accordance with resolution 425
(1978), for the purpose of confirming the withdrawal of
Israeli forces, restoring peace and security and
re-establishing the effective authority of the Lebanese
Government in the area. Since then, the Council has
remained seized of this question, and to this day Israel
refuses to comply with that resolution.

It has been a pattern that any resistance to Israeli
aggression is immediately labelled an act of terrorism. Let
me reiterate once again Lebanon's constant position on this
point: while Lebanon stresses its firm condemnation of all
forms of terrorism, it firmly supports the legitimate right of
peoples to resist foreign occupation. What we have in south
Lebanon is foreign occupation, and the Lebanese are within
their legitimate rights in defending themselves against
occupation, human rights abuses and displacement.

This principle was reaffirmed time and again in the
solemn declarations of Heads of State and Government at
the Commemorative Meeting on the occasion of the fiftieth
anniversary of our Organization. What is happening in
Lebanon today is resistance against foreign occupation.

Israeli occupation of Lebanon is terrorism. Since 1978
Israel has refused to comply with resolution 425 (1978),
which

"Calls for strict respect for the territorial
integrity, sovereignty and political independence of
Lebanon within its internationally recognized
boundaries" (resolution 425 (1978), para. 1)

and

"Calls upon Israel immediately to cease its
military action against Lebanese territorial integrity
and withdraw forthwith its forces from all Lebanese
territory" (ibid., para. 2)

Instead of complying with resolution 425 (1978),
Israel has carved out the so-caIIed security zone in south
Lebanon and the Western Bekaa, perpetuating its
occupation of Lebanon.

At this stage, I would like to sum up some of
Israel's erroneous expectations and conclusions in
launching the new large-scale bombardments against
Lebanon. First, if Israel thinks that violence is the
solution it should know that violence will serve for
nothing; it will only add misery, suffering and destruction.
The whole history of Israel since 1948 has been full of
this distorted logic.

Secondly, if Israel thinks that the perpetuation of the
so-called security zone is another solution, here Israel
should know once again that it is wrong. The so-called
security zone is a complete failure. It has not achieved
security for Israel.

Thirdly, if Israel thinks that it can keep the peace
process intact by combining violence and diplomacy,
again Israel should know that it is wrong. Israel can see
clearly the deplorable results of its military actions on the
peace process since 1991.

Fourthly, if the purpose of the exercise is to force
Lebanon to accept submission, this is again a futile hope.
Lebanon will have no peace with Israel as long as Israel
does not withdraw from south Lebanon, in
implementation of resolution 425 (1978), and from the
Golan Heights up to the 4 June 1967 line, in
implementation of resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973).
It is high time Israel forgot once and for all its hopeless
dreams in this regard. History has fully proved to Israel
on many occasions the complete failure of this kind of
futile thinking.

Fifthly, if the purpose of the exercise is to confuse
terrorism with resistance to foreign occupation, we say to
Israel, "Don't waste your time". It is obvious to all that
Lebanon's resistance is a sacred right. It is up to Israel to
withdraw and to end the occupation, which is the cause
of the resistance.

Children are being slaughtered in ambulances, and
elderly people, men and women in Lebanon are falling
every minute for the sole purpose of helping the electoral
ambitions of the Israeli Government. This is pure
madness.

 

What did the Israeli authorities achieve by
launching a new, large-scale aggression against my
country? Just new statistics of death and misery to add to
their well-known record of killings. Since the peace process
started in 1991 in Madrid, Israel has been launching raids
of death and destruction against Lebanon. Why? Simply
because it refuses to abide by international law and
implement Security Council resolutions.

My appeal to the Security Council in this fiftieth
anniversary year of the United Nations is to act swiftly in
putting an end to Israeli terror, to condemn this aggression
and to force Israel to withdraw to the internationally
recognized boundaries of Lebanon, in accordance with
resolution 425 (1978).

The Israeli aggression in Lebanon is seriously
damaging the peace process. Everybody should realize that
the Israeli aggression against Lebanon today is a process of
destruction. Israel bears complete responsibility for the
crimes committed in my country.

My delegation made it clear on many occasions in the
peace talks in Madrid and Washington that Israel has to
comply by implementing fully resolution 425 (1978).
Furthermore, we asked for the release of all detainees from
Israeli jails and from detention camps under Israeli control
in south Lebanon.

What is happening in Lebanon today is the result of a
joint venture of Israeli terrorism and Israeli elections. Again
and again my country is the first arena of Israeli terror.

We have always said that security will never support
peace, but that peace will support security. When we
participated in the Madrid Peace Conference in 1991 we
expected the implementation of resolutions 425 (1978),
242 (1967) and 338 (1973). After five long years none of
those resolutions has been implemented. Israel wants peace
and wants also to keep the land, water, Jerusalem, the
settlements, and it refuses to solve the Palestinian refugee
issue in accordance with General Assembly resolution
194 (III).

My delegation said during the peace talks that Israel
should not fool itself. Peace will prevail only with the
implementation of instruments of international legality or
peace will not prevail at all. It will be a reality when the
rights of all parties are respected. It will succeed only if
Israel abides by the Madrid equation of land for peace.
Peace will be lasting only if it is just and comprehensive.
The omens are not too promising, and time is running out.
The process has been very badly damaged by this second
blitz against Lebanon in three years.

Every violent means has been used by Israel against
Lebanon since 1968 when the Israeli air force destroyed
the Lebanese civil fleet at Beirut International Airport.
My country, which has been invaded twice, in 1978 and
in 1982, has since been subjected to daily Israeli terror.

Unfortunately, Israel thinks that it is above
international law, and, ironically, it is a person who
received a Nobel Prize who is perpetrating this aggression
against my country. It is the main responsibility of the
Council immediately to stop the Israeli aggression. How
long should Lebanon suffer to make Israel understand that
violence does not solve anything?
Israel can kill human beings, but it will never kill
our rights. If Israel wants to pursue a distorted, violent
logic it can do it. But it will not achieve anything. Israel
will fail as usual. It should refer to the history of recent
decades, which demonstrates that aggression against
Lebanon ends in total failure. Israelis should not play
politics in Lebanon because it has never been a good
omen for their country or their politicians.

At this stage I would like to quote from the prophet
Habakkuk in the Old Testament, who says:

"For the violence of Lebanon shall cover thee" (The Holy Bible, Habakkuk 2:17)

The Israelis should let my people live by
withdrawing from Lebanon. They will have to implement
resolution 425 (1978). There is only one way for Israel:
southward. International law has to be implemented.
Israel's logic of terror is distorted. Its military might is its
weakness, its stubbornness is blindness and its pretentions
are pure imagination and dream. The peoples of the
region will never accept Israeli expansionism. They
should know that our right will never die. They have tried
many times to impose their military might on us but have
always failed; and they will fail again and again. Violence
does not achieve anything.

In conclusion, I would like to present my
delegation's request to the Security Council. We ask the
Council: first, to order Israel to stop immediately its
aggression against Lebanon and to withdraw all its
reinforcements; secondly, to condemn the Israeli
aggression against Lebanon, its civilians, its economy, its
infrastructure and its archaeological sites, in particular

 

those internationally protected; thirdly, to force Israel to
implement resolution 425 (1978); fourthly, to provide, in
cooperation with the Secretary-General, a massive
programme of assistance to Lebanon and its people to
overcome the suffering and casualties resulting from the
Israeli aggression; and fifthly, to remain seized of the
matter so long as the Israelis do not abide by the order of
the Council to halt their aggression, with a view to
convening further meetings to take appropriate action.

