Mr. Gunnarsson (Iceland): I thank the New
Zealand presidency for convening this important
debate, and the Special Coordinator for his insightful
briefing.

Iceland reiterates its strong conviction that the only
path to peace between Israel and Palestine is the two-
State solution.

But both sides need to commit fully to the two-
State solution, and they must refrain from actions
that undermine the viability of the only solution that
will bring peace. Israeli leaders have yet to dispel, by
actions on the ground, the very serious doubt cast on
their commitment to the two-State solution during the
pre-election period. Indeed, acts on the ground continue
to be very damaging to the chances of peace; there is
little letup in the expansion of Israeli settlements and
the expropriation of land in Palestine, a clear breach of
international law. We join others in calling on Israel to
immediately stop all settlement activities.

Of continuing deep concern is the humanitarian
situation of the Palestinians, particularly in Gaza,
where we continue to call for the lifting of the blockade.
The cycle of violence has to be broken, which calls for
different approaches by all concerned. In this regard,
we welcome the report by the Independent Commission
of Inquiry on the 2014 Gaza conflict.
The situation in the rest of the occupied Palestinian
territories, including East Jerusalem, is also of deep
concern. The continued fragmentation of Palestine
through settlement activities and movement and access
restrictions undermine Palestinian livelihoods and
deprive the Palestinians of their basic human rights.
Israel needs to abide by international humanitarian and
human rights law, including ceasing the demolition of
Palestinian homes and the displacement of Palestinians
from their land.

Predictably, the highly abnormal living conditions
in the occupied Palestinian territories have a
disproportionate impact on women and children. We
commend the work of the United Nations agencies
against gender-based violence. The Mehwar Centre for
Protection and Empowerment of Women and Families,
supported by UN-Women and to which Iceland has
contributed, does excellent and much-needed work in
the West Bank. Ensuring equal participation of women
at all decision-making levels on both sides of the
conflict and within the international community is also
key to durable peace and reconciliation. Unfortunately,
the absence of women in the peace process has been
noticeable. This has to change.

Terrorist activity from Palestinian elements is also
totally unacceptable and can only undermine peace.
We condemn all acts of violence against civilians.
The safety and well-being of civilians must always be
ensured.

The recent report by the High-level Independent
Panel on Peace Operations underlines the primacy of
politics in maintaining and achieving peace. Managing
a crisis is not enough; the aim must be to solve it. There
is consensus on the urgency thereof. There are signs in
both communities of a loss of faith in the possibility
of a peaceful solution. It is therefore essential that
the Security Council create a clear frame for ending
the occupation and establishing a durable peace, with
two States living side by side in peace and security.
The dangers of inaction are far greater for all parties
involved than the risks of action.

