Mr. Kasanda (Zambia): I, too, would like to offer
my regrets for not having taking the floor at the time
when I should have done so. Having said that, I would
like to congratulate you, Sir, for having presided over the
business of the Council so effectively during the month of
June. I also wish to offer my congratulations to your
predecessor for the able manner in which he steered the
work of the Council last month.

My delegation would like to thank the Secretary-
General for his lucid report on the United Nations Angola
Verification Mission (UNAVEM. III) dated 5 June 1997.
It is a record of the progress in the various aspects of the
Angolan situation, embracing socio-economic, political,
military and humanitarian aspects. This is as it should be
as UNAVEM. III is being wound down. It cannot be
denied that the formation of the Government of Unity and
National Reconciliation on 11 April 1997 has gone a long
way in facilitating the progress that has been registered.

The road of the Angolan peace process has been
long and difficult, and those who have helped pave the
way towards the progress recorded deserve to be
congratulated. These include the Secretary-General
himself, whose last visit to Angola last March was such
a great catalyst towards peace and progress in Angola.
Congratulations also go to his indefatigable Special
Representative in Angola, Mr. Alioune Blondin Beye,
who over this long period of difficult negotiations has

 

taken many actions that have kept the peace process on
track. Special thanks go also to the three observer States -
Portugal, the Russian Federation and the United States -
for their continuing advice to the parties to stay the course,
even in the face of many difficulties during the peace
process.

The progress that has been registered in Angola will
remain fragile as long as UNITA continues its
intransigence. In fact, my delegation is greatly disturbed by
the fact that UNITA has not been fully forthcoming in
honouring its side of the bargain in the peace process.

Considerable progress has been made along the road
to peace. We urge UNITA to remove the obstacles that it
has consistently placed on the road to peace. In this
respect, UNITA should immediately provide all the
information relative to the forces under its control,
including that section that is attached to its leader, Jonas
Savimbi. The process of demobilization and integration of
military personnel into one national army is a critical part
of the Lusaka Protocol and must be honoured by UNITA.

Angola has reached a critical stage at which all
parties concerned must do their best to sustain the
momentum towards total peace. As UNAVEM. III winds
down, we are gratified that plans are under way to
establish a United Nations Observer Mission in Angola
(MONUA). It will go a long way towards assisting the
Angolan parties in consolidating peace and national
reconciliation. Peace in Angola will also go a long way
towards expanding the parameters of peace and stability
in the entire southern African region. We all, therefore,
stand to gain immeasurably from Angola's well-being as
a country.

