Mr. Sinirlioglu (Turkey): We thank Uruguay for
organizing the first open debate on the protection of
civilians and medical care in armed conflict since the
adoption of resolution 2286 (2016), the first on this
subject, nearly a year ago. We also thank the Secretary-
General and the briefers for their insightful remarks.

Turkey joins the concerns expressed by many
delegations with regard to the ongoing pattern of
destruction of medical care in too many conflicts
today. Those trends pose an immediate danger to the
millions ofpeople affected by man-made crises, as well
as the health systems supporting their well-being and
lives. With that understanding, Turkey co-sponsored
resolution 2286 (2016), which demonstrated the
determination of Member States to strengthen the
protection of medical care in armed conflict.

In view ofthe continuing disrespect of international
humanitarian law, including through the actions of
criminal and terrorist networks in our neighbourhood,
Turkey appreciates the Security Council's sustained
attention to this issue, with a view to reinforcing the
normative framework. Furthermore, we take note of the
recommendations presented by the Secretary-General.

Beyond the Security Council, the World
Humanitarian Summit, the first anniversary of which
we just marked, generated over 3,000 commitments by
Member States and other stakeholders. Some of those
commitments highlighted actions to strengthen the
protection of civilians, including women and children,
and the promotion of the centrality of protection. Other
commitments demonstrated a collective desire to
address the root causes of conflict, increase conflict
prevention and resolution capacities and learn from
successful prevention practices. Those commitments
can make a meaningful change in the lives of 130 million
affected people only if they are implemented. As
President Erdogan underscored in his message to mark
the anniversary of the Istanbul Summit, it is important
to maintain the momentum generated by the World
Humanitarian Summit, and we call on all stakeholders
to uphold their commitments.

Turkey has been carrying out activities to reinforce
the respect for the protection of the wounded and sick,
to ensure access to assistance, to raise awareness
with regard to the protection of health care and to
support efforts to increase accountability. In Palestine,
Afghanistan, Iraq and Somalia, Turkish assistance
has strived to strengthen the national health systems.
In Yemen, we have been providing medical assistance
in Turkish hospitals for those affected by the ongoing
conflict. In Libya, just yesterday Turkish aid agencies
delivered to the Libyan Government of National Accord,
more than 22 tons of medication and health kits so as
to support the various hospitals and medical facilities.

However, more than anywhere else, Turkey's
humanitarian and medical efforts have been focused
on Syria. Since the beginning of the crisis, Turkey
has maintained an open-door policy, including for
urgent medical evacuations. Today, Turkey provides
free health care to the more than 3 million Syrians in
Turkey. We have been facilitating the work of the United
Nations agencies in their vaccination campaigns for
Syrian children and that of medical non-governmental
organizations across the border who treat civilians
targeted by barrel bombs, shelling and chemical
weapons. Inside Syria, Turkey has been supporting the
Security Council-mandated cross-border shipments
that have delivered more than 11,500 truckloads of
humanitarian assistance since July 2014. Those efforts
helped the United Nations and its partners to reach
more than 13.5 million Syrians with health assistance.

In blatant disregard of international humanitarian
law, the attacks on medical staff and their equipment and
facilities have been more brutal in Syria than anywhere
else. Most of those attacks were perpetrated by the
Syrian regime. Furthermore, the regime continues
to pursue its shameful policy of removing medical
equipment and medication from humanitarian convoys.

Ifwe are to transform the recent advances achieved
in the normative framework under today's agenda into
concrete action on the ground, the implementation of
our existing obligations and commitments must take
place in Syria and in other ongoing conflicts. Turkey
stands ready to support the relevant United Nations-led
efforts in achieving that objective.

