Mrs. Kawar (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): I thank the
President for holding today's public meeting following
the request of 9 members of the Security Council,
including Jordan. I would like to thank the Under-
Secretary-General for Political Affairs, Mr. Jeffrey
Feltman, and the United High Commissioner for Human
Rights, Mr. Zeid Ra'ad Al Hussein, for their briefings
on the situation in the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea.

Jordan is deeply concerned about the gross
violations that continue to be committed in North Korea
in a systematic manner and on a wide scale, particularly
against women and children. The violation of the right
to food, the right to expression and the right to free
movement, in addition to the forced disappearances
and the inhumane treatment in detention camps,
which are described in many United Nations reports,
are all violations of human rights and of international
humanitarian law and may be violations that constitute
crimes against humanity.

The situation in North Korea - in its internal
dimension with regard to human rights and in its
international dimensions in view of the continued
threat by North Korea to conduct nuclear tests,
to develop ballistic missiles and to launch those
missiles - represents a threat to international peace
and security and has led to violations of the relevant
Security Council resolutions and of the Charter of the
United Nations. We call upon the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea to allow the Special Rapporteur of
the United Nations on the human rights situation in
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea to visit the
country. The Democratic People's Republic of Korea
must engage constructively with the international
community on all issues related to human rights and
comply with the relevant Security Council resolutions
in that regard. At the same time, we would like to stress
the need for the Security Council to work in a unified
manner so as to put an end to such practices, which
threaten peace and security on the Korean peninsula,
and to take concrete measures to deal with the present
situation.

