Mr. Duale (Somalia): At the outset, allow me to
thank you, Mr. President, for the opportunity to brief
the Security Council. I very warmly congratulate you
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council and wish you success. I also wish to express
my appreciation to last month's Council President, His
Excellency Mr. Baki Ilkin of Turkey. Allow me also to
thank the Secretary-General of the United Nations, and
the Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs,
Mr. Lynn Pascoe, and the Under-Secretary-General for
Field Support, Ms. Susana Malcorra, who have just
briefed us. I very much appreciate their briefings.

I wish to also thank and express our appreciation
for the efforts of the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM), the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD) and the African Union (AU), as
well as other international regional organizations that
are currently supporting Somalia and whose continued
support is urgently required.

I would like to begin my presentation with some
salient points from the address of His Excellency
Mr. Sheikh Sharif Sheikh Ahmed, President of the
Transitional Federal Government of Somalia, to the
13th African Union Summit, held from 1 to 3 July 2009
in Sirte, Libya.

His Excellency the President stated that following
approximately 20 years when there were no
functioning governments, the long-awaited
breakthrough in the tragedy experienced by the people

of Somalia came when the National Reconciliation
Conference was held in Djibouti under the auspices of
the United Nations, the international community and
regional and local organizations. It led to a peace
agreement between the then interim Somali
Government and the opposition at the beginning of this
year, and the new joint parliament was formed. His
Excellency the President was elected and then a
Government of National Unity was appointed and
gained the confidence of the parliament and the
majority of the Somali people.

Unfortunately, during the long period of chaos in
the country, Somalia became a safe haven for militants
and terrorists who continue to obstruct peace efforts
and pose a threat not only to Somalia but to the region
as well. The situation is now very critical, as was
mentioned by the Under-Secretary-General for Political
Affairs. Now the situation is taking on a new
dimension since the emergence of the extremist
movements which are linked to Al-Qaida and some
State sponsors of terrorism which always maintain
agendas that do not promote the interests of peace in
Somalia.

The presence of Al-Qaida in Somalia is not
merely a claim; it is a reality. On 19 March 2009,
Usama bin Laden declared war against the Transitional
Federal Government (TFG) and incited foreign fighters
to help overthrow it by mobilizing financial and human
resources for that purpose. In the past month, groups of
extremists, along with foreign fighters backed by the
Eritrean Government, launched attacks on the
Government. As a result, hundreds of thousands of
innocent people were displaced from Mogadishu.

During this brief period of about five or six
months, as mentioned by Mr. Lynn Pascoe, the
achievements of the Transitional Federal Government
have included the following. Immediately after its
formation, the Government, including the Parliament,
was moved to Mogadishu, the capital. The Government
opened peace and reconciliation negotiations and
welcomed all efforts by tribal leaders, businessmen,
religious leaders and members of civil society to bring
about reconciliation between the Government and the
opposition. These efforts resulted in some success,
including some of the opposition groups joining the
Government. Other achievements include: the
preparation and implementation of a temporary budget;
the establishment of a central bank and financial
institutions and the appointment of an Accountant

General; the formation of an anti-corruption
commission; the establishment of the Military High
Court with the objective of disciplining the Somali
forces and preventing human rights violations; the
integration of the former transitional Government
forces and the forces of the Alliance for the
Re-liberation of Somalia; and the appointment of a
chief of staff, a land force commander, a commander of
the navy and coast guard and a commander of the air
force.

In order to enable the Transitional Federal
Government to take control of the situation in the
country and deliver on its mission, His Excellency
President Sheikh Sharif Sheikh Ahmed appealed to
heads of State or Government at the just-concluded
African Union summit to provide the necessary support
to his Government as soon as possible, especially in
the following areas: bringing the number of the African
Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) to 8,000, as
promised; broadening the African Union Mission in
Somalia and following up on the full participation in
the peacekeeping process; and accelerating the
strengthening of the Somali national forces by
providing training, equipment and funding.

The current situation in Somalia is so serious that
it cannot wait for a long period of deliberations, as our
President has stated. That is why he has said that we
urgently need support as soon as possible. The
approval of the implementation of the communique of
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
(IGAD) was also requested, as were contributions for
building up the Somali security forces, for providing
humanitarian relief for the affected population, which
was also mentioned by the Under-Secretary-General
Ms. Malcorra, and for building infrastructure and
implementing development projects in the country.

In conclusion, let me refer to paragraph 16 of the
communique of the just-concluded African Union
summit in Sirte, which calls on

"the United Nations Security Council, in line
with the AU Peace and Security Council and
IGAD communique, to take immediate measures,
including the imposition of a no-fly zone and
blockade of seaports, to prevent the entry of
foreign elements into Somalia, as well as flights
and shipments carrying weapons and
ammunition".

09-3985]
It is these foreign elements which are
continuously attacking the Government, AMISOM. and
the population in general.

The communique also requests the imposition of
sanctions against all those foreign actors, both within
and outside the region, specially Eritrea, providing
support to the armed groups engaged in destabilization
activities in Somalia, attacks against the Transitional
Federal Government, the civilian population and
AMISOM, as well as against all the Somali individuals
and entities working towards undermining the peace
and reconciliation efforts.

In View of the critical situation in Somalia, I have
the honour to reiterate the appeal made by His
Excellency Sheikh Sharif Sheikh Ahmed for urgent
action by the Security Council and the international
community. I wish also to thank all those who have so
far supported the fight against piracy in Somalia, those
who are supporting us now and those who will be
supporting us in the future.

I would also like to express my appreciation to
Ahmedou Ould Abdallah, the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Somalia. Although my
President did not mention this, it was requested that I
should mention that a United Nations peacekeeping
force should also be provided and that AMISOM
should become part of that peacekeeping force as soon
as possible.

