Mr. Mahbubani (Singapore): At the outset, we
would like to associate ourselves with our colleagues
in expressing our condemnation of the bombing that
took place in Grozny. We express our condolences to
the families of those who lost who lives and our
sympathies to those who were wounded.

Thank you, Mr. President, for convening this
meeting. We are pleased that the Security Council has
once again provided an opportunity for concerned non-
Council members to air their views on this important
subject. Let me quickly thank Secretary-General Kofi
Annan and Under-Secretary-General Jean-Marie
Guehenno for the latest report (S/2004/333). At the
same time, I should like to join Senior Minister Ana
Pessoa Pinto in paying a special tribute to Ambassador
Kamalesh Sharma for the work he has done. I was
present in this Chamber when he was appointed. We
had no certainty then that today we would be as well
off as we are. We owe Ambassador Sharma a special
vote of thanks for all the success we have had. We wish
him all the best.

I will be concise, as Singapore's position on this
issue is well known. The Council's last public meeting
on Timor-Leste was held only three months ago. At
that time, we heard nearly every speaker support an
extension of the mandate of the United Nations
Mission of Support in East Timor (UNMISET) for a
further one-year consolidation phase. While some
progress has been made since February, it remains
irrefutable that Timor-Leste will still require assistance
in a number of areas beyond May 2004 if the gains
made to date are to be sustained. Without the continued
support of the United Nations and the rest of the
international community, Timor-Leste's path to self-
sufficiency could very well be jeopardized.

The Secretary-General has once again set out in
his report a compelling case for the extension of the
Mission, with a modified mandate and a significantly
reduced presence of about 700 international personnel.
Singapore fully supports all of the Secretary-General's
recommendations, and we urge the Council to support
and endorse them as well. It is important that we
ensure that the Secretary-General is provided with the
resources he requires, across the three broad
programmes that he has proposed, to allow Timor-
Leste to reach a critical threshold of self-sufficiency.
Such an additional investment would seem relatively
modest, considering the scale of the task at hand and
the difference it would make.

Let me add here that Singapore strongly supports
the proposed deployment of an international response unit
of 125 gendarmerie, along with the earlier proposed
military component of some 310 formed troops, to
form a two-element security force. Given the continued
possibility of challenges across the security spectrum, the
complementary deployment of both the gendarmerie unit
and the military component would enable UNMISET to
assist the Timor-Leste Government in dealing with a
range of security challenges, even while Timor-Leste
builds up its own capacities in that arena.

As the Senior Minister said only a few minutes
ago, we must be wary of being overconfident or hasty,
and mindful that we do not prematurely withdraw our
support for Timor-Leste. The fragility of the progress
made so far cannot be overstated. Let us stay the
course and ensure that the gains made so far are
consolidated and that a solid foundation is laid for
Timor-Leste's future development.

This morning, I heard Ambassador Kamalesh
Sharma say that a success story is a retrospective
evaluation. I also heard your comment on that subject,
Mr. President. But let me add here that the continuation
of this success story and the perception that it is a
success story are assets that the Security Council has.
At a time when the Council should be concerned about
its standing in the world, it helps the Council to have
the continuation of a success story such as Timor-
Leste. That is a responsibility that we hope the Council
will not walk away from.

