Mr. Almagro (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): It is a
great pleasure to see you, Madam President, presiding
over today's meeting of the Security Council. It is also
a great honour to have been invited to participate. I
thank you for convening this open debate on security
and development. I especially thank you for the
presidential statement (S/PRST/2015/3), which makes a
contribution to consolidating the interdependence that
exists among the three pillars of the United Nations

system, namely, human rights, peace and security, and
development. I should also like to express my gratitude
for the important contributions by Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon, by my dear friend Antonio Patriota,
whom I have the honour to sit next to once again, and
by Ms. Leymah Gbowee.

There is no doubt that, in a general sense, inclusive
development is linked to the conflict-prevention agenda
and to peacebuilding. The political stability, democratic
governance and territorial integrity of States are
conditions to generate development and are also, as a
result, factors that contribute to conflict prevention. I
stress this principle by which we govern and cooperate
internationally. Although every State is responsible
for its own development, international cooperation
complements national efforts aimed at building
increasingly greater rights for increasing numbers of
people in order to strengthen human and institutional
capabilities with a view to achieving comprehensive
and inclusive development.

Allow me to refer to the Social Charter of the
Americas, agreed upon by the Organization ofAmerican
States, which establishes the basis for inclusive
development with equity in the American hemisphere
and emphasizes respect for human rights, inclusion and
non-discrimination as a basic pillar of the system. That
Vision, which is shared in other regional forums such as
MERCOSUR, the Union of South American Nations,
and the Community of Latin American and Caribbean
States, has helped to maintain our regional space and to
keep it stable and free of conflict.

Inclusion - social, religious, territorial, national,
ethnic, social, gender, economic and cultural-is important
in governing ourselves better. It is the paradigm of
democractization, and it is relevant to build political
stability and democratic governance, which in turn
are fundamental to the preservation and building of
peace. Whenever we exclude others or fail to deal
with discrimination against a person, group or social
class, we empoverish our coexistence and impair our
societies. But fundamentally, we are being unjust.

Peacebuilding, as a long-term objective, is a cross-

cutting task that must begin with the initial phases of a
peacekeeping operation. It is important that the Security
Council consider ways to accentuate the dimensions
of development and respect for human rights in the
mandates of peacekeeping missions. Urugay, as one of
the main troop contributors to these missions, has seen
on the ground the strong positive impact of building
stronger, more inclusive and more resilient societies.
We recognize the importance of a political vision with
regard to rights for the resolution of conflicts.
Our societies are richer only through the promotion,
observance and recognition of full economic, social and
cultural rights. Our societies cannot further develop
without full respect for civil and political rights, which
are essential to the consolidation of democracy and
the rule of law. Likewise, achieving fairer, more stable
societies depends on the universality, indivisibility and
interdependence of human rights.

Uruguay, as a candidate for a non-permanent seat
of the Security Council for the period of 2016-2017,
expresses its commitment to that broad approach, which
links inclusive development with the maintenance of
peace and security. Our development entails poverty
reduction and the elimination of extreme poverty, the
inclusion of all in the educational system and universal
access to health services, the inclusion of women in all
spheres of participation through their empowerment,
the recognition of the rights of those who wish to marry
someone of the same sex, and the possibility of persons
with disabilities to lead a full life in all areas, including
that of employment, among others.

The best society is based on the observance and
promotion of the rights of every child, woman, minority,
refugee, victim of violence, sexual orientation. We
believe that the Security Council must help through its
work, coordinated with other United Nations agencies
on the ground, to transform post-conflict situations
into environments that promote development and long-
term stability.

It is crucial that the principal organs of the United
Nations make significant contributions to the well-
being of populations and that they have a genuine
impact on situations that have been on the agenda for
decades. Our standards for respect for and observance
of human rights must continue to rise.

