Mr. Jayakumar (Singapore): First, I would like
to begin by joining you, Mr. President, and all our
colleagues in the Council in conveying our
condolences to the Government and the people of the
United States and to the bereaved families of those who
perished in today's air crash. We do not yet know what
caused this crash, but the immediate consternation and
considerable destruction it has caused for citizens,
residents and diplomats in this city clearly demonstrate
how deeply our lives continue to be affected by the
events of 11 September.

I congratulate Jamaica on its timely and
important initiative to convene this ministerial meeting
on counter-terrorism. I also thank Ukraine for
suggesting that this meeting be held.

Two months have passed since the transforming
events of 11 September this year. Countering the threat
of terrorism is now clearly and rightly a central global
priority. The perpetrators of these horrendous crimes
must not go unpunished. They must be brought to
justice to deter others from contemplating similar
horrific crimes. Singapore stands with the international
community in this campaign against terrorism. It is not
a fight against any religion. It is not a fight against the
people of Afghanistan. It is a fight against the forces of
violence, intolerance and fanaticism. It is a fight for
civilization, and it is a fight that we must win.

We must gird ourselves for a long effort. The
threats will come in many forms. Some will be more
virulent than others. Some will wax while others wane.
And, like disease, even as one source of terrorism is
eradicated, others will spring up or mutate. Only a
determined, united, comprehensive and sustained
global strategy will enable the international community
to contain these malignant forces. Since 11 September,
many regional and international forums have held
discussions and have issued statements on terrorism.
Two common threads have emerged: first, a clear
condemnation of terrorism and a resolve to make
common cause against it.

The challenge now is to translate statements of
outrage and declarations of resolve into coherent and
coordinated international action. The United Nations
will play a central role in this effort. The Security
Council and the General Assembly have, with
unprecedented speed, passed three landmark counter-
terrorism resolutions. These resolutions, particularly
1373 (2001), have established a basic legal foundation
for international action against terrorism. The
expeditious conclusion of negotiations on a
comprehensive convention against terrorism will also
serve to further strengthen the international legal
framework. We welcome the adoption later today of a
Security Council declaration on the global effort to
combat terrorism.

But, far as we have come, we still have a long
road to travel. We urgently need better practical
cooperation among law enforcement, customs and
intelligence agencies of all countries. These
professional agencies are the cutting edge of the
international campaign against terrorism. After 11
September, many Governments have tightened their
national practices in these areas of law enforcement.
Some have passed new legislation. These are positive
developments, but they also make international
coordination all the more important. We will prevail
against terrorism only through closer and deeper
coordination between our law enforcement agencies.

Various forums have called for the convening of
an international conference to discuss the next steps in
the fight against terrorism. In order to effectively
contribute to the global counter-terrorism effort, the
focus of any conference should be on practical and
achievable concrete measures of cooperation. I suggest
that, as an essential component of the preparatory
process of a possible conference, our law enforcement
professionals first meet with a mandate to review the
adequacy of existing international mechanisms and
practices for countering terrorism. Their objective
should be to identify jurisdictional and other lacunae,
harmonize practices, strengthen existing international
counter-terrorism mechanisms and, if necessary,
suggest the creation of new international mechanisms
dedicated to the fight against terrorism.

The Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC)
leaders, who met last month in Shanghai, took such a
results-oriented approach. Their astute theoretical
debates favoured specific and practical counter-
terrorism measures, including, among other things, to
enhance airport and port security, tighten financial
regulations and develop an integrated customs
communications network in Asia and the Pacific. At
the annual summit held in Brunei this month, leaders of
the Association of South-East Asian Nations (ASEAN)
also agreed to a practical regional strategy against
terrorism centred on enhancing cooperation among our
law enforcement agencies. A special meeting of
ASEAN interior ministers will be convened early next
year to further extend our cooperation in law
enforcement and counter-terrorism.

These and other regional efforts can be the
building blocks for coordinated international action
against terrorism. There is no alternative, as the
Secretary-General has said. Either we cooperate in the
struggle and win, or we do not win at all.

