Sir Jeremy Greenstock (United Kingdom): We
warmly thank the Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations for an excellent briefing.
Like our European partners, the United Kingdom fully
endorses the statement which the representative of
Belgium will later make on behalf of the European
Union, not least in our collective support for the
excellent work which the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Haekkerup, is doing in
implementing resolution 1244 (1999) in all its aspects.
Mr. Guehenno outlined a number of welcome
developments, including especially on preparations for
the elections. I want to highlight two key areas of
continuing concern. The first is progress on law
enforcement, and the second is developing contacts
between the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) and Belgrade.

On law enforcement, we very much welcome
UNMIK's development of a professional police and
justice cadre in Kosovo, and their efficiency in
implementing regulations aimed at stamping out
terrorism. We welcome particularly the recent arrest by
the Kosovo Force (KFOR) of individuals caught
possessing illegal weapons and illegally crossing
Kosovo's borders. UNMIK and KFOR must both
continue to address the holes in the framework of
regulations to ensure that extremists have no room to
operate. That applies to both sides of the community: a
British Foreign Office minister was recently in Kosovo,
and emphasized to Kosovo Albanian leaders that
extremism and ethnically motivated violence had to
stop because it undermines the responsible work of
legitimate ethnic-Albanian politicians in the region.
Small groups of armed Albanians cannot and should
not be allowed to plunge other parts of the region into
chaos.

On contacts between UNMIK and Belgrade, I
think this was one of the most important areas where
our mission last month had an effect. We welcome the
appointment of the Serbian Deputy Prime Minister, Mr.
Covic, as Belgrade's coordinator on Kosovo, because
his involvement will be vital in many areas, including
three in particular. The first is Mitrovica, where we
look to Belgrade to use its influence positively to help
resolve the situation. This is a crucial test of progress
in establishing a multi-ethnic society in Kosovo.

The second is participation in the elections. Here,
we welcome the decision of 12 minority parties to
register; now they must participate. Individuals too
must register to vote. It is important that all
communities participate in the elections to ensure that
their interests are reflected in the new institutions.

The third area is missing persons and detainees.
We very much welcome the fact that a contact group of
UNMIK and the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia on
missing persons met for the first time on 19 June. That
group must be encouraged to continue its work in this
difficult but crucial area.

Finally, since there is such a huge amount to do in
a difficult environment, I want to echo the concerns
about the situation in Macedonia that have been uttered
by Ambassadors Doutriaux, Cunningham, Ryan and
others. I will not repeat them; I share what they have
said about the situation there. The Council is clearly
going to have to keep a very close eye on
developments.

