Mr. Sparber (Liechtenstein): Liechtenstein
associates itself with the statement delivered by the
representative of Switzerland on behalf of the Group of
Friends of the Protection of Civilians.

The year 2019 marks the twentieth anniversary of
the Security Council's protection of civilians in armed
conflict agenda. This year also marks the seventieth
anniversary of the Geneva Conventions, which are the
cornerstone of contemporary international humanitarian
law. This crucial body of law is the primary framework
to regulate situations of armed conflict, designed first
and foremost to protect civilians.

In his report (S/2019/373), the Secretary-General
underscores the importance of enhancing and ensuring
compliance with the law and accountability for
violations with respect to the protection of civilians.
A key responsibility for ensuring such compliance
rests with the Security Council. It has several tools at
its disposal, ranging from support for national efforts
to ensuring accountability through to referrals to the
International Criminal Court (ICC). The Council's
overall record, however, is unfortunately mixed at best.

The people of Syria, for example, have been at the
receiving end ofthe failure ofthe Council to act, several
times due to a veto cast by one or more permanent
members of the Council. This failure to act prompted
the General Assembly to play a more active role in the
area of accountability by creating the International,
Impartial and Independent Mechanism to Assist in the
Investigation and Prosecution of Those Responsible
for the Most Serious Crimes under International Law
Committed in the Syrian Arab Republic since March
2011. This decision was a major step forward in
ensuring that Violations of international humanitarian
law in Syria would not go unpunished and also a
landmark decision for the accountability work of the
United Nations. We look forward to the financing of
the Mechanism from the regular budget of the United
Nations later this year.

The Council's work in this area must be forward-
looking, as well as comprehensive and consistent
in its implementation of initiatives that can help
to protect civilians trapped in conflict situations.
One such initiative is the code of conduct regarding
Security Council action against genocide, crimes
against humanity or war crimes put forward by the
Accountability, Coherence and Transparency group and
currently supported by 119 States, including two-thirds
of the current Security Council members. The code
of conduct is a political commitment to taking timely
and decisive action aimed at preventing or ending
atrocity crimes and not to vote against credible draft
resolutions put forward to this end. It foresees a very
important role for the Secretary-General in submitting
relevant information to the Security Council and is
thus complementary to and reinforces the Secretary-
General's prevention agenda.

The most effective way to protect civilians is to
avoid armed conflict in the first place, and indeed the
goal to prevent armed conflict was the driving idea
behind the creation of the United Nations. Preventive
diplomacy, mediation and other tools can play a key role
in this respect, but the Charter of the United Nations
also makes it clear that armed conflict is, in fact, illegal
except in narrowly defined, exceptional cases.

We view the criminalization of illegal war-making
as an essential part of the conflict prevention agenda.
The activation of the jurisdiction of the ICC over the
crime of aggression on 17 July 2018 was therefore an
important step forward. We encourage all States to
ratify the Kampala amendments to the Rome Statute
on the crime of aggression and we remind Council
members that the possibility of referring aggression
situations to the ICC is a powerful new deterrent at
its disposal.

