Mr. Mohamed (Maldives): Let me start by
congratulating you, Mr. President, on your successful
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
March, and to thank you for convening this important
debate on collective action to improve United Nations
peacekeeping operations.

The United Nations was established with the
noble objective to save succeeding generations from
the scourge of war. Peacekeeping, peacemaking, and
peacebuilding have become among the most effective
instruments in the maintenance of international
peace and security. Peacekeeping operations are
about creating a safer tomorrow for those with little
hope; it is about rebuilding communities and creating
an environment for future generations to grow and
unleash their creativity. For that to happen, there is a
need to re-evaluate the level of coordination that exists
between the various agencies of the United Nations,
both here in New York and in the field, in designing
such operations. The Maldives proposes that we should
not lose sight of the fact that, while peacekeeping
and peacemaking operations can succeed in keeping
warring parties apart, an equally important priority
must be to address the root causes of the conflict and to
create the conditions so that the affected communities
can enjoy the dividends of peace.

For that to happen, we must construct an analytical
framework that enables the Council to consider the
necessary changes to United Nations peacekeeping
mission mandates. Such a framework can start by
establishing, at the inception level, greater coordination
and operational coherence between peacekeeping
operations and the United Nations country team on the
ground. The design stage of any peacekeeping operation
should take full account of the unique historical,
political and economic circumstances of the situation,
using the most relevant analytical tools available.
Such tools must be used to identify the underlying
set of issues and causes that led to the conflict in the
first place.

Situations that have given rise to conflicts are
often due to system-level failures that might have
resulted from the decaying social fabric that held the
communities together for several centuries, or it might
be the gradual weakening of the State's capacity to
govern and maintain order. Any peacekeeping or
peacebuilding operation, in any intra-State conflict,
should aim to build the capacity of the State, first to
govern and then to foster a governing order that is
rooted in the principles of democracy, good governance
and inclusive development.

The Maldives also wishes to reiterate the need to
integrate the relevant aspects of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development in designing peacekeeping
and peacebuilding operations. The 2030 Agenda makes
it clear that there can be no peace without sustainable
development and no sustainable development without
peace. There is enough empirical evidence to suggest
that poverty alleviation and inclusive economic and
social development promote the causes of peace.
Therefore, those factors should figure more prominently
in the design and implementation of peacekeeping and
peacebuilding operations. The Maldives hopes to see
renewed emphasis on that point in the implementation
of the reform package of the Secretary General. The
United Nations should be able to act as one United
Nations in helping a country to sustain peace and, when
required, to keep the peace.

Efforts to improve peacekeeping operations
should, as a matter of urgency, review the coordination
mechanism between the United Nations and the regional
and subregional organizations that have assumed greater
responsibilities in peacekeeping operations. Regional
organizations need the political support, financial
resources and assets required to implement Council
decisions in the maintenance of international peace
and security. The collaboration between the Security
Council and regional organizations should be enhanced
and institutionalized with more predictable support.

The Maldives believes that the Security Council, in
collaboration with other agencies of the United Nations
system, can inspire and lead in bringing the necessary
reforms to peacekeeping missions, in designing such
operations and in implementing a set of strategies that
will sustain peace. The reforms must take a holistic
approach and must take into consideration the wishes

to of every woman, man and child in conflict areas and
give hope for a better future. The Maldives believes
that the Security Council will not fail to provide the
necessary leadership to create a safer world for all.

