Mr. Vrailas: I have the honour to speak on behalf
of the European Union (EU) and its member States. The
acceding country Croatia, the candidate countries the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro,
Iceland and Serbia, the countries of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidates Albania
and Bosnia and Herzegovina, as well as Ukraine, the
Republic of Moldova, Armenia and Georgia, align
themselves with this statement.

First and foremost, I congratulate the current and
preceding Timor-Leste Governments for the tremendous
progress made towards stabilization and recovery
since the restoration of independence in 2002. On the
eve of the departure of the United Nations Integrated
Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT), I would also like to
express our sincere gratitude to the successive Special
Representatives of the Secretary-General and to all
UNMIT personnel for their substantial contributions.
Finally, I join others in thanking Acting Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Finn
Reske-Nielsen, for his briefing and the Minister of
State and Minister for Foreign Affairs and Cooperation
of the Democratic Republic of Timor-Leste, Mr. Jose
Luis Guterres, for his statement.

Over the past decade, Timor-Leste has accomplished
impressive progress in terms of stability, democracy,
the rule of law, human rights and economic growth.
Since the Security Council debate on UNMIT in
February (see S/PV.6720), Timor-Leste has witnessed
several new milestones, including successful and
peaceful presidential and parliamentary elections, as
observed by an EU election observation mission. The
withdrawal of UNMIT by the end of this year, 10 years
after the country regained its independence, is a logical
step on that path and a clear sign of Timor-Leste's
national commitment to consolidate the capacity of its
institutions.

However, as noted by the Secretary-General in his
latest report (S/2012/765), several challenges remain,
in particular as a result of persisting human resource
capacity constraints, namely, in socioeconomic
development and justice. To address those challenges it
is important, in our view, to build on the progress already
made and to focus on the effective implementation of
the remainder of the Joint Transition Plan, as well as
the reforms already endorsed. We welcome the new
Government's five-year programme, as well as the
Strategic Development Plan, which aims to further
advance the previous Government's actions and to set
a course for a sustainable future. In that regard, we
underline the importance of a continuous focus on the
rule of law, human rights and access to justice. In that
context, it will be important to maintain the engagement
of, and support by, the international community.

We furthermore firmly believe that reconciliation
is an important precondition for long-term
stability. We therefore look forward to the National
Parliament's renewed discussions on the two draft
laws on the memorial institute and reparations, and
on the implementation of the recommendations of the
Commission for Reception, Truth and Reconciliation.

We believe that, following UNMIT'S departure, the
United Nations presence in Timor-Leste for the coming
years should be designed to support the ongoing
consolidation efforts and to build on the significant
achievements of UNMIT's activities to date, in close
coordination with the Timorese authorities. We
acknowledge the preferences expressed by Timor-Leste
in that regard and stand ready to support the outcome
of the discussions between Timor-Leste's Government
and the United Nations.

We commend Timor-Leste's achievements at the
regional and international level, in particular through
establishing strong and cordial ties with its neighbours
and through its driving role as co-Chair ofthe Group of
Seven Plus (g7+). We welcome Timor-Leste's candidacy
for membership of the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations, its active role within the Community of
Portuguese-speaking Countries and its integration into
the Pacific through cooperation under the Pacific Island
Forum's regional programme.

In conclusion, we have stood by Timor-Leste's
side through challenging times and remain committed
to do so in the future. We are currently preparing
our development support for 2014 to 2020 in close
consultation with national authorities, which will, of
course, be based on Timor-Leste's National Strategic
Development Plan. It will also ensure alignment with
the new deal of the g7+.

As the focus is shifting from security and stability
to development issues, we encourage others to remain
strongly engaged as well in support of Timor-Leste's
developmentprocess. We are confident that Timor-Leste
will continue to be a successful example of national

leadership in institution-building and socioeconomic
development.

