Mr. Mehdiyev (Azerbaijan): At the outset, I would
like to thank Mr. Valentin Inzko, High Representative
for Bosnia and Herzegovina, for presenting the
forty-second report on the implementation of the
Peace Agreement on Bosnia and Herzegovina (see S/2012/813). I would also like to express our full support
for Mr. Inzko and his Office.
The local elections held in Bosnia and Herzegovina
on 7 October were a major political landmark achieved
during the reporting period. We note with satisfaction
that they were conducted in line with democratic
standards and that the security situation in the country
remains stable. That confirmed the commitment and
capability ofthe Government ofBosnia and Herzegovina
to ensure a safe and secure environment in the country.

We also take positive note of the High
Representative's assessment that during the reporting
period cooperation with the International Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia was satisfactory.

At the same time, we are concerned by the
relative stagnation of the political dynamic and by the
deepening divisions among political parties in Bosnia
and Herzegovina during the reporting period. As the
High Representative noted, little has been done to
implement the outstanding requirements for the closure
of his Office. We are particularly alarmed at the
significant intensification of direct and open challenges
to the foundations of the Peace Agreement, including to
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

Azerbaijan condemns divisive rhetoric advocating
secession and dissolution of the State, as well as any
action or attempt to challenge the functionality of the
State and its constitutional responsibilities and to roll
back reforms related to the implementation of the Peace
Agreement. We agree with the High Representative
that abiding by the Dayton Agreement, particularly
the constitutional framework and the rule of law, is a
prerequisite for long-term stability. Obviously, efforts
to negate or undermine vital aspects of the Peace
Agreement and to undermine the unity of Bosnia
and Herzegovina require continued attention from
the Security Council and the broader international
community.

The economic and social situation in the country
continues to weaken, with a deteriorating fiscal
situation and poor growth prospects. The High
Representative noted the possible negative impact of
the current financial difficulties on the functioning of
State-level institutions. It is therefore essential that all
political factions of Bosnia and Herzegovina focus on
the country's economic and development priorities.

There is also a need for redoubled effort to resolve
long-outstanding humanitarian issues and to ensure
that the rights of returnees are fully guaranteed and
implemented.
We call on all parties in Bosnia and Herzegovina
to engage in constructive dialogue with a view to
addressing pressing challenges and to strengthening
stability and unity in the country. It is also important
that the Security Council and the broader international
community continue to support the efforts of the
political leadership of Bosnia and Herzegovina to that
end.

