The President (spoke in Spanish): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Burundi in which he requests to
be invited to participate in the discussion of the item on
the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Nteturuye
(Burundi) took a seat at the Council table.

The President (spoke in Spanish): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance with
the understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2002/1259, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General to the Security Council on the
situation in Burundi.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council.

"The Security Council welcomes the
signing of the ceasefire agreement between the
Transitional Government of Burundi and the
Conseil national pour la defense de la
democratie-Front de defense de la democratie
(CNDD-FDD) on 2 December 2002 in Arusha
('the Ceasefire Agreement'). It pays tribute to the
courageous and responsible decision by the
President of the Transitional Government of
Burundi, Mr. Buyoya, and by the legal
representative of CNDD-FDD, Mr. Nkurunziza,
to sign the agreement. It welcomes their decision

to implement the truce immediately, while
finalizing all pending political issues within the
time limits set by the agreement.

"The Security Council supports the decision
of the 19th regional Head of States summit of the
Regional Initiative to direct the Palipehutu Forces
Nationales de Liberation (FNL) to enter into
negotiation immediately and conclude a ceasefire
agreement by 30 December 2002 or face the
consequences. In this regard, the Council strongly
urges the FNL, under the leadership of
Mr. Rwasa, to put an end immediately to the
hostilities, sign a ceasefire agreement and commit
themselves to political negotiations. It recalls that
the settlement of the crisis in Burundi depends on
a political solution, and that only a negotiated
settlement in the framework of the Arusha
Agreement of 28 August 2000 will enable the
country to restore stability, in accordance with the
will of the Burundian people.

"The Security Council expresses its
intention to support the immediate and full
implementation of the agreements signed between
the Burundian parties, in particular the Ceasefire
Agreement of 2 December 2002. It requests the
Secretary-General to study ways of responding
positively and with urgency to the requests of the
Burundian parties and of the Facilitator, the
Deputy President of the Republic of South Africa,
in particular with regard to:

"Any expertise and advice which the
Secretariat could provide to facilitate the
definition of the mandate and the deployment of
the African mission provided for in the Ceasefire
Agreement of 2 December;

"Facilitation of logistical assistance to the
deployment of this mission;

"Mobilization and coordination of donor
contributions;

"Designation, at the request of the parties,
of a person to chair the Joint Ceasefire
Commission.

"The Security Council emphasizes the
merits of cooperation between the African
mission and the United Nations Organization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUC), in particular in the border area.

"The Security Council expresses its thanks
for the historic role played by former President
Mandela, pays tribute and expresses its full
support to the efforts of the Republic of South
Africa, in particular its Deputy President,
Mr. Zuma, the Facilitator of the Burundian peace
process. It pays tribute to the role of the African
Union. It also pays tribute to the efforts of the
Republic of Tanzania and of President Mkapa,
President Bongo of Gabon, President Museveni
of Uganda, and the other Regional Initiative
countries. The Council also expresses its full
support to the action taken by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General in
Burundi and approves the recommendations of
the Secretary-General, in paragraphs 47 to 51 of
his report of 18 November 2002 (S/2002/1259),
with a View to increasing the resources of the
United Nations Office in Burundi.

"The Security Council recalls that the
responsibility for the Burundi peace process lies
primarily with the Burundian parties themselves.
The parties must agree without further delay on
the modalities of the reform of the army, as well
as the political issues mentioned in annex 2 of the
Ceasefire Agreement of 2 December 2002. The
Council requests the parties to continue to respect
their commitments. The Council condemns the
human rights Violations that have taken place in
Burundi and calls for the perpetrators to be
brought to justice.

"The Security Council recalls the joint
communique issued by the Governments of
Burundi and the Democratic Republic of the
Congo on 7 January 2002 (S/2002/36) expressing
their intent to normalize their relations. It calls on
them to finalize and implement an accord as soon
as possible ensuring the territory of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo will not be
used for armed attacks against Burundi, as well as
the effective withdrawal of Burundian troops
from Congolese territory. It also notes that, as the
Burundi parties have taken the bold step of
reaching the 2 December 2002 Ceasefire
Agreement, the Security Council stands ready to
consider steps against States that are found to
continue to support armed attacks by the Burundi
rebels.

"The Security Council recalls that the
support of the international community, in
particular financial support, is critical to the
success of the peace process. In that regard, it
welcomes the success of the donor round table
organized in Geneva on 27 and 28 November
2002, and calls on donors to respond urgently to
the

the significant progress made recently and to
disburse fully the contributions promised so far.
In particular, it calls on donors to provide the
necessary financial assistance to facilitate the
return to development and financial stability, and
to consolidate the substantial efforts deployed by
the Burundian authorities in this regard.

"The Security Council pays tribute to the
donors that are supporting the deployment of the
South African Special Protection Unit,
encourages them to continue their efforts and
calls on the donor community to mobilize to help
the countries concerned set up, as soon as
possible and in liaison with the United Nations,
the African mission provided for in the Ceasefire
Agreement of 2 December 2002, and to
participate in the financing of the repatriation and
the reintegration of Burundian refugees.

"The Security Council strongly condemns
all massacres and other acts of violence against
civilians in Burundi.

"The Security Council expresses serious
concern about the deteriorating humanitarian
situation in Burundi. The Council calls on all
Burundian parties to take practical steps to grant
safe access to humanitarian personnel in their
efforts to deliver assistance to vulnerable
populations throughout Burundi."

This statement will be issued as a document of
Security Council under the symbol

S/PRST/2002/40.

The Security Council has thus concluded the

present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 11.40 am.

