Mr. Park (Republic of Korea): As my delegation
has already stated, in the formal meeting of the Security
Council on Monday, we are gravely concerned at the
continuing hostilities and the further deterioration of the

 

situation in Lebanon, which has resulted in an increasing
number of civilian casualties and the destruction of
property. We were shocked at the news this morning of the
death of more than 60 innocent civilians and of the serious
injuries inflicted upon several United Nations personnel in
a compound of the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon (UNIFIL).

Given the gravity and urgency of the situation and its
possible negative impact on the overall Middle East peace
process, the Security Council must act promptly and
resolutely. It has already been seven days since the tragic
and senseless killing started. As the organ with the primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and
security, the Council should react to the situation in a
resolute and timely manner so that the hostilities can be
brought to an end immediately and so that the Middle East
peace process is not derailed.
The draft resolution contained in document S/1996/304
is a clear expression of the collective will of the members
of the Security Council. It also reflects the common wish
and firm resolve of the international community, in that it
calls for an immediate cessation of hostilities as well as for
strict respect for the sovereignty, territorial integrity and
political independence of Lebanon as reaffirmed by
resolution 425 (1978), and in that it calls upon Member
States to respect the safety and security of civilians.

My delegation is satisfied to note that all the members
of the Council, including my delegation, were able to
accept that draft resolution. We take great pride in seeing
that the Council has been able to act in unison in dealing
with the extremely complicated issue at hand, which has
significant bearing upon the peace and stability of the entire
Middle East region. My delegation strongly believes that
united action by the Council will carry a clear and credible
message to the parties in particular and to the international
community as a whole.

It was for these reasons that my delegation voted in
favor of draft resolution S/ 1996/304. My delegation wishes
to take this opportunity to commend the delegation of
France for having so successfully promoted consensus
among the members of the Council, enabling us to act now
in unity and in a timely manner.

My delegation would like to add a word of
appreciation for the intensive diplomatic efforts being
conducted by France, Italy, the United States and others to
bring to an immediate end the senseless killing that has
been taking place for the past seven days. We are
convinced that the resolution we have adopted today will
shore up these efforts.

Although the major thrust of draft resolution
S/1996/292 was acceptable to the Korean delegation, we
were well aware that some elements were contentious
enough to be opposed by some members of the Council.
It was in this context that we strongly encouraged France
and others to promote a consensus text fully taking into
account the urgent need for the Security Council to take
action today. In our view, there was a window of
opportunity which members could have utilized to
promote a consensus text. However, it seems to us that
that opportunity was not fully explored. It was for that
reason that we decided to abstain in the vote on draft
resolution S/ 1996/292.

