Mr. Llorentty Soliz (Plurinational State ofBolivia) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, I would like to thank
the delegation of the Russian Federation for its initiative
to convene today's debate. I would also like to thank
Mr. O'Brien and his team for their work on one of the
most sensitive issues for the international community,
and it is in that spirit that we meet today. We intend to
make every effort to ease the tragic situation in various
parts of the world.

We, too, are concerned about the alarming
developments in South Sudan and Somalia. We believe
that the solution to such situations must be political
in nature. We reiterate our support for the efforts of
Mr. O'Brien and the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs because we believe that their
work is fundamental.

With regard to Yemen, we stated earlier that silence
is eloquent because much can be conveyed through
silence. I believe that with respect to the situation in
Yemen, the Council's silence could well be interpreted
in another way. We believe that it is imperative for us
to look more closely at the situation in Yemen from
every angle. We reiterate that the Plurinational State of
Bolivia firmly believes that a solution to the conflict in
Yemen will be reached only through a political process
and not through the use of violence.

The statistics that Mr. O'Brien cited for us are quite
shocking. We are talking about 21.2 million people who
are in need of assistance and protection to meet their
basic needs. Some 17 million people are suffering from
food insecurity, which is a very elegant way of saying
that they are on the verge of famine, and 3.3 million
pregnant women are in a state of malnutrition. The
representatives of the United States and Sweden
recalled another figure, which is that a child dies in
Yemen every 10 minutes owing to the lack of food. If
we consider how many children have died since the
beginning of this meeting, we realize just how serious
the situation is.

I will not repeat all of the statistics that
Mr. O'Brien's briefing covered in such detail, but the
situation in Yemen has resulted in more than 10,000
deaths with the war that began in March 2015. On
behalf of the delegation of Bolivia, I reiterate that the
Security Council has remained silent for too long on
this issue, which, at the same time, is also suspicious.
We are very concerned about the unsustainable
humanitarian situation in Yemen and the famine
threatening the lives of millions of people. We are also
concerned by the limited humanitarian assistance that
can be deployed continues to be attacked along with
civilian installations.

Like other colleagues, we are very concerned in
particular about the province of Hudaydah, which
has been subject to restrictions despite the fact that
thousands of Yemenis are in need of the humanitarian
assistance that arrives through its port and about the
constant attacks affecting its operational capacity. The
United Nations Resident Coordinator/Humanitarian
Coordinator and United Nations Development
Programme Resident Representative for the Republic
of Yemen, Jamie McGoldrick, told the Washington
Post on 24 February that the attacks have destroyed
bridges and roads throughout the entire port province
of Hudaydah, while unexploded rockets landed inside
the port, thereby further reducing the number of
imports and vessels willing to travel to Yemen. A
unilateral blockade has been imposed that restricts
food and medicine imports on which millions of
Yemenis depend and that now have to be transferred
from ports in the south to reach the millions of people
who risk dying of hunger in the north. Of its food and
medicine, Yemen depends on approximately 20 per cent
imports, and to prevent them is really an attack on the
Yemeni population and runs contrary and is an affront
to international humanitarian law.

In that regard, we believe that there is something
concrete that we can do today in the Security Council,
and that is to send out an absolutely clear, unequivocal
and unanimous message that the restrictions on
Hudaydah port have to be lifted to provide access for
humanitarian assistance. Of course, it will take time
and other actions depending on the economic needs to
attend to the situation, but we believe that at the very
least the Council has the obligation to unanimously
reiterate its call to lift restrictions on that port.

