Mr. Chowdhury (Bangladesh): Even as we
speak, war rages unabated in Palestine. It is a war
unleashed by a mighty military machine against an
entire civilian population. It is a war that is inflicting
horrific carnage, exacerbating occupation and
compounding pain.

Bangladesh is gravely concerned, as, indeed, is
the rest of the world. We are concerned that Security
Council resolutions are being ignored, even flouted. It
is to the Council that people subjected to aggression
turn for protection. For this Council to fail them when
such appeals are made will surely erode faith in the
system; it will redound to no one's benefit.

We are also concerned that continued bloodletting
could further inflame passion, in the region and
beyond. It could lead to a slide towards crisis over
which the major protagonists would have lost control.
Stability in societies far removed could also be
threatened. We are concerned about all of this, and
more. We are deeply disturbed that United Nations
institutions, in which our peoples place great store, are
unable to cut the Gordian knot of an intractable
impasse.

We are all the more saddened because, now more
than ever, there is broad agreement on the vision of an
ultimate solution. It includes the creation of two
separate States for the Israelis and the Palestinians. Yet
a consensus on the vision has not advanced the cause
of peace. Israel's latest invasion of Ramallah and other
towns threatens to destroy all the progress that has
been made. It is in that spirit that the Prime Minister of
Bangladesh, Begum Khaleda Zia, called for an
immediate withdrawal of Israeli forces from Ramallah
and other occupied territories.

The time has surely come for us to go beyond
mere platitudes and to put in place effective
mechanisms for implementing international decisions. I
refer to Security Council resolutions 1397 (2002) and
1402 (2002). The concept of an international force to
that end merits serious consideration. The Tenet plan
and the Mitchell recommendations must be followed.
That remains the only path for the movement towards
durable peace. The Council and the "quartet" should
intensify efforts towards those goals. As stated by
South Africa in its capacity as Chair of the Non-
Aligned Movement, we believe that a special mission
of the Security Council to Israel and Palestine could
significantly contribute to stabilizing the situation. Or
perhaps we could consider a visit by the
Secretary-General to the area, under the Council's
mandate. We have reached a stage where we cannot
afford the luxury of discarding any alternative.

It is heart-rending for us to see the trampling of
the mores of humanitarian law in the region from
which emanated the three great models of humane
conduct - Islam, Christianity and Judaism. What is
happening there today is contrary to all acceptable
values. It militates against everything that the United
Nations Charter and its principles stand for. This
cannot - must not - be allowed to go on. The world
can, and must, now intervene.

In the language that I am speaking - English -
the expression "new Jerusalem" has always implied a
renaissance of hope. Could we not keep it that way?

