Mr. Li Baodong (China) (spoke in Chinese):
I am grateful for the statements made by Special
Representative Zarif and the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Serbia, Mr. Ivan Mrkie. I also listened
carefully to the statement by Mr. Hoxhaj.

The situation in Kosovo remains calm, but it is a
calm shadowed by sensitivity and fragility. In particular,
we are concerned about the fact that ethnic relations in
the north remain tense. The parties involved must adopt
a prudent approach, stick to dialogue to resolve their
differences, and avoid taking actions that might further
complicate or escalate the situation. China has always
called for full respect for the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Serbia. The question of Kosovo must be dealt
with within the framework of resolution 1244 (1999).
It is up to the parties concerned to find an acceptable
solution through dialogue and negotiations.

China welcomes the high-level direct talks between
Belgrade and Pristina, and hopes that both parties will
bear in mind the overarching interest of lasting peace
in the region and the well-being of their peoples as they
continue making progress in the process of dialogue in
order to preserve peace and stability in the Balkans and
in Europe as a whole.

China welcomes the mediation efforts of the
Secretary-General aimed at resolving the question
of Kosovo. We commend the work carried out by the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) and support its ongoing efforts to
implement the Council's mandate. We hope that the
international presence through UNMIK, the European
Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo and the Kosovo
Force will strengthen coordination and play an active
and constructive role in facilitating solutions to the
outstanding questions.

China is deeply concerned by the illegal smuggling
of human organs in Kosovo. Any violation of the
standards of international law and international
humanitarian law is unacceptable, and the perpetrators
must be held accountable. The Council should play
the role that is expected of it and ensure the full and
complete investigation of the cases in question.

