Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): The Russian Federation actively supported
the request of the Non-Aligned Movement to convene
this open debate on Iraq. It gives the Security Council
an opportunity to hear and consider the opinions of all
States Members of the United Nations before
determining how to proceed on the question of Iraq.
This approach is in full consonance with the United
Nations Charter.

For almost 12 years now, the international
community has sought a way to settle the Iraqi
situation. Throughout that time, the Security Council
has adopted more than 50 resolutions and endured
several severe crises. The current ongoing impasse is
rooted not only in the position of the Iraqi side,
although we are far from condoning Baghdad's
behaviour, while the need for Iraq to meet all its
obligations under Security Council resolutions has
been frequently alluded to yesterday and today. We
fully support such assessments. At the same time, in a
number of instances the Security Council has been
unable to hold up its own end with respect to an
objective assessment of the situation and to meeting its
own obligations to work for a comprehensive
settlement in the Persian Gulf.
Throughout their many years of work in Iraq, the
United Nations Special Commission (UNSCOM) and
the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA)
conducted some 7,000 inspections. As a result, they
achieved significant progress in shutting down Iraq's
weapons of mass destruction programmes. The
inspections allowed us to destroy more components of
weapons of mass destruction than were destroyed by
the military strikes against Iraq during the Gulf War.

We have managed to structure a material balance
in the nuclear sphere which, in 1998, in the opinion of
IAEA, allowed us to convert this file into a long-term
monitoring regime.

Unfortunately, the Security Council was not able
to recognize this fact four years ago. It is an important
thing that this conclusion was supported by the
Director General of IAEA, Mr. ElBaradei, in his letter
to the President of the Security Council of 14 October,
in which he clearly indicated that there are no
outstanding unresolved nuclear disarmament issues.
This has been circulated to Security Council Members
and everyone can become acquainted with it.

There is a virtually complete picture of the
missile situation as well. A significant portion of the
stocks of chemical weapons have been destroyed,
although there were some outstanding issues requiring
further clarification. The largest problems persisted in
the biological sphere. But on these issues and all the
outstanding issues, solutions were possible. At any
rate, documents of the former UNSCOM. testify that
such was the case.

However, this did not in fact happen. In
December 1998 the head of the former UNSCOM
provoked a crisis, arbitrarily withdrawing inspectors
from Iraq without the approval of the Security Council.
His report came to the Council only after United States
and United Kingdom aviation had launched military
strikes against Iraq. In fact, the United States
Government, after these strikes, stated that the strikes
had dealt with the issue of eliminating the vestiges of
Iraqi weapons of mass destruction programmes,
although the relevant information was not given to the
Security Council.

The former UNSCOM, in this way, through its
acts of provocation, fully discredited itself and
simultaneously undermined the pre-December 1998
prospects for reaching a comprehensive settlement.

The Security Council then found itself in a
profound crisis not of its own making on the question
of Iraq and for a long time was unable to get out of this
impasse. And then, a year later, we drafted Security
Council resolution 1284 (1999), which allowed us to
renew the inspections on a new genuinely international
basis. However, this resolution contained extremely
ambiguous criteria for suspension of the sanctions,
which gave an opportunity to individual Security
Council members at their discretion to maintain the
embargo indefinitely.

For this reason Russia, together with France,
China and Malaysia, abstained in the vote on resolution
1284 (1999). We made proposals to give concrete
substance to the criteria of sanctions suspension in the
context of a comprehensive settlement. These
proposals are well known and they remain in force.

We will not forget the fact that in resolution 1382
(2001), the members unanimously stated their
commitment to a comprehensive settlement on the
basis of existing Council decisions, including a fine-
tuned Security Council resolution 1284 (1999). The
Security Council must carry out these commitments, as
the other part of Council resolution 1382 (2001) was
carried out, and create a goods review list. So there
were two parts to the resolution. One part of it has been
complied with, the other has not.

Russia, being a responsible member of the
international community, has done and will do its
utmost to prevent a renewal of Iraqi weapons of mass
destruction programmes. We are prepared to cooperate
on this matter with all States. Up to now, we, like all
unbiased observers, have not seen any kind of
persuasive evidence that there are weapons of mass
destruction in Iraq or programmes to develop them.
Nor have we seen any other facts that would situate
Iraq in the context of combating terrorism. The only
way to remove any doubts is the immediate
redeployment of the international inspectors to Iraq.
And today, there are no legal or technical impediments
to doing this. Moreover, as a result of the intensive
efforts of a whole host of countries, including Russia,
as well as the United Nations Secretary-General, the
leadership of UNMOVIC and IAEA, Baghdad has
consented, not only to an unconditional return of the
United Nations inspectors, but also to UNMOVIC's
and IAEA's new, enhanced and very effective
parameters for conducting the inspections.

In this way we have everything we need to ensure
that there is no renewal of the proscribed military
programmes in Iraq and that there is a political and
diplomatic settlement of the crisis. We see no reason to
delay deployment of the UNMOVIC and IAEA
structures in Iraq. Neither formally nor legally, in order
to begin the inspections, do we need any new decisions
to be taken by the Security Council. This has been
confirmed by Messrs. Blix and ElBaradei. They do not
need new decisions. They need clarity.

Do all Security Council members support the
swift redeployment of the inspectors in Iraq? If the
Council has a prevailing desire to give further support
to UNMOVIC and the IAEA in the interest of an
effective implementation of existing resolutions, then
we will be prepared to look at the relevant proposals,
including and based on the great importance of
maintaining Council unity.

We are calling for collective steps by the
international community. Unilateral actions do not
facilitate the efforts for a settlement, as we see over
and over again, according to the example of the
unilaterally announced so-called no-fly zones. At the
same time, with the efforts of non-renewal of Weapons
of Mass Destruction programmes in Iraq, we must
continue to press for Iraq's compliance with all other
Security Council requirements, particularly the need to
shed light on the fate of the missing detainees, a swift
conclusion of the process underway to return the
Kuwaiti archives and a return of Kuwaiti property.

When we listen to the media, we might get the
impression that the most important thing is to reach an
agreement on whether or nor we are adopting one
resolution or two. In fact, the issue is not how many
resolutions, or do we need any resolutions. That diverts
attention from the crux of the matter. But in fact we
believe that the crux of the matter is the following.

If we are all sincerely interested in the non-
renewal of weapons of mass destruction programmes in
Iraq, then what is the remaining issue? What are we
waiting for? The inspectors can travel as early as
tomorrow and Iraq knows that it must fully and
scrupulously cooperate with the inspectors. If we are
talking not about the deployment of the inspections but
about an attempt to use the Security Council to create a
legal basis for the use of force, or even for a regime
change of a United Nations Member State - and this
goal has been constantly and publicly alluded to by
several officials - then we see no way how the
Security Council could give its consent to that. I
reiterate that the crux of the matter is not in the number
of resolutions.

The Charter powers of the Security Council allow
it at any time to make decisions about any measures
which could be required to eliminate real threats. The
important thing now is to achieve a comprehensive
settlement, based on political and diplomatic methods,
with the central role of the Security Council and in
strict compliance with Council resolutions on the
norms of international law.

In this we see the common platform for the
United Nations work on Iraq and we are prepared to
interact on this platform with other members of the
Security Council. This is what we have been called to
by the vast majority of the international community
during the discussions yesterday and today. That is the
opinion of the world community. And that is geo-
political reality as well. We are convinced that Security
Council members will not be able to ignore this call.

