Mr. Duclos (France) (spoke in French): My
delegation associates itself with the statement to be
made later by the representative of Italy, on behalf of
the European Union.

We would like to thank you, Mr. President, for
having organized this very important debate. My
delegation would also like to express our deep
gratitude to Mr. Egeland for his very compelling
briefing at the beginning of the meeting.

The massacre and persecution of civilians in
armed conflict is, unfortunately, nothing new in the
history of humanity. All of us here are mindful of
Callot's etchings of the miseries of war and of Goya's
drawings - in which my compatriots are not portrayed
in a favourable light - and of the famous painting by
Picasso, a copy of which we pass every time we come
to the Security Council. All the same, in recent years or
recent decades, what was previously a terrible
exception is becoming, in today's conflicts, a normal
occurrence, almost a structural component of
contemporary conflicts. Fortunately, the Security
Council is aware of that phenomenon and is trying to
understand its consequences as much as possible.

For some years now, we have been witnessing an
increase in the number of items on protection on the
Council's agenda and that is the real meaning of the
document that we refer to as the aide-memoire and
which increasingly represents the common position of
the Security Council and the international community
in confronting this new situation. When you read the
current aide-memoire and compare it with the version
we had one year ago, we are pleased to note that major
progress has been made in the common ground that we
share as Council members in trying to deal with threats
against civilians in armed conflict. That effort is
particularly outstanding, since it is less the result of a
doctrinal vision, than a step-by-step reaction by the
Security Council in its various resolutions, as it has
dealt with the various crisis situations.

Our thinking in the Council as we deal with
attacks against civilians during conflicts has been
guided, first and foremost, by international justice and
the International Criminal Court (ICC). Like
Mr. Egeland, we welcome the cooperation between the
Transitional Government in Kinshasa and the ICC
Prosecutor, which will demonstrate above and beyond
the ideological debates of the past, what a great
contribution the ICC can make, not only in the area of
justice, but in bringing about reconciliation and in
dealing in depth with the wounds of a society that has
been traumatized by a particularly horrendous conflict.

The Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs quite rightly noted that the problems involved
in protecting civilians in armed conflict exist within a
constantly evolving context. He described several
elements of that context that were particularly striking.
I note from that context in flux three new elements,
namely, new opportunities, new obligations and new
sources of concern. We see new opportunities in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and West Africa,
the consolidation of the situations in Liberia and Sierra
Leone, the setting up of a transitional process in
Liberia and the latest positive developments in C6te
d'Ivoire, which give one hope for effective
implementation of the Linas-Marcoussis agreements.
All of that is creating an opportunity for the
international community to assume an exemplary
approach based on close regional coordination to deal
with the extraordinary scourges that have beset the
civilian populations. I could also refer to other
opportunities, but I will dwell on two opportunities
that, in particular, require a response from the Council.

The Council has new opportunities as well as new
obligations, and here, how can we not think of Iraq?
Even if Iraq is not a case of a humanitarian crisis,
undoubtedly it creates an obligation to provide
humanitarian assistance on the part of the international
community. That also creates special obligations for
the Coalition Authority, which has a special duty to
fulfil their obligations under international humanitarian
law, in particular the Geneva Conventions, including
caring for the civilian population in Iraq and avoiding
collateral damage to those civilians.

New opportunities and obligations and also new
sources of concern are created, and from that long list I
will highlight three subjects. First, as many other
colleagues have noted, the cases of violence against
women concern us and as we study various cases we
realize how great that scourge is and how devastating
its effects can be. Mr. Egeland referred in particular to
some regions in the Democratic Republic ofthe Congo.
Secondly, the use of children in armed conflict is a
source of concern. Here again, the Under-Secretary-
General referred to examples that were particularly
shocking. In the case of Uganda, he mentioned a war
against children waged to a large extent by other
children. In the cases of women and children, we don't
know whether the situation has become worse, which
we fear, or whether there is just more information on
the subject. In both cases, our better awareness ofthose
problems forces us to step up our efforts to increase our
investment in attempting to find solutions to those
issues.

The third source of concern I would like to refer
to - and here it is not a question of having better
information 4 is the result, unfortunately, of
irrefutable facts, namely the worsening attacks against
humanitarian personnel.

Like others I would like to pay tribute to those
who have given their lives for the civilian population
and for the ideal of a better world while working for
the United Nations. The worsening situation requires
that the Council discuss that issue and take action.
Indeed, we must note with bitterness that the terrorists
of today have even more scorn for international law
than yesterday's warlords.

How in such a changing context can we make
progress in the months to come? How can we take
further action? Mr. Egeland has given us a ten-point
platform that we completely support. We are fully
prepared to work on that basis, perhaps - if other
Council members agree - with the idea of adopting
another resolution that would be a further
demonstration of our resolve to act in this area. For that
joint undertaking to be developed fully, there are
probably two conditions that should be met. The first is
to give full priority to information gathering on this
very painful subject. Put simply, I believe that
Mr. Egeland's briefing is, in itself, a factor in the
struggle to protect civilians against attacks, because it
has provided us with a very concrete and incisive
portrait of the scourges besetting our world. In the
future it is very important that we continue to twitch
the guilty conscience of the responsible parties and
international actors. It is also our duty to provide some
sort of prioritization scheme in that regard, lest we
follow only the conflicts that receive the greatest media
attention and forget that there are other bloody
conflicts far from the television cameras. That is the
first condition that needs to be met.

The second condition is to give high priority to
the question of access to civilians. On that point as well
I would agree with what Mr. Egeland said earlier. It
seems to us that the problem of gaining access to the
population is the key to dealing with a large number of
problems that we place under the heading of protection
of civilians in armed conflict. With regard to access,
we need, of course, to give priority to secure access,
but we also need to deal with problems such as the
political instrumentalization of access to populations. It
is likewise imperative to create and enforce respect for
obligations, and this includes armed groups and other
illegal groups that participate in conflicts.

We could have a lengthy discussion on this
subject, as it goes right to the heart of the action we
need to take in the coming months and years in the
service of international peace and security. I will stop
here for the time being and merely reiterate that my
delegation is very willing to continue along the route
marked out by Mr. Egeland in the search for further
progress in this area.

