Mr. Liu Zhenmin (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
congratulate Burkina Faso on its assumption of the
presidency of the Council for this month. I was pleased
to see President Compaore presiding over today's
meeting. I wish to welcome the Secretary-General,
Mr. Ban Ki-moon, to this meeting and to thank him for
his statement. I wish also to welcome Mr. Lakhdar
Brahimi.

As clearly stated in Article 33 of the Charter of
the United Nations, mediation is an important
instrument for the peaceful settlement of disputes. How
to maintain international peace and security more
effectively by means of mediation is a question that is
receiving increasing attention from the international
community. Here, I would like to express my
appreciation to Burkina Faso for taking the initiative to
convene this meeting.

For many years, the United Nations has played an
important role in mediation and the settlement of
disputes. I wish to emphasize the following with regard
to how the international community can make better
use of mediation in the search of solutions to disputes.

First, the Security Council should give more
attention and greater play to its role in preventive
diplomacy. The Council has always had a primary
focus on peacekeeping and has authorized the
deployment of a great number of peacekeeping
missions. In fact, to defuse potential conflicts by such
preventive means as mediation costs far less and
produces much better results than deploying
peacekeeping operations after conflicts erupt. In the
future, the Council should follow with close attention
matters that are brought to it by Member States and the
Secretary-General, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter, and should work out a
comprehensive preventive strategy in light of the
particular circumstances of each crisis.

Secondly, mediators should remain neutral. The
international community should back them up with
constructive support. Facts have shown that neutrality
and fairness constitute the basic conditions for
successful mediation. When its integrity is tainted by
self-interest or compromised by partiality in favour of
one party over the other, mediation can in no way bring
about lasting peace. On the contrary, it will only
further complicate the situation. Mediators should also
have an in-depth understanding of the history and
reality of the situation in question and respect the
views of all the parties concerned in order to come up
with solutions that are relevant and operable.

With regard to factions that are intransigent in
their resistance to mediation, States that have influence
over them should do their part to collaborate with the
efforts of the mediators.

Thirdly, the United Nations should give vigorous
support to the African Union and African subregional
organizations in their mediation efforts. In recent years,
African regional and subregional organizations such as
the African Union, the Economic Community of West
African States and the Southern Africa Development
Community have made unremitting efforts in the
mediation and settlement of African conflicts and have
achieved positive results in Cote d'Ivoire, Sierra
Leone, Burundi and Zimbabwe. China calls upon the
United Nations to respond more positively to the
reasonable requests of Africa, give high priority to
capacity-building in its cooperation with Africa and
enhance cooperation with the African Union and
subregional organizations in the fields of training,
institution-building, information and experience
sharing and logistical support, where the United
Nations enjoys an advantage. China further calls upon
the United Nations to implement effectively the 10-
year capacity-building programme between the United
Nations and the African Union and mobilize other
international donors to provide more support to Africa.

Important as it is for the settlement of disputes,
mediation is not a panacea. In many cases, it can only
build a bridge between the parties concerned. While it
may not be able to build up trust and goodwill among
various parties, it can serve to dispel suspicion and
misunderstanding. While it may not be able to lead to
peace, it can serve to avoid conflict. Real solutions
require all parties concerned to demonstrate good faith
and meet each other halfway. Fundamentally, a lasting
settlement of any dispute requires an integrated
approach that includes parallel efforts to achieve
economic development, reduce poverty, enhance
administrative capacity, advocate the culture of
reconciliation and promote judicial justice.

China always stands for the proper settlement of
disputes by peaceful means such as mediation,
dialogue and negotiations, and supports the efforts
made by the United Nations, regional organizations
and the countries concerned to that end. China will
continue to take a responsible approach and play a
constructive role in addressing relevant hotspot issues.

