Ms. Wolcott (United States): The United States
believes strongly in the importance of a successful
United Nations Peacebuilding Commission. We
appreciate the report presented today by Ambassador
Takasu.
Preventing a reversion to violence in post-conflict
States through sustainable peacebuilding is in the
interest of all members of the international community.
We applaud the accomplishments of the Peacebuilding
Commission during the difficult early days of

establishing a new institution. These are the first steps
towards achieving coordinated peacebuilding structures
that produce tangible and sustainable results. We View
the Peacebuilding Commission as, potentially, a key
part of the United Nations peacebuilding architecture.

The Peacebuilding Commission's efforts at
integrated peacebuilding strategies for the first
countries under the Peacebuilding Commission's
review, Sierra Leone and Burundi, are a valuable
exercise in promoting better dialogue among
Governments, civil society representatives, the
international community and other relevant actors. We
look forward to seeing these strategies translated into
concrete programmes and institutions that serve the
people of Burundi and Sierra Leone and form the
foundation for healthy, peaceful societies in these
States.

Tracking and monitoring mechanisms for
integrated peacebuilding in countries under
Peacebuilding Commission review can be helpful in
identifying gaps with precision and allowing for the
more effective marshalling of resources for the purpose
of creating sustainable peace.

We would support formation of a roster of experts
who, in coordination with the efforts of other related
offices in the United Nations system could assist the
Peacebuilding Commission by drawing on existing
initiatives. Our own peacebuilding experts in the
Office of the Coordinator for Reconstruction and
Stabilization stand ready to work with the
Peacebuilding Commission.

The United States has still not contributed to the
Peacebuilding Fund, but we are in the process of
assessing the Fund's performance, as seen in its first
year of operation. We urge the Secretary-General to
consider commissioning an independent evaluation of
the Fund. We are particularly interested in the ultimate
sustainability of the initial projects funded by the Fund,
given that it is meant to have a catalytic effect in
bringing about sustained support.

We see the Peacebuilding Commission as having
a unique niche in the United Nations system, the focal
point for garnering long-term political will from the
international community and coordinating long-term
efforts to ensure sustainable peacebuilding.

We would like to see the role of the
Peacebuilding Commission strengthened in the United
Nations system. We look forward to stronger
engagement by the Peacebuilding Commission with the
Security Council, the General Assembly and the
Economic and Social Council.

We would like to highlight our appreciation for
the work of the Peacebuilding Commission's Working
Group on Lessons Learned, which is chaired by El
Salvador and in which the experiences of post-conflict
countries are drawn upon to accumulate best
peacebuilding practices.

Let me also add my country's thanks, as well as
my own, for the work of Angola, the Netherlands and
Norway on the Peacebuilding Commission this past
yean

The United States looks forward to discussion of
the Peacebuilding Commission's future agenda and
capacity to take on new countries. At this early stage of
the Peacebuilding Commission's development, we
want to be sure that the Commission does not
overextend itself and that, instead, it has solid
successes, with a realistic agenda derived from
judicious consideration of the many post-conflict
countries that could benefit from the Commission's
review. As we gradually build up the experience and
capacity of the Peacebuilding Commission, we should
consider how it can assist countries with United
Nations peacekeeping missions that are winding down,
to ensure that their peacebuilding phase is sustained
and successful.

In addition, we look forward to considering new
modes for the engagement of the Peacebuilding
Commission that are tailored to the needs of particular
countries and to allow more efficient use of the
Commission's resources.

