Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I thank
you, Sir, for convening today's debate and for chairing
it in person. I also thank the Secretary-General for his
thoughtful briefing this morning.

Seventy years ago, the Charter of the United
Nations established the three founding pillars of the
United Nations system: peace and security, human
rights, and development. Since 1945, these pillars have
provided a framework for the Security Council to tackle
challenges our predecessors could never have foreseen.
But these three pillars remain relevant today, and that is
testament to their enduring value.

Inter-State conflict remains a threat to international
peace and security, as Russia's illegal annexation
of Crimea and destabilization of eastern Ukraine
graphically demonstrate. But threats are no longer
confined to disputes between nation States, as the
United Nations founders first conceived. These threats
now exist irrespective of borders, in deep-rooted ethnic
and religious divisions, in violent non-State actors and
terrorists, and where Governments fail to abide by the
rule of law and disregard the human rights of their
citizens. These threats now undermine the sovereignty
of States in a way we have never seen before. If left
unaddressed, legitimate grievances can quickly turn
to violence and disorder. We must recognize that
preventive action and support from this Council can
bolster sovereignty by helping States to address these
issues. We must utilize all the tools at our disposal in
order to do so.

Peacekeeping is one such tool, and is a strong
example of the flexibility of the Council in implementing
the Charter of the United Nations. There is no mention
of peacekeeping in the Charter, and yet today there are
over 120,000 military and civilian personnel keeping
the peace and protecting civilians on four continents,
many in partnership with the African Union or the
European Union. This year, we have the opportunity
to further improve United Nations peacekeeping. The
peace operations review will consider more effective
protection of civilians, including better prevention
of sexual violence. On this fifteenth anniversary
year of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), on
women and peace and security, we must recognize the
disproportionate effect of conflict on women and the
important role of women in peacebuilding.

Over the past 70 years, as the Secretary-General
spelled out, respect for human rights has become
increasingly central to maintaining international peace
and security. Last year, resolution 2171 (2014) affirmed
that patterns of human rights violations and abuses can
act as early warning signs for impending or escalating
conflicts. As we look ahead to the next 70 years,
we must embrace a reconception of international
security that recognizes that human rights are integral
to the Council's work on conflict prevention. The
consequences of not doing so can be seen in Aleppo,
in the camps of Yarmouk and in the rise of the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant. When individual States
can no longer ensure respect for human rights, they
put their countries at risk of conflict and international
peace and security are threatened. In these instances,
the Charter is clear about the Council's responsibility
to intervene in matters that would normally fall within
domestic jurisdiction.

Ending impunity for human rights violations and
abuses is also paramount to help reconcile communities
and aid the settlement of disputes. No one can be above
the law, and the International Criminal Court and the
International Court of Justice have important roles
to play. The United Kingdom has long accepted the
compulsory jurisdiction of the International Court
of Justice, but is the only permanent member of the
Council to have continuously done so. We urge others
to follow suit.

We have an historic opportunity this year to
tackle the causes of poverty through the post-2015
development framework. We support an agenda that
will leave no one behind and will respect the equal
rights of men and women. Enshrining those principles
in the framework can only further our work on human
rights and, in the long-term, ensure fair and inclusive
economies and societies.

The United Kingdom is proud to be investing 0.7 per
cent of our gross national income in overseas aid. We
are the only Group of 20 country to do so. As my Prime
Minister David Cameron has said, this aid fosters a
golden thread of development that allows countries to
prosper and to avoid conflict. It helps create inclusive
institutions, open societies and economies, and maintain
the rule of law. The perils of not doing so can be seen in
the events of the Arab Spring, the aftermath of which
still undermines international peace and security today.

Let me conclude with the words of former
Secretary-General Kofi Annan. He argued that

"we will not enjoy development without security,
we will not enjoy security without development,
and we will not enjoy either without respect for
human rights" (A/59/2005, para. 17).

The United Kingdom fully endorses those words. The
three pillars of the Charter are greater than the sum
of their individual parts. They support each other, and
success in one fosters success in the others. We cannot
pick and choose which pillars the Council supports, nor
can we focus on to the detriment of the others. To do so
would be to ignore the lessons of the past 70 years and
to invite future conflict.

