Mr. Ciss (Senegal) (spoke in French): The Senegalese
delegation is pleased to see you, Mr. President, presiding
over this Security Council open debate, which your
country has decided to dedicate to the important theme
of the protection of civilians and medical care in armed
conflict - the first public debate of this kind since the
Council adopted resolution 2286 (2016).

I would also like to take this opportunity to thank
the Secretary-General for his report (S/2017/414) and
the recommendations contained therein, as well as
our briefers, Ms. Christine Beerli, Vice-President
of the International Committee of the Red Cross and
Mr. Bruno Ugarte, Deputy Executive Director for
Advocacy of Human Rights Watch, for their continued
commitment to the humanitarian cause.

In the report before us, the Secretary-General
provides a pertinent description of his vision of
establishing the protection of civilians and the prevention
of conflicts as absolute priorities within the framework
of the maintenance of international peace and security.
Senegal, in accordance with the principle underlying
its foreign policy, fully adheres to such a vision, which,
we are convinced, will also deeply inspire the United
Nations, especially the Security Council, given that
armed conflicts remain by far the number-one cause of
humanitarian emergency in the world.

At the same time, during times of conflict, emphasis
should be placed, on the one hand, on the protection of
civilians and infrastructure - which, unfortunately,
have become preferred targets - and, on the other
hand, on the need for accountability, given the flagrant
and systematic violations of international humanitarian
law by parties to conflict. That is why the triptych
of prevention, protection and accountability should,
more than ever, guide the action of the international
community. Indeed, as conflict prevention makes it
possible to avoid the escalation of violence, which is a
source of indiscriminate attacks and the displacement
of persons, it should be the foundation of any security
strategy. That is why it is necessary to strengthen the
coherence of relevant policies introduced by the United
Nations and by other international organizations.

In addition, everyone is aware that in the various
hotbeds of conflict around the world, civilians and
health facilities have increasingly been deliberately
targeted by either armed groups or regular armies.
Added to that are indiscriminate and recurring attacks
on health facilities, medical personnel and humanitarian
convoys and, therefore, on humanitarian workers - to
whom I wish to pay due credit for their sacrifices, often
made at the cost of their lives.

At the same time, as stressed by the Secretary-
General in his report,

"among the international community there is a
growing sense of fatigue, even resignation, in
addressing the suffering of civilians in conflict"
(S/2017/4I4, para. 2).

Faced with that bitter observation, which has lasted
too long, it seems to us that the time has come for the
Security Council in particular to give priority to the
protection of civilians, especially to medical personnel,
health facilities and transport, in accordance with the
provisions of the Geneva Conventions of 1949 and their
Additional Protocols of 1977 and 2005, as well as all
relevant international instruments.

While it is true that States have the primary
responsibility to ensure the protection of civilians
in times of armed conflict, the fact remains that the
United Nations, through this Council, has an essential
role to play in the matter. To that end, it is important
to strengthen, in all ways, the culture of preventing
violations of international humanitarian law and human
rights and to combat the impunity of their perpetrators,
whoever they may be.

For that, it remains essential to strengthen the
prevention role of United Nations peacekeeping
operations. When reviewing or establishing mission
mandates, it is appropriate to consider capacity-building
measures and measures to support security sector
reform and, where appropriate, sanctions procedures. It
is also appropriate to ensure that the resources of peace
operations are adapted to their mandates.
As for the parties to conflicts, they are clearly
obligated to respect international humanitarian law,
while the international community has a duty to
ensure that persons suspected of serious violations
of these rules of law, including International law
relating to the protection of medical care in time of
armed conflict, are brought to justice. That is why
military partnerships play a prominent role, as they
offer a unique opportunity to influence the parties
to the conflict and to ensure respect for international
law. The achievement of these objectives requires a
multidimensional approach that involves a variety of
actors, including the Security Council, Member States
and troop-contributing countries.

It is also essential to ensure the restoration of basic
services, in particular by rebuilding hospitals and other
medical facilities destroyed or damaged during attacks.

Another important aspect to be taken into account
is the implementation of the measures taken by the
Security Council in resolution 2286 (2016) and the
recommendations made by the Secretary-General in
this regard. In addition, all possible barriers to access
to health care and related facilities should be lifted
to allow for adequate deployment on the ground.
Furthermore, local health organizations need to be
supported in order to maintain a minimum level of
service through tailor-made solutions, depending on
circumstances on the ground.

Finally, quality training should be provided to
military personnel in order to minimize disruptions
to health-care services while safeguarding legitimate
security concerns.

Despite the unanimous condemnation by the
international community of indiscriminate attacks on
civilian populations and health facilities in flagrant
violation of the relevant provisions of international
humanitarian law, the report of the Secretary-General
states that, unfortunately, the number of such attacks
remained very high in 2016. Even more serious, the
report states:

"Many incidents were never investigated, and where
investigations were conducted they often failed to meet
international standards, preventing effective corrective
action and accountability (ibid., para. 37)"

It is for that reason that my delegation supports
the strengthening of the international community's
efforts through opening investigations of allegations of
violations and the prosecution of perpetrators of attacks
on health infrastructure - the services of which, of
course, remain essential in times of armed conflict.
It goes without saying that our generation has the
opportunity, if it has the genuine will, to replace the
culture of impunity with that of accountability.

My delegation believes that we can hold to the
view that the best way to protect civilians is to create
a protective and preventive environment that pays
particular attention to the root causes of conflict, the
promotion of human rights and the rule of law, and
inclusive and sustainable development.

