Mr. Djedje (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French):
First of all, allow me to congratulate the Secretary-
General on the high quality of his twentieth report
(S/2009/l96), which gives an update on the main
developments in my country over the past three
months.

Taking the opportunity offered by this meeting of
the Security Council on that report, my delegation
would like to outline for the Council the prospects for
the implementation of the Ouagadougou Political
Agreement in the coming months, culminating in the
holding of presidential elections in 2009, since none of
the signatories of the Ouagadougou Agreement, be it
President Laurent Gbagbo, Prime Minister Guillaume
Soro or the facilitator, President Blaise Compaore,
have any agenda other than the successful holding of
presidential elections in 2009.

First, on behalf of my Government, I wish to
reaffirm that political will and the genuine willingness
of the major actors in the process to overcome the
crisis in Cote d'Ivoire, despite what some outsiders
have suggested in recent weeks.

As acknowledged in the Secretary-General's
report, in the two years since the Ouagadougou
Agreement was signed in March 2007, significant
progress has been made towards a return to normalcy
in Cote d'Ivoire. That progress was reinforced by the
signing on 22 December 2008 of a fourth supplementary
agreement to the Ouagadougou Agreement, which
3
paves the way for completing the reunification process
and holding elections.

It is true that, despite the significant strides made
in the process of emerging from the crisis, we have
noted a number of difficulties and constraints regarding
its implementation. Most of those difficulties -
essentially logistical and financial - are being
resolved. Indeed, I am pleased to announce that, as of
31 March 2009, the executive boards of the World
Bank and the International Monetary Fund have agreed
that Cote d'Ivoire is eligible to benefit from debt relief
under the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries Debt
Initiative (HIPC). I take this opportunity to express
once again the appreciation of President Laurent
Gbagbo to all our development partners, including the
French Government, for their tireless support. He
encourages them to continue their efforts until HIPC is
concluded. With this support from the international
community, we can now be less apprehensive about the
rest of the process of emerging from the crisis.

The restoration of State authority and the
redeployment of State administration throughout the
country are nearly complete. The 156 pre'fets and sous-
pre'fets for the central, northern and western zones have
been nominated and appointed.

With regard to the centralization of the treasury,
the redeployment of financial administration -
including the treasury bank - in the central, northern
and western zones is also under way. Missions have
been organized to consider the feasibility of opening
branches of the Central Bank of West African States in
those areas.

The problems related to the transfer of authority
from zone commanders to the corps prefectoral will be
resolved in the coming days thanks to the deployment
of 8,000 personnel seconded to the integrated
command centre, including police officers, gendarmes
and members of the armed forces of the Forces
nouvelles. A list of those individuals will be issued this
week.
To date, 6,081,625 people, out of a population of
8.6 million potential voters, have been registered to
vote. With the improvements in the State's financial
situation, we hope to complete the registration of
nearly all potential voters by mid-June 2009.

In accordance with the recommendations made at
the fourth meeting of the Permanent Consultative
Framework of the Ouagadougou Political Agreement,
held on 10 November 2008, the Independent Electoral
Commission proposed a timetable for the electoral
process to the Prime Minister, who passed it on to the
President on 15 April 2009. According to the timetable,
the presidential election could be held between 11
October and 6 December 2009. The exact date of the
elections will be announced by the President in the
next few days.

In conclusion, I should like to urge the United
Nations not to become discouraged and the Security
Council to continue its efforts to assist the people and
the Government of Cote d'Ivoire in effectively
emerging from the crisis through the holding of
elections in 2009. The most difficult phase is behind
us, and we must work together to hold credible
elections in Cote d'Ivoire, the first round of which
should be held no later than 6 December 2009.

Once again, I wish to emphasize that the peace
process in Cote d'Ivoire is not at an impasse. The
political decision has already been made. The first
round of the presidential elections in C6te d'Ivoire will
be held no later than 6 December 2009.

