Sir Jeremy Greenstock (United Kingdom): It is
a great pleasure, Mr. President, to see you in the Chair.
In keeping with your style, please accept my
abbreviated compliments. Likewise your predecessor,
who did excellent work in November.
The United Kingdom is very pleased to see what
we expect will be the unanimous adoption of draft
resolution S/2000/1149. It is right for the Council to
unite behind this programme, which is important and
necessary for the welfare of the Iraqi people. It is also
right at this juncture for us to pay tribute to the staff of
the United Nations who work so hard to implement the
programme in sometimes difficult conditions.

The United Kingdom played a central role in the
preparation of this draft resolution, and we are
therefore well placed to realize the compromises that
were made to allow it to be adopted. There were
measures we would have preferred to see included; no
doubt there were other measures that others would have
preferred to see included. But the draft resolution
represents a reasonable balance of our collective
interests and an important contribution to the work of
the programme. There are a number of technical
measures contained in the draft resolution, such as the
extension of the so-called green, or pre-approved, lists
that will ease and improve the implementation of the
programme. Again, we ask for the implementation of
the so-called cash component across all sectors in Iraq,
a measure which, if Iraq allowed it to be implemented,
has the potential to make a significant difference to the
humanitarian situation by allowing the local economy
to be revived.

Perhaps the most important measure we are
enacting is to use the money made available from our
decision to reduce the funds for compensation to
address directly the needs of the vulnerable groups in
Iraq. As the Secretary-General has often reported, the
needs of those groups - the poorest, the displaced
children and the elderly - are often neglected. We
look forward to hearing in the next l80-day report how
the first tranche of money has been used to meet their
needs.

