Ms. Wronecka (Poland): As this is the first
official meeting under your presidency, Mr. President,
I would like to congratulate Equatorial Guinea on its
assumption of the presidency of Security Council for
the month of February and to wish you success in your
work. Likewise, I would like to commend the delegation
of the Dominican Republic for its very good leadership
in guiding the work of the Security Council during the
month of January.

Allow me to thank Secretary-General Antonio
Guterres, Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat, Chairperson
of the African Union Commission, and Mr. Richard
Sezibera, Minister of Foreign Affairs and International
Cooperation of Rwanda, for their very informative
statements. I also welcome the Ministers for Foreign
Affairs who are present with us today in the Chamber.

Mercenary groups pose a serious threat to
the independence, security, stability and peaceful
development of many nations in Africa. We therefore
welcome the initiative of the Government of Equatorial
Guinea to hold this high-level presidential debate in the
Security Council. The topic of the debate covers a broad
and impressive array of issues. As such, we would like
to comment on a few that are of particular importance
to Poland.

First, weak legal systems, a lack of good
governance and the rule of law, as well as poverty and
unemployment, create an environment conducive to
mercenary-related activities. Therefore, the promotion
of the rule of law, which is at the core of the activities
of the United Nations system and is also a priority of
Poland's membership in the Council, has to be more
streamlined and focused in the context of the current
discussion. We also encourage regional organizations,
particularly the African Union, to continue to promote
the rule of law and the principles of security, territorial
integrity and peaceful cooperation, as well as the
institutional development of States, as the most effective
remedies to mercenary activities.

Secondly, law always lags behind the dynamic
development of real-life situations on the ground.
Introducing new legal instruments in a rapidly changing
world is not always sufficient. We believe that existing
law is relevant but that, as always, their universal
applicability and effectiveness is problematic. That
is where we should focus our attention. We therefore
consider this debate as an opportunity for the United
Nations, its Member States, regional and subregional
organizations and United Nations entities such as the
Working Group on the use of mercenaries to build
broader consensus on this issue, similar to that which
exists on the fight against terrorism. Poland was one of
the original ratifying States of the Montreux Document.
Our strong support for that document is based on our
conviction that any international activity that involves
the use of force must not contravene international
humanitarian law or human rights law. We therefore
remain deeply concerned about the illegal use of private
military companies that do not follow basic principles
of international law and constitute a destructive factor,
which can be seen within and outside of Africa.

Thirdly, decades of internal and international
tensions and the rise of fundamentalism and religious
extremism have fuelled the proliferation of mercenary
groups around the region. A few ways to prevent
or limit the spread of such conditions is to promote
confidence-building measures, foster dialogue between
interested parties and avoid tensions that may spin out
of control.

In conclusion, I would like to underline that our
recent discussions on the subject of women and peace
and security provide us with examples of measures that
decrease the risk of the escalation of conflict, which in
turn diminishes the risk of mercenary practices, among
other dangers.

