Mr. Khalilzad (United States of America): Like
colleagues who have spoken before me, I would like to
welcome President Tadic' once again to the Security
Council. We are also pleased to see the Secretary-
General here. And I welcome the new Ambassador of
Croatia to the Council and look forward to working
with him.

In exercise of its sovereign rights, the United
States has today recognized an independent and
sovereign Kosovo. Our recognition was communicated
by President Bush to the President of Kosovo a few
hours ago. We congratulate Kosovo and welcome it to
the family of nations.

I would like to make three points today. The first
concerns how we got to where we are. Kosovo's
independence is the culmination of a long, unique
process caused by Yugoslavia's Violent,
non-consensual break-up. Throughout the 1990s, war
wreaked havoc throughout the former Yugoslavia.
Towards the end of the decade, the Serbian
Government of Slobodan Milosevic brought ethnic
cleansing to Kosovo. Responding to that humanitarian
disaster and clear threats to international peace and
security, NATO led a military intervention that stopped
the Violence and brought peace to Kosovo.
The Security Council solidified that peace by
adopting resolution 1244 (1999) in June 1999 - an
unprecedented resolution that provided for an interim
political framework and circumscribed Serb
sovereignty in that territory, and that called for the
determination of Kosovo's final status. There was
much effort to reach an agreement between the two
sides, Kosovo and Serbia, on final status. Belgrade and
Pristina negotiated for more than two years to resolve
the status of Kosovo, first facilitated by Special Envoy
Martti Ahtisaari and then by a Troika comprising the
European Union, Russia and the United States. Those
intensive efforts left no stone unturned. But the parties
could not reach agreement, confirming that their
positions on the fundamental question of status were
irreconcilable.

President Ahtisaari, on behalf of the Secretary-
General, recommended that Kosovo become
independent, subject to a period of international
supervision. He was convinced that uncertainty over its
future status had become a major obstacle to Kosovo's
democratic development, that the United Nations
Mission in Kosovo had exhausted its potential to
facilitate further progress, that Kosovo's estrangement
from Serbia was irreversible and that only an
independent Kosovo could produce the fully mature
democratic institutions needed to realize his Vision. We
continue to accept Mr. Ahtisaari's wisdom.

Much to our regret, the Council was blocked
from adopting a draft resolution endorsing that plan,
which would have helped facilitate Kosovo's path
forward. As United Nations Envoys Kai Eide and
Martti Ahtisaari, a series of Special Representatives of
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) and the Secretary-General himself
told us repeatedly, this interim status quo was
unsustainable. The people of Kosovo have therefore
decided to bring the issue to a close themselves. They
did so in a mature, non-violent and responsible manner.

Kosovo's declaration of independence is a
logical, legitimate and legal response to the situation at
hand. Kosovo's declaration is fully consistent with
resolution 1244 (1999) and expressly recognizes that
that resolution will remain in force.

The recognition of Kosovo's sovereignty by a
substantial number of European Union Governments,
the United States and countries in other regions on the
first day since Kosovo declared its independence has
ensured that that fact is irreversible. Our collective
efforts must now focus on working constructively with
Kosovo and Serbia to help them turn a new page.

Secondly, let me address legal concerns and the
issue of precedent. Resolution 1244 (1999) rendered
Kosovo unique by requiring the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia to withdraw its military, paramilitary and
police forces from Kosovo and to place Kosovo under
interim United Nations administration, effectively
replacing Belgrade's governance of Kosovo.

I understand the concern of some that Kosovo's
independence could be cited as a precedent in other
parts of the world. But the reality is that Kosovo is
clearly a special case and has been treated as such by
the United Nations since 1999. As we have noted
repeatedly, the violent and non-consensual break-up of
Yugoslavia; Milosevic's policies of repression and
ethnic cleansing, which led the international
community to act; the adoption of Security Council
resolution 1244 (1999), under which Serbia has long
been prevented from exercising normal governmental
authority in Kosovo; and the United Nations-facilitated
political process to help determine Kosovo's future
status are all factors that make the situation in Kosovo
different from other conflicts or situations and one that
does not set a precedent for other regions. My
country's recognition of Kosovo's independence is
based upon the specific circumstances in which
Kosovo now finds itself. We have not, do not and will
not accept the Kosovo example as a precedent for any
other conflict or dispute.

Thirdly, let me talk about the future. Kosovo now
stands at an important threshold in its development.
Fortunately, Kosovo has a blueprint, the Ahtisaari plan,
for its path to becoming a functional, multi-ethnic and
democratic country. Kosovo's embrace of the Ahtisaari
plan and the commitment, contained in its declaration
of independence, to the highest principles of the United
Nations Charter are heartening. Kosovo has said that it
seeks to become a responsible, peace-loving State. It is
time for Kosovo to take its rightful place among the
community of nations as a democratic, secular and
multi-ethnic State. We will work together to help
Kosovo realize the commitments that it has freely
undertaken, including the commitment to protect the
rights of its ethnic minorities, and to ensure that the
entire region of South-East Europe can move forward
towards a democratic, prosperous and stable future.
In that regard, the European Union has made an
extraordinary offer to help Kosovo develop its rule of
law sector and implement reforms required for
European Union membership. The United Nations
should welcome that offer of support. New
international presences are required to protect the
substantial United Nations investment in Kosovo and
preserve the legacy of the United Nations there.

I want Kosovo to know that the United States will
stand with it as it assumes responsibility for its destiny.

To President Tadie, we express today our strong
desire to maintain and strengthen our relationship with
Serbia, a historical friend and ally in two world wars.
We understand that the independence of Kosovo is
difficult for Serbia to accept. We can assure you,
Mr. President, that the United States wishes to work
with you and that it will be a strong supporter to you as
you pursue a path towards Europe.

To others at this table and in this Chamber, I urge
that we come together. The time for scoring political
points is over. Together, we should encourage
negotiations between Belgrade and Pristina to
normalize diplomatic, social and economic relations.
We can best promote stability in the Balkan region by
effectively encouraging such normalization and
encouraging them to meet the standards for European
Union membership. I know that will take time. We
should be prepared to do our part to help them. The
United States is prepared to do its part.

