Mr. Matjila (South Africa): My delegation would
like to thank you, Madam President, for convening
this meeting. We would also like to thank the Under-
Secretary General for Peacekeeping Operations,
Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix, and the African Union
Commissioner for Peace and Security, Ambassador
Sma'il Chergui, for their comprehensive briefings. I
also welcome my old friend and peer, the Chair of the
Group of African States for this month, Ambassador
Omer Siddig of the Sudan. I would like to focus my
intervention on two key issues, namely, the political
situation and developments in Khartoum and the
situation in Darfur.

On the political situation, we welcome the recent
signing of the constitutional declaration in the Sudan
and congratulate the parties for reaching this historic
milestone. We also welcome the efforts undertaken
by the Prime Minister of Ethiopia on behalf of the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development and the
African Union in bringing the parties together and
ending months of unrest. We particularly commend
the African Union Special Envoy, Mohamed El Hacen
Lebatt, and the Special Envoy of the Prime Minister
of Ethiopia, Ambassador Mahmoud Dirir, on their
role in facilitating the mediation that resulted in the
power-sharing agreement. The establishment of the
Sovereign Council, which includes two women, to be
led in the first 21 months by Lieutenant General Abdel-
Fattah Al-Burhan, is a welcome development. We also
applaud the appointment of Mr. Abdalla Hamdok as
Prime Minister.

The real work begins now. We urge all Sudanese
stakeholders to implement the commitments made in
the agreements, in order to meet the aspirations of
the Sudanese people for sustainable peace, security,
reconciliation and development. The people of the
Sudan have yearned for peace for too long and
sacrificed too dearly. Their aspirations need to translate
into tangible dividends on the ground. In that regard,
we urge all parties to redouble their efforts to work
together to rebuild a united, inclusive and strong Sudan
underpinned by democratic principles.

It is vital that the region and the African Union
continue to provide assistance to the political process in
the Sudan. The support of the international community
remains a critical part of enhancing the work of the
region and unlocking those international institutions
and processes that will allow the Sudan to rebuild its
economy. Moving forward, it is imperative to create an
enabling environment and provide support to the parties
to ensure the full implementation of the agreements. We
should safeguard against external interference and give
the parties the space to chart their trajectory towards
peace and development.

We are encouraged by the improving relations
between the countries in the region. This rapprochement
is a step in the right direction for regional peace and
stability and will contribute to the ideal of silencing
the guns on the continent by 2020. We urge the leaders
in the region to continue this positive momentum of
political dialogue, to strengthen regional stability and
to utilize the same determination to help resolve the
Somalia question.

The situation in Darfur continues to improve.
However, remnants of insecurity find expression in
the form of human rights and humanitarian challenges.
Therefore, it is imperative for the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) to
continue discharging its mandate as issued by the
Security Council.

South Africa looks forward to the joint report of
the Secretary-General and the Chairperson of the
African Union Commission in September. The report
is expected to provide an assessment of the situation
on the ground and recommendations on the appropriate
course of action regarding the drawdown of UNAMID,
as well as ajoint African Union-United Nations political
strategy detailing options for a follow-on mechanism
to UNAMID.

In the meantime, it is worth underlining that the
root causes ofthe situation in Darfur must be addressed
in a sustainable manner. As such, the rejuvenation of
the Doha peace process is very important, particularly
given its current unclear trajectory. We trust that the
renewed hope ushered in by the current agreement will
create impetus for the peace process in Darfur and
we encourage all armed groups to cooperate and join
the political dialogue with a view to working towards
comprehensive peace and reconciliation throughout
the Sudan.

Lastly, the international community must support
the parties in the Sudan as they work towards
consolidating peace and stability in their country. That
support should address socioeconomic challenges, with
the primary focus being on economic development
and the mobilization of necessary financial resources
to bolster the country in its economic recovery. We
commend the countries that have already contributed
in that regard.

It is our view that the Sudanese people must
capitalize on the prevailing positive environment to
identify, drive and direct priorities, strategies and
activities for building and sustaining peace during the
transition and the UNAMID drawdown process, as well
as for managing outstanding and unresolved issues
between the Sudan and South Sudan. South Africa
welcomes and supports the visit to the Sudan by both
Mr. Lacroix and Mr. Chergui, planned for October.

