Mr. Hyseni: I wish first to extend Kosovo's
profound condolences to the Haitian Government on
the tragic loss of human life as a result of the
catastrophic earthquake that struck that country. At the
same time, our condolences go to the Member States
that lost citizens who were serving with the United
Nations missions in that country. Of course, we wish to
extend our condolences to the Secretary-General on the
loss of life among United Nations personnel in Haiti.

As always, I wish first to thank the Security
Council for the opportunity to brief it on the situation
in Kosovo, namely, on the continued accomplishments
and steady progress that the Republic of Kosovo has
continued to make since my last address to the
Council, on 15 October 2009.

Before I continue, I also wish to congratulate the
five new members - Brazil, Gabon, Lebanon, Nigeria
and Bosnia and Herzegovina - on their election to the
Security Council.

Kosovo has continued to build its State
institutions on the basis of our new democratic
Constitution, as well as on the basis of the provisions
contained in the Ahtisaari comprehensive plan. The
year 2009 was a successful one for Kosovo on many
fronts. We completed the process of membership with
the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank.
Recognition of the independence of our country has
continued uninterrupted. The Government of Kosovo
has been very successful in addressing and resolving
many economy, security and justice issues throughout
Kosovo.

The well-being of minority communities and the
return of Kosovo refugees to their homes and
properties have been a priority. The progress achieved
during 2009 is obvious. The improvement of
conditions in the minority community areas, especially
in the Serb-majority municipalities, will remain an
issue of high priority for the Government of the
Republic of Kosovo during this year as well. We will
continue to make special efforts in order to intensify
the return of Kosovo Serb refugees and to protect and
restore religious and cultural heritage.

As for Kosovo's relations with other States,
65 nations around the world have so far recognized
Kosovo as an independent and sovereign State. The
most recent recognitions came from New Zealand, the
Republic of Malawi and the Islamic Republic of
Mauritania. We wish to extend our deepest appreciation
to those three countries for their recognition of our
country's independence.

On the other hand, Kosovo has entered into
diplomatic relations with over 25 States around the
world. Following the very successful conclusion of the
process of the physical demarcation of the border with
the Republic of Macedonia, we signed an agreement on
diplomatic relations with that country. The
establishment of embassies is under way. On
15 January 2010, diplomatic relations were established
with Montenegro as well; ambassadors will be
exchanged in due course.

Kosovo stands ready to improve its relations with
the Republic of Serbia too. Dialogue between our
countries can take place on many issues of mutual
concern and interest; this can happen only on an equal
footing, as dialogue between two independent and
sovereign States.

We reject any calls for renewed negotiations on
status. Furthermore, we consider that calls for renewed
negotiations on the status of Kosovo come from people
who either are unaware of the situation and the great
efforts to achieve consensus or, worse, from those who
actively seek to create disorder in the region. New
negotiations would be highly disruptive and could even
spark new conflict in the region. Kosovo's
independence is irreversible, and that will remain the
case not only for the sake of Kosovo but also for the
sake of sustainable regional peace and security, to
which Kosovo's independence has so greatly
contributed.

We have also entered into numerous bilateral
treaties and agreements with many countries around
the world - such as those on investment incentives,
law enforcement, cooperation in the field of health,
mutual travel of citizens, readmission of persons,
economic cooperation, police cooperation, mutual
assistance in customs matters, development
cooperation, mutual abolition of visas, et cetera -
including with Albania, Austria, Denmark, France,
Luxembourg, Macedonia, Slovenia, Turkey and the
United States. We recently concluded our first treaty-
succession agreement, with Belgium.

November and December 2009 saw two events
that were very important for Kosovo. One was
elections. On the basis of the Constitution of the
Republic of Kosovo and consistent with a number of
laws that govern the conduct of elections in Kosovo -
that is, the law on general elections and the law on
municipal elections, both adopted in June 2008 - we
held elections for members of assemblies and mayors
of 36 municipalities across Kosovo. The Kosovo
Central Election Commission was fully charged with
the organization and conduct of these elections. The
elections were very orderly and peaceful. Participation
of non-majority communities in the election was
sizable. Out of 74 entities certified to contest the
elections, 40 represent various minority communities.
Twenty-two were Kosovo Serb political entities. That
is clear evidence that, despite Serbia's assertions to the
contrary and indeed despite the Serbian Government's
pressure and calls for a boycott, Kosovo Serbs are
increasingly taking part in institution-building in
Kosovo.

The good participation of Kosovo Serbs in these
elections was widely welcomed. In a resolution
adopted shortly after the elections, the European
Parliament welcomed what it called the unprecedented
good participation of Kosovo Serbs, and it regarded
this as encouraging indication that the Kosovo Serb
community is willing to take up its responsibilities in
the Kosovo institutions.

We believe that the November elections created
new momentum in building up a multi-ethnic Kosovo.
In their statements, observer missions also described
the 15 November elections as free, fair and democratic.
The European Parliament ad hoc delegation welcomed,
in its statement, the ongoing decentralization process
and what it called a peaceful election day in Kosovo.
The European Union presidency's statement
"welcomed the orderly conduct of municipal elections"
as well as broad participation of different ethnic
groups. Very positive reactions to the elections came
from the NATO Secretary-General, the European
Union Special Representative in Kosovo, ambassadors
from various States accredited to Pristina and various
national and international non-governmental
organizations. And the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General also "considered the trend towards
more active participation by the Kosovo Serb
community as an encouraging step towards longer term
reconciliation and integration with the local
community".

The turnout of voters in Serb majority
municipalities was as high as 54 per cent, in Shterpce,
a municipality in southern Kosovo, whereas in the
three new municipalities of Gracanice, Kllokot and
Ranillug, the turnout was around 22 per cent. As a
result, today we have four elected Serb mayors from
the Independent Liberal Party (SLS) in four
municipalities.

The second development I wish to underscore is
the oral statements to the International Court of Justice,
on 1 to 11 December 2009. The delegation of the
Republic of Kosovo, headed by the Minister for
Foreign Affairs, addressed the Court on 1 December,
offering substantive information for the proceedings.
As all statements to the Court are now available to the
public, let me just emphasize that the Republic of
Kosovo has asked the International Court of Justice if it
deems it appropriate to respond to the request for an
advisory opinion, in accordance with General
Assembly resolution 63/3, finding that the declaration
of independence of Kosovo of 17 February 2008 did
not contravene any applicable rule of international law.
We place full trust in the International Court of Justice.

As I said in my address to the Court, we cannot and
should not forget the crimes against humanity and
other horrors that the Republic of Serbia inflicted upon
the people of Kosovo; such things must never happen
again.

Yet we in Kosovo are determined to look towards
the future. We are determined to preserve peace and
security in Kosovo and in the region. Now it is more
certain than ever before that the common future of both
Kosovo and Serbia - and indeed, of all Western
Balkan countries - lies in eventual membership in the
European Union, as contemplated in the European
Commission's recent report of October 2009.

We also look forward to the day when we will be
able to take our place as a Member of the United
Nations. The commitments expressed in our
declaration of independence and in our constitution
demonstrate our willingness to assume the
responsibility of such membership. In line with that,
my Government has recently agreed on a draft law to
enable Kosovo to implement the Security Council
sanctions, and the Parliament of the Republic of
Kosovo is expected to adopt that draft law shortly.

The overall security situation in the Republic of
Kosovo is calm and stable, although the situation in the
north remains an issue of concern. Continued and
additional effort is needed to see further improvement
of the situation and progress in that part of Kosovo.
The institutions and the Government of the Republic of
Kosovo have been working and cooperating closely
with European Union Rule of Law Mission to combat
crime and corruption, as well as to prevent further
destructive action of parallel and criminal structures in
the north.

Unfortunately, extremely disruptive interference
on the part of the Government of the Republic of
Serbia in the Republic of Kosovo and support for
parallel structures has continued. The recent so-called
nomination of prosecutors and judges for the courts in
Kosovo by authorities of Serbia was another severe
attack on the court system of Kosovo, apparently with
a clear aim of undermining the ongoing
decentralization process and establishing Serb majority
municipalities. It is also an attempt to obstruct and
undermine joint efforts of the EULEX and Kosovo
authorities to restore law and order across Kosovo
through the establishment of multi-ethnic institutions.
The continued destabilizing interference of Serbia in
my country is unacceptable, and it must end.

Kosovo, for its part, will continue to seek ways to
further strengthen and improve relations with its
neighbours, including Serbia. That remains one of my
Government's key priorities.

In conclusion, I wish to thank you, Mr. President,
and the members of the Council for the opportunity to
present the views of Kosovo. We look forward to
working with all the members of the Council and,
indeed, with all Members of the United Nations as we
promote the shared goals of international peace and
regional stability and cooperation in the Western
Balkans.

