Mr. Regis (Haiti) (spoke in French): Perhaps never
before in the recent history of the situation in the Middle
East has the region been fraught with so many threats
to international peace and security. It is therefore the
honour and duty of the Security Council, aware of its
primary responsibility for the maintenance of peace
and security, to strive to meet the challenge posed by
the current situation. In that regard, it is fitting to pay
tribute to the initiative of the presidency of Uruguay,
which represents an innovative and courageous step in
that direction.
Terrorism, with its serious consequences, is
undoubtedly at the forefront of the plethora of risks and
threats to international peace and security. The threat
posed by terrorist and extremist groups to regional
stability, international security and human rights is
omnipresent. Revolting acts of barbarism have plunged
the Middle East into bloodshed - and the people and
minorities, notably in Syria and Iraq, into a nightmare.
Terrorism is an affront to the conscience of humankind.
The recent attacks in Paris, Istanbul, Beirut, Jakarta,
San Bernardino, Bamako and Ouagadougou all
compound the long list of atrocities committed by those
groups, whose tentacles now extend to all continents.

That dramatic expansion is accompanied by a
constantly growing wave of refugees, of persecution of
religious and ethnic communities, and of widespread
violations of human rights. Moreover, the increasing
possibility of nuclear, chemical or biological weapons
falling into the hands of those terrorist entities
considerably increases both the scale and severity of
the threat.

In addition, the current impasse in the peace process
between Israel and Palestine removes any prospects ofa
negotiated solution and thereby compounds the threats
confronting the region. The destabilizing effects of
the suspension of peace talks between the Israeli
Government and the Palestinian Authority are clear.
They contribute in particular to fuelling extremism,
which, as we know, uses the unresolved conflict as
a pretext to carry out its fanatical work. The recent
outbreak of Violence that has indiscriminately struck
Israeli and Palestinian civilians is a sad illustration
of that. Such a situation could deteriorate at any time
and clearly shows the extent to which the status quo is
untenable.

The solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict is
undoubtedly a key to stability and peace in the Middle
East. The Republic of Haiti is pleased to participate in
this open debate, which affords us an opportunity to
reiterate our position on this conflict, which has lasted
far too long; to express its absolute respect for the
major principles of international law and the relevant
resolutions of the Security Council and the General
Assembly, whose respect alone can ensure a lasting
settlement to the conflict; and to lend its support to the
Council's approach aimed at renewing dialogue and
enabling the parties to resume the path of negotiations,
which remains a necessary precondition for peace.

The position of my delegation is based on a
fundamental principle, that is, the right of Israel to
exist and to live in safety, within secure and recognized
borders, must be universally and unequivocally
recognized, just like that of the Palestinian people to
self-determination and sovereignty in the framework of
a viable and democratic State. My delegation believes
that the coexistence of two States living in peace and
security within internationally recognized borders,
taking into account the legitimate security concerns
of Israel, is the cornerstone of any solution to the
conflict. Pursuant to that position and in accordance
with the resolutions of the Security Council and the
General Assembly, Haiti, which is linked to Israel
through historical ties of friendship dating back to
Israel's creation in 1948, has also recognized the
Palestinian State, in the belief that the boundaries
and borders of that State must be determined through
an agreement in the context of a comprehensive,
negotiated and final settlement between the two States.
To that end, my delegation fully supports the two-State
solution - the only one that is worthwhile - and
supports all international initiatives, whether they
come from the United Nations or other bodies, aimed
at reaching a just, equitable and sustainable solution,
the modalities of which fall first and foremost to the
parties to resolve.

Never has the dynamic commitment of the United
Nations to the Middle East been as necessary and
desirable as it is today. Faced with the dual challenge of
the fight against terrorism and of resolving the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict, the international community
must act. On the one hand, it is imperative to take and
strengthen the collective measures that are urgently
needed to counter the growing threat of terrorism
and extremism. On the other hand, is important that
the United Nations make every effort to restore the
momentum of the peace process between Israel and
Palestine. Both actions must be taken with the same
resolve.

My delegation believes that the United Nations,
with its long experience in the field and the efforts
already made to solve the structural problems of the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict, is now best placed to
promote a resumption of talks, which are the only route
to peace. This solution can be achieved only through a
negotiated peace. It requires above all a return to the
negotiating table. There can be no conditions attached.

The holding of this meeting is evidence that it
will be possible to reach a solution through United
Nations mediation. My delegation fully agrees with
this approach on the part of the Security Council. It
extends its best wishes for this meeting and hopes that
it will lead to new ideas and innovative approaches that
can pave the way to stability in the Middle East and
the early resumption of the diplomatic process between
Israel and the Palestinian Authority as the only way to
achieve the negotiated, just, comprehensive and lasting
settlement desired all parties.

