Mr. Ramirez Carrefio (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We thank the delegation
of France for presiding over the work of the Security
Council during the current month and for convening
this open debate. We also appreciate the briefings by
the Secretary-General and his Special Representative
for Children and Armed Conflict, Ms. Virginia Gamba,
to whom we express our full support. We are also
grateful for the statement made by Mr. Mubin Shaikh
and welcome the presence Mr. Romeo Dallaire.

Children continue to be the main victims of
armed conflicts, which take place in various regions
throughout the world and in which their human rights
are severely violated by the actions of armed groups,
including terrorist organizations and the military
forces of some States. In that regard, according to the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2017/821), in some
countries, very few cases of violations against children
were recorded in 2017 or there was a reduction in the
number of violations. However, in other countries, the
gravity of such violations has worsened with a shocking
number of deaths, mutilations, cases of recruitment,
exploitation, sexual abuse and direct attacks on boys
and girls - with record numbers of such crimes and
violations recorded in several areas.

For Venezuela, it is tragic and ethically unacceptable
that such violations continue to take place, and that
obstacles to protecting children affected by armed
conflict still exist. Apparently, our collective conscience
remains unmoved, and we fail to adopt urgent measures
that would enable us to reverse the situation. There is
something very wrong with humankind in today's
globalized society.

We believe that the best strategy that we can employ
to shield children from the pernicious consequences
of war is one of conflict prevention and resolution,
principally by addressing its overall root causes. It is a
contradiction to want firm and lasting peace when there
is a considerable number of boys and girls who grow
up surrounded by armed violence and hatred, as well
as by economic and social deprivation, which is the
result of poverty and social exclusion. Marginalization,
along with the impact of armed conflict, puts in
serious jeopardy the chances for children and
adolescents to shoulder responsibility, in a few years,
for the future of countries with a culture of peace and
sustainable development.

This year's report also mentions that attacks
carried out by terrorist organizations, such as Da'esh,
Al-Shabaab and Boko Haram, among others, have had
serious repercussions on children. Such terrorist entities
commit barbaric acts that are a threat to humanity itself,
and lead to abuses and violations of children's rights. In
that regard, we reiterate our ongoing condemnation of
the fact that foreign military intervention and wars in
the Middle East and North Africa have been one of the
main reasons why children become victims of violence
and why their societies get destroyed, which, in turn,
strips them of their rights and their future.

In that regard, we call for the cessation of all
foreign military intervention, in particular in those
regions, as well as for the end to the destabilization of
entire societies for geopolitical and economic purposes,
the transfer of weapons, and the funding, training and
safe haven given to extremist and terrorist groups. We
urge all States to take action in line with the Charter
of the United Nations, the provisions of international
instruments and Security Council and General
Assembly resolutions.

Similarly, we are concerned about that fact that
addressing the terrorist threat has also led to an increase
in the number of human rights violations and greater
suffering among the civilian population, in particular,
children. We therefore call for every effort to be made
to address those scourges and scrupulously respect
international humanitarian law, in accordance with the
principles of distinction and proportionality. The States
Members of the United Nations must be consistent in
their action when protecting children in armed conflict.
When holding to account those who have committed
violations against children in armed conflict, we must
adhere to the principles of objectivity, non-selectivity
and impartiality. No one should be exempt, be they
non-State armed groups or State armed forces.

In that regard, we must also say a word about
the situation of Palestinian children, who have been
enduring acts of aggression and violence perpetrated
by the occupying Power. In addition, more than 700
children have been arbitrarily detained in Israeli
prisons. Similarly, we are concerned about the violence
carried out by the forces of the occupying Power
against children, which has claimed lives and left many
injured. We call on the Government of Israel and the
Security Council to take measures to end such human
rights violations.

In conclusion, Venezuela reaffirms its commitment
to supporting and assisting multilateral efforts aimed at
protecting and helping children, because it is an urgent
ethical commitment that must be honoured in line with
international law.

