Mrs. Chassoul (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish):
Mr. Minister, may I tell you how very pleased we are to
see you presiding over this meeting.

On behalf of the States members of the Rio
Group, it is my honour to congratulate the people and
the Government of East Timor on their independence
day. Today East Timor is taking its first steps in the
community of nations as a result of the democratic
exercise of the right to self-determination, and we
congratulate it.

Today the peoples of Latin America extend a
brotherly hand to the Timorese people. The Rio Group
congratulates in particular the new President of East
Timor, Mr. Xanana Gusmao, on his election to lead the
destiny of his nation at this crucial time. The
independence of East Timor is the result of a long
effort that has required the broad participation of its
population. The countries members of the Rio Group,
which have always supported the legitimate aspirations
of the Timorese people, are delighted to see the
successful conclusion of those efforts.

Independence gives East Timor a new status, a
new dignity and new rights. But it also imposes new
responsibilities and obligations on its Government. We
know that the task confronting the new Government of
East Timor is enormous: to rebuild its economy and
society following the tragic events that occurred at the
end of 1999; to consolidate a democratic system that is
respectful of human rights; to create effective
administrative and judicial institutions; to coordinate
the development efforts and the administration of the
natural resources of the new nation; to develop existing
human resources and to strengthen them through
education and health programmes; and to be effectively
integrated into the international community.

Among these tasks, the Rio Group attaches
highest priority to that of consolidating, preserving and
promoting democracy and human rights in East Timor,
since these are the indispensable prerequisite for
ensuring justice, equity, freedom, peace and sustainable
development for all the people. At the same time, the
new authorities must emphasize the development and
implementation of education, health, housing and
poverty-reduction programmes.

The countries members of the Rio Group
appreciate the excellent work of the United Nations
Transitional Administration in East Timor (UNTAET)
and the work of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello, in the
preparation of East Timor's independence, the holding
of the first elections, the drafting of the new
constitution and the creation of the new nation's basic
administrative and political structures. We hope that
the lessons learned in this effort at peace-building will
be effectively incorporated in the practice of the
Security Council. Nonetheless, the task is not over. The
international community must continue to support the
Government and the people of East Timor.

In the short term, East Timor needs the political,
military and financial support of the United Nations,
the Bretton Woods institutions and the international
community in general. The Rio Group supports the
mandate of the new Mission of Support in East Timor
(UNMISET), which is aimed at ensuring the stability
and viability of the new political and administrative
structures, the training of the Police Service, the
administration ofjustice and security of the population.
We welcome the appointment of Ambassador
Kamalesh Sharma to head the Mission.

In the medium term, East Timor needs a strong
flow of investment and development assistance with a
view to ensuring the economic viability and political
stability of the new State. During the second stage,
focusing on the economic development of East Timor,
the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP)
and the Economic and Social Council must play a
fundamental role in coordinating the work of the
international community.

The independence of East Timor is an example of
the success and effectiveness of the work of the United
Nations when it is backed by the resources and
political support of all its Members. Today is a joyful
day not only for East Timor but also for the entire
international community. We hope that it will soon be
possible to celebrate the admission of East Timor to the
United Nations as one more Member State.
This concludes my statement on behalf of the
States members of the Rio Group. My next comments
will be made in my national capacity on behalf of
Costa Rica.

The people and the Government of Costa Rica
wish to convey sincerest congratulations to the people
and the Government of East Timor on the occasion of
their independence. The Timorese people can
henceforth rely on the fraternal friendship and firm
solidarity of the people of Costa Rica.

As I said in my statement on behalf of the Rio
Group, the tasks of economic development and the
consolidation of the political system confronting the
new Government are enormous. Regrettably, the
resources available, both at the local and international
levels, are limited and insufficient. The new
Government will have to wisely design its development
priorities and the corresponding budgetary allocations.

Like East Timor, Costa Rica is a small developing
country, and it has therefore confronted similar
challenges. More than 50 years ago, our country
discovered that the resources devoted to defence were a
heavy burden on our national economy and that this
limited our possibilities for progress. Developing
countries that are truly committed to the well-being of
their people cannot afford to waste scarce resources on
armies or weapons. On the contrary, we need to devote
our meagre resources to economic development, social
justice and democratic institution-building.
Furthermore, the existence of armies has harmful
political and social effects. Unfortunately, armed forces
are frequently sources of tension, repression and
violations of democratic principles. They exacerbate
conflicts, promote the arms race and make it difficult to
resolve disputes peacefully. Many armies violate
human rights and radicalize various sectors of society.

In this context, Costa Rica notes the creation of
the East Timor Defence Force. My country would have
preferred to see the birth of East Timor as an
independent nation without an army. We believe that
the Security Council, UNTAET, UNMISET and the
other multilateral collective security mechanisms are
the real guarantors of the independence of East Timor.
The new nation consequently does not need armed
forces to feel secure. We would have preferred the
Security Council to discourage the creation of the
Defence Force and resolutely to promote the creation
of a culture of peace in East Timor. We therefore invite
the new Government of East Timor to abolish its
Defence Force and courageously to allocate the largest
possible sum of resources to the economic and social
development of its people.

