Mr. F edotov (Russian Federation) (interpretation from Russian): From the very outset, the Russian
Federation has viewed the recent events in Kosovo as the
internal affair of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. We
strongly believe that the basic principle for a settlement
of the situation in Kosovo is that that autonomous region
must remain within Serbia on the basis of unswerving
compliance with the principle of the territorial integrity of
the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and of the republics
that make it up.

Only within this legal framework is an effective
settlement of the Kosovo problem possible through
peaceful political dialogue without preconditions or
unilateral approaches. It is precisely in support of such a
political process that the decisions of the international
Contact Group, adopted at London and Bonn, are
directed.

While we condemn the use of excessive force by the
Serbian police, we also strongly condemn any terrorist
acts on the part of the Kosovar Albanians, including the
so-called the Kosovo Liberation Army, and other
manifestations of extremism, which seriously destabilize
the situation and complicate the search for a mutually
acceptable and effective political settlement of the
situation. This approach is based on a key principle of
Russian foreign policy: Terrorism is categorically
unacceptable in any form or manifestation and calls for
the most decisive condemnation of the international
community. Clearly, any foreign support for terrorism
must be nipped in the bud, which requires a coordinated
international effort.

Unfortunately, the events in Kosovo have an adverse
regional impact. At the same time, the situation in
Kosovo, despite its complexity, does not constitute a
threat to regional, much less international peace and
security. It is precisely this understanding that is reflected
in the draft resolution before us today.

 

It was extremely difficult for Russia to agree with
such a measure as the introduction of a military embargo.
We embarked on this step only on the understanding -
which is now embedded in the draft resolution - that the
issue is not about punishing anyone, Belgrade in particular,
but about specific measures designed to prevent an increase
in tensions, to erect an obstacle to external terrorism, and
to foster the political process with a view to a speedy and
lasting settlement. The prospects for such a settlement
depend on the political will and willingness to take a
constructive approach of both sides - the Serbian
leadership of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and the
Kosovar Albanians.

One of the most important conditions for the viability
of the embargo is an effective monitoring regime for its
implementation, particularly on the Albanian-Macedonian
border. The illegal arms traffic must be reliably impeded
and mere declarations on that subject do not suffice. It is
precisely from this perspective that we must consider the
mandate of the United Nations Preventive Deployment
Force. It may be useful in this context for the Secretary-
General, in preparing the reports contemplated in the draft
resolution, to conduct investigations on the supply of
weapons, training, and financial and other support for the
Kosovo terrorists from the territories of neighbouring and
other countries.

Russia's position has been and continues to be that the
Security Council' s establishment of a military embargo, like
any military sanctions, is possible only with a clear exit
strategy. In the future, we will continue to advocate the
need to limit the sanctions with a clear schedule, following
the expiration of which the Council will have to decide
whether or not the sanctions should be extended.

Unfortunately, our approach has not, for the time
being, received sufficient support in the Security Council.
Nevertheless, the draft resolution has been able to define
strict criteria; if Belgrade complies with these, the Security
Council will decide to lift the embargo. We note that the
Governments of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and
Serbia have already taken important steps in that direction.
They have announced the withdrawal of police units; the
International Committee of the Red Cross and other
humanitarian organizations have been given access to
Kosovo; the President of Serbia, Mr. Milutinovie, officially
announced his readiness for a political dialogue with the
Kosovar Albanians, without preconditions. We encourage
Belgrade to intensify these positive efforts.

As the draft resolution confirms, concrete progress
to resolve the issues relating to the situation in Kosovo
will improve the international position of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia and prospects for normalization
of its full participation in international institutions. Russia
sincerely hopes that this will happen as soon as possible.

It is also important that the draft resolution clearly
links the restrictions it imposes to existing agreements in
the region on the levels of armaments, inter alia, the
Florence Agreement on Subregional Arms Control.

We see the main task of the international community
to be the full promotion of the consolidation of progress
made in the situation around Kosovo. This must not be
done by increasing sanction measures, which may have
the most adverse repercussions for the entire Balkan
region and many other States besides. The efforts of all
interested countries and international organizations must
be directed to encouraging and supporting the political
process, fostering dialogue to the greatest extent possible,
and preventing any deterioration of the situation. Russia
will continue to work precisely to that end.

