Ms. Bahous (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): Allow me at the outset to congratulate you, Mr. President, on your country's assumption of the presidency of the Security Council this month, as well as on its accession to membership of the Council for the period 2020-2021. I also extend my congratulations to the other new elected members of the Security Council and express my sincere appreciation to the five non-permanent members that left the Security Council at the end of 2019. I also thank Ms. DiCarlo and Ms. Mueller for their briefings. With regard to the recent escalation of the situation in the Middle East, we stress the need to make every effort to seek calm and reduce tensions in order to avoid any further threat to the security and stability of the region. We would also like to reaffirm Jordan's unwavering support for Iraq in maintaining its security, stability and prosperity, protecting all factions of the Iraqi people and countering terrorism. Terrorism is a danger to all of us in the region and throughout the world. It constitutes a security and ideological threat that we must confront collectively, no matter where terrorist organizations are. With regard to the Syrian crisis, the international community must step up its efforts and build on what has been achieved thus far in order to reach a political solution that preserves Syria's unity, cohesion and sovereignty, restores its security and stability and rids it of terrorism. On Libya, we reaffirm the importance of adopting a political solution and supporting the efforts of the United Nations as a means to overcome the crisis and guarantee the security, stability and territorial integrity of the country. The Palestinian question remains our central issue and deepest wound, as it is the main cause of the crises ravaging the Middle East. Unilateral measures continue, as do violence, injustice, the building of settlements and a lack of respect for international law. The frequency of violations and aggressions perpetrated by Israel, the occupying Power, in occupied Jerusalem continues to escalate in a systematic and dangerous manner. The Israeli occupation is seeking, by various means and methods, to impose new conditions that may alter the Arab and Islamic identity and legal status of Jerusalem. The safety and integrity of Islamic and Christian holy sites, especially the holy Al-Aqsa Mosque/Al-Haram Al-Sharif, are also under serious threat by the Israeli occupation. Such attacks and violations, which have been internationally condemned, arein flagrant contravention of international law and international humanitarian law. Those breaches of international legitimacy have repeatedly and systematically been manifested since East Jerusalem and the West Bank came under Israeli military occupation in 1967. The numerous resolutions issued by the various organs of the United Nations, including the Security Council, consider all such Israeli measures, violations and aggressions in occupied East Jerusalem, including the holy Al-Aqsa Mosque/ Al-Haram Al-Sharif, as null and void and without legal or political effect. The Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan, under the leadership of His Majesty King Abdullah II, the guardian of Islamic and Christian holy sites in Jerusalem, continues to confront attacks on those holy sites head-on, using all diplomatic and legal means at its disposal. We will spare no effort in that regard and will continue to diligently protect, maintain and care for those holy sites. In that context, we commend the role played by the Al-Quds Committee, chaired by His Majesty King Mohammed VI of sisterly Morocco. A more peaceful world cannot be achieved without a stable Middle East. Stability in the Middle East is not possible without peace between the Palestinians and the Israelis. The two-State solution is therefore the only path towards peace in the Middle East through the establishment of a Palestinian State with fullsovereignty over its national territory and along the 4 June 1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital. In that regard, I need to stress that peace in the Middle East will pave the way for a life full of hope, opportunities, prosperity and progress for the millions of young people in our region and throughout the world who yearn for a better life and future. During its membership of the Security Council in 2014-2015, the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan initiated the historic resolution 2250 (2015) on youth and peace and security. That resolution sought to involve young people as fundamental partners in peacebuilding and empower them to harness their capacities to build lasting peace and combat extremism, as well as to protect them from the negative impacts of conflict and prevent them from falling prey to the forces of evil, violence and extremism. To guarantee the effectiveness of the Organization and its Charter, we must work together and keep youth at the top of our priorities, with a view to building comprehensive and just peace through this Organization. In conclusion, I recall the statement that His Majesty King Abdullah II Ibn Al-Hussein delivered to the European Parliament last week, "My father, the late King Hussein, taught me that peacemaking is always the harder but the noblest way". Let us work together through the Council and the United Nations, with our Palestinian brethren, our friends and our partners, to seriously address the challenges before us in order to achieve a comprehensive, just and lasting peace.
