Mr. Ripert (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I should like to thank Mr. Pascoe for his very
comprehensive briefing, which provided a most sombre
picture of the situation in the Middle East.
I wish first to say a few words on Lebanon, where
the situation is of grave concern to us and should be

the full focus of the Council's attention. We firmly
condemn the assassinations and attempted
assassinations in that country since October 2004 and
deplore the considerable deterioration in the security
situation in recent months. In a genuine campaign of
destabilization, four new attacks have been carried out
since the end of Emil Lahoud's mandate. Following the
assassination of the army's chief of operations on
12 December, another critical institution in preserving
Lebanese stability was crippled by the murderous
attack of 25 January against an officer of the internal
security forces. On 15 December, a diplomatic vehicle
was attacked for the first time in three years. In mid-
January, the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon
was hit. We reiterate our full support for the United
Nations Force, which is doing outstanding stabilization
work in difficult conditions in southern Lebanon.

As the Security Council recalled yesterday, it is
extremely important that the perpetrators and
instigators of those crimes be brought to justice and
that impunity finally be brought to an end in Lebanon.
My delegation reiterates its support for the efforts of
the Secretary-General to establish a special court as
soon as possible, in accordance with Council resolution
1757 (2007).

My delegation has followed this weekend's
developments with concern, and mourns the Victims of
events in Beirut. Those responsible must be found, and
everything should be done to shed light on the
circumstances behind those events. Such growing
instability is even more disturbing given the ongoing
political stalemate and the vacuum at the head of the
Lebanese State. My delegation naturally notes that the
priority must be, now more than ever, an end to that
political impasse and hence, first and foremost, the
convening of presidential elections without delay in
accordance with Lebanese constitutional law and with
the broadest possible inclusiveness. In that respect,
France fully supports the initiative of the League of
Arab States and the efforts of its Secretary-General.
France is fully prepared in its ongoing commitment to
welcome a resolution to the crisis in Lebanon along the
lines the Arab League's plan.

In the context of the most disturbing security and
political situation, the international community must
show its determination to act to ensure the full
implementation of Security Council resolutions so as to
guarantee the sovereignty, stability, unity and
independence of Lebanon. My delegation reiterates, as
did the European Union two days ago, its full support
for the legitimate Government of Lebanon, its armed
forces and security forces in their efforts to maintain
stability in the country. The international community
must call on the parties within and outside Lebanon to
assume their responsibilities immediately and to
respect their commitments.

I now turn to the Israeli-Palestinian issue. For
several days, the Council sought to draft a consensus
text on the deteriorating humanitarian situation in Gaza
and the increased violence there and in southern Israel.
Unfortunately, despite all our hard work we were
unable adopt a presidential statement. That is even
more regrettable given that the Council was very close
to an agreement that would have enabled it to respond
to the gravity of the situation and, for the first time, to
condemn the growing violence, in particular the
terrorist rocket attacks on Israel, which have increased
considerably since Hamas won control of Gaza.

France will continue to strive to ensure that the
Security Council can play its role in the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict. We are encouraged by the
openness shown by all delegations and hope to
continue along those lines. Our efforts should focus
first on an objective and complete understanding of
realities in that part of the world. That is a prerequisite
to an effective response from the Council. As has been
broadly demonstrated here, the reality is that there has
been an unacceptable increase in violence in Gaza,
which we condemn in all its forms. We have therefore
called firmly for an end to the mortar and rocket fire
that threatens Israeli civilians in southern Israel every
day. No State would accept such terrorist attacks
against its civilians without having recourse to its
legitimate right to self-defence. At the same time, that
right should not be exercised to excess. We call on the
authorities to show the greatest restraint in
implementing that right and fully to respect
international law so as to avoid further harm to the
civilian population.

France is also concerned by the humanitarian
situation in Gaza. Despite the admirable work
undertaken by United Nations agencies and
humanitarian workers, the situation has deteriorated
significantly in recent days and led to current events
along the Egyptian border. Once again, that is a reality
that we cannot and must not ignore. France believes
that measures, such as electricity cuts, to effectuate a
blockade of Gaza are tantamount to the collective
punishment of the entire civilian population. France

deplores such measures and calls for the immediate
restoration of all fuel deliveries and the resumption of
essential services. In that respect, we note the recent
statements made by the Government of Israel, as
recalled by Ambassador Gillerman, that it will do its
utmost to ensure the humanitarian needs of all
civilians.

Alongside our partners in the European Union,
we again reiterate our call for the removal of all
obstacles to humanitarian activities, primarily by the
opening of crossing points to the movement of goods
and persons. In that respect, I stress the support
expressed by the entire European Union for the
proposal, as recalled by Ambassador Mansour, that the
Palestinian Authority monitor those crossings itself. In
general, we call for strict respect for international law,
in particular international humanitarian law and human
rights law.

As to the situation on the border with Egypt,
France welcomes the Egyptian Government's efforts.
We express our readiness, alongside our partners in the
European Union, to contribute to stabilizing the
situation within the framework of an agreement
between the Palestinian Authority, Egypt and Israel.
Speaking of Gaza, we stress the need for increased
confidence on the ground. If the Annapolis dynamic is
to be maintained, the Israeli and Palestinian peoples
must see positive developments in their daily lives.
Unfortunately, we have only seen the situation worsen
in the meantime.

Beyond Gaza, the parties must fulfil their
commitment to implementing phase I of the road map
forthwith. We all recognize what is at stake on the
ground. Israel must do more with regard to releasing
prisoners and gradually lifting restrictions in the West
Bank. Israel must stop constructing new settlements
and dismantle outposts. In that regard, as noted by the
ministers of the European Union on 28 January, we are
disturbed by recent settlement activities, in particular
recent bids for new construction in Har Homa. On their
side, the Palestinians must increase their efforts for
security and the fight against terrorism.

With the European Union, especially in the
framework of the Quartet, we will provide all support
required to the American authorities in their task of
supervising the implementation by the parties of their
obligations and commitments, as recalled at Annapolis.
We must now remember that the parties themselves
outlined that agreement at Annapolis. It envisages the
conclusion of an agreement on the creation of a
democratic, viable Palestinian State living in peace and
security next to Israel by the end of 2008. We are
committed to that objective.

First we must support both parties in their
negotiations on substantive issues, which have begun
recently. The Palestinians and the Israelis must show
boldness and creativity to find the way to a settlement.

We also believe it is essential to continue to
provide political and financial support for the
Government of President Mahmoud Abbas and Prime
Minister Salam Fayad and their vision for a future
Palestinian State. Specifically, that means that the
strong signal sent during the international donors'
conference on the Palestinian State, held in Paris on
17 December, should become a reality. Eighty-seven
countries and international organizations committed
themselves to providing some $7.7 billion to support
reconstruction and economic recovery. We will
continue our efforts along those lines.

Mr. Pascoe recently recalled that our Minister
met with the co-chairmen of the Paris conference to
work on the implementation of that conference. That
meeting made it possible to recognize that in order to
improve the Palestinian economy, the donors must
fulfil their pledges as soon as possible, especially with
regard to budget matters, in 2008. The Palestinian
Authority must also rapidly implement the reform plan
it has announced. Finally, Israel must ensure improved
movement of goods and people, which, as the IMF and
the World Bank have emphasized, is a requirement for
economic recovery.

We recognize the complexities and difficulties in
the Middle East. France will do everything possible to
help regional actors take every possible opportunity to
progress along the path to peace. We are convinced that
we have the pressing duty to refuse the suicide option
of giving up.

