Mr. Nazirov (Uzbekistan): At the outset, I would
like to thank you, Mr. President, and the Permanent
Mission of the Dominican Republic for convening this
open debate to address the impacts of climate-related
disasters on international peace and security, which,
from Uzbekistan's perspective, is a very important and
timely event given the various serious challenges in the
contemporary world in protecting the environment and
confronting climate change.

Today, I would like to draw the Council's
attention to one of the most serious environmental
disasters - the desiccation of the Aral Sea, which has
caused a cascade of environmental, socioeconomic,
health and humanitarian challenges for the Governments
and communities in the region. The fivefold reduction
in water flow from the Amu Darya and Syr Darya rivers
has decreased the volume of the Aral Sea by a factor
of more than 14 over the past 50 years. Salinity levels
have increased by a factor of 25, and now significantly
exceed those of the world's oceans. Today, in place of
once-flourishing fishing waters, a sandy salt desert of
more than 5.5 million hectares is a breeding ground for
dust and salt storms, carrying more than 75 million tons
of dust and poisonous minerals into the atmosphere
every year across thousands of kilometres.

The Aral catastrophe has exacerbated climatic
conditions in the region, increasing dryness and heat
in summer and extending periods of cold in the winter.
According to the forecasts of experts, by 2035 to 2050,
the air temperature in the region could increase by
another 1.5°C to 3°C relative to current indicators.
Moreover, the threatening impact of the Aral
catastrophe is observed all over the world. According
to international experts, poisonous salts from the Aral
region are found on the coasts of Antarctica, in the
glaciers of Greenland, in the forests of Norway and
many other parts of the globe.

The President of the Republic of Uzbekistan,
Mr. Shavkat Mirziyoyev, in his address during the
seventy-second session of the General Assembly in
New York in 2017 (see A/72/PV.5), drew the special
attention of the world leaders to the Aral Sea crisis
and emphasized the need for concerted efforts by the
international community. During the summit of the
Heads of the Founder States of the International Fund
for Saving the Aral Sea, the President of Uzbekistan
emphasized the importance of unifying efforts to
overcome the consequences of the Aral catastrophe. In
particular, Uzbekistan's leader put forward a number
of initiatives, including the designation of the Aral
Sea region as a region of ecological innovation and
technology. This initiative aimed at unifying Central
Asian countries' efforts to create the conditions to
attract foreign investments to develop and introduce
ecological, clean technologies, ensure the broad
application of the green economy, prevent further
desertification, develop ecotourism and implement
other measures.

At the same time, one should admit that an
insufficient level of funding and coordination of
activities of international financial organizations and
donor countries in the Aral Sea region limit the efforts
of the Central Asian States to effectively address this
ecological problem. Such a situation has prompted
Uzbekistan and the United Nations to establish a unified
platform for mitigating the consequences of the Aral
Sea crisis and ensuring the sustainable socioeconomic
development of the Aral Sea region.
On 27 November 2018, at the high-level meeting
held at United Nations Headquarters in New York,
the Multi-Partner Human Security Trust Fund for
the Aral Sea Region was established. It was presided
over by Secretary-General Antonio Guterres, who
personally Visited the Aral Sea in June 2017 and
described it as one of the world's biggest man-made
environmental disasters. The Trust Fund is designed to
be transformative, evidence- and human rights- based,
and inclusive in its goal of catalysing and strengthening
a multi-sectoral and people-centred response to address
its consequences. Taking into account the planetary
nature ofthe Aral catastrophe, it is necessary to expand
joint actions by the world community in this direction
by implementing deeply thought-out, targeted and well-
funded projects.

In conclusion, I would like to underline that the
establishment of the aforementioned Trust Fund should
encourage the international financial institutions and
donor-countries to look anew at the Aral Sea problem
and to make concerted efforts to address this global
issue. For its part, the Government of Uzbekistan
stands ready to closely collaborate with them and other
stakeholders in mitigating the consequences of this
acute ecological problem of our time.

