Ms. Schoulgin Nyoni (Sweden): Let me start by
joining others in expressing my sincere condolences to
the families of the peacekeepers who lost their lives in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo a few days ago. I
would also like to thank the Secretary-General and the
Commissioner for Peace and Security of the African
Union (AU) for their insightful briefings this morning.

I align myself with the statement to be delivered on
behalf of the European Union (EU) later today.

Today's challenges to security and development
are increasingly interconnected. Climate change,
inequality, terrorism and violent extremism are
pertinent examples. African countries face security
threats and risks that have clear implications beyond
the African continent. Supporting and further
strengthening African capabilities to deal with those
challenges is therefore essential. Peace is best pursued
in partnership.

Sweden has been a long-standing supporter of an
enhanced strategic partnership between the United
Nations and regional and subregional organizations
in Africa. We welcome the renewed momentum and
concrete steps taken to advance thatpartnership, not least
thanks to the dedicated leadership of the organizations
involved. Last week we saw first-hand evidence of
that closer cooperation through the briefing on the
joint visit to South Sudan by Under-Secretary-General
Lacroix and Commissioner Chergui (see S/PV.8403),
accompanied by Executive Director Mlambo-Ngcuka
of UN-Women. That represents a concrete example of
how cooperation at the subregional, regional and global
levels can generate results that will contribute to peace.
We believe that our two Councils should build on our
successful July meeting (see S/PV.8306) and follow suit
by conducting similar joint visits to enhance shared
analysis of the situations on our agendas.

We commend the work carried out by the AU to
enhance its capacity for preventing, mediating and
settling conflicts on the African continent, including
by strengthening the African Peace and Security
Architecture. The launch of the AU Peace Fund at the AU
Summit last week with the mobilization of $60 million
is a particularly important step for enhancing self-
reliance and the financing of the AU's own activities,
and represents concrete progress on the institutional
reform agenda. Perspectives from civil society remain
crucial to those efforts. However, additional financial
and political support is needed to realize the full
potential of the AU-United Nations partnership. We
welcome the discussions on the proposals pertaining
to financing that are laid out in the Secretary-Generals
report (S/2018/678), including the use of assessed
United Nations contributions. We are encouraged by the
collaborative work on strengthening the oversight and
accountability of AU-led peace operations, including
the ongoing work to strengthen and ensure compliance
with human rights and international humanitarian law,
as well as the conduct and discipline frameworks of the
United Nations and the AU.

Our joint efforts to enhance African capabilities
must go beyond strengthening military responses.
Holistic approaches across the conflict cycles are
needed for sustaining peace. That includes addressing
the root causes of conflict in order to achieve structural
prevention at the national level, and building effective,
transparent and inclusive institutions. It requires
scaling up efforts to address illicit financial flows and
fight transnational organized crime, which exploit and
exacerbate State fragility. Mitigating the effects of
climate change is also crucial.

We commend the commitment of the African
Union to implementing Agenda 2063 as a means to
ensure peace, stability and prosperity in Africa, efforts
that clearly embody African leadership and ownership.
The women and peace and security agenda remains a
particularly vital area, and the AU has already taken
important steps to advance its implementation. But it
will still be important to ensure continued political will
and leadership in order to implement the regional action
plan. The support to the Network of African Women in
Conflict Prevention and Mediation, FemWise-Africa,
to promote women's role, inclusion and leadership in
peace processes is encouraging, as is the work carried
out by the African Women Leaders Network to build
on and harness women's participation throughout the
region. Triangular partnerships beyond the AU and the
United Nations should also be further explored. The
European Union has been a long-standing supporter of
the AU's peace operations, not least in Somalia and the
Sahel, where we have close collaboration with the AU,
the EU and the United Nations. Further opportunities
for trilateral collaborations should be pursued.

We spend a large amount of time in this Chamber
discussing devastating crises on the African continent.
Today is an opportunity to focus solely on cooperation
and solutions, and on how our respective efforts can
yield better results ifwe join forces. Moving forward on
this agenda will require our substantial and sustained
political investment, and we look forward to doing
our part.

