Mr. Gahrah (Saudia Arabia) (spoke in Arabic):
At the start I would like to associate myself with those
who have congratulated you, Madam President, on
your presidency of the Security Council this month. We
would also like to thank you for your prompt response
to the request to hold this meeting.

The delegation of Saudia Arabia would like to
associate itself with Algeria and the statement it
delivered on behalf of the Arab Group, and with
Malaysia's, statement on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement.

Once again, the Government of Israel reasserts its
aggressive nature and continues its terrorist practices.
Its aggression against the Palestinian people in the
Gaza Strip is a form of terrorism that must be rejected.
It is totally unjustified and is clear in its aims and
objectives.

The Israeli claim that the Palestinians are solely
responsible for the escalation of tension in the region
because of Palestinian acts of resistance against the
Israeli occupation and their taking of an Israeli soldier
is unacceptable. The Palestinian resistance has suffered
the loss of many victims, including members of
families who were merely promenading on the beach of
Gaza without having committed any act of aggression
against Israel. Five people in one family were killed by
Israeli artillery from land and from the sea. A small
child cried out to the conscience of the international
community, but that cry received no response. Not
even an international investigation commission was
dispatched, nor was there an explicit condemnation of
that shameful act.

Israel continues to besiege the Palestinian
Authority and the Palestinian people. It continues to
isolate them, to prevent them from gaining their
livelihoods. It prevents the payment of Palestinian
wages. Through extermination groups called "special
units", it continues its assassination of activists and
Palestinian leaders. The Palestinians are only
exercising their legitimate right to resist.

The Israeli aggression against the Palestinian
people in Gaza is a flagrant violation of international
law and of agreements that have been reached. The
kidnapping of Palestinian personalities - ministers
and representatives - is a terrible crime and a
violation of international norms, international
humanitarian law and the Fourth Geneva Convention.
Israeli terrorism in Gaza is not only the result of the
capture of an Israeli soldier; it is part of the Israeli plan
to destroy the Palestinian Government, which was
legitimately, democratically and transparently elected,
as witnessed by all.

The purpose of the Israeli aggression against the
Palestinians is to prevent them from reaching
agreement among themselves, so that Israel can then
claim that it has no partner for peace. The Israeli
aggression lays bare the reality of the situation. Israel
claims that its withdrawals are genuine; in fact, they
are a deceptive attempt to keep the people who remain
in the territories under siege. Israel is continuing to
destroy the Palestinian infrastructure and the daily
lives of the Palestinian people. It is starving the
Palestinian people and depriving them of clean
drinking water and the most basic living requirements
so as to bring them to their knees and force them to
34
accept the fait accompli created by a shameful and
unjust occupation.

The Government of Israel would not have
continued its acts of aggression if it were not for the
negative stance of the international community and the
failure of the Security Council to shoulder its
responsibilities and ensure that its resolutions were
implemented. The Israeli Government would not have
disregarded resolutions of international legitimacy
unless is knew that it could get away with its claim that
it was acting in self-defence and that its acts of
terrorism were legitimate and acceptable. The
continuation of the tension and the violence in the
occupied territories would not have continued if the
road map had been implemented, the Arab initiative
accepted and international resolutions implemented on
the ground.

Saudi Arabia appeals to the international
community, including the Security Council and the
Quartet, to ensure that there is an immediate end to the
Israeli aggression against Gaza and to compel Israel to
withdraw its forces. They should ensure that all
prisoners on both sides are released and that the
provisions of international resolutions are implemented
so as to ensure the establishment of a Palestinian State
with Arab Jerusalem as its capital, in accordance with
the terms of reference of the Madrid Conference and
the land-for-peace initiative, and in implementation of
resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973), the road map
and the Arab peace initiative.

