Ms. Bogyay (Hungary): We would all like to see a
more efficient, transparent and relevant Security Council
that provides solutions - and not culs de sac - for all
of us. In order to join forces in trying to find ways and
means to form a more effective Council, let me reiterate
Hungary's views while fully supporting the statements
delivered previously on behalf of the Accountability,
Coherence and Transparency (ACT) group.

I thank Japan for providing us with the opportunity
to reflect on this very important topic.

Hungary naturally welcomes resolution 69/321,
adopted by consensus by the General Assembly, on
11 September 2015, on the revitalization of the work
of the General Assembly. The resolution has set up
a structured process for the selection of the next
Secretary-General. So far, the publication of candidates
and the informal dialogues have been conducted
successfully and have yielded interesting results.
I would like to congratulate the Presidents of the
General Assembly and of the Security Council for their
successful cooperation. We hope that this transparent
and inclusive process will be fully implemented and
completed on time. However, we would like to see a
more transparent process during the straw polls as well.

Hungary supports measures that further
strengthen the relationship between the Security
Council and the General Assembly. We would like
the relationship between the two main bodies of the
United Nations to continue to improve in terms of
greater transparency and consistency. We therefore
suggest making more effective use of already existing
tools and the further development of current practices
and measures. We would like to suggest that the
Security Council submit an analytical, substantive and
comprehensive evaluation of its work in the annual
report to the General Assembly. We would like to see
the Council continue expanding consultations and
cooperation to include non-Council Member States,
in particular troop- and police-contributing countries
and regional organizations.

The Council, we think, should increase the number
of its public meeetings, interactive briefings, informal
interactive dialogues and Arria Formula meetings. The
Council should hold more wrap-up sessions to improve
the flow of substantive information and understanding
of the Council's positions within the wider membership.
We believe that the Council should use existing tools
to prevent mass atrocities. We advocate voluntary
refraining from the use of the veto in cases of mass
atrocities and encourage all Member States that have
not yet done so to support the so-called code of conduct
elaborated by the ACT group and signed by 112 Member
States so far.

The role ofthe International Criminal Court is vital
to ending impunity and bringing perpetrators to justice
when national criminal accountability mechanisms
are not available. The Security Council therefore has
a special role to play under the Rome Statute as it can
refer situations of States not party to the Statute to the
Court in order to hold perpetrators to account. The
Security Council should utilize its referral power in a
consistent manner.

Hungary would also like to see the Council engage
in clear-cut communications and able to translate its
work clearly to the outside world.

