Sir John Weston (United Kingdom): This draft
resolution, in whose preparation, along with Portugal and
Sweden, the United Kingdom has played a major part,
would implement the recommendations of the Secretary-
General to expand the oil-for-food programme in Iraq. But
it is more than just a technical draft resolution. It is a clear
message that we are not prepared to see the Iraqi people
suffer as a consequence of the actions of their leaders, a
message that we will do everything we can to see that their
urgent humanitarian needs are met.

This draft resolution will mean a massive increase in
the humanitarian programme in Iraq. It will pay for the
food and medicines the Iraqi people so badly need. It will
help restore clean water and proper sanitation to hundreds
of thousands of Iraqis. It will restore schools and help
farmers increase their output. And, as a new measure, it
will provide funds for Iraqi pilgrims to perform the Hajj.

No one wishes to see sanctions maintained for one
moment longer than necessary. We have always been
determined that their impact on the Iraqi people be
minimized and their impact on the Iraqi regime maximized.
Despite Iraqi propaganda, we all know that food and
medicine are not covered by United Nations sanctions, and
thus it is not sanctions that have prevented food and
medicine from getting to the Iraqi people. We have done
our utmost to ensure that their needs are met. In 1991 we
presented a resolution allowing Iraq to sell oil in return for
humanitarian supplies. The Iraqi regime refused to
implement it. We tried again later that year with another
resolution. Again, the United Nations adopted it and
Saddam Hussain rejected it.
In 1995 we all tried again, adopting the oil-for-food
resolution 986 (1995). The Iraqi regime opposed the
resolution for over a year. For months afterwards they
prevented its implementation. When they did sell oil, they
used the money to lower, by an equivalent amount, their
own spending on the welfare of the Iraqi people.
Meanwhile, Saddam Hussain has spent at least $1 billion on
his presidential palaces.

We have said it many times before, but it needs to
be repeated: all that the Government of Iraq has to do to
bring about the lifting of sanctions is to comply with the
resolutions of this Council. It is a simple enough demand,
but one that the Government of Iraq persists in ignoring.
Instead, the Iraqi regime has cynically manipulated the
oil-for-food programme and slowed the delivery of
supplies to the people who most need them. They have
prolonged the suffering of the Iraqi people for their own
political ends.

This draft resolution therefore rightly responds to the
strong wish of every member of the Security Council to
do everything possible to bring much-needed
humanitarian relief to the Iraqi people, to increase the
food ration and to restore medical facilities and
agriculture. The Government of Iraq must accept this
draft resolution so that the people of Iraq can get the help
they so desperately need. If it does not, we know exactly
who is to blame.

