The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Afghanistan, Canada, Denmark,
India, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Japan, Malaysia,
Nepal, Pakistan, the Republic of Korea, Tajikistan,
Turkey and Ukraine, in which they request to be
invited to participate in the discussion of the item on
the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
discussion, Without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Farhadi
(Afghanistan) took a seat at the Council table;
Mr. Heinbecker (Canada), Ms. Laj (Denmark),
Mr. Nambiar (India), Mr. Nejad Hosseinian
(Islamic Republic of Iran), Mrs, Ogata (Japan),
Mr. Hasmy (Malaysia), Mr. Sharma (Nepal),
Mr. Khalid (Pakistan), Mr. Sun (Republic of Korea), Mr. Alimov (Tajikistan), Mr. Pamir
(Turkey) and Mr. Kuchinsky (Ukraine) took the
seats reservedfor them at the side of the Council
Chamber

The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, and in the absence of objection, I shall
take it that the Security Council agrees to extend an
invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of
procedure to Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi, Special
Representative of the Secretary General for
Afghanistan.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite Mr. Brahimi to take seat at the Council
table.
I should like to inform the Council that I have
received a letter dated 17 July 2002 from the Charge
d'affaires ad interim of the Permanent Mission of the
Sudan to the United Nations, which reads as follows:

"I have the honour in my capacity as
Chairman of the Islamic Group of the United
Nations to request that the Security Council
extend an invitation to participate in the
discussion, without the right to vote, under rule
39 of the provisional rules of procedure of the
Council, to his Excellency Mr. Mokhtar Lamani,
Permanent Observer of the Organization of the
Islamic Conference to the United Nations, during
the Council's discussion on the situation of
Afghanistan on Friday, 19 July 2002."

That letter has been issued as a document to the
Security Council under the symbol S/2002/780. If I
hear no objection I shall take it that the Security
Council agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of
its provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Lamani.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite Mr. Lamani to take the seat reserved for
him at the side of the Council Chamber.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations. Members of the Council have
before them the report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in Afghanistan and its implications for
international peace and security (S/2002/737).

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for
Afghanistan. There have been a number of important
developments since the last open debate on
Afghanistan in May, not least the successful meeting of
the Emergency Loya Jirga last month. This, therefore,
is a timely opportunity to take stock of progress
towards implementation of Bonn process and to
consider our priorities for the way ahead. It is a great
honour to have the Secretary-General's Special
Representative with us this morning, and I should like
to pay a tribute to him on behalf of the Security
Council for the excellent work he is doing for the
United Nations in Kabul and throughout Afghanistan. I
now invite him to offer us his analysis of recent
developments, his assessment of the many challenges
which lie ahead for both the international community
and the Transitional Authority, and his thoughts on
how best these challenges should be faced.

