Mr. Piot (spoke in French): I thank all the
delegations for their support of our joint activities and
in particular for their commitment to this question.

I remember the first debates on HIV/AIDS in the
Security Council. Everyone who was there at the time
will remember that the atmosphere was not as positive
and supportive as it is today. At that time there also
were very few results to report.

Together we have clearly made significant
progress in implementing Security Council resolution
1308 (2000), but much remains to be done. As
emphasized by several Council members, there are now
more peacekeeping operations at the regional level.
There, we do not yet have good coordination and
implementation of HIV/AIDS prevention measures, but
we have begun cooperation with a number of regional
peacekeeping operations and I believe we can apply the
same methods and principles that have been proven in
the fight against this epidemic. We now are in the
process of policy discussions in order for such
operations to become a reality.

A number of representatives rightly raised the
problem of evaluating the scope of the problem. As to
the possible contribution of peacekeeping operations to
the spread of HIV among populations in conflict areas,
I do not think there is any very direct evidence of that
yet. But this is going to be one of the central themes we
will be working on in future. As Mr. Guehenno already
emphasized, we will step up our efforts to evaluate the
impact of our programmes and to determine the scope
of the problem. For example, we included evaluation of
the programmes' impact on troops as part of the
follow-up indicators to the Declaration of Commitment
on HIV/AIDS, which emerged from the General
Assembly's special session on that topic. Another point
that was underscored is the need for more thorough
analysis and better documentation on the relationship
between AIDS, security and stability. We are trying to
lay the groundwork for that and I think in 2004 we will
be able to provide Council members with more
evidence-based reports.

In regard to a permanent position within the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations on AIDS
matters, I think it is absolutely essential. AIDS is not
going to disappear in the next few years. As AIDS in
peacekeeping has now become a central issue in our
work, I think we have to give priority to finding the
means to deal with it. I do not foresee any problems
there.

In conclusion, there are still many challenges
ahead. Preventing HIV/AIDS among peacekeeping
troops can best be achieved by first intensifying
prevention programmes among young people and then
by having good linkage between national programmes
and special armed forces programmes, a point that has
been made by virtually everybody here. But, as the
Council President says, we have to run faster than the
epidemic.

I thank you all very much and we will provide a
detailed joint report next year.

