Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): We congratulate you,
Mr. President, on the smooth start to your leadership of
the Council for this month, outfitting all the members
of the Council with shirts and getting them ready for the
heat of summer, in a very original move. We wish you
all the best in your able stewardship of the Council for
this month. We also thank the Indonesian presidency
for highlighting the importance of enhancing training
and capacity-building in order to improve the security
and performance of United Nations peacekeepers
and civilians serving in conditions featuring extreme
violence and terrorism. The death toll is rising, and we
pay tribute to all who have fallen in the cause of peace.
We must ensure that their sacrifice was not in vain. It
is our moral responsibility to provide adequate levels of
training, preparedness and equipment at various levels
and modes, and my delegation would like to make the
following proposals.

First, we must help troop-contributing countries
(TCCs) to build their own capacities adequate to
peace operations by developing national trainer
cadres, refurbishing training facilities, refining
training materials and providing training equipment.
Secondly, we should invest in critical enablers such as
engineering, aviation, medical, logistical, signal and
counter-improvised explosive device (IED) capabilities.
Predeployment training for specific missions, technical
and advisory assistance, equipment maintenance and
sustainability, strategic-level planning and in-mission
competence is equally important.

Thirdly, we must master communication skills,
languages and content on international law and
humanitarian law. In that regard, the training of civilian
components engaged in dangerous tasks on field
missions, as well as of larger numbers of women, is
critical. Fourthly, we should prepare peacekeepers for
measures related to early warning, information-sharing
and, as appropriate, intelligence-sharing, as well as
self-defence. Fatalities can be reduced only if we
understand and combat the drivers of conflict. In that
regard, primary prevention can be achieved by investing
in development by using combined regional approaches
as well as national ones, and through cooperation
among Member States. We should therefore focus on
the best ways to harness the potential of international
instruments to that end, including the Declaration of
Shared Commitments on United Nations Peacekeeping
Operations, which Kazakhstan strongly supports.

Fifthly, we must promote partnerships and
co-deployments, which can enhance the credibility and
effectiveness of United Nations missions through the
engagement of countries, regional organizations and
the world community. Kazakhstan would like to thank
India for its partnership, which includes predeployment
training conducted in both India and Kazakhstan. We
are currently operating in the United Nations Interim
Force in Lebanon together with an Indian battalion.
Such co-deployment is valuable in ensuring capacity-
building for new TCCs.

Kazakhstan pays great attention to peacekeeping
training and the development of its national
capacity. This year I am pleased to announce that the
peacekeeping courses on the protection of civilians
and for United Nations staff officers at our Partnership
for Peace Training Centre, KAZCENT, have been
certified and are available to partner nations. Today's
peacekeeping missions very often lack technology
adequate to overcoming the brutal threats that exist
on the ground. Such avoidable failures require
adequate equipment, technology and innovation. In
that regard, we would like to inform the Council that
the fifth Partnership for Technology in Peacekeeping
Symposium will be held between 28 and 31 May in
Nur-Sultan. The focus of the Symposium will be
technological improvements to enhance peacekeepers'
safety, strengthen communications, improve situational
awareness, counter IEDs, introduce tele-health and
reduce environmental impacts. We would like to take
this opportunity to once again remind Member States,
international organizations, think tanks and academia
that they can participate in the Symposium in our
capital with the aim of establishing and improving
partnerships that strengthen the security of our missions
and enhance capacity-building.
