Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): I thank
you, Mr. President, for convening today's meeting. We
would also like to thank the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo (MONUSCO), Ms. Leila Zerrougui,
and the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
the Great Lakes Region, Mr. Said Djinnit, for their
valuable briefings.

With regard to the visit by the members of the
Security Council to the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, which took place from 5 to 7 October, we
would like to thank the Congolese Government for
having facilitated the organization of the delegation's
visit from our arrival in the capital, Kinshasa, until
our departure. We also thank Ms. Zerrougui and all
MONUSCO staff, as well as the Security Council
secretariat. Of course, we also thank the delegations
of Bolivia, France and Equatorial Guinea for their
outstanding arrangements and efforts to make the visit
a success, with a positive effect on our discussion of
the situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
I would like to address three aspects in my statement.

First, on the political front, our discussion today
coincides with the beginning of the countdown to the
most important event for the Congolese people, namely,
the presidential and legislative elections at the national
and provincial levels to be held in approximately two
months' time. During our visit, we took note of the
determination and commitment of the Government
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo to the
electoral timetable, as well as to holding the elections
on 23 December, which is the date specified in the
electoral calendar. We hope that the election process
will put an end to the political tensions the country has
been experiencing, and that the elections will be free,
transparent, inclusive of all segments of the Congolese
people and credible, as well as in line with the Congolese
Constitution and legislation. Confidence-building
measures must be ensured with the participation of all
Congolese political parties in the elections, as stipulated
in the political agreement of 31 December 2016.

We also welcome the efforts being made by the
Congolese Government and the Independent National
Electoral Commission to ensure the achievement of
key milestones in the electoral process, including the
publication of the final list of presidential and legislative
candidates at the national and provincial levels.

We underscore the importance of reaching
consensus on the outstanding contentious issues,
such as on the use of electronic voting machines,
the electoral roll and the financing of the electoral
process - which the Government has committed to
covering it in its entirety - as well as of MONUSCO's
provision of technical and logistical support in the run-
up to the elections.

Secondly, on the humanitarian situation, the
ongoing humanitarian crisis in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo is very worrisome. As set out
in the Secretary-General's latest report, published
on 1 October (S/2018/882), the statistics pertaining
to refugees, displaced persons and people in need
of urgent humanitarian assistance are a source of
concern. That is all the more so following the Ministry
of Health's declaration on 1 August that an Ebola
outbreak had begun, which to date has killed more
than 120 people. The Congolese Government and the
international community must cooperate in order to
meet humanitarian needs and alleviate the suffering of
the people. In that regard, we commend MONUSCO
and the World Health Organization for their efforts and
prompt response to counter the disease.

Thirdly, on the security situation, the ongoing
violence and armed conflict in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, in particular in the eastern part of the
country, continue to escalate militarily, to varying levels

of intensity, in various areas, which is also a source of
concern. Military attacks directly jeopardize unarmed
civilian lives and exhaust the natural and human
resources of the country. In that respect, we commend
the enormous efforts by MONUSCO and its personnel
to combat military attacks and protect civilians. We call
on all the parties responsible for the military clashes to
halt them in order to save unarmed civilian lives and
establish the desired security and stability.

In conclusion, we underline our full support for
the efforts made by Special Envoy Djinnit and for the
initiatives of the African Union, the Southern African
Development Community and the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region in following
up on the implementation of the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the Region. The aim is to address the
security, political and humanitarian challenges at the
national and regional levels and to end the conflicts and
instability that have existed for so long. We hope that
the African Union will be able to achieve its goal of
putting an end to all conflicts by 2020, in accordance
with the Framework Agreement.

