Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): Allow me, first of all, to express the
gratitude of the delegation of the Republic of Equatorial
Guinea to Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations Jean-Pierre Lacroix and his team for their
comprehensive and detailed briefing this morning
on the situation and recent developments in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the work of the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO). I
would also like to thank the Permanent Representative
of Cote d'Ivoire, Ambassador Bernard Tanoh-
Boutchoue, for his outstanding presentation as Chair of
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1533 (2004), concerning the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. His contributions help us to
better understand the situation in the country.

We in Equatorial Guinea have always closely
followed events taking place in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, and all the more so now as a
member of the Security Council, because it is a brother
country whose problems we cannot stand by and watch
indifferently and because we experience its problems
almost as if they were ours. I therefore want to express
Equatorial Guinea's full commitment to, and support
for, bringing about stability and peace in that country.

The delegation of Equatorial Guinea believes that
the different political and social actors in the country
should understand that the only possible way to overcome
the current complex situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo is through a transparent, frank
and inclusive dialogue carried out in good faith. The
need for the different actors to understand one another
flows from the enormous responsibility they have to
lead the country to credible and transparent elections
and to avoid unnecessary delays, which generally lead
to more tension and violence. All of the country's
groups must join the process of political dialogue with
a positive attitude and make their due contributions,
which in practice means honouring the agreements
signed by the Congolese parties on 18 October and
31 December 2016 on organizing peaceful, credible and
transparent elections, in order to pave the way towards
a peaceful solution to the political crisis in the country.
In that regard, the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo must play a leading and catalytic
role in the legislative and logistical aspects, especially
when it comes to supporting the Independent National
Electoral Commission so that it can conclude all its
preparatory work before the elections, despite the
challenges it faces.

The President of the Republic of Equatorial
Guinea, Mr. Obiang Nguema Mbasogo, in his speech
on 29 January 2016 on the occasion of the twenty-
sixth Summit of the Peace and Security Council of the
African Union in Addis Ababa, said:

"At present, nobody can deny that our security
is facing a global terrorist threat and the risks it
represents for our societies, as well as the conflicts
suffered by certain brother countries. This situation
requires our collective mobilization, as well as
mutual collaboration and close consultation."

International cooperation is the only way to be able
to effectively confront a threat that can no longer be
responded to from an exclusively national perspective.

In that regard, Equatorial Guinea is convinced
that the contribution of various international bodies,
including the United Nations, in close cooperation with
the European Union, the African Union, the countries
of the region, the Southern African Development
Community, the International Conference on the Great
Lakes Region and the Economic Community of Central
African States, is essential in the search for a lasting
solution to the political situation in the country. To the
same end, Equatorial Guinea would like to echo the
call made by the Peace and Security Council of the
African Union for the establishment of a coordination
mechanism that would include all actors with a view
to ensuring effective and coherent support to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

Despite the significant progress made in the country
in recent years with the stabilization of many regions,
which we must certainly welcome, the humanitarian
and security situation in the east of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo remains worrying, with
persistent abuses and violations ofthe political and civil
rights of the civilian population, prevailing impunity,
and illegal exploitation of resources by militias and
other various armed groups still active in the area. In
that regard, Equatorial Guinea calls for ensuring the
implementation of the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Region, signed on 24 February 2013 in Addis
Ababa, and that its signatories and guarantors take the
necessary steps and redouble their efforts to guarantee
its full and effective implementation, for which the
neutralization of armed groups operating in the east
of the country is paramount. The constant incidents of
violence and human rights violations must cease, and
those responsible for them must be brought to justice.

Finally, I would like to express the deepest
condolences of the Republic of Equatorial Guinea
to the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
the Secretary-General and Tanzania on the deaths
of 15 of that country's peacekeepers. We commend
MONUSCO and support its commendable and tireless
efforts to promote peace, security and stability in this
brotherly country despite the challenges it faces and the
sacrifices and losses it has suffered, and not always in a
favourable environment. From this Chamber, we would
like to encourage the Mission to continue to support the
authorities and institutions of the Democratic Republic
ofthe Congo in its stabilization and consolidation efforts
in the country, while at the same time we recommend
strengthening the Mission so that it can face the great
challenges that will arise throughout 2018, until the
holding of the presidential, legislative and provincial
elections on 23 December.

