Mr. Biegman (Netherlands): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the European Union. The following
associated countries - Bulgaria, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Romania, Slovakia
and Slovenia - have aligned themselves with this
statement, as has Norway.

The Security Council will today be adopting a draft
resolution creating a new United Nations Observer
Mission in Angola (MONUA), which takes over from the
United Nations Angola Verification Mission (UNAVEM. III) after several years of a complex peace process in
Angola. In spite of problems and delays, MONUA is the
result of positive developments that have taken place
during the past months. The formation of a Government
of National Unity and Reconciliation, the participation of
UNITA deputies in the National Assembly and the
beginning of the normalization of Government
administration are important steps on the road to full
implementation of the Lusaka Protocol and constitute a
good basis for the process of national reconciliation.

While some problems remain, the European Union
remains optimistic about a positive outcome. It is in that
spirit that we welcome the establishment of MONUA,
which could make an important contribution to the return
of stability and the necessary reconstruction in Angola.

The peace process remains fragile, however. Recent
developments in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
have increased tensions in Angola. We are concerned at
the Secretary-General's reports of "serious clashes
resulting in casualties" (5/1997/438, para. 9) in north-east
Angola. Both sides must cooperate with the United
Nations and grant full access to all areas under their
control. In particular, we call on UNITA to put an end to
attacks against United Nations staff.

The pace of demobilization of UNITA soldiers,
which is crucial for the success of the peace process, is
still slower than originally envisaged. While the
Government should create proper conditions for this
process, we urge UNITA to cooperate fully with the
United Nations in the demobilization of the UNITA
fighters and the early completion of the new, united
Angolan army.

Other military tasks, such as the elimination of all
obstacles to the free circulation of people and goods and
the disarmament of the civilian population, also need to
be completed urgently. UNITA must provide the Joint
Commission with complete information regarding its

 

armed personnel, including the nature and size of its
leader's security contingent. Without that, UNITA will be
unable to transform into a legitimate political party.
The European Union believes that an early meeting
within the national territory between the President of
Angola and the Leader of the Largest Opposition Party
would contribute significantly to easing political tension and
would help in the normalization of State administration in
territories under UNITA control. It would, hopefully, also
resolve the precarious military situation in the border area
between Angola and the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. The transformation of the UNITA radio station into
a non-partisan broadcasting facility and the transformation
of UNITA into a political party are other remaining
political aspects which have to be completed.

Notwithstanding the gradual progress made in the
peace process, the human rights situation in Angola is still
a reason for concern. The promotion of good governance,
including abidance by the rule of law and the protection of
human rights, should be an integral part of activities
focused on reconstruction and the normalization of State
administration. MONUA will have an important role to play
in the field of human rights.

In view of the unrest in northern Angola and the fact
that large parts of the country are not yet under
Government control, the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) at present considers
the conditions for the return of refugees, as well as of
demobilized soldiers, unfavourable. This, too, is a reason
for concern. It is important that more funds be made
available, both for demobilization and for UNHCR's
repatriation programmes.

I should like to conclude by paying tribute to the
Secretary-General, his Special Representative and the men
and women of UNAVEM. III for their strenuous and
unabated efforts to keep Angola on the road to a lasting
peace. The personnel of UNAVEM. III are to be
congratulated for a job well done, which we all hope will
be completed by MONUA.

