Mr. Melki (France) (spoke in French): I would like at
the outset tojoin all Council members in congratulating
the Egyptian presidency on its extraordinary work
during the recent month. Mr. President, you have
organized the Council's work with rigour, transparency
and effectiveness, while at the same time allowing the
necessary flexibility to adapt our programme of work,
on the one hand, to the many breaking news events
at the international level, as illustrated by the recent
events in the Democratic People's Republic of Korea
and Myanmar, and on the other hand, to address the
concerns of individual Council members, for example
with respect to the Central African Republic. Moreover,
you have steered the Council's work based on a clear
understanding of our shared priorities in matters related
to the maintenance of international peace and security,
and an acute awareness of the Council's responsibility.
We warmly thank you.

I would like to underscore a number of issues
that were of particular importance for France in this
month's full and variegated agenda. Yesterday's open
debate on peacekeeping and sustaining peace (see S/PV.8033) allowed for further reflection on the means
with which the United Nations can be more effective
on the ground. Accordingly, sustaining peace will be
contingent on our work in several areas, including
disarmament, reform of the security sector, justice and
the settlement of local conflicts. It is incumbent upon
the Security Council to best mold that work to tailored
mandates. Sustainable peace also depends on the those
involved in peacekeeping operations to be able to react
to challenges in a coordinated manner among the Host
State, regional organizations, bilateral partners, and
economic and development actors. The convergence of
such actors is therefore essential.

Concerning the Council's work in connection with
Africa, the meeting (see S/PV.8022) that brought us
together with the Deputy Secretary-General, whose
commitment we commend, demonstrated how the
United Nations can promote the role of women in
promoting peace and security on the ground. We
welcome the importance accorded to that subject,
which will be the topic of an annual open debate during
our presidency in October.

As early as the second day of your presidency
(see S/PV.8016), Sir, we adopted a firm presidential
statement (S/PRST/2017/ 13) on Burundi, which
focused the unity of the Council on that crisis and
showed our determined support for the East African
Community, President Mkapa's road map and the work
of the Secretary-General's Special Envoy to Burundi,
and particularly recalled the absolute need to respect
the Arusha Peace and Reconciliation Agreement for
Burundi to ensure its stability. France sincerely hopes
that Burundi will take advantage of this opportunity
so as to re-establish an eased relationship with the
international community, launch a political process
that will allow for the peaceful holding of the elections
and end human rights Violations.

On 15 August, the Security Council held a briefing
(see S/PV.8024) on the joint force of the Group of Five
for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel) joint force in accordance with
resolution 2359 (2017), adopted in June. Following the
terrorist attacks on Burkina Faso that also targeted
the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali, the previous day, that
meeting allowed us once again to underscore the
transnational nature of the terrorist threat facing the
Sahel and to move forward the work of the G-5 Sahel
so as to ensure the joint force's deployment on the
ground according to the agreed timeline. We welcome
the fact that much has already been done in a very short
time. With regard to that issue, our conviction remains
more than ever that the international community has a
moral and political responsibility to help African States
to come together to combat terrorism through means
complementary to those of peacekeeping operations.
Along with a large majority of Council members,
France continues to believe that United Nations support
for the G-5 Saheljoint force is essential.

The Council also held an important meeting (see S/PV.8026) on the Democratic Republic of the Congo
in the presence of the families of the two members
of the Group of Experts on the Democratic Republic
of the Congo extended pursuant to Security Council
resolution 2293 (2016) who were killed in March. Their
work, mandated by us, had been outstanding. It is
important that the Council pay tribute to their memory.
Henceforth, every effort must be made in shedding
light on those murders. We reiterate our call that the
Secretary-General assemble as quickly as possible, as
is within his authority, a special mechanism of inquiry
enabling the appropriate judicial authorities to carry
out an effective follow-up.

Concerning the Middle East, the Council has also
been very active. Despite a divergence in approaches,
through the unanimous adoption of resolution 2373
(2017), only moments ago, we renewed the ambitious
and robust mandate of the United Nations Interim Force
in Lebanon for one year. That was an essential step
towards maintaining the stability of southern Lebanon
and the entire region.

Concerning Libya, the first briefing (see S/PV.8032)
by the new Special Representative of the Secretary-
General and Head of the United Nations Support
Mission in Libya, Mr. Ghassan Salame', allowed us
to follow up the new impetus that has been infused
in United Nations mediation efforts. The unity of the
Council will be decisive in our ensuring together a stable
future and a safe and prosperous environment in Libya
in line with international and regional initiatives and
those of neighbouring countries. In July, our Permanent
Representative presented to members of Council the
outcomes of the Celle-Saint-Cloud meeting, which
strives to work coherently towards those same ends.
The Council will play an active role in following up the
implementation of the commitments undertaken by the
Libyan stakeholders themselves.

The United Nations Support Mission in Libya will
be the key component of that process, and it will be
necessary to ensure that the Mission be provided with
the resources necessary to fulfil its mandate. I would
like to also commend the work of Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1970
(2011) concerning Libya and its Swedish chairmanship,
which, in particular included on its sanctions list two
vessels for trafficking in petroleum.

With regard to Yemen, the briefing (see S/PV.8027)
by the Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and the subsequent Arria Formula meeting
on humanitarian issues stressed the need to enable
unimpeded humanitarian access and to stop the
serious violations of international humanitarian law.
On that occasion, the Council was also able to call for
relaunching the political process - given that there
can only be a political solution to the situation in
Yemen - and to commend the commitment of Special
Envoy Ismail Ould Cheikh Ahmed who is pursuing his
work despite constraints.

Concerning Syria, a majority among us has
repeatedly called for safe, full, immediate and
unimpeded access to humanitarian assistance for all
those in circumstances that remain catastrophic. We
met this morning (see S/PV.8036) to discuss the issue
of Syria, and France recalled its efforts to supporting
the United Nations-led process towards achieving a
democratic and negotiated transition in accordance with
resolution 2254 (2015) and the Geneva communique
(S/2012/522, annex). That is the only option, which will
allow for the lasting return of peace and for effectively
combating terrorism, which is our first priority. We are
seeing convergences today. We will spare no effort, in
particular from now to the week of high-level meetings
of the General Assembly at its seventy-second session
so as to find a way out of that crisis.

Lastly, this synopsis would not be complete
without mentioning North Korea on which the Council
showed its responsiveness and firmness yesterday (see S/PV.8034).

In concluding, I would like to join all those who
have commended the outstanding work of Japan on
presidential note (S/2010/507) from which we will
all benefit as members of the Council in the future.
Concerning all of these issues, as well as many others,
the work that remains to be done is immense, but you,
Sir, over the past month, have made a considerable
contribution to that work in sparing neither your resolve
or efforts. And we thank you for that.

