Brazil would like to thank the Russian presidency for convening today's quarterly debate on the situation in the Middle East. It would also like to thank the briefer. The resolution of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict remains relevant to peace and stability in the Middle East. The recent announcement of the normalization of Israel's relations with the United Arab Emirates, Bahrain and the Sudan is an important step towards improving dialogue and diplomacy in the region. We welcome this historical decision and acknowledge the role of the United States with respect to it. Building on the momentum generated by the signing of the accords, we encourage the parties to resume negotiations and engage in new and creative diplomatic efforts in order to achieve a just and comprehensive settlement. Brazil reiterates its support for a negotiated two-State solution, with Israelis and Palestinians living side by side in peace and security in two democratic and sovereign States. Strengthening the democratic legitimacy of Palestinian institutions is a key element for achieving a solution based on the existence of two democratic and sovereign States. We therefore commend the Palestinian Authority's commitment to holding parliamentary and presidential elections. We hope they can take place soon. Brazil welcomes the launching of discussions on the delineation of the Lebanon-Israel maritime boundary following the framework agreement announced on | October. Having had the privilege of being commander of the Maritime Task Force of the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon for almost 10 years now, Brazil understands the importance of a mutually agreed outcome on this sensitive topic and hopes to see continued progress in this regard. The conflict in Syria has reached its tenth year and continues unabated, with an increasing toll on human life. The situation is made worse by the spread of the pandemic and its effects on the economic well-being of the most vulnerable populations. Accordingly, the humanitarian exemptions for any sanctions programme in relation to Syria must be closely followed, in order to ensure that they do not undermine access to food and essential health supplies. The protection of civilians, including humanitarian and medical personnel, and compliance with international humanitarian law, must also remain a priority. Brazil once again underscores its support for the work of Special Envoy Geir Pedersen and encourages the members of the Constitutional Committee to bridge their differences in order to ensure progress on the political track. We remain convinced that only a Syrian-owned and Syrian-led United Nations-facilitated political process, with due regard for the preservation of Syria's territorial integrity, will bring lasting peace and provide relief for the suffering of the Syrian population. Brazil remains deeply concerned at the worsening of the humanitarian situation in Yemen, where the threat of famine is once again looming, intensified by locust infestation and the COVID-19 pandemic. The continued clashes around the country are also a cause of great concern, particularly the Houthi offensive on Marib. Urgent action is also needed with regard to the FSO SAFER oil tanker, and we join our voices to those calling for the Houthis to facilitate access for experts to conduct an assessment-and-repair mission, in order to prevent a potential environmental disaster from occurring in Yemen and beyond. We urge all parties to agree on a nationwide ceasefire and to ensure safe and unhindered humanitarian access, including by keeping the Sana'a airport open for relief flights. We call on all parties to fully implement the Stockholm Agreement and to engage with the Special Envoy Martin Griffiths. We commend the parties, as well as the Special Envoy and the International Committee of the Red Cross, for the recent successful exchange of over 1,000 prisoners of war. We hope that this constructive spirit continues to guide negotiations on the United Nations peace proposals. Brazil welcomes the resumption of inclusive intra-Libyan talks through the convening of the Libyan Political Dialogue Forum in November in Tunisia. Building on months of extensive consultations, the Libya Political Dialogue Forum is a unique opportunity for generating consensus around a unified governance framework for Libyan institutions. We hope that progress on the political track will have an impact on the situation on the ground and help to consolidate a lasting and comprehensive ceasefire. The arms embargo is also an indispensable element to de-escalate the conflict, and we reiterate our call for its full implementation. We welcome the ceasefire agreement recently signed by the 5+5 Joint Military Commission in Libya, which will bring much-needed respite to the Libyan people. We hope that it can pave the way for the implementation of other confidence-building measures and allow further progress in the peace process. Brazil reiterates that long-term political stability and economic prosperity are mutually reinforcing and that regional socioeconomic development can be achieved only through the peaceful resolution of conflicts. Safeguarding religious freedom should also be kept a high priority, for minority communities often have to withstand the most violence and persecution of any groups. We stand ready to contribute to any diplomatic effort directed at promoting a more peaceful and prosperous Middle East.
