Mr. Laro (Nigeria): I thank Mr. Aleksandar
Vueic', Prime Minister of the Republic of Serbia, and
Mr. Hashim Thaci, Prime Minister of Kosovo, for their
statements. I also thank Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Zarif for his briefing.

Nigeria takes positive note ofthe continued progress
in technical talks between the parties. It is significant
that through the dialogue both sides have reached an
agreement on the integrated management of border
crossing points, on telecommunications and energy, and
on the use of Kosovar identification documents. These
agreements, we believe, will go a long way towards
strengthening bilateral relations between the parties.
We urge both sides to work diligently towards an early
resumption of high-level talks on the normalization of
relations.

The absence of a Government in Pristina is
delaying the resumption of negotiations on issues
concerning municipal governance. That is an outcome
of the ongoing political crisis in Kosovo. We encourage
the political leaders to reach an early agreement on
the election of the President of the Assembly and
the formation of a Government. We believe that this
would help to consolidate the gains made in Kosovo's
democratic process. We welcome the engagement
of the four Serb-majority municipalities in northern
Kosovo with the central authorities in Pristina in the
preparation of the municipal budgets. We note that the
process also involved consultations with the authorities
in Belgrade. Those are positive developments, and we
urge all concerned to maintain their engagement.

The problem of foreign terrorist fighters is an
ongoing threat to international peace and security.
Resolution 2178 (2014), which the Council adopted in
September, underscores the urgent need to prevent the
movement and recruitment of foreign terrorist fighters.
In that regard, we commend the Kosovo police for
its operations conducted to detain suspected former
combatants and supporters of the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant and the Al-Nusra Front. We look
forward to the debate on the draft law prohibiting the
participation of Kosovars in armed conflicts outside
Kosovo. Its early adoption, we believe, would help to
strengthen the legal framework and aid the fight against
foreign terrorist fighters.

During the debate in August (see S/PV.7257), we
encouraged the return of internally displaced persons
and called for projects that would promote their
reintegration, education and access to services. We
are therefore pleased to note that a new consultative
body has been launched to promote discussion on
improving outcomes for internally displaced persons.
Of particular significance is the inclusive nature of the
body's composition. It involves Serbian and Kosovar
institutions, as well as the United Nations and other
international and regional organizations. We see this
multi-stakeholder approach as having the potential
to help in resolving the many challenges faced by
internally displaced persons in Kosovo.

Reconciliation remains crucial to strengthening
cohesion and laying a foundation for peace and progress
in Kosovo. In that regard, we take positive note of the
outcome of the meeting of the Interministerial Working
Group on Dealing with the Past and Reconciliation,
which met on 16 October and established various
working groups to assist in the design ofa comprehensive
strategy on transitional justice. With a focus on
institutional reform, as well as the right to truth, justice
and reparations, we are hopeful that the working groups
will help to identify ways of promoting reconciliation
among the different communities in Kosovo.

