The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as Minister for Foreign Affairs of Turkey.

I would first like to join others in thanking
Special Representative Mr. Staffan de Mistura for his
insightful presentation, but more so for his unrelenting
and keen efforts at the helm of the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI). Indeed, during
his rather short tenure, he energized the entire United
Nations team in assisting the Iraqi Government and
people in their quest for peace and stability. This took
place at a critical point in time, when Iraq's need for
United Nations assistance was perhaps greater than
ever. Under his able leadership UNAMI has played a
most constructive role. It provided expertise and
analysis, bridged differences and helped bring about
positive change.

However, the job of the United Nations is still far
from over. In the months and years ahead there will be
an equally pressing need for it to continue to support
Iraq. We hope that Mr. De Mistura's successor will
carry the flag even further.

Of course, not only the United Nations but the
entire international community, first and foremost the
Iraqi Government and people themselves, should rise
to the occasion. We must all collectively ensure that
Iraq embarks upon an irreversible path towards lasting
peace, security and prosperity. It is still a tall order to
reach that point, but we have no other option. For a
united and democratic Iraq, assuming its rightful place
within the community of nations will constitute a true
success for all of us.

Given what has been achieved in the past six
years, we have good reason to be optimistic. Indeed,
not long ago, doomsday scenarios of all sorts
abounded. Today, despite many risks still ahead of us,
we see the light at the end ofthe tunnel.

I myself have been a witness to that evolution.
Indeed, I have been to Iraq a few times in this past six
years, and every time I go back I observe changes in
the right direction. After years of dictatorship plagued
by fear, frustration and hatred, the Iraqi people are now
trying to make a leap forward with hope, confidence
and empathy. And they are feeling good about it. That
is because democracy is seen in action at both national
and local levels. The security situation is improving
despite spikes of violence by extremist elements. There
is a growing awareness among political parties to
engage in a national dialogue. And more importantly,
there is an increasing sense of ownership on the part of
the Iraqi people.

These are not modest achievements, given where
Iraq was only six years ago. But they are no reason to
be complacent, either. We must not let our optimism
outrank realism in our assessments for the future of
Iraq. It is still at a critical point in its transformation
into a stable and democratic State. As a matter of fact,
Iraq is on the verge of yet another defining phase in its
history. For instance, the parliamentary elections
coming up at the beginning of next year will be a
crucial turning point in Iraq's young democracy. In
View of the irregularities experienced during the last
elections, the impartiality and professionalism of the
Independent High Electoral Commission will certainly
be one of the keys to a successful election process.

But more significantly, the political process itself
is fraught with serious pitfalls in the run-up to the
elections. Given the considerable and rather
confrontational differences among the political parties,
efforts towards national reconciliation become all the
more important at this critical stage. In particular,
ethnic and sectarian harmony in Iraq requires close
attention. Differences along these lines have to be
addressed within the framework of a meaningful
national dialogue, in a way that will strengthen the
unity and territorial integrity of Iraq.

Likewise, settlement of the status of Kirkuk and
the broader question of disputed administrative
boundaries also presents a pressing priority. Thus the
ongoing political and legislative processes should be
intensified with a view to rapidly resolving this
sensitive issue. As a microcosm of Iraq, Kirkuk could
and should be a stimulus for national reconciliation.

The peaceful transfer of security responsibilities
to the Iraqi Security Forces poses yet another
challenge, for the extremist elements will try to exploit
this transition to create chaos and fear. We have already
started to see the first signs of this threatening
development. This is why the training and equipment
of the Iraqi Security Forces should be at the highest
possible level at this critical phase leading up to the
elections and beyond.

On top of these concerns, fair and just
implementation of the amnesty law, facilitation of the
return of refugees and internally displaced persons,
adoption of the long-overdue laws on hydrocarbon
resources and revenue sharing, building confidence and
cooperation with neighbouring countries, strengthening
regional dialogue and, last but not least, combating
terrorism originating in Iraq and emerging from it are
also among the issues that require urgent and constant
attention.

At this point, I would like to stress that the fight
against terrorism demands full cooperation within the
international community, but more so among the
neighbouring countries. In fact, it is an obligation by
which all Members of the United Nations are strictly
bound. In the case of Iraq, Turkey fully respects that
obligation and expects both Iraq and its neighbours to
do the same.

Finally, and maybe for the rather longer term,
achieving a solid consensus based on the Constitution
is imperative for Iraq to become a truly functioning
democracy. A unifying constitution that enjoys national
consensus is the basis of any democratic system. In
Iraq too, the Constitution should reflect a social
contract that all parties could embrace and unite
around.

As can be seen, the road ahead is not an easy one.
Given the manifold challenges, it will certainly be a
bumpy ride. But I have full confidence that the Iraqi
people and Government will come out of this process
with flying colours.

The responsibility of the international community
is to stand in solidarity with Iraq in tackling these
daunting tasks. Indeed, we must all help the Iraqis take
the right steps along this road. This is why we are glad
to see that the divisions within the international
community which prevailed in the early stages of the
post-Saddam era have now given way to a strong and
joint commitment to supporting Iraq's desire for peace,
security and prosperity.

The United Nations is certainly an integral part of
this collective effort and it must continue to play its
useful role. United Nations assistance in resolving the
question of disputed administrative boundaries and the
status of Kirkuk, in particular, is of great importance.
The reports prepared by UNAMI on this matter provide
a good basis to build upon. We now expect all parties
in Iraq to engage in an inclusive dialogue that will
yield a consensual solution to this sensitive issue.

On the other hand, the International Compact
with Iraq also provides an excellent framework for the
international community's engagement with Iraq, in
tune with the priorities set by the Iraqi Government
itself. Thus, we must constantly review and update the
Compact to maintain its effectiveness. This is
particularly important given that the global financial
crisis and the sharp fall in oil prices have had a rather
serious impact on Iraq's economy.

For its part, Turkey will continue to support the
development and reconstruction of Iraq. As a matter of
fact, Turkey has long provided a significant conduit for
the flow of humanitarian and economic assistance to
Iraq. Today, the volume of bilateral trade is also rapidly
rising. The Turkish-Iraqi High-level Strategic Council
led by our Prime Ministers provides firm guidance and
impetus to the diversification and advancement of our
economic cooperation.

On the political front, too, the frequency of high-
level bilateral visits can in itself be seen as an
indication of the exemplary nature of our relationship.
Indeed, we enjoy good relations with all the political
actors in Iraq, and that enables us to play an effective
role in encouraging national reconciliation.

Furthermore, the recently signed bilateral military
training agreement is yet another clear example of the
deepening cooperation between our countries. Through
this agreement, we shall provide extensive training to
the Iraqi Security Forces in order to strengthen their
ability to cope with increased security responsibilities
at a critical time.

In short, I would like to reiterate once again that
Turkey will spare no effort to help the Iraqi people
achieve the peace and prosperity they deserve. As a
neighbour, we see this as our responsibility. Our
centuries-old ties of common history and culture create
an unbreakable bond between us and among all
segments of the Iraqi society, ranging from Arabs to
Kurds, Turkmen to Assyrians, Shiites to Sunnis. They
are all our brothers and sisters, whose security and
welfare is as clear to us as our own.

Let me emphasize once again our fine belief that
Iraq has a bright future, which is now within reach. We
are confident that the Iraqi people will achieve that
future by acting in unison and rising above their ethnic
and sectarian differences. For our part, we promise to
be with them at every step of this honourable journey. I
should like to conclude on this rather high note.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

The representative of Iraq has asked for the floor
to make a further statement. I give him the floor.

