Mr. Aboulatta: (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): Nearly
two months ago, we met in the Security Council to
debate the Syrian crisis, in particular the situation in
Aleppo (see S/PV.7785). We left the Security Council
Chamber carrying only messages of our continued
failure with regard to the Syrian people and indications
that can be explained only as lack of care with regard
to Syrians and the fact that some prefer their narrow
political interests over all else.

I recall now when we declared before the Council
that, despite the strong polarization following the
suspension of coordination between the co-Chairs
of the International Syrian Support Group and the
escalation of the political and military strife among
the various influential parties, we would continue to
work with other members of the Council on the basis of
elements that we believe reflect strong principles that
take into account only Syria's interests. Indeed, we did
so, over one month of difficult negotiations, based on
those principles, working with Council members and in
cooperation with our partners on this draft resolution
(S/2016/1026), Spain and New Zealand. I am duty-
bound to express to those delegations, their Permanent
Representatives and their experts on Syria our sincerest
thanks and appreciation. They showned a level of trust
and sincerity throughout difficult negotiations.

We believed that we would be able to reach a very
balanced view reflecting the principles that must not
be affected by political positions. Our approach in that
regard was comprehensive and took up all the issues
on the ground. In our approach, we clearly called on
all parties to the conflict to cease all attacks, starting
in 24 hours, against Aleppo for seven consecutive days
in order to allow humanitarian assistance to reach
the city to save civilians, recalling that assistance
had ceased in July. We also called for an immediate
implementation of the components of the cessation
of hostilities agreements on all Syrian territory in
accordance with resolution 2268 (2016), which also
calls for humanitarian assistance to be delivered to all
Syrian people, in particular in besieged and not easily
accessible areas.

Furthermore, we have publicly called for cessation
of any cooperation between any parties and terrorist
organizations that control large swathes of Syrian
territory, particularly Da'esh and Jabhat Al-Nusra, now
known as Jabhat Fatah Al-Sham. Cooperation by some
parties with Jabhat Fatah Al-Sham/AI-Nusra began
more than a year and a half ago, without any deterrent.
Some groups have reached an unprecedented level
of cooperation that cannot be met with silence. It is
perhaps appropriate that I recall some of the sanctions
that are in accordance with the Security Council
Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989
(2011) and 2253 (2015), concerning Da'esh, Al-Qaida
and associated individuals, groups, undertakings and
entities. It is the only Committee qualified to classify
terrorists, and it continues to closely monitor those
developments in order to adopt future draft resolutions
on a firm basis.

I would also like to call on the International Syria
Support Group to resume its work, which was initiated
by our brothers in Jordan a year ago. We thank them
that and for participating in the ongoing efforts.

We also call for a resumption of the political
process and negotiations on the transitional period, in
accordance with the communique (S/2012/522, annex)
and resolution 2254 (2015) as soon as possible. Let
me also clearly state that it is unacceptable for those
negotiations to remain suspended. It is also unacceptable
for us to remain silent with respect to those who hamper
those negotiations, whoever they may be.

We were determined to put this draft resolution
to a vote today even though we were fully aware of
the complications surrounding the positions of some
Member States regarding any movement by the Security
Council on the issue. That determination was not
based on political interests. Rather, it is born out of the
strength of our conviction that we are right. Therefore,
Egypt will continue in its approach. It will continue
to use its political capital with all parties, including
major Powers and friendly Powers, whether they are
allies or foes on the Syrian battlefield, to respond to
the pleas of Syrians, regardless of their affiliations or
political positions.

We are not directly party to the crisis. That does
not mean that we do not care. On the contrary, we are
focusing on settling the crisis, not on fuelling it or
benefiting from it. I would like to call on the conscience
of the parties to the conflict - those in the country
and those with regional or international connections.
What you are fighting for in Syria - does it really
justify having to see mothers and fathers holding their
dying children? What is the victory you seek? What is
the aspiration that requires millions of Syrians to seek
refuge and mercy from strangers? What religion, what
sect can still justify this level of bloodshed?

I would also like to address the Syrian people in all
of their communities and faiths - whether Arab, Kurd,
Druze, Yazidi, Muslims, Christians, Sunni, Shia or
Alawi. Yes, we have been unable to impose a settlement
or quick change of the situation on the ground that
would immediately erase their tragedy. However, we
have intent and perseverance. More important, we
have goodwill and good intentions. What we want is
to stand with Syrians, shoulder to shoulder, with every
political tool at our disposal until a final settlement
is reached and the aspirations of Syrians to freedom
and democracy in a united, sovereign State, safe from
extremism and terrorism, are achieved. We make a
promise to Syrians that we shall continue on a straight
path that is dictated only by our humane conscience
towards a brotherly people. We promise to fight any
attempts to fuel the conflict.

