Prince Zeid Ra'ad Zeid Al-Hussein (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): On behalf of the Arab Group, I
should like to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month. We are certain that thanks to your
experience, outstanding qualities and competence, the
work of the Security Council will be crowned with
success. I should also like to express my great thanks
to His Excellency the Permanent Representative of
Mexico for having guided the work of the Council so
skilfully last month. We should also like to welcome
the Foreign Minister of Somalia. We wish as well to
express our greatest appreciation to you, Sir, for having
convened this meeting of the Council, which affords us
an opportunity to take a fresh and close look at the
Somali situation, evaluate it and find ways and means
to help the Somalis move forward with their national
reconciliation process and overcome the obstacles that
block the restoration of calm and stability.

In order for peace and security to be restored to
Somalia, and thereby to guarantee that it regains its
territorial integrity, full sovereignty and political
independence, it is essential to help the Transitional
National Government to move forward, strengthening
its contacts, pursuing the process of national
reconciliation and, finally, ensuring national unity.
With this in mind, we must avoid foreign interference
in the domestic affairs of Somalia, as well as anything
that might compromise or hamstring the process. In
this connection, we are certain that the Arta conference
has provided the foundation for that process of national
reconciliation and understanding in Somalia. Indeed, if
we depart from the fundamental principles of that
process, we will not be able to help Somalia to emerge
from the crisis or facilitate a just and comprehensive
solution in that country.

In that context, we welcome the 9th Summit of
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development, held
in Khartoum, which considered the issue of national
reconciliation in Somalia. That complemented and
affirmed the work of the Arta conference. The process
of reconciliation is to be pursued in Nairobi in April,
with a view to finally restoring peace, security and
tranquillity to Somalia.

We hope that the Security Council will continue
to convene meetings of this kind and to closely follow
developments in Somalia. We call on the Security
Council to dispatch a fact-finding mission to Somalia
to assess the situation there and to re-examine the
situation on the ground. We also support the setting up
of monitoring mechanisms for the arms embargo, in
particular to monitor compliance with the resolution
that established the embargo.

We believe that the League of Arab States should
be part of the Committee of Friends on Somalia with a
view to helping that country emerge from crisis.

Finally, we would also like to express the hope
that Somalia will finally overcome the crisis that has
affected it for so long, and that the Transitional
National Government will get all the support and
assistance that it needs in all areas from the Security
Council and from the international community as a
whole.

