Mr. Dabbashi (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke in Arabic): Libya has been following very attentively
and with great interest the devastating situation in
Zimbabwe over the past few months. We are concerned
about the ongoing tension between the Government
and the opposition.

Through the African Union and in cooperation
with its member States, we shall continue to endeavour
to defuse the crisis in keeping with the decisions taken
by the Union during its recently held eleventh summit
at Sharm el-Sheikh.

As the Council is aware, the summit considered
all aspects of the situation in Zimbabwe and
recognized its complex nature. It also expressed its
concern about the situation, as well as its appreciation
for the efforts of South African President Mbeki and
Mr. Jean Ping of the African Union to promote
reconciliation between the political actors in
Zimbabwe. The summit adopted a decision expressing
the wish that Zimbabwe should resume dialogue and
form a Government of national unity. We note that
dialogue is now taking place under the aegis of the
Southern African Development Community (SADC),
represented by President Thabo Mbeki. We are pleased
to note that the Zimbabwean parties resumed dialogue
yesterday.

I would like to draw attention to the fact that the
African Union decided to support the efforts of SADC
and called for them to continue in order to help the
people and leaders of Zimbabwe to resolve their
problems. In that regard, the African Union has
08-41947
appealed to the parties concerned to avoid any action
likely to have a negative impact on the climate of
dialogue. The African Union has confirmed that the
people of Zimbabwe are capable of resolving their
problems if they are given the joint support of SADC,
the African Union and the international community at
large.

SADC and the African Union are supporting the
people of Zimbabwe as they strive to preserve their
territorial integrity and sovereignty. However, the draft
resolution before us today does not serve those
objectives. It is in conflict with Article 52 of the
Charter of the United Nations, which pertains to
regional arrangements, and specifically with paragraph
3 of that Article, which states that

"[t]he Security Council shall encourage the
development of pacific settlement of local
disputes through such regional arrangements or
by such regional agencies either on the initiative
of the States concerned or by reference from the
Security Council."

The draft resolution before the Council is based
on the assumption that the situation in Zimbabwe poses
a threat to peace and security in the region. That
assumption is undermined by the fact that the dispute is
between Zimbabwean parties and that neighbouring
countries affirm that the situation is in no way a threat
to regional peace and security. That is why the
situation in Zimbabwe does not fall within the purview
of the Security Council's mandate. The draft resolution
before us also constitutes a violation of Zimbabwe's
sovereignty and interference in its internal affairs. That
fact is underscored by the first paragraph of the draft
resolution, which deliberately omits any reference to
Zimbabwe's sovereignty. Security Council resolutions
have always reaffirmed the Council's adherence to the
principle of the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
States.

Imposing sanctions on Zimbabwe would hinder
African efforts to resolve the crisis in the country
through SADC. Sanctions would have serious
consequences for the people of Zimbabwe and create a
climate of tension that would in no way be conducive
to finding a solution to the problem. Imposing
sanctions now would be contrary to the international
consensus that sanctions are a last resort to be used
when all other means have been exhausted. That is
especially relevant given that there is no justification
5
whatever for imposing sanctions. We fear that one of
the parties may regard the draft resolution as tacit
support for it, which could embolden that party to
increase its demands and to refuse to enter into or to
continue dialogue to resolve the situation.

Libya, whose leadership has always worked to
strengthen the African Union and has continuously
endeavoured to resolve African conflicts in the context
of African good offices, cannot endorse the draft
resolution before the Council and will vote against it.

