The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of Israel, in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the discussion of the item on
the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
discussion Without the right to vote, in accordance with
the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Lancry
(Israel) took a seat at the Council table.

The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter dated 27 March
2001 from the Permanent Observer of Palestine to the
United Nations, which will be issued as document
S/2001/282, and which reads as follows:

"I have the honour to request that, in
accordance with its previous practice, the
Security Council invite the Permanent Observer
of Palestine to the United Nations to participate
in the meeting of the Security Council to be held
today, Tuesday, 27 March 2001, regarding the
situation in the occupied Palestinian territory,
including Jerusalem."

I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite the Permanent Observer of Palestine to
participate in the current debate in accordance with the
rules of procedure and the previous practice in this
regard.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Al-Kidwa
(Palestine) took a seat at the Council table.


The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2001/270, which contains the text of a
draft resolution submitted by Bangladesh, Colombia,
Jamaica, Mali, Mauritius, Singapore and Tunisia. I
should like to draw the attention of the members of the
Council to photocopies of letters dated 26 and 27
March 2001 from Israel addressed to the Secretary-
General, which will be issued as documents of the
Security Council under the symbols S/200l/278 and
S/2001/280, respectively.

It is my understanding that the Council is ready to
proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it.
Unless I hear any objection, I shall put the draft
resolution to the vote now.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

Before giving the floor to members of the
Council wishing to make statements before the voting,
I should like to state the following in my capacity as
the representative of Ukraine.

From the very beginning of the outbreak of the
current crisis in the Middle East, Ukraine has been
among the delegations that stood for appropriate and
effective actions by the United Nations Security
Council with a view to putting an end to the increasing
Israeli-Palestinian confrontation. Proceeding from that,
my delegation has been consistently in favour of the
idea of establishing a United Nations observer presence
in the Palestinian territory to protect Palestinian
civilians. While being supportive of that idea, we have
always recognized that its practical implementation is
impossible without the cooperation of Israel.

Our position on this matter was clearly
manifested during the voting on a draft resolution that
took place on 18 December 2000, and was reconfirmed
at the recent emergency meeting held by the Council at
the request of the Arab Group and Palestine. This
position has not changed since then. However, my
delegation is worried about the current stage of the
Council's consideration of this issue, and about the
likely outcome of the action. The different approaches
of the members of the Council to this sensitive issue
are well known but, in our view, they are not
insurmountable.

We commend the enormous efforts exerted by all
members of the Council - in particular by the
members of the non-aligned caucus, the four Western
European members and the United States delegation, as
well as the delegations of Palestine and the Arab
troika - to find common ground for the agreed text of
the draft resolution. As the delegation holding the
presidency of the Council, we did our utmost to
contribute to reaching that goal.

As the current President and as a member of the
Council, my delegation bears its share of responsibility
for this unfortunate situation. Without the necessary
unanimity of the members of the Council, we do not
believe that today's vote on the draft resolution before
us will either achieve its original goal as regards the
protection of Palestinian civilians or send any positive
signal to the peoples in the region.

Therefore, while supporting the contents of the
draft resolution and being well aware of the outcome of
this voting exercise we are about to embark upon, my
delegation will not take part in today's vote. We hope
that there is still a chance to reach consensus on the
draft resolution contained in document 8/2001/281,
which we hope will ultimately have the support of the
members of the Council.

I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Council who wish to make statements before the
voting.


