Mr. Patriota (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, I
should like to thank you, Sir, for the opportunity to
present our report to the Council under your presidency.

(spoke in English)

I thank the delegation of Chile, in its capacity
as President of the Security Council, for inviting
me to address the Council in my capacity as Chair
of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) and for its
commitment to advancing the Council's consideration
of post-conflict peacebuilding. I am pleased to recall,
Sir, that the first report (S/2009/304) of the Secretary-
General on peacebuilding in the aftermath of conflict
was presented during your leadership of the PBC in
2009. The periodic reporting to the Security Council
and the General Assembly on peacebuilding, which
that report initiated, offers an opportunity for Member
States and United Nations operational entities to assess
the coherence and effectiveness of our efforts to prevent
the outbreak of conflict and its recurrence, as well as to
consolidate stability in post-conflict situations.

The release of the fourth report on peacebuilding
in the aftermath of conflict (S/2014/694) and its
consideration by the Council today is particularly
significant, coming with the launching of the
10-year review of the United Nations peacebuilding
architecture. To that end, the Commission is pleased
to note that, on 15 December, the Security Council and
the General Assembly decided to endorse the terms of
reference for the review and to formally initiate the
process. As indicated in the terms of reference, the
review will take the original vision and motivation
behind the establishment of the PBC, the Peacebuilding
Fund (PBF) and the Peacebuilding Support Office
(PBSO) as its starting point.

The exercise will critically assess the developments
since 2005 in United Nations, global and regional
peacebuilding-related approaches and practices. The
review will further identify areas of progress and
remaining gaps in international assistance to countries
emerging from conflict. The terms of reference
stipulate that the review will be grounded in specific
country studies, which will be conducted in Burundi,
the Central African Republic, Sierra Leone, South
Sudan and Timor-Leste. That will help the Security
Council and the General Assembly place the challenges,
needs and aspirations of the countries emerging from
conflict at the core of our future efforts. Adjustments
and improvements resulting from the outcome of the
review should aim at enabling the PBC, the PBF and the
PBSO to realize their full potential, and for the broader
peacebuilding architecture to become more effective
and relevant. It should also propose practical ways to
strengthen and improve the Commission's working
relationship with the Council.

The Commission also takes note of the Secretary-
General's communication of the United Nations system's
collective input to the review. That input signals the
potential for joint ownership of the review's outcome
by both Member States and operational entities of the
United Nations. We should aim for greater coherence
and complementarity between the United Nations
political and operational response to post-conflict
situations, as well as improving coherence in the
overall international response. That is an imperative
that, unfortunately, continues to elude our collective
efforts. The broad scope for the 2015 review points
to Member States acknowledgement that the political
and operational components of a broader United
Nations and global peacebuilding architecture must
work in synergy. Therefore, we welcome the Council's
reiteration in the draft presidential statement prepared
for adoption today that the analysis underpinning the
2015 review should also be undertaken in conjunction
and synergy with the upcoming Secretary-General's
review of peace operations.

I strongly recommend to all a thorough reading of the
Secretary-General's report, which I found to be written
in a particularly useful, informative and substantive
manner. The core messages presented in the Secretary-
General's report on peacebuilding in the aftermath of
conflict are reflected in the terms of reference of the
2015 review. For instance, both documents point to
the importance of further sharpening the tools at the
disposal of the United Nations with a view to preventing
relapse into violent conflict.

The crises in the Central African Republic, South
Sudan and Libya, as well as the risks posed by the
Ebola crisis, serve to remind us that our response must
be multifaceted, carefully sequenced and sustained
over the long term. Attention and support to nationally
owned and inclusive political and socioeconomic
development and institution-building processes should
be prioritized.

In my intervention before the Council on 19 March
2014 (see S/PV.7143), I noted the centrality of building
peace as a central objective of the United Nations
peace and security architecture. However, despite its
importance, it is still not granted the sustained attention
and commitment that is required by the international
community to meet the complex and long-term
challenges to sustainable peace. The Peacebuilding
Fund provides catalytic funding in many situations,
but that is insufficient to overcome the longer-term and
larger scale gaps in financing and capacity that put our
initial investments in peacemaking and peacekeeping
at serious risk. Meanwhile, the PBC continues to focus
its attention not only on the six countries on its agenda,
but also on cross-cutting issues such as illicit financial
flows, resource mobilization, gender, and food security.
The PBSO remains a valuable source of expertise and
support for our work, and I join the Deputy Secretary-
General in commending the very able work done under
Assistant Secretary-General Oscar Fernandez-Taranco
and his team.

The recent Ebola outbreak in West Africa has
demonstrated the frailty of peacebuilding gains and
the slow pace of institutional strengthening in the
aftermath of conflict, where investment in national
and local institutions is insufficient. The Commission
requested the Secretary-General to undertake a
multifaceted assessment of the long-term implications
of the Ebola crisis on political and security institutions,
as well as on social cohesion and economic recovery, in
the three affected countries. Through that assessment,
the Commission hopes to draw the international
community's attention to the nature of the challenges
facing countries emerging from conflict, especially
when their nascent institutions and recovering societies
and economies are confronted with unexpected
shocks. The Commission also hopes that the outcome
of the assessment will shed light on the scope of the
technical, financial and political support required for
those countries to ensure their continued progress and
resilience.

Let me share with the Council an informal
conversation I had with the Special Envoy and Head
of the United Nations Mission for Ebola Emergency
Response, David Nabarro, on the situation in the three
most affected countries, which happen to be on the
agenda ofthe PBC, according to whom the impact of the
outbreak would have been even more devastating had it
not been for the work that the Commission undertook
in the past years, and continues to carry out. Allow me
also to remind Security Council members that a first
early-warning of the peace and security implications
of the epidemic was made through a statement issued
by the PBC in August 2014, thereby illustrating the
preventive role played by the Commission.

The draWdown of Security Council-mandated
missions represents a milestone that brings to light
the challenges of long-term peace consolidation
in countries emerging from conflict. An adequate
transition from emergency to development remains
essential but, to a great extent, is still an ideal fraught
with challenges. The change in the nature of the
United Nations presence and mandate on the ground
in Burundi and Sierra Leone, and soon in Liberia,
calls for calibrated yet sustained attention to ongoing
political and socioeconomic challenges associated with
nascent national institutions, governance practices
and development. On that topic, I strongly recommend
the useful report recently issued by the PBC Working
Group on Lessons Learned under the very competent
guidance of the Permanent Representative of Japan,
which can be found on the Commission's website.

Security Council mandates have increasingly
emphasized the necessity of providing appropriate
support to the Governments of countries emerging
from conflict in order to establish sustainable
peace. Early investment in peacebuilding activities,
including security sector and justice reform as well as
socioeconomic development, is a necessary complement
to political and security-focused mandates. As the
Secretary-General's report makes clear, however, there
continues to be serious gaps in the implementation
of those aspects of Security Council-mandated
missions. Greater financial and technical support for
peacebuilding in collaboration with international
financial institutions and regional and subregional
organizations is necessary for the fulfilment of those
ambitions.

Securing predictable and sustainable financing
continues to be a major challenge for countries emerging
from conflict, limiting the provision of basic services,
economic opportunities and the rebuilding of State
institutions. At the same time, such countries are most
affected by illicit financial flows and by unbalanced
contractual arrangements for the exploitation of their
natural wealth. The Commission made that particular
challenge a priority in 2014. There are obvious gaps in
international mechanisms to ensure timely, targeted and
sustained support for countries emerging from conflict
in the area of domestic resource mobilization, including
curbing illicit financial flows and negotiating fair and
balanced natural resources contracts. The Commission
will continue to support regional and national efforts
aimed at catalysing greater international commitment
to address that challenge. Let me call attention to the
forthcoming report under the authority of the High-
level Panel chaired by former President of South Africa
Thabo Mbeki, which will be of special interest in that
regard.

Finally, the Commission wishes to underscore
the importance that we must continue to attach to
the contribution of women to building and sustaining
peace. While they endure the tragic consequences of
violent conflicts, women are also strategic agents for
transformation and emancipation in post-conflict
societies. In that regard, the Commission is of the
view that women's empowerment greatly contributes
to enhancing inclusivity and cohesion in post-conflict
situations.

Our collective understanding of post-conflict
peacebuilding has continued to evolve over the past
few years. Perhaps many of us, Member States and
operational entities, tend to define peacebuilding in
terms of certain mandated tasks or programmatic
activities, but experience generated through years
of engagement with countries at different stages
of their post-conflict struggle confirms otherwise.
Peacebuilding is indeed the political framework
within which many of the mandates and activities
must be conceived, sequenced and implemented. It
rests on a delicate balance between State-centric and
people-centred approaches to rebuilding institutions,
strengthening social cohesion and regenerating a sense
of an inclusive and nationally owned vision of the
country's future. As noted by the Deputy Secretary-
General, peacebuilding is at the core of the United
Nations ambitions in countries affected by conflict.
The main conclusions from the Secretary-General's
report before us today offer us a unique opportunity to
renew our commitment to the peoples in the countries
emerging from conflict who struggle to chart a new
course towards a better future.

