Mr. Mehdiyev (Azerbaijan): At the outset, I would
like to thank the Guatemalan presidency and you
personally, Mr. Minister, for convening this important
open debate on peace and justice and for submitting a
concept note on the topic (S/2012/73l, annex). We also
thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, President of
the International Criminal Court (ICC) Judge Sang-
Hyun Song and Mr. Phasiko Mochochoko of the Office
of the Prosecutor of the ICC for their briefings.

It is obvious, but perhaps it should be reiterated, that
there can be no peace withoutjustice. Such an approach
provides that no peace settlement can be reached that is
inconsistent with international law, particularly where
peremptory norms are concerned, such as the prohibition
of aggression, genocide and racial discrimination and
the obligation to respect the territorial integrity and
sovereignty of States. Suffice it to say that the need to
establish the truth concerning the egregious violation
of international law, including the Violation of human
rights and international humanitarian law, the provision
of effective and adequate reparation to victims and the
need for institutional action to prevent the recurrence
of such violations are all a necessary adjunct to true
conflict resolution.

In recent years, international attention to the
importance ofthe rule oflaw has significantly increased.
International law has moved towards concretizing
the need for justice, and the question of impunity has
rightly assumed great prominence. Important steps
have been taken at the national and international levels
on the prevention and punishment of wrongs, including
the development of international jurisprudence. Today,
it is incontrovertible that no official or political status
cloaks the person concerned with immunity for the
most serious crimes of concern to the international
community.

Azerbaijan is not party to the Rome Statute
of the International Criminal Court. Nevertheless,
we proceed from the strong understanding that
the protection and vindication of rights, as well as
insistence on international accountability, contribute
to the maintenance of international peace and security
and that they are therefore the responsibility of the
international community as a whole. We welcome
the consensus decision to amend the Rome Statute to
include a definition of the crime of aggression, as well
as the condition for the Court's exercise ofjurisdiction
over that crime. The crime of aggression is the most
serious and dangerous form of the illegal use of force
between States, which is usually committed together
with other crimes.

We believe that the competence of the International
Criminal Court to investigate and prosecute those
suspected of the crime of aggression will contribute
to the efforts of the Security Council and the broader
international community to ensure the accountability of
States and individuals acting in breach of international
law, undermining the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of States and ignoring the Security Council
resolutions that explicitly condemn such behaviour.

The activity and jurisprudence of ad hoc and
mixed tribunals have helped to develop international
law, particularly the law on war crimes and crimes
against humanity, and, in certain well-known cases,
have contributed to advancing the rule of law and to
restoring peace. Their practice, as appropriate, can
obviously benefit other national efforts to pursue
post-conflict justice, especially in those situations
where the prevailing culture of impunity for serious
crimes represents a considerable obstacle to peace and
reconciliation.

Indeed, serious challenges remain. Unfortunately,
the violation of international humanitarian and human
rights law in some situations of armed conflict,
including those of a protracted nature, have not received
due attention and a response at the international and
regional levels. More resolute and targeted measures
are required to end impunity for such violations.

As the concept note emphasizes, there are strong
indications that past wrongs left unpunished and
unrecognized have played a key role in the eruption of
new conflicts and the commission of new crimes. In
addition, it should be taken into account that combating
impunity is important not only for the purpose of
prosecuting crimes and bringing those responsible to
justice but also to ensure sustainable peace, truth and
reconciliation. In any event, the conflict resolution
initiatives considered by the Security Council and
regional arrangements must ensure that peace and
justice work together effectively.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate that, in
order to achieve the goal of the rule of law, we should
uphold fundamental principles, adhere to the uniform
application of international law and promote the
democratization of international relations.

