Mr. Mekdad (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): It gives me pleasure to welcome the presence
of Mr. Jose Ramos-Horta, Minister for Foreign Affairs
and Cooperation of Timor-Leste. I wish him and the
Government and people of Timor-Leste every success
in building their nation. I should like to thank the
Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi Annan, for his special
report on the United Nations Mission of Support in
East Timor (UNMISET) (S/2004/117) and to thank Mr.
Jean-Marie Guehenno, Under-Secretary-General, for
presenting the report. In addition, the efforts of Mr.
Kamalesh Sharma, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Timor-Leste, merit our full
appreciation.

The Secretary-General's special report reviews, in
a general and comprehensive manner, all the important
developments in Timor-Leste since its independence,
the achievements made thus far in its reconstruction
and the changes facing the country. We agree with
many of the statements made thus far that Timor-Leste
is one of the success stories of the United Nations
because of intensive follow-up as a result of the efforts
undertaken by the General Assembly and its Special
Political and Decolonization Committee, the Security
Council and the Secretariat. The delegation of Syria
concurs with the report that the political institutions
developed by Timor-Leste and the progress it has
achieved are worthy of admiration.

My delegation expresses its satisfaction with
paragraph 9 of the report, which indicates that the
excellent communication that has characterized the
relations between Timor-Leste and Indonesia continued
over the reporting period, supported by commitment at
the highest political levels on both sides. We hope that
the Governments of both countries will, as soon as
possible, reach agreements that serve the interests of
both countries with regard to the issues mentioned in
the report.

The report of the Secretary-General contains a
special proposal to provide assistance to Timor-Leste
in the coming period in the areas of stability, justice,
internal security, the rule of law, external security and
border control. There are also a number of excellent
observations at the end of the report. We agree with the
Secretary-General's analysis and his important ideas
for follow-up by the United Nations, including the
provision of the assistance needed to consolidate and
build upon the gains already made. While we express
our appreciation to donor countries, we hope that they
will continue to assist in Timor-Leste's reconstruction
and development process.
My delegation notes in particular the Secretary-
General's assertion that UNMISET continues to play a
decisive role as the country's security capabilities are
being built. We agree with him that the capacity of the
Timorese authorities to meet the challenges ahead still
requires assistance and support from the United
Nations. In that regard, my delegation takes note of the
letter dated 12 February 2004 from Mr. Mari Alkatiri,
Prime Minister of Timor-Leste, to the Secretary-
General (S/2004/ll4), in which he requests the
presence of United Nations peacekeping troops, a
battalion-sized military force, backed by helicopters, in
Timor-Leste beyond May 2004.

In the light of the recommendations contained in
the report of the Secretary-General and the urgent need
for such a force, as emphasized in the Prime Minister's
letter and in the statement made to the Council this
morning by Timor-Leste's Foreign Minister, Syria
supports the request for an extension of UNMISET's
mandate. We hope that any decision taken by the
Security Council with regard to Timor-Leste will be
reached by consensus. That would help to ensure an
environment of stability, which would improve and
strengthen the capacities of the institutions of this
nascent nation.

