The President: The Security Council will now

continue its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Council is meeting in accordance with the understanding
reached in its prior consultations.

Following consultations among members of the

Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council has considered the report
of the Secretary-General concerning the situation in
Afghanistan and its implications for international
peace and security of 10 March 2000
(A/54/79l-S/2000/205).

"The Security Council reiterates its grave concern
at the continued Afghan conflict, which is a serious
and growing threat to regional and international peace
and security. It strongly condemns the Taliban for the
launching of new offensives, most notably that of 1
March 2000. The Council expresses its deep concern
at the reports that both parties to the conflict are
preparing for renewed large-scale fighting and recalls
its repeated demands that the Afghan parties cease
fighting. These events add to the enormous suffering
of the civilian population of Afghanistan.

"The Security Council reiterates that there is no
military solution to the conflict in Afghanistan and
that only a negotiated political settlement aimed at the
establishment of a broad-based, multi-ethnic and fully
representative Government acceptable to all Afghans
can lead to peace and national reconciliation. It notes
that the United Front of Afghanistan is willing to talk
with the Taliban and recalls its demand that the
parties, in particular the Taliban, resume negotiations
under United Nations auspices without delay and
preconditions in full compliance with the relevant
resolutions of the General Assembly and the Council.

"The Security Council calls upon all Afghan
parties to comply with their obligations under

international humanitarian law and to ensure the full
and unhindered access of international humanitarian
assistance and personnel to all those in need. It
expresses its grave concern at the further
deterioration of the humanitarian situation in
Afghanistan as a result of ongoing hostilities. The
Taliban has the primary responsibility for this.

"The Security Council strongly condemns the
Taliban for the repeated forced entries on 26, 27 and
29 March 2000 by its armed groups into and
searches of the United Nations premises in Kandahar
and for the intimidation of the United Nations
personnel. It stresses that responsibility for the
subsequent withdrawal of all international staff from
Kandahar and suspension of humanitarian assistance
activities in southern Afghanistan rests solely with
the Taliban. The Council demands that the Taliban
stop these unacceptable practices and ensure the
safety and security of all United Nations and
associated personnel and humanitarian personnel
working in Afghanistan in accordance with
international law.

"The Security Council stresses its grave
concern at the human rights situation in Afghanistan,
which is unacceptable. It expresses particular alarm
at the continuing disregard by the Taliban of the
concerns expressed by the international community.
The Council strongly condemns the forced
displacement of the civilian population, notably that
conducted by the Taliban in 1999, the deliberate
targeting of civilians and the destruction of their
assets and means of survival, summary executions,
arbitrary detention of civilians and forced labour of
those in detention, the separation of men from their
families, indiscriminate bombing and other violations
of human rights and international humanitarian law.
It calls upon all Afghan parties, especially the
Taliban, to put an end to such practices and to
ensure the protection of civilians.

"The Security Council reaffirms the principle of
non-refoulement of refugees, as provided for in a
relevant instrument of international law, welcomes
recent efforts of countries neighbouring Afghanistan
to support the voluntary repatriation of Afghan
refugees in safety and dignity, and urges those host
States to continue to provide international protection
to Afghan refugees in need of it. It encourages the
international community to provide the necessary
assistance in this regard.

 

"The Security Council condemns the continuing
grave violations of the human rights of women and
girls, including all forms of discrimination against
them, in all areas of Afghanistan, particularly in areas
under the control of the Taliban. It remains deeply
concerned about continued restrictions on their access
to health care, to education and to employment outside
the home, and about restrictions on their freedom of
movement and freedom from intimidation, harassment
and violence. The Council notes the recent reports of
modest progress regarding the access of women and
girls to certain services, but considers that such
incremental improvements, while welcome, still fall
far short of the minimum expectations of the
international community, and calls upon all parties,
particularly the Taliban, to take measures to end all
violations of human rights of women and girls.

"The Security Council reiterates that outside
interference in the internal affairs of Afghanistan,
including the involvement of foreign combatants and
military personnel and the supply of weapons and
other materials used in the conflict, should cease
immediately. It calls upon all States to take resolute
measures to prohibit their military personnel from
planning and participating in combat operations in
Afghanistan, and immediately to withdraw their
personnel and to assure that the supply of ammunition
and other war-making materials is halted. The Council
expresses its deep concern at the continuing
involvement in the fighting in Afghanistan, on the side
of the Taliban forces, of thousands of non-Afghan
nationals.

"The Security Council reiterates its position that
the United Nations must continue to play its central
and impartial role in international efforts towards a
peaceful resolution of the Afghan conflict. It
welcomes the appointment of a new Personal
Representative of the Secretary-General and the
activities of the United Nations Special Mission to
Afghanistan (UNSMA) to facilitate a political process
aimed at achieving a lasting political settlement to the
conflict. The Council supports the phased deployment
of the UNSMA Civil Affairs Unit inside Afghanistan,
as the security conditions permit.

"The Security Council welcomes the renewed
commitment of members of the 'six plus two' group
to contribute to a peaceful resolution of the Afghan
conflict in support of the efforts of the United Nations,
and urges the members of the group and the Afghan

parties to implement the Tashkent Declaration on
Fundamental Principles for a Peaceful Settlement of
the Conflict in Afghanistan (A/54/174-S/1999/812, annex), particularly the agreement of members of the
group not to provide military support to any Afghan
party and to prevent the use of their territories for
such purposes.

"The Security Council expresses its
appreciation for the efforts undertaken by the
Organization of the Islamic Conference, in support
of and in coordination with the United Nations, to
facilitate the convening of negotiations between the
two Afghan parties. It encourages the process
launched in Rome to convene a loya jirgah in
Afghanistan and acknowledges other recent efforts
to promote peace in Afghanistan, such as those of
the Cyprus group and the meeting in Tokyo.

"The Security Council strongly condemns the
continuing use of Afghan territory, especially areas
controlled by the Taliban, for the sheltering and
training of terrorists and planning of terrorist acts,
and reaffirms its conviction that the suppression of
international terrorism is essential for the
maintenance of international peace and security. It
insists that the Taliban cease the provision of
sanctuary and training for international terrorists and
their organizations, take effective measures to ensure
that the territory under its control is not used for
terrorist installations and camps or for the
preparation or organization of terrorist acts against
other States or their citizens, and cooperate with
efforts to bring indicted terrorists to justice.

"The Security Council demands once again that
the Taliban turn over indicted terrorist Usama bin
Laden to appropriate authorities as set out in its
resolution 1267 (1999) of 15 October 1999. It
stresses that the continued failure of the Taliban to
comply with this demand is unacceptable. The
Council will ensure effective implementation of the
measures imposed by that resolution. It condemns
the recent attacks and planned attacks by terrorists
affiliated with Usama bin Laden, which constitute a
continuing threat to the international community.

"The Security Council reiterates that the
capture by the Taliban of the Consulate-General of
the Islamic Republic of Iran and the murder of the
Iranian diplomats and journalist in Mazar-e-Sharif as
well as the murders of the United Nations personnel

 

constitute flagrant violations of international law. It
expresses its concern at the failure of the Taliban
effectively to bring to justice those responsible for
these crimes. The Council reiterates its demand that
the Taliban cooperate fully with the United Nations in
this regard.
"The Security Council is deeply disturbed by an
alarming increase in the cultivation, production and
trafficking of drugs in Afghanistan, especially in areas
controlled by the Taliban, and by its consequences for
the continuation of the conflict. It demands that the
Taliban, as well as others, halt all illegal drugs
activities. The Council encourages the initiative of the
'six plus two' group to address the drug-related issues
in a coordinated manner with the support of the Office
for Drug Control and Crime Prevention. It also
encourages Member States and others concerned to
increase their support for the efforts aimed at
strengthening the drug control capacities of countries
bordering Afghanistan.

"The Security Council stresses the need for
prompt and effective implementation by all Member
States of the measures imposed by its resolution 1267
(1999), and reminds Member States of their
obligations under this resolution, including assisting in
the identification of Taliban assets and aircraft. It
underlines that sanctions are not aimed at the Afghan
people, but are imposed against the Taliban because of
its non-compliance with that resolution. The Council
reaffirms its decision to assess the impact, including
the humanitarian implications, of the measures
imposed by that resolution. It encourages the
Committee established pursuant to its resolution 1267
(1999) to report in this respect as soon as practicable.

"The Security Council holds the leadership of
the Taliban responsible for not taking measures to
comply with the demands made in its resolutions,
especially to conclude a ceasefire and to resume
negotiations, and stresses the need for the Taliban to
comply with these demands without delay.

"In this context the Security Council reaffirms
its readiness to consider the imposition of further
targeted measures, in accordance with its
responsibility under the Charter of the United
Nations, with the aim of achieving the full
implementation of all its relevant resolutions."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2000/l2.

I thank all representatives for their time and
consideration and for their welcome remarks. I think that
the Security Council has issued an important statement.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.
The Security Council will remain seized of the
matter.

The meeting rose at 2.45 pm.
