Mr. Sahovie (Serbia and Montenegro): Allow me
at the outset to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council for this
month. We wish you every success in your extremely
challenging task in February.

My delegation would like to express its
appreciation for the visit of the Security Council
mission to Kosovo and Belgrade last December,
especially to Ambassador Kolby, the head of the
mission. We consider it invaluable that the Council
members had the opportunity to gain first-hand
knowledge of the conditions on the ground. The report
of the mission clearly demonstrates that so much still
needs to be done in Kosovo and Metohija.

We also welcome the Secretary-General's report,
which contains a comprehensive assessment of the
overall situation in Kosovo, and we are grateful for his
presence at this meeting. I wish to thank his Special
Representative, Mr. Steiner, for his briefing.

I would like to take this opportunity to reiterate
the importance of the recent adoption and promulgation
of the Constitutional Charter of Serbia and
Montenegro. The new Constitution will enable the
country to stabilize and will contribute to the stability
of the region as a whole. In this context, allow me to
emphasize that the adoption of the Constitutional
Charter does not change the identity or the
international personality of the State. The international
obligations and laws relevant to the Federal Republic
of Yugoslavia, including resolution 1244 (1999), will
continue to apply to Serbia and Montenegro.

We welcome the fact that the Security Council, in
its presidential statement prepared for this meeting,
expresses the same view, namely, that resolution 1244
(1999) remains fully valid in all its aspects in the
context of the transformation of the Federal Republic
of Yugoslavia into Serbia and Montenegro. We are
firmly of the view that all United Nations documents
should continue to reflect the fact that Kosovo and
Metohija is a part of Serbia and Montenegro, in
accordance with resolution 1244 (1999). Specifically,
our position is that reference to Serbia and Montenegro
should be inserted into United Nations documents
whenever Kosovo is mentioned.

It is necessary to assess the extent to which
resolution 1244 (1999) has been implemented. With
due respect to significant efforts and gradual
improvements in some segments, the reports of both
the Secretary-General and the Security Council
mission, as well as recent reports by other international
bodies, clearly indicate that, after almost four years of
the international presence, the objective of a stable,
multi-ethnic and prosperous Kosovo and Metohija is
far from being achieved. There are still flagrant
violations of human and minority rights. Violence,
crime, intolerance, arms, drugs and trafficking in
human beings are, unfortunately, abundant throughout
the province.

Our primary concerns continue to be security,
human and minority rights, the return of refugees and
internally displaced persons, and resolving the fate of
the missing. Decentralization, which has unfortunately
not moved from the initial stages, is also of immense
importance as a precondition for ensuring equal rights
for all communities.

Within the context of security and minority
rights, the issue of protecting cultural and historical
heritage and religious sites must be addressed.
Regrettably, the efforts of KFOR and the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) have been insufficient, as has been evident
from the destruction of more than 100 patrimonial sites
in Kosovo and Metohija in the past few years.

The Secretary-General's report has noted the
obstacles to the establishment of a multi-ethnic civil
service, which include security concerns and the lack
of freedom of movement. The report concludes that
violence against the Kosovo Serb community has been
widely condemned by the international community,
while the reaction of the Kosovo leadership has been
rather low-key.

One of the goals of resolution 1244 (1999) is the
establishment of substantial autonomy in Kosovo and
Metohija. However, many developments on the ground
undoubtedly go well beyond the scope of autonomy.
Some of the decisions by UNMIK have contributed to
this situation. Also, there have been major attempts by
the Provisional Institutions of Self-Government to
overstep their authority, established in the
Constitutional Framework.

The Secretary-General's report concludes that
Government meetings and Assembly sessions are
characterized by an increasing desire to encroach on
the powers reserved to the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, while the Assembly has shown
continued reluctance to accommodate minority
community demands. The report notes several new
year messages from leading Kosovo Albanian
politicians calling for independence in 2003.

The latest example of this pattern of behaviour is
a proposal by a number of Albanian deputies of the
Kosovo Assembly to adopt a declaration of
independence for the province. While recognizing the
freedom of political expression, we do believe that it is
essential to abide by international law and relevant
documents, which are binding for all. We therefore
urge the Security Council to respond decisively to the
aforementioned initiative, as it is not only contrary to
resolution 1244 (1999), but also poses a threat to
regional stability. Otherwise, this trend towards
creeping independence will continue - a trend that
motivates the calls to begin discussions on the future of
Kosovo and Metohija, and to begin such discussions
"before it is too late" and while there is still something
to discuss.

Time and again, we have stressed the importance
of initiating a dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina.
For our part, we are ready to engage in this process.
However, our calls to that effect have gone
unanswered. We have to rebuild ties between the
various parts of the country if we want to leave the
tragic legacy of the past behind. Also, we firmly
believe that our cooperation with UNMIK is a key to
the successful implementation of resolution 1244
(1999). The cooperation needs to be further intensified
and improved, which implies that all our agreements
and understandings should be honoured. Mutual trust is
a sine qua non for this cooperation. In that sense, the
arrangements for northern Mitrovica are especially
important and have to be fully implemented to enable
us to move forward.

The benchmarks of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General are an important aspect of the
efforts to normalize Kosovo and Metohija. However,
we strongly believe that the Security Council should
remain focused on resolution 1244 (1999) as the basic,
legally binding document on Kosovo and Metohija.
Unfortunately, it is obvious that a number of important
provisions of the resolution have not been implemented
yet. We therefore reiterate the need for its full
implementation, including paragraph 9.

My country fully shares the view of the Security
Council mission that continued substantial
international engagement in Kosovo will be necessary
in the foreseeable future. The fact that only 2 per cent
of internally displaced persons have been able to return
to Kosovo and Metohija so far is the best proof that the
current level of international security presence should
be maintained.

We are relying on the Security Council to
continue to address all of those problems and to
actively monitor the events in Kosovo and Metohija. It
is of particular importance that the Council continue to
act in a resolute and comprehensive manner, in line
with its authority under resolution 1244 (1999), taking
into account the interests of all parties concerned. No
party should be excluded from that process. Short of
that, it is difficult to expect any substantive
improvement in the situation in Kosovo and Metohija.

