Mr. Al-Kidwa (Palestine) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I have the pleasure to express to you,
Mr. President, our happiness at seeing you preside over
this meeting. Allow me also to thank the members of
the Security Council for giving us this opportunity to
participate in a debate of such great importance. In that
regard, we would also like to express our gratitude to
South Africa for its initiative in calling for the holding
of this meeting in its capacity as the current Chair of
the Non-Aligned Movement.

Like other Arab and Islamic countries and the
overwhelming majority of the world's peoples and
States, Palestine is deeply concerned and harbours
serious apprehensions about what we are witnessing
with regard to the increasing possibilities of a new
outbreak of war in the Middle East region. We are also
worried about the growing possibility of the use of
military force against Iraq - a sisterly Arab member
country of the United Nations - as well as about the
possibility of invading and occupying it. Were such
things to occur, they would of course lead to further
destruction in Iraq and to further suffering for its
people. Moreover, such events would also have
profound negative consequences on the region as a
whole, encourage extremism and heighten hatred
towards those who actually undertook such actions. It
is very difficult to imagine stability in either Iraq or the
region if such events take place. Using military force or
going to war is definitely no solution. It must be
avoided.

Despite the beating of war drums we have been
hearing recently, there have been some positive
developments. On the one hand, this question has been
referred to the United Nations instead of taking
unilateral action; and, on the other hand, Iraq has
accepted the unconditional return of inspectors. We
believe we should build on these two elements and that
the current crisis should be resolved through a rapid
return of inspectors to ensure that there are no weapons
of mass destruction, thereby reassuring the
international community with regard to this important
issue.

The Security Council has adopted enough
resolutions on this subject. The recent negotiations in
Vienna and Iraq's subsequent position seem to point to
the possibility of reaching acceptable arrangements
between the United Nations and Iraq with a View to
ensuring full compliance with the resolution calling for
the destruction of all weapons of mass destruction and
verifying that there are no such weapons in Iraq.
Nevertheless, if the members of the Council find it
necessary to adopt a new resolution, it will be
important that such a resolution not contain impossible
demands or mandate the use of force in advance. A
new Council resolution should serve as a bridge
leading to the implementation of its previous
resolutions and not as a bridge to war.

Just prior to the last crisis, Arab States had indeed
made great headway towards Arab reconciliation with
regard to the situation between Iraq and Kuwait. The
Beirut Summit was a very important step in that
direction. We would like to reiterate our commitment
to the spirit of the Summit and to its decisions and
resolutions, including with regard to cooperating with
the Tripartite Commission to resolve the issues of the
return of Kuwaiti property and of Kuwaiti prisoners
and third-party citizens being held in Iraq.

It is very difficult for the Arab street to believe
that the use of force against Iraq would serve to uphold
international law and legitimacy or to ensure respect
for the resolutions of the Security Council. It is doubly
difficult to believe when all Arabs - and indeed the
entire world - have witnessed how Security Council
resolutions are violated and rejected and how the
provisions of international law are flouted by a single
State. That State is, of course, Israel, which is
considered by the Council to be the only occupying
Power in the world today and which, incidentally, has
illegally acquired several weapons of mass destruction.
Just a few hours ago, Israeli tanks once again destroyed
the homes of civilians in Rafah, killing at least five
people and injuring forty. What we need here is for
Members to try to regain, even partially, credibility for
the Council and for this international Organization.

