Mr. Sinhaseni (Thailand): I have the honour to
speak today on behalf of the 10 States members of the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN),
namely, Brunei Darussalam, Cambodia, Indonesia, the
Lao People's Democratic Republic, Malaysia,
Myanmar, the Philippines, Singapore, Viet Nam and
Thailand.

ASEAN would like to congratulate Viet Nam, a
fellow ASEAN member State, on its assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
October, and on convening the debate on this issue,
which is of vital importance to our region.

ASEAN warmly welcomes back to New York His
Excellency Mr. Jose Luis Guterres, Deputy Prime
Minister of Timor-Leste, himself a close friend of
ASEAN. ASEAN appreciates his personal participation
in the recent ASEAN Regional Forum held in Phuket,
Thailand, in July 2009, and his message of
commitment to strengthening relations with ASEAN.

ASEAN also thanks and pays tribute to
Mr. AtulKhare, the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Timor-Leste, and to the men and
women of the United Nations Integrated Mission in
Timor-Leste (UNMIT), for their dedication in
supporting the Government and the people of Timor-
Leste in the nation-building process. We join in
wishing Mr. Khare well in his future endeavours.

From the beginning, several ASEAN Member
States have contributed troops and police units to
successive United Nations missions in Timor-Leste,
including the current mission, UNMIT. That, in itself,
is a testament of ASEAN's support for the United
Nations on this issue.

I would like to take this opportunity to share
ASEAN's views on a few points as follows. First,
ASEAN welcomes the continued progress achieved in
Timor-Leste in all four mandated areas of UNMIT,
namely review and reform of the security sector,
strengthening of the rule of law, promoting a culture of
democratic governance and dialogue, and economic
and social development. We congratulate the
Government and the people of Timor-Leste on having
successfully held, on 30 August, the celebration of the
tenth anniversary of the popular consultation as well as
on having successfully held local elections in early
October; we believe that these were important
milestones for the country.

ASEAN is pleased that the overall security
situation remains calm and that there has been
substantial progress in addressing the two residual
consequences of the 2006 crisis. In particular, we note
with satisfaction that all 65 camps for internally
displaced persons were officially closed without
significant incident and the reintegration of the
"petitioners" into civilian life has proceeded smoothly.
We are confident that Timor-Leste will continue to
move ahead in this positive direction.

Secondly, ASEAN is pleased that, since May, the
national police of Timor-Leste has started to gradually
resume primary policing responsibilities in some
districts or units on the basis of the criteria for
resumption that were mutually agreed between the
Government of Timor-Leste and UNMIT. ASEAN
strongly supports further international efforts, both in
terms of bilateral and multilateral assistance, to support
Timor-Leste in strengthening the capacity of its
national police. We also support efforts to establish
clear command and control arrangements between
security institutions in border areas and to establish
accountability mechanisms and civilian oversight of
those security institutions.

Thirdly, ASEAN fully supports the strong
commitment of the Government of Timor-Leste to
promote the socio-economic development of the
country, which has resulted in steady progress in areas
of national priority. We also support the Government's
commitment to mainstream the Millennium
Development Goals (MDGs) into its national
development strategy. Here, we must not allow the
world financial and economic crisis to adversely affect
international assistance and partnership for Timor-
Leste. As Timor-Leste proceeds with its nation-
building process, development assistance from
international partners is vital to help the country
through this delicate period.

With that in mind, as noted by the Special
Representative, individual ASEAN Member States are
working closely with the Government of Timor-Leste
in areas that are consistent with the latter's national
priorities, such as poverty eradication, employment
generation, food security, rural development, fisheries,
infrastructure development, public health and human
resource development.

Fourthly, ASEAN supports the recommendation
in the Secretary-General's report (S/2009/504) that the
present strength and composition of UNMIT, including
its formed police units, should be maintained while
Timor-Leste is undergoing the delicate process of
security sector reform. Continued peace and stability
will be essential for socio-economic development and
efforts to lay a strong and durable foundation for
democratic governance of the country. At the same
time, ASEAN believes that we should be clear about
the future role of the United Nations in Timor-Leste
and about how best to ensure a smooth transition from
peacekeeping to durable peacebuilding. In that
connection, ASEAN looks forward to
recommendations by the Secretary-General in his next
report on possible adjustments to UNMIT's mandate
and strength.

On a final point, which we feel is most important,
ASEAN wishes to reiterate that the principle of
national ownership should be, not only a principle that
guides every facet of UNMIT's work, but also the
ultimate goal of the international community in Timor-
Leste. ASEAN strongly believes that it is of vital
importance to ensure ownership by the leaders and the
people of Timor-Leste of any strategy and benchmarks
that the United Nations would develop for the country.
We should all strive for a nation-building process that
is a process of, by, and for the people of Timor-Leste.
Here, ASEAN stands firm in solidarity with Timor-
Leste as a regional partner and, above all, as a friend.

