Mr. Mohammad Kama] (Malaysia): My delegation,
like the others before me, would like to congratulate you,
Mr. President, and your country on the smooth manner in
which you have conducted the work of the Council thus far.
We are confident that under your able and wise leadership
the work of the Council will be brought to a successful
conclusion in the remaining 11 days of your presidency.

My delegation will vote in favour of the draft
resolution before us this morning, as we believe that early
and decisive action by the Council is pertinent to support
the Government and people of Sierra Leone in their deep
and palpable yearning for peace following the signing of
the Peace Agreement between the Government of Sierra
Leone and the Revolutionary United Front in Lorne on 7
July 1999. We View the Lome Peace Agreement as a
milestone and a great step forward for Sierra Leone.

My delegation would like to take this opportunity to
commend the tireless and inexorable efforts of the President
of Togo, the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) and all those involved in facilitating the
delicate and difficult negotiations in Lome for their
contribution to this courageous achievement. In particular,
Malaysia would like to commend the unflinching efforts
and the dedication of the Military Observer Group of
ECOWAS (ECOMOG) in helping to restore peace and
stability in the country.

We note that progress is being made by the parties
towards the full implementation of the Peace Agreement.
In this regard, we wish to underscore that the immediate
priority in Sierra Leone is to consolidate peace. We
concur with the Secretary-General's views that this
Agreement affords a unique opportunity to bring an end
to the conflict. The international community must
endeavour to continue assisting Sierra Leone in its
national reconciliation efforts and in the reconstruction of
its devastated economy. To this end, Malaysia believes
that the United Nations Observer Mission in Sierra Leone
(UNOMSIL) has a critical role to play, particularly in the
phase following the signing of the Peace Agreement.

We support the recommendation of the Secretary-
General to authorize, as an immediate first step, a
provisional increase in the number of UNOMSIL military
observers, who are to be deployed in a gradual manner
and operate under the security provided by ECOMOG.
Malaysia, for its part, will give its utmost consideration to
providing additional military observers to UNOMSIL
despite the recent regrettable hostage-taking incident, in
which a Malaysian military observer was among the
hostages held. My delegation views the incident with
great concern and wishes to underscore the importance of
the safety, security and freedom of movement of United
Nations and associated personnel. The hostage-taking
incident in which some UNOMSIL and ECOMOG
personnel were held captive is a grim reminder of the
still - fragile and precarious situation in the country.

Needless to say, the challenges ahead remain
daunting. The international community and this
Organization have indeed an important responsibility to
assist Sierra Leone and to ensure that momentum is
maintained in this peace process. Let us not allow this
momentum be an ephemeral one. We must join hands to
advance the peace process in Sierra Leone. There is no
other option.

