The President: I thank Baroness Catherine Ashton
for her extremely interesting and valuable briefing.

The Council has before it the text of a statement by
the President on behalf of the Council on the subject of
today's meeting. I thank the Council members for their
valuable contributions to the statement.

In accordance with the understanding reached
among the members of the Council, I shall take it
that the members of the Security Council agree to the
statement, which will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2014/4.

It is so decided.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Lithuania.

I am happy to welcome Baroness Catherine
Ashton, High Representative of the European Union
for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy, with whom
we had fantastic cooperation during Lithuania's recent
presidency of the European Union (EU). I also thank
Baroness Ashton for her briefing today. And I wish to
sincerely thank the Secretary-General for his support
and contribution to the ever-expanding cooperation
between the United Nations and regional organizations
in general to prevent, manage and resolve crises.
Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations is as
relevant today as ever, and this important debate today
is a vivid testimony to that.

Today, both the United Nations and the EU operate
in an ever-changing global environment where the
multiple challenges can be addressed only collectively.
The proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, the
illicit trade in small arms and light weapons, terrorism
and violent extremism, horrendous violations of human
rights and international humanitarian law, transnational
organized crime, threats to cybersecurity, disputes over
energy and natural resources, and climate change are
but a few examples of global threats and risks. Yet they
often manifest specific regional and local dimensions.

For that reason, the knowledge of localized
perspectives and the contribution of regional and
subregional organizations are essential for the
international community to be able to effectively
tackle those challenges. The interaction and synergies
of the United Nations, the EU and other regional and
subregional organizations, first and foremost among
which is the African Union (AU), are critical in solving
conflicts. They are also key for prevention, as regional
organizations can be particularly helpful in the early
identification of potential crises and mediation. Over
recent years, EU/United Nations cooperation has grown
considerably in terms of both focus and scope. I will
therefore limit myself to just a few examples and issues
that define that mutually beneficial cooperation.

First, humanitarian action remains one of the key
areas of cooperation between the United Nations and
the EU. The EU is the world's largest humanitarian
donor. By urgently responding to humanitarian crises
in close cooperation with the United Nations, the Union
has helped to save lives in numerous conflict and
natural disaster areas.
For example, the Central African Republic
continues to suffer from the most horrendous crimes
that can befall a nation in conflict. In response, the
EU has taken it upon itself to maintain a regular
humanitarian air service to ferry aid workers and
emergency supplies to that strife-torn country. It thus
complements the efforts on the ground undertaken by
the United Nations, the AU and other actors.

The Sahel region is another area where the United
Nations and the EU are close partners in action. Earlier
in February this year, the European Commission
announced that it would provide €l42 million in
humanitarian funds to the Sahel region in 2014.
Likewise, the EU has been supporting life-saving
activities in South Sudan, providing aid for internally
displaced persons and refugees.

Since the end of 2011, in direct response to the
Syrian crisis, more than €2 billion in aid has been
provided to Syria and neighbouring countries from the
EU budget and its member States. We call for full and
immediate implementation of the presidential statement
of 2 October 2013 (S/PRST/2013/15). The crisis is
testing the response capacity of the entire international
aid system, aid organizations and donors alike. Lessons
learned should serve a basis for our joint efforts to
improve the international humanitarian system even
further.

My country has been a consistent participant in
humanitarian efforts, both bilaterally and through joint
EU funding. Lithuania has made several contributions
to alleviating the humanitarian crisis in Syria, including
through aid to Palestinian refugees in Syria, as well as,
more recently, to the humanitarian crisis in the Central
African Republic.

A second area where United Nations-EU
cooperation continues to have an impact on the ground
is crisis management and early peacebuilding. At
present, the EU is preparing for the deployment of an
operation in the Central African Republic in support
of the African-led International Support Mission in
the Central African Republic and the French forces.
Lithuania is about to join the efforts of the international
community in the Central African Republic with an
initial contribution of air assets to Operation Sangaris.

My country is also contributing to EU operations
off the coast of Somalia and in Mali. Those operations
are being carried out in close coordination and
complementarity with United Nations efforts on the
ground. It is particularly encouraging that, thanks to
such joint efforts, piracy off the East coast of Africa
has decreased to the lowest level in seven years. Also
in Mali, Lithuania is contributing to the EU training
mission. Our officers are part of the team that provides
training and advice for the Malian defence and
security forces. That mission will help build national
institutions, which will be essential for enabling Mali
to defend itself as terrorism, violent extremism and
international drug trafficking continue to pose serious
threats to the country on its path to recovery.

Both the United Nations and the EU continue to
work for a better future for the Afghan people. The
international community must stick to its commitments
in Afghanistan, with a special focus on supporting
regional cooperation between Afghanistan and its
neighbours, building the capacities of central and local
authorities and strengthening the rule of law and respect
for human rights, in particular the rights of women and
girls. In turn, Afghanistan must continue on the path of
comprehensive reform and democracy, for the sake of
the Afghan people's future.

A third aspect that I would like to emphasize
is mediation. In that regard, I must personally
congratulate the High Representative on her tireless
efforts, skills and deep understanding of the situation
in the Balkan region, which have led to a breakthrough
in Serbia-Kosovo relations, which, in turn, represents
a veritable success for the entire region. Thanks to
that breakthrough, Serbia and Kosovo are today on the
path to European integration, as accession negotiations
with Serbia and negotiations on a stabilization and
association agreement with Kosovo are ongoing.

Another good example of EU-United Nations
cooperation in the field of mediation is the international
discussions in Geneva to address the consequences of
the 2008 war in Georgia. That process is very important
for strengthening security and stability in the region
and must continue.

The interim agreement reached during E3+3 and Iran
talks, chaired by Baroness Ashton, is another example
of well-coordinated and synergetic efforts based on
mediation. We commend the High Representative for
that achievement and hope that further efforts to reach a
comprehensive solution to the Iranian nuclear issue will
lead to greater stability and security in the entire region.

As we all know, human rights violations are
often the first sign of a bigger crisis to come. We
can hope to break the cycle of recurring crises and
conflicts only by ensuring full respect for human
rights, justice, accountability, good governance and
the rule of law in particular. Lithuania stresses the
importance of the EU-United Nations partnership in
the area of strengthening the rule of law, as the rule
of law has tremendous potential in facilitating post-
conflict peacebuilding, preventing armed conflicts
and promoting progress towards sustainable peace and
development.

We welcome the Secretary-General's "Rights
up front" initiative. Lithuania looks forward to the
continued work of the United Nations and the EU as
natural partners in seeking to ensure human dignity
and a safe and secure life for all.

We are convinced that the voice of the EU should
continue to speak clearly at the United Nations, and the
core United Nations objectives should remain at the
heart of EU foreign policy endeavours.

Let me assure the Secretary-General and the High
Representative of Lithuania's continued support to the
ever-expanding cooperation, based on shared values,
between the EU and the United Nations in promoting
international peace and security.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Security Council.

