Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, allow me to congratulate you, Sir, and the
Republic of Korea on assuming the presidency of the
Security Council this month. We thank the Secretary-
General, the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights and the Director for International Law
and Cooperation of the International Committee of the
Red Cross for their statements.

Once again, the Security Council is addressing the
issue of the protection of civilians in armed conflict
from the perspective of the duty to observe the relevant
regulations of international humanitarian law in order to
reduce the impact of armed conflict on civilians. This is
an issue of particular relevance to the Colombian State,
which has been defending its democratic institutions
from the attack of illegal armed groups whose strategies
of war openly violate those rules.

My country shares the concern of the Secretary-
General and other delegations over the situation of
civilians in armed conflicts in some parts of the world,
and over the recurrent failure of parties to conflict
to fulfil their duty to respect and protect civilians in
accordance with international law. We also agree that
respect for international law should be promoted by
all parties to a conflict; that the protection of civilians
by United Nations peacekeeping missions and other
relevant missions should be strengthened; that access
to humanitarian assistance should be improved in
coordination with States on the Council's agenda; and
that accountability should be promoted when the law is
violated.

The report of the Secretary-General (S/2012/376)
refers to the importance of enhancing compliance by
non-State armed groups, implying that such compliance
depends on existing direct contact between the United
Nations and non-State armed actors. The practice of
identifying a formula that can work or that has worked
in certain specific situations and elevating it to a
generalized category can cause difficulties. From our
point of view, it is hard to identify a unique formula
applicable to all cases. Each situation is different and
must be addressed by taking into account its own
special circumstances.

In the particular case of policies towards non-State
armed actors, and in order to ensure that such policies
are compatible with those adopted by the Colombian
Government in the context of peace negotiations, in
the current circumstances we consider it essential to
preserve ownership by the State and its Government in
driving the process, without external interference. We
believe that the concern to ensure that non-State armed
actors comply with international humanitarian law and
other relevant law is valid, but we also believe that this
concern is fully covered by the cardinal principles of
distinction, proportionality and precaution during an
attack.

For that reason, it is necessary to consider very
carefully the recommendation that State Members
should refrain from adopting policies or other measures
with the effect of preventing humanitarian actors from
working with non-State armed groups for humanitarian
purposes, and in particular from carrying out activities
to promote respect for international humanitarian law.
That recommendation must be based on principles of
cooperation and coordination with a concerned State on
the basis of its national sovereignty.

Based on its recent historical and painful experience,
and in relation to the particular circumstances of the
Colombian conflict, the Government of President
Santos Calderon has adopted a policy to ensure that
no dialogue with an illegal armed group that has been
designated internationally as a terrorist organization
will take place without its prior explicit consent - that
is, when the national Government of Colombia considers
such dialogue appropriate. Furthermore, while the
Government is determined to ensure that those groups
and their leaders take specific actions to comply with
the rules and principles of international humanitarian
law, it also firmly believes that such compliance should
not include independent contact by those groups with
United Nations representatives. Colombians have
already been down that road, with meagre profit.

We thank the States Members of the United
Nations and the Organization itself for understanding
and respecting that policy and for their offers of
cooperation, which will remain in effect until the illegal
armed groups operating in the country decide to change
their behavior and fully respect the international norms
described. The existence or absence of United Nations
contacts with these groups does not affect the viability
of the law applicable to armed conflicts, because what
counts is the will of the parties. When that is lacking,
States should have solid institutions for prosecution and
due punishment.

Focus on the possible approaches of certain actors
towards illegal armed groups diverts our attention from
the fundamental issue, which is the lack of political
will. The validity of the rights of civilians in hostilities
requires no contact with non-State armed groups, but
only the decision of the latter either to abandon violence
and pursue their goals through democratic debate, or, if
they decide to pursue armed conflict, to give full effect
to international humanitarian law, without exception.

Our Government has always welcomed and been
grateful for the work of the International Committee
of the Red Cross in facilitating the release of those
kidnapped by illegal armed groups. In recent years,
the Colombian Government has succeeded, with the
active collaboration of the International Committee of
the Red Cross and in some cases with the support of
friendly Governments and civil society organizations,
in helping many people to recover their freedom.

Another issue that we wish to highlight is the
recommendation to establish commissions of inquiry
and fact-finding missions, as contained in the
Secretary-General's report, the concept paper before
us (S/2012/75, annex) and the presidential statement
(S/PRST/2013/2) . We understand that, by definition,
these mechanisms may be applicable only to countries
on the agenda of the Security Council, and otherwise
only by prior arrangement with the State concerned.

My Government agrees that the alternatives raised in
the report to reach populations in need of humanitarian
assistance - such as temporary cessation of hostilities,
humanitarian pauses, humanitarian corridors and days
of tranquillity - must be adapted to the circumstances
of each conflict. Any serious analysis will indicate that
international humanitarian law obligates military forces
to adjust themselves to humanitarian imperatives,
without implying that such efforts may not occasionally
control, for obvious security reasons in the middle of a
conflict, the movement of people and properties.

Colombia supports the idea expressedby the Security
Council in the presidential statement on the protection
of civilians in November 2010 (S/PRST/2010/25), that
the promotion of peace processes, the achievement of
peace and sustainable development, and respect for
human rights and the rule of law are of the utmost
importance to protect the civilians in the medium and
long terms.

Colombia, with 200 years of democratic institutions
and a modern regulatory framework, has spared
no effort to enhance and complement its efforts in
that field, as can be see in the adoption of ambitious
initiatives to seek peace and reconciliation. Examples of
this include the transitional justice system incorporated
into the Justice and Peace Law of 2005, which has
allowed for the demobilization and reintegration into
society of over 54,200 members of illegal armed
groups; the establishment of an innovative mechanism
of indemnities and restitution of land established under
the Victims and Restitution of Land Law of 2011; and
the constitutional reform that has established a legal
framework for peace.

Consequently, we strongly believe that the peace
talks currently under way are founded on a solid
domestic legal basis and a strong political will on the
part of the Government, which are compatible with
the international obligations that we have undertaken
and consistent with the aim of protecting the civilian
population.

