Mr. Ugarelli (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): I wish
to express my gratitude for this opportunity to share
some remarks on the subsidiary bodies of the Security
Council that Peru had the honour of steering over the
past two years.

I would like to begin with the Peruvian
chairmanship of the Council's Informal Working
Group on International Tribunals, which supports
and monitors the work of the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals, which is currently
led by Judge Carmel Agius. The work of the Informal
Working Group clearly constitutes an integral
component of multilateralism and international law,
thereby contributing to effectively addressing the
most demanding contemporary global challenges,
in particular the fight against impunity for atrocity
crimes. We exercise those functions being convinced
of the need for the Security Council to remain united
in support of the Residual Mechanism, as well as in the
preservation of its work and its legacy. Not only has
the Mechanism strengthened the fight against impunity
and served to deter the perpetrators of such crimes,
but it has also promoted reconciliation while making a
fundamental impact on the jurisprudential development
of international criminal law.

The Informal Working Group held a series of
informal meetings over the past two years, primarily
to discuss the biannual reports of the Residual
Mechanism, as well as to consider and ultimately adopt
both presidential statement S/PRST/2018/6, which
established the time frame for the review of the Residual
Mechanism's progress, and resolution 2422 (2018),
which, in addition to appointing the Prosecutor and
renewing the mandate of the Mechanism, approved that
review, taking into account the recommendations of the
Office of Internal Oversight Services. The resolution
also calls for the cooperation of all States, as it befalls
States to execute the sentences and orders handed
down, as well as respond to requests for assistance
and prosecution.

In that regard, I would like to acknowledge the
significant role played by each of the member States of
the Council in ensuring that the Residual Mechanism
continues strengthening its work, including its
judicial agenda, meeting requests for assistance, the
preservation of historical archives and the monitoring
of cases referred to national courts. We wish the
Permanent Representative of Viet Nam, Ambassador
Dang Dinh Quy, and his team every success in their
efforts to continue developing this firm and constructive
approach to upholding international criminal justice
and the fight against impunity. Moreover, I thank the
United Nations Office of Legal Affairs and the Security
Council Affairs Division for their tireless support over
the past two years.

Peru assumed the chairmanship of the Counter-
Terrorism Committee (CTC) convinced, based on our
own experiences, of the need to unrelentingly combat
this scourge in all its manifestations and arenas. I
would like to take this opportunity to share three
specific points in relation to our work in a position of
such high responsibility.

First of all, we wish to underscore the relevance
of assessment Visits to Member States, which enable
the Committee to verify, on the ground, weaknesses
and challenges that might require renewed technical
assistance; to take stock of new trends and terrorist
methods; and to identify good practices so that those
can be rendered more systematic. Therefore, over the
past two years, the CTC conducted 31 visits to various
countries, with the participation of the five permanent
members ofthe Council and Peru. In that connection, we
note the importance of members ofthe Security Council
being the first to consent to such visits and to participate
actively in the successful development thereof.

Secondly, we consider it essential to foster synergies
among the various stakeholders concerned in the fight
against the scourge of terrorism. That is why, upon
assuming the chairmanship of the Committee, we made
it a priority to establish a close and fluid relationship with
the recently created United Nations Office of Counter-
Terrorism, as well as with the Executive Directorate
of the Counter-Terrorism Committee, which helps
to strengthen the United Nations counter-terrorism
chain. We would therefore highlight the importance of
that cooperation not being limited to United Nations
entities, but rather extended to relevant international,
regional and subregional organizations, in areas such
as technical assistance facilitation, the exchange of
experiences and the coordination of collective efforts.

Thirdly, I wish to underscore the opportunities
offered by the CTC as the preferred forum for discussion
on this matter. In that regard, we are delighted to
have convened, with the support of the Executive
Directorate, 22 briefings and events on specific areas of
interest to Member States in the fight against terrorism.
The issues we addressed included maritime and civil
aviation security, including the use of drones; emerging
trends and new threats; and methods of countering
terrorist narratives, inter alia. The Committee also
continued to promote the mainstreaming of human
rights and the gender approach in the fight against
terrorism and violent extremism, while reminding
Member States that any fight against terrorism must
adhere to obligations arising from international law,
particularly international human rights law, refugee law
and humanitarian law. We would like to highlight the
valuable participation and contributions made during
those meetings by representatives of the public sector
and civil society, particularly the world of academia,
and to express our thanks for them.

I would also like to highlight the policy documents
that have been formulated, particularly the Addendum
adopted to the Madrid Guiding Principles on foreign
terrorist fighters (S/2018/ll77, annex), which is a
useful tool for States dealing with the challenges of the
return and relocation of fighters and their families. I
will conclude the section on the CTC by expressing our
best wishes for success to the incoming chairmanship
of Tunisia under the leadership of Ambassador
Moncef Baati, as well as our sincere thanks to all
the members of the Committee for their commitment
and cooperation, to the Executive Directorate and
especially its Executive Director, Assistant Secretary-
General Michele Coninsx, for their valuable guidance
and continuous support, and to the Secretariat for its
essential assistance.

Lastly, I would like to touch on Peru's chairmanship
of the Committee established pursuant to resolution
2140 (2014), on Yemen, which Peru has considered
a top priority in view of the impact and scale of
the humanitarian tragedy affecting the country's
population. That is why, in tackling that very delicate
responsibility, we sought to send a strong message to
the various actors concerned that there was no room
for a military solution and that new violations of
international humanitarian law and human rights in
Yemen would not be tolerated. It was in that context,
under Peru's presidency of the Security Council, that
the Committee paid its first visit to the region, in what
was a valuable exercise in raising awareness of the
purposes of the sanctions and measures imposed by the
2140 Committee and obtaining first-hand information
on their implementation. It also helped to foster greater
interaction, dialogue and cooperation between the
Committee, its Panel of Experts and the States in the
region, and to familiarize us with the latest political,
security and humanitarian developments in Yemen
related to the Committee's mandate.
We believe that the rapprochement that we have been
promoting with our various Government interlocutors
in the region should not be a one-time exercise but
that we should organize similar efforts in the next few
months aimed at continuing constructive dialogue and
making tangible progress on the process of a political
solution promoted by the United Nations. To that end, I
would like to underscore the importance of continuing
firm support to the Panel of Experts that so efficiently
and professionally supports the 2140 Committee. We
consider it essential to ensure that the Panel continues
to carry out its work independently and impartially,
protecting it from pressures motivated by political and
strategic considerations that might seek to control the
aims and outcome of its investigations.

In conclusion, I would like to express my
delegation's sincere gratitude to all who supported us
in executing our mandate, especially the members of
the Sanctions Committee that we chaired and the very
efficient and dedicated staff of the Secretariat, and to
express our wish to Ambassador Rhonda King, the
Permanent Representative of Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, and her team for a productive term as they
steer the Committee's work.

