Ms. Murmokaite (Lithuania): I would like to thank
you, Mr. President, for organizing this debate, and the
briefers for their useful insights.

Improving the Security Council's working methods
is an issue of great interest to all Member States.
After all, while only 15 Council members prescribe
and set legally binding norms, all 193 United Nations
Members have to implement their decisions. Greater
accountability, transparency and openness in the
Council's work are therefore paramount. Briefings by
the presidency at the beginning and end of the month
and by the Chairs of subsidiary bodies have become
routine, and more Council meetings are being held in
an open format.

We welcome the fact that more Sanctions
Committees are now briefing the Council in public.
In our View, such practice should become standard,
because it enables us to have a better understanding
of what those bodies do, and that is key to better
implementation, whether of sanctions regimes or
counter-terrorism measures. Particularly where the
Counter-Terrorism Committee is concerned, we believe
it is essential for it to engage with the membership ofthe
United Nations in order to raise awareness and provide
a platform for sharing good practices and insights on
how best to tackle the threat of terrorism and foreign
terrorist fighters. To that end, my delegation has
sought to increase the number of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee's open briefings and special events, and
through them tackle some issues that may not be on the
Committee's regular agenda. There is nothing regular
about the threat and spread of terrorism these days, and
the United Nations counter-terrorism machinery must
adjust to that new reality.

Late last year, the Department of Political Affairs
(DPA) took a useful step in bringing the Counter-
Terrorism Committee and the Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force together for an informal
briefing. Such meetings should not be one-offs,
especially since the gap between assessment and
assistance, and for that matter, between bodies with
mandates from the Security Council and from the
General Assembly, remains. It is vital that we overcome
the silo mentality and make sure that we respond jointly
and promptly to countries' concerns and needs for
assistance. There is still a lot of work to be done to that
effect.

Regarding the Sanctions Committees, we have
sought to engage actively with the countries concerned
and their neighbours and with relevant regional actors,
both formally and informally. We did so with the aim
of improving understanding of the situation at hand and
of how the decisions we take affect developments on
the ground, including the concerns that countries may
have about the impact of sanctions and their related
capacity-building needs. We believe these are good
practices that should be continued. Visits by the Chairs
of subsidiary bodies to the countries concerned should
be further encouraged. And, of course, as the Deputy
Secretary-General mentioned, the handover from Chair
to Chair should be better managed and streamlined. We
should strengthen the Secretariat's capacity to provide
adequate assistance to the Sanctions Committees in
their work. In that regard, we should keep in the mind
the work done last year by one Council member, and we
hope we can move it forward, with the best interests of
the countries concerned at its heart.

Where appropriate, we should also consider closer
cooperation among the Council's subsidiary bodies. We
have had a positive experience, both on their substance
and for practical reasons, with joint meetings between
the Counter-Terrorism Committee, the Committee
established pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989
(2011) concerning Al-Qaida and associated individuals
and entities, and the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 2140 (2014), as well as between the
Yemen Sanctions Committee and the Working Group
on Children and Armed Conflict. They save time for
both experts and briefers and can help us deal better
with the ever-growing demand for meeting spaces and
interpretation services.

We welcome the steps that the DPA has taken to
establish consolidated sanctions lists and provide more
systematic information on the United Nations website
and social media. Press statements and other forms of
media engagement by relevant subsidiary bodies or their
Chairs - although that practice is not common - offer
additional avenues for outreach and disseminating
relevant information and should be further explored.

Speaking of websites, we call on Council members
to take a fresh look at the possibilities of adjusting the
structure of the Security Council's annual report in line
with the realities of the information age. My delegation
has submitted a number of proposals in that regard, as
the representative of New Zealand has mentioned, to the
Informal Working Group on Documentation and Other
Procedural Questions, and we are open to engaging
further on the matter with all Council members.

As the Council endeavours to tackle an
unprecedented number of crises simultaneously, better
use of the agenda item on "any other business" during
consultations would be welcome. One useful option
that can strengthen the Council's preventive approach
is the ability to be flexible through the use of"any other
business" and informal briefings, aimed at flagging
potential crises, by the Secretary-General, the DPA
or, for that matter, the High Commissioner for Human
Rights, since human-rights violations are usually
harbingers of more serious trouble to come. With
regard to the Council's increasingly heavy workload,
we believe there is some scope for improvement by
reviewing existing mandate cycles to make things a
little easier, especially in cases where situations remains
static for long periods of time and may not warrant the
existing frequency of deliberations, as, for example, in
the case of quarterly meetings on Kosovo.

In our view, Council members must put the
"interactive" back in interactive debates. We should take
advantage of the rare meetings with Force Commanders,
police commanders, regional organizations and other
relevant actors to engage in genuine exchanges, not
limited to the reading ofprepared statements. Similarly,
there is room for improving the Council's dialogue
with the Peacebuilding Commission. While the Chairs
of peacebuilding country configurations do brief the
Council occasionally, their experience and insights
could be used more extensively, and in consultations
as well.

Open debates remain a highly important tool for
the work of the Council. However, more thought should
be given to structuring them better. It is frankly painful
to see ministers from countries that are not Council
members addressing the Council with only junior
experts there to listen to them - or to think of our own
colleagues speaking at 8.30 pm. on issues of critical
importance. Such questions remain open, although a
number ofuseful documents have already been adopted.
Previous Council documents contain useful indications
which should be revisited and taken up again.

During the general debate of the General Assembly
last month, several events dedicated to the issue of
veto restraint drew large numbers of participants. It is
simply unacceptable that veto powers should be used to
protect the perpetrators, as has been the case with Syria
or the downing of Malaysia Airlines Flight MH-17,
and not the victims. Lithuania fully supports relevant
initiatives, including the call for adopting a code of
conduct to that effect. Failure to bring the perpetrators
to account encourages impunity. Repeated failure to
do so calls the Council's credibility into question. We
believe that the Council should make better use of the
tools available to pursue justice, including cooperation
with the International Criminal Court, with respect
to both new referrals and the follow-up on existing
referrals.

Finally, let me touch upon the election of the next
Secretary-General. As the United Nations claims its
rightful place in the twenty-first century, so should the
selection ofthe chief officer of the United Nations meet
twenty-first century standards. He or she will take up
one of the most challenging jobs on Earth. For the first
time, as the President ofthe General Assembly reminded
us today, General Assembly resolution 69/321, on the
revitalization of the Assembly's work, envisages a joint
activity on the subject.

While we are realistic about expecting change to be
of limited scope in the short term, we remain convinced
that greater transparency, inclusiveness, interactivity
and diversity of candidates, including in terms of
gender, are definitely in order in the process of selecting
and appointing the individual who will lead the United
Nations at a time ofunprecedented challenges and tasks
ahead.

