Permit me to extend our appreciation for their remarkable work to Ms. Fatou Bensouda, Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court (ICC), and her team. We also thank her for today's presentation of the thirty-second report to the Security Council, pursuant to resolution 1593 (2005). Since the Prosecutor's last report in June (see S/2020/538), we have witnessed considerable progress by the Sudanese transitional Government in its efforts to restore democracy, peace and stability in the country. That progress includes, inter alia, the conclusion of the Juba Agreement for Peace in the Sudan on 3 October and the Sudan's commitment to usher in a new era with the special political mission of the United Nations - the United Nations Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in Sudan. Saint Vincent and the Grenadines welcomes those positive developments unfolding in our sister nation. The Juba peace agreement, which comprises provisions to promote human rights, the rule of law, transitional justice and reconciliation, as well asa scope for greater cooperation with the ICC, could be a pioneering instrument to transform the lives of all Sudanese people. In that respect, it is essential that the agreement be implemented comprehensively and in a timely manner. Despite those notable advances, we remain concerned about the dire humanitarian and economic situation confronting the Sudan, which has been exacerbated by climate change and the coronavirus disease pandemic. We encourage the transitional Government and all international partners to decisively address those vexing issues. Intercommunal violence, together with grave violations against the most vulnerable groups, including women and children, are also very disturbing. We condemn those atrocities and call on the Sudanese authorities to renew their efforts to ensure that all perpetrators are held accountable and brought to justice. We also call on the international community, especially international donors, to renew their support to the Sudan and to increase their contribution to the humanitarian response plan. As champions of a robust international legal system, it is incumbent on us all - both States parties and non-State parties to the Rome Statute - to comply strictly with our international obligations. In that context, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines encourages greater cooperation between the Sudan and the ICC, particularly in ensuring that the Office of the Prosecutor executes its mandate without hindrance. We note with gratitude the transitional Government's decision in July to amend legislation to repeal the criminal laws that had prevented cooperation with the ICC, as well as its commitment to conclude a memorandum of understanding with the ICC. The visit to Khartoum by the Office of the Prosecutor in October is also laudable. We are encouraged by those developments and stress that a strengthened relationship between the Sudan and the ICC augurs well for the respect of international criminal justice. We underscore that cooperation and the principle of complementarity are sine qua nons for the ICC. As such, we emphasize that the ICC's jurisdiction can only be invoked in the case of the State's inertia to prosecute alleged perpetrators. To that end, we look forward to enhanced cooperation and the application of complementarity, in accordance with the Rome Statute, to ensure that the four outstanding ICC arrest warrants in the Sudan are resolved. Saint Vincent and the Grenadines stands resolute in its condemnation of the grave injustice against the ICC and its officials through unilateral coercive measures in the form of sanctions. It is our view that those unilateral measures are unjustifiable, flagrantly violate our international rule-based system, seek to undermine the work of the ICC and must be withdrawn. In conclusion, my delegation reaffirms its commitment to the ICC and repeats its call for non-State parties to the Rome Statute to become members of the ICC.
