Ms. Murmokaite (Lithuania): Lithuania
co-sponsored and voted in favour of resolution 2235
(2015), establishing the Joint Investigative Mechanism
to identify those involved in the use of chemicals as
weapons in Syria.

Despite the fact that the complete prohibition of the
use of chemical weapons is at the core of the Chemical
Weapons Convention, to which Syria has been a
State party since October 2013, and the prohibitions
contained in the resolutions 2118 (2013) and 2209 (2015)
to use, develop, retain or transfer chemical weapons in
Syria, the use of toxic chemicals has continued with
disturning frequency. Civilians remain the primary
targets of such attacks, while spreading fear remains
their main objective.

When in August 2013 hundreds died in Ghouta after
the Syrian regime used sarin against its own people,
a formidable effort was launched by the international
community to destroy the regime's declared stockpiles
of chemical weapons. For some time, there was hope
that Ghouta would be the last time we would ever see
chemical weapons use in Syria or anywhere else for that
matter. But after Ghouta came Talmenes, Al Tamanah,
Kafr Zita, Idlib and others - more helicopters
overhead, the whistling sound of falling barrels, and
orange plumes of noxious chlorine gas rising above
civilian neighbourhoods.

The attacks did not stop either after the conclusion
was reached by the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons Fact-Finding Mission in September
2014 that a toxic chemical was used as a weapon,
systematically and repeatedly, in the villages of northern
Syria, or when the Council - barely five months
ago - adopted a second resolution on the subject, in
which it stressed that those responsible for any use
of chemicals as weapons must be held accountable
and reiterated its readiness to impose measures under
Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations in the
event of non-compliance.

The resolution we have just adopted is about
accountability. The Joint Investigative Mechanism
that is to be established will provide a clear path to
identifying those responsible for attacks involving
chemical weapons in Syria, whoever they are. That
is a crucial step forward, since it will enable us to
drag the perpetrators out of the shadow of their ugly
deeds, put a face on those criminals and thereby send
a clear message to other would-be perpetrators that the
international community will no longer tolerate such
crimes.

The Council must take all the steps necessary to
make sure that those responsible for the chemical attacks
are brought to justice. Accountability, however, should
not be limited only to those responsible for chemical
weapons attacks, but extend to all those who have
caused death, destruction and unimaginable suffering
to the Syrian people during the conflict that started
some four and a half years ago. The Council must stand
firm for accountability. We owe it to the memory of the
hundreds of thousands who have lost their lives and to
the millions left destitute and displaced by the carnage
in Syria.

