Mr. Yassin (Sudan): At the outset, Sir, on the last day
of your presidency, permit me, on behalf of my delegation,
to congratulate you on your assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council for this month. We are confident
that your presidency will contribute to the success of the
Security Council's work in a manner that will achieve
justice and maintain the purposes and principles for which
the United Nations was created.
Let me also pay tribute to His Excellency Ambassador
Lavrov, Permanent Representative of the Russian
Federation, for the exemplary manner in which he led the
work of the Security Council during the month of
December. He demonstrated a high standard of wisdom and
selflessness during his presidency.

Today the Security Council is considering the letter
presented by Ethiopia concerning the deplorable terrorist
assassination attempt against President Hosni Mubarak of
Egypt. In its submission to the Security Council, Ethiopia
accuses the Government of the Sudan of sheltering three
suspects of Egyptian nationality and requests that the Sudan
be called upon to cooperate in this matter. This is occurring
without consideration being given to the efforts already
made by the Sudan towards solving the issue and without
awaiting the outcome of the ongoing regional efforts.

Before starting to address the issue, let me reiterate the
position of the Sudan concerning terrorism. The Sudan
condemns, in the strongest terms, terrorism in all its forms
and manifestations. We have consistently stated that the
Sudan will not allow its territory, nationals or institutions
to be used in any manner whatsoever for direct or indirect
terrorist activities. The Sudan is prepared to apply the
severest punishments to all persons implicated in such acts.
We are fully aware of the pain, the suffering and the
carnage that terrorism wreaks, and it is our belief that no
cause or objective can ever justify it. It is our belief that
members of the international community must stand
shoulder to shoulder in ensuring the eradication of all forms
of terrorism, which we believe is a serious threat to
international peace and security.

I should like also to reiterate the Sudan's position
concerning the assassination attempt on President
Mubarak's life. The Sudan is particularly outraged at the
tragic incident of the terrorist assassination attempt on the
life of the Egyptian President and condemned it, as it has
done before on many other occasions involving attacks on
the life of other Egyptian Presidents and Ministers,
including the Prime Minister, the Minister of the Interior
and the Minister for Culture. We believe that due
punishment should be meted out to the terrorists
responsible for this act.

Two weeks ago, in an informal meeting with the
members of the Security Council, our Foreign Minister
reviewed what the Sudan has done in the face of the
requests concerning the three Egyptian suspects. My
delegation believes it would be useful now to recall the
steps taken by the Sudan, with the aim of demonstrating
the extent to which the Sudanese authorities have
cooperated and how much they want completely to
uncover all the facts relating to those Egyptian suspects.

In that context, I repeat formally before the Council
today that upon receipt of the Ethiopian request the
competent authorities in the Sudan acted promptly in
response.

The President of the Republic of the Sudan himself
decreed the establishment of a high-level investigation
committee from the relevant authorities and endowed it
with all the necessary powers to undertake thorough
investigations into the matter, with a view to its carrying
out its task in the shortest possible time. The report of the
investigations was communicated to the Ethiopian
Government within only 10 days of the receipt of its
letter. The report, while expressing the difficulties the
Committee experienced due to the lack of adequate
information, reached the conclusion that there was no clue
whatsoever showing that two of the terrorists entered the
Sudan at any time before or after the incident. Concerning
the third suspect, the investigation confirmed entry into
the Sudan of a person bearing one of the three names
given by the Ethiopian authorities, on a regular flight of
Sudan Airways from Addis Ababa, and his
disembarkation card was submitted to the Ethiopian
Government in good faith. However, due to the time that
had elapsed- 32 days - the Committee could not
definitely locate this suspect. This fact was also conveyed
to the Ethiopian authorities, which were asked for
additional information that could help the Sudanese
Committee in its work.

Moreover, in its cooperation efforts the Sudan has
expressed its readiness to cooperate with the relevant
authorities in the States concerned - namely, Egypt and
Ethiopia. We have expressed our readiness to cooperate
with all the parties concerned in their investigations.

In addition, my country has reintroduced visa
restrictions for entering the Sudan, which had been lifted
in the past for some nationalities. These measures have

 

been adopted at great cost to our friendly relations with a
number of countries. However, this action was taken to
cater to concerns expressed by the Ethiopian Government
and to assert the Sudan's cooperation and good will.

What was the response of the Government of Ethiopia
to these efforts? It responded to the Sudanese request for
additional information with more than rejection. Ethiopia
preferred to bring the matter to the attention of the
Organization of African Unity (OAU). The latter, without
formally inviting the Sudan to attend the meeting, passed its
resolution of 11 September 1995, in clear violation of the
most basic principles of the established procedural rules of
international organizations and basic principles of natural
justice. It is an established rule of law in the legal systems
of all civilized nations that there can be no accusation
without sufficient evidence, that the accused has the right
to be heard and that he is innocent until his guilt is proved.

Although the Sudan was disappointed at the outcome
of the Central Organ meeting, it has loyally accepted the
verdict and continued its cooperation by responding to the
OAU mission, headed by an envoy of the Secretary-General
of the OAU, which visited the Sudan. The report of the
Secretary-General was put before the meeting of the Central
Organ of the OAU of 19 December 1995. Our Minister of
Foreign Affairs was invited to attend and address the
meeting. The statement issued at the conclusion of the
meeting clearly indicated that there was new information,
which convinced the meeting to urge my Government

"to take the necessary measures to look for, locate and
extradite the three [suspects]". (5/1996/10, annex II, para. 3)

The Central Organ also decided
"to remain seized with the issue". (ibid., para. 4)

The statement was adopted on 19 December 1995.
Surprisingly enough, the very day of its adoption, the
Deputy Foreign Minister of Ethiopia flew here to New
York to bring the matter to the attention of the Security
Council, which he addressed informally on 21 December.

Why such haste? Why do some members of the
Council refuse to await the outcome of the OAU efforts on
the question? Why are they exerting pressure on the
Security Council to consider the question at the same time
as the OAU is considering it?

All that I have said clearly shows that the impasse
in finding a solution to the problem has not been created
by any lack of cooperation on the part of the Sudanese
authorities. The impasse has been created by the other
parties, which have rejected all initiatives designed to
bring about a fair and equitable conclusion to the matter.

My country has continued to adopt this cooperative
attitude. On the basis of the OAU decisions, it has taken
concrete, practical measures and has requested the
Secretary-General of the OAU to contact the Sudanese
authorities with a view to implementing these decisions.

In brief, these are the measures my country has
taken since the beginning of the dispute. Regrettably, the
response of the States concerned has been to push the
issue through the Security Council.

It has been argued that the Security Council decided
to consider this question because the Sudanese authorities
did not cooperate in implementing the OAU resolutions.
Whatever pretexts are invoked to justify this position, we
wish to reaffirm that the Sudan has always abided by the
resolutions of the OAU and any resolutions adopted by
the United Nations.

The draft resolution before the Council for adoption
today seek to achieve two main objectives: first, to send
a clear message that the international community is
determined to deal firmly with terrorism; and, secondly,
to ensure that the perpetrators of the attempt are brought
to justice. The Sudan strongly supports these two aims.
However, the draft resolution is imbalanced for a number
of reasons: it does not take into consideration the repeated
position of the Sudan, which is to cooperate fully and
unconditionally.

Besides referring to Ethiopia's hastiness in bringing
this matter before the Security Council, we cannot fail to
note the hasty manner in which this draft resolution was
prepared. Its original authors spared no effort to inject
into the draft all negative elements, relevant or irrelevant,
with only one objective: to implicate the Sudan, as the
symbol of international terrorism. Moreover, despite their
claim that the draft resolution is intended to support the
OAU, the Central Organ's statement of 19 December
1995, when the Sudan contributed new information on the
issue, was not taken into consideration. The authors were
even very selective, including in the draft only those
paragraphs adopted in the absence of the Sudanese
Foreign Minister, paragraphs which serve their purpose of
incriminating the Sudan.

 

Operative paragraph 4(a) and (b) is a clear,
indisputable example of the real intentions of the original
authors of the draft resolution. The language of operative
paragraph 4(a) completely ignores the 19 December
decision of the Central Organ, the last meeting held by the
OAU, in which the Sudan was called upon to look for,
locate and - if they were found and apprehended -
extradite the three terrorists.

Moreover, the draft resolution reflects a new
dimension of Security Council resolutions, based on
hypotheses and assumptions. In this case, it assumes that
the three Egyptian suspects are in the hands of the
Government of the Sudan and that all the Government
needs to do is to take immediate action to extradite them to
Ethiopia. If the countries concerned, Egypt and Ethiopia,
are in possession of such information on the whereabouts
of the terrorists, we urge them now, before the Council, to
provide the Sudan with that information. The Sudan has
repeatedly expressed its readiness to cooperate with them
and has even invited them to send investigation teams for
this purpose, an initiative that they have rejected. I would
like to express the Sudan's readiness to hand over to
Ethiopia those Egyptian terrorists, if they are found within
the Sudanese boundaries and territories.

As regards relations between the Sudan and its
neighbours, reflected in paragraph 4(b), as mentioned by
my colleague the Ambassador of Ethiopia, it was not the
Sudan that committed aggression against the territories of
its neighbours or occupied part of their territories. The
Council might recall the acts of aggression committed
against the Sudanese territories. All African States are
equally obligated to respect the Charters of the OAU and
the United Nations and the sovereignty of States. The
Sudan's answer to the allegations by the co-sponsors of the
draft resolution, as well as to those made by the Egyptian
Foreign Minister at the September and December meetings
of the Central Organ, is the invitation extended by the
Foreign Minister of the Sudan to the Secretary-General of
the OAU to visit the Sudan and establish a fact-finding
mission consisting of all the interested African countries -
in particular, the members of the Central Organ - to verify
the allegations that the Sudan is assisting, supporting and
facilitating terrorist activities and giving shelter and
sanctuary to terrorist elements. It is easy to air such
allegations, but it is also difficult to hide an act of
aggression.

The Sudanese delegation wishes to make one more
appeal to the parties concerned to adopt a cooperative
attitude so as to bring about a peaceful solution to the
dispute. We also appeal to the Security Council to
persuade the other parties to do the same.

The Sudan Wishes to put on record that it abides by
the United Nations Charter and that it accepts that all
Security Council resolutions are binding and must be
complied with. As concerns the OAU statements, the
Sudan has reaffirmed its readiness to cooperate fully with
the Secretary-General of the OAU, in accordance with the
Charters of the OAU and the United Nations and with the
norms of international law.

My Government warmly welcomes the role that the
Secretary-General is expected to play in resolving this
issue. We undertake to cooperate fully with him in
fulfilling the task entrusted to him by the Council.

Permit me in conclusion to emphasize the following
three points. First, my Government reaffirms its
categorical opposition to and condemnation of any forms
or manifestations of international terrorism. No cause,
reasoning or pretext of a political, religious or ideological
nature, or of any other nature, however legitimate, can be
invoked to justify acts of terrorism. The Sudan has
ratified a series of international Conventions dealing with
various aspects of the issue, as well as a number of
bilateral agreements on judicial assistance and extradition.

Secondly, the Sudan condemns in the strongest terms
the assassination attempt against the Egyptian President.
This condemnation is reaffirmation of the view expressed
by the Sudan Government, through its President in his
press conference in Addis Ababa on the day of the
deplorable incident, and of the sincere sentiment conveyed
to the Egyptian Foreign Minister by our Foreign Minister
in Addis Ababa. This position is mainly motivated by our
principles and divine values, which condemn as criminal
and unjustifiable all acts, methods and practices of
terrorism, wherever and by whomever committed.

Thirdly, my Government declares before this Council
its readiness to cooperate fully and unconditionally with
all the parties concerned. In this context, we pledge our
tireless help to the Secretary-General of the OAU and to
the Secretary-General of the United Nations in accordance
with the provisions of the present draft resolution. We
reaffirm our commitment to implement all the relevant
decisions and resolutions concerning this matter.

I would like to conclude my statement in Arabic by
adding a few words that I have received from my
country.

 

(spoke in Arabic)

I would like to salute you once again, Mr. President,
and the members of your Council. I would like through you
to put on record a few remarks.

First, we the people of the Sudan have been endowed
by God with certain unique characteristics. We are sincere
and faithful. We do not show evil to anybody. Our country
is open to guests and refugees. We follow the rules of good
neighbourliness. We do not go back on our word. Betrayal
is not one of our characteristics. We believe in God and all
his messengers: Muhammad, Jesus, Moses. And we believe
that the killing of one human being is a crime, an act of
apostasy. Our folklore and our heritage says that we must
choose our neighbour before we choose the location of our
house. Our folklore reaffirms that good neighbourliness is
one of the most important things. It is also one of the tenets
of our religion.

Therefore, we say to our brothers to the north: the
Sudan will continue to be sincere and to be giving and
generous; it will always take care of the bonds of friendship
and brotherhood; and it will always be your sanctuary in
your hour of need. As for our brothers to the east: we have
opened our houses to them; we have shared our food with
them; we have kept our promises to them. They have lived
with us. We are a part of them. They are a part of us. Their
country is the twin sister of our country. Any evil that
befalls them befalls us. The Sudan is full of sincere men
who continue to comply with the commands of our Lord.
A nation like this cannot possibly support terrorism or
assassination attempts.

