The President (spoke in French): The Security

Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance with
the understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Following consultations among the members of

the Security Council, I have been authorized to make
the following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council reaffirms its
commitment to the independence, sovereignty,
unity and territorial integrity of Iraq, and
emphasizes the importance of the stability and
security of Iraq for its people, the region and the
international community.

"The Security Council welcomes the letter
sent by the Minister of Foreign Affairs of Iraq on
18 January 2010 which confirms that the
Government of Iraq supports the international
non-proliferation regime and complies with
disarmament treaties and other relevant
international instruments and is committed to
taking additional steps to comply with non-
proliferation and disarmament standards, and has
also committed to inform the Security Council,
the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA)
and other relevant agencies on progress made
towards implementing those measures in
accordance with the Government of Iraq's
constitutional and legislative procedures and in
compliance with international norms and
obligations.
"The Security Council welcomes Iraq's
accession to the Convention on the Prohibition of
the Development, Production, Stockpiling and
Use of Chemical Weapons and on their
Destruction, becoming the 186th State party on
12 February 2009.

"The Security Council also welcomes the
intention of the Government of Iraq to sign the
Hague Code of Conduct against Ballistic Missile
Proliferation.

"The Security Council also welcomes that
Iraq signed in 2008 the Additional Protocol to the
Comprehensive Safeguards Agreement with the
International Atomic Energy Agency and that the
Additional Protocol is currently before
Parliament for ratification, as is the
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty. The
Security Council further welcomes that,
consistent with Iraqi law, Iraq has agreed to apply
the Additional Protocol provisionally, pending its
entry into force.

"The Security Council underlines, in
particular, the importance of Iraq ratifying the
Additional Protocol. The Security Council also
requests that the IAEA inform the Council as
soon as possible regarding the quality of Iraq's
safeguards-related cooperation with the IAEA,
including provisional implementation of the
Additional Protocol pending entry into force.

"The Security Council underlines its
readiness, once the necessary steps have been
taken, to review, with a view towards lifting, the
restrictions in resolutions 687 (1991) and 707
(1991) related to weapons of mass destruction
and civil nuclear activities."

This statement will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2010/5.

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 10.25 am.
10-2525]
