The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations and the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Benin,
Burkina Faso, Gambia, Liberia, Mali, Niger, Nigeria,
Senegal, Sierra Leone and Togo to participate in our
discussion.

On behalf of the Security Council, I extend a
warm welcome to His Excellency Mr. Pierre Osho,
Minister of State for Defence of Benin, His Excellency
Mr. Jean-De-Dieu Somda, Minister assigned to the
Minister of Foreign Affairs of Burkina Faso in charge
of Regional Cooperation, His Excellency Mr.
Baboucarr-Blaise Ismaila Jagne, Secretary of State for
Foreign Affairs of Gambia, His Excellency Mr. Monie
Captan, Minister of Foreign Affairs of Liberia, His
Excellency Mr. Cheick Tidiane Gadio, Minister of
Foreign Affairs of Senegal, His Excellency Mr. Roland
Y. Kpotsra, Minister of Foreign Affairs of Togo, and
Her Excellency Ms. Diallo Mbodji Senn, Minister of
Labour and Vocational Training of Mali. I invite all the
aforementioned Ministers to take the seats reserved for
them at the side of the Council Chamber.

I also invite the representatives of Niger, Nigeria
and Sierra Leone to take the seats reserved for them at
the side of the Council Chamber.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations and rule 39 of the
Council's provisional rules of procedure, I invite His
Excellency Mr. Said Djinnit, Interim Commissioner for
Peace, Security and Political Affairs of the African
Union, to take a seat at the Council table.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations and rule 39 of the
Council's provisional rules of procedure, I invite His
Excellency Mr. Nana Effah-Apenteng, representative of
the current Chairman of the Economic Community of
West African States, to take a seat reserved for him at
the side of the Council Chamber.
In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations and rule 39 of the
Council's provisional rules of procedure, I invite His
Excellency Mr. Mohamed Ibn Chambas, Executive
Secretary of the Economic Community of West African
States to take a seat at the Council table.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations and rule 39 of the
Council's provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr.
Ibrahima Sall, Regional Director, Programme for
Coordination and Assistance for Security and
Development, to take a seat at the Council table.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on the agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Before opening the floor, I wish to request all
participants to limit their statements to no more than
seven minutes, in order to enable the Council to work
efficiently within its timetable. I thank you for your
understanding and cooperation.

I welcome the presence among us of the
Secretary-General. Before giving him the floor, I
would like to express my deep thanks to the Ministers
and their representatives, the representative of Interim
Chairperson of the Commission of the African Union,
the Executive Secretary of the Economic Community
of West African States and the Regional Director of the
Programme for Cooperation and Assistance for
Security and Development. Despite of their heavy
workload, these people agreed to come to participate in
this important workshop, which is being held in
particularly difficult circumstances, with greater
Security Council activity due to current concerns, in
particular the Iraqi crisis. I am convinced that in spite
of those challenges, our work will proceed in a spirit of
calm and cooperation.

I give the floor to the Secretary-General.

