Mr. Enkhsaikhan (Mongolia): First of all I
would like to express my delegation's gratitude to you,
Sir, for organizing this meeting on implementation of
the Security Council resolution 1373 (2001).

As of today, almost two thirds of the Member
States have submitted their reports on the
implementation of the resolution to the Counter-
Terrorism Committee. Therefore, we believe that
consideration of the issue today is both timely and
useful for assessing where we are and for
contemplating a long-term, effective strategy of
combating terrorism.

In this connection my delegation would like to
thank the Secretary-General for his brief, yet very
important and pertinent remarks made earlier this
morning at the meeting, as well as Ambassador
Greenstock, the Chairman of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee, for the briefing on the progress of the
Committee's work and for responding to the questions
raised in the course of this debate.

Mongolia believes that pledges of support are not
sufficient to fight this evil. Practical actions are needed
for a common struggle against terrorism. Mongolia has
signed the International Convention for the
Suppression of the Financing of Terrorism and will be
ratifying it very soon. In so doing, it will have ratified
all the global conventions combating terrorism that can
be practically implemented by a land-locked country.
Moreover, earlier this month the Mongolian parliament
strengthened the relevant anti-terrorist provisions of its
criminal legislation.

Combating terrorism should be universal. To be
effective, all States need to be actively involved,
including those that are not at present directly affected
by terrorism or are not parties to ad hoc coalitions. The
States not directly affected or involved must
nevertheless deny safe haven to terrorists and deny
transit through their territory of terrorists, their
resources and sources of financing. It cannot be ruled
out that terrorists in the future, following the law of
least resistance, could contemplate pursuing their aims
through smaller, weaker or so-called neutral States,
seeing in them, as Ambassador Greenstock has rightly
pointed out, a "weak link" in the chain opposing or
fighting terrorism. Moreover, early warning, exchange
of operational information, investigation, prosecution
and so on can be successful only with the active
participation of all States of the international
community.

My delegation believes that one of the effective
ways to combat terrorism would be to deprive terrorists
of ideological justification of their actions, since in
many cases terrorists attempt to give religious or
national justification or coloration to their criminal
acts. In such cases, active denunciation by
representatives of hijacked nations or religions of such
attempts are of paramount importance in discrediting
the terrorists and thus narrowing the social basis of
terrorism. Depriving the terrorists of ideological
justification could in this case be considered as a form
of preventive diplomacy.

Because of its nature and universal membership,
the General Assembly has a special role to play in such
preventive action. Thus, the General Assembly, as the
main United Nations organ that is empowered to
consider the general principles of cooperation in the
maintenance of international peace and security, should
continue to address the different aspects of terrorism,
including the legal, socio-economic and even cultural
aspects, all of which remain outside the Security
Council's mandate and that of resolution 1373 (2001).
The fight against terrorism will be successful if it is
undertaken in compliance with and through
strengthening of international law and order. In that
connection, my delegation expresses the hope that the
Ad Hoc Committee on terrorism established by General
Assembly resolution 51/210 will soon be able to
finalize a draft convention against nuclear terrorism
and a comprehensive convention against terrorism,
based on the progress made during the fifty-sixth
session of the General Assembly.

Likewise, my delegation believes that measures
need to be taken to accelerate the entry into force of the
Statute of the International Criminal Court as a timely
response to impunity for crimes against humanity,
genocide and war crimes.

Besides those legal measures, effective political
measures need also to be taken to address the long-
standing festering international problems on which
terrorism feeds. Terrorism is being supported through
drug trafficking, trafficking in arms and explosives,
money-laundering, electronic fraud, etc. Therefore,
other relevant United Nations bodies, such as the
Vienna United Nations Office for Drug Control and
Crime Prevention, as well as the International Criminal
Police Organization (Interpol) and other multilateral
organizations, should also be more actively involved in
the fight.

We agree fully that regional action to combat
terrorism is very important, and in some cases even
crucial. The existence of seven regional agreements
and the emergence of an eighth as part of the Shanghai
Cooperation Organization constitute a vital link
between individual national measures and concerted or
coordinated international measures. In many cases it is
the regional agreements that will make a difference in
effectively combating terrorism.

Last but not least, my delegation shares the view
that the strategy for combating terrorism will not be
effective if the root causes of terrorism are not properly
addressed. Poverty, deprivation, frustration and despair,
which bring suffering to millions of people, provide a
fertile breeding ground for terrorism. Many of the root
causes of terrorism are to be found in or are connected
with abject poverty. Therefore, in our view, the General
Assembly and its subsidiary bodies should redouble
their efforts to reduce and eliminate poverty in line
with the objectives of the Millennium Declaration. My
delegation believes that perhaps the question of
combating international terrorism could be taken up by
the General Assembly at a special session after the
Counter-Terrorism Committee has presented its report,
conclusions and recommendations to the Council and
after the Council has in turn reported to the Assembly.

