Mr. Swe (Myanmar): I wish to thank you, Sir, for
this opportunity to make a statement at this briefing. I
should also like to thank the Secretary-General for his
efforts to support Myanmar's democratization process
and for his comprehensive briefing today. The
Secretary-General's recent visit to Myanmar was his
second in just over a year, and Under-Secretary-
General Gambari's ninth. It is noteworthy that, during
the Secretary-General's visit to Myanmar, we did our
utmost to accommodate his requests, although we were
unable to arrange the requested meeting Daw Aung San
Suu Kyi.

It is an established protocol practice that our
Head of State receives foreign dignitaries only once
during their visits. However, at the request of the
Secretary-General, Senior General Than Shwe received
the Secretary-General twice. During their meetings, the
Secretary-General expressed the views of the United
Nations and the international community. Senior
General Than Shwe thoroughly explained the
developments in Myanmar's political process and
highlighted the two most important priorities of the
Government at this moment - to hand over State
power to a civilian Government after the 2010 general
elections and to lay a good foundation for future social
and economic development. He also assured the
Secretary-General that the 2010 general elections will
be free, fair, credible and arranged to ensure the
participation of all citizens.

With regard to the Secretary-General's request to
meet with Daw Aung San Suu Kyi, although our Head
of State himself was willing to arrange the meeting, we
regret our inability to accommodate the request, as the
Special Court has independent jurisdiction over the
matter. It is the discretion and position of the Special
Court not to accommodate those who could have
influence over its judgments. Our inability to arrange
the meeting with Daw Aung San Suu Kyi was clearly
explained before and during the Secretary-General's
visit.

Arrangements were made for the Secretary-
General to meet with the leaders and representatives of
10 officially registered political parties, including the
National League for Democracy (NLD) and former
armed groups. We also even made an arrangement for
the Secretary-General to meet separately with the
representatives of the NLD, although such a meeting
was not included in the original programme. We would
like to take this opportunity to express our appreciation
and thanks to the Secretary-General for encouraging
the political parties and former armed groups to
participate in the national reconsolidation process.

As requested by the Secretary-General, a public
"Thank you event" was arranged by the Myanmar
Government, although we were fully aware that such
public meetings have not taken place during the
Secretary-General's recent visits to certain Member
countries. Moreover, we anticipated that Secretary-
General might touch on areas and issues that were not
on the agenda of the event. However, with the aim of
demonstrating our cooperation with the United Nations
and of respecting the wishes of the Secretary-General,
we arranged that unprecedented public meeting. We
invited those whom the Secretary-General wished to
invite, and cabinet ministers, deputy ministers and
senior officials of the Government also attended that
event to honour the Secretary-General.

During his visit, the Secretary-General discussed
at length with the Prime Minster the social and
economic development of Myanmar. As a developing
country, Myanmar has been making untiring efforts for
its economic and social development. However, some
09-40115
countries have imposed economic sanctions instead of
providing assistance and cooperation. Regrettably,
official development assistance for Myanmar is less
than $3 per capita, which is minimal compared to that
received by similar countries. During the meeting, the
Prime Minister highlighted the fact that such policies
towards Myanmar hinder the social and economic
development of the country and have mainly impacted
people at the grassroots level. It would be more
constructive and conducive to our democratization and
development efforts if the international community
were to view the situation of Myanmar in a wider
perspective.

Despite these obstacles, the Myanmar
Government has been striving to stabilize the situation
in the political, social and economic fields with our
own resources. We appreciate the Secretary-General's
remark on Myanmar Government's endeavours to
achieve the Millennium Development Goals, control
HIV/AIDS, combat human trafficking and eradicate
opium poppy cultivation.

During his visit, the Secretary-General also
visited the Ayeyarwaddy Delta region, which was
struck by Cyclone Nargis a year ago, to observe the
construction of cyclone shelters and other
reconstruction works carried out jointly by the
Myanmar Government, United Nations agencies and
the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN).
The Secretary-General has rightly pointed out that the
response to Cyclone Nargis proved the value of
engagement and the unprecedented cooperation
between Myanmar, the United Nations and ASEAN
through the Tripartite Core Group, with the support of
the international community.

With regard to the success of the visit, the
Myanmar Government intends to implement all
appropriate recommendations that the Secretary-
General proposed. At the request of the Secretary-
General, the Myanmar Government is proceeding to
grant amnesty to prisoners on humanitarian grounds
and with a View to enabling them to participate in the
2010 general elections. Moreover, with regard to the
National Economic Forum, the Government will
cooperate with the United Nations in the agricultural,
livestock and fishery sectors for the betterment of
people at the grass-roots level.

With regard to the offer of technical assistance in
elections, Myanmar will cooperate with the United
09-40115

Nations if technical assistance is necessary for the
2010 general elections. The State will enact a political
party registration law and election law in due time.
Myanmar is resolved to implement everything it
possibly can with a view to facilitating the smooth
attainment of the democratic goals it has set for the
nation and its people.

Myanmar's acceptance of the good offices role of
the Secretary-General and its active cooperation in the
process, as well as the Secretary-General's second visit
to Myanmar in just over a year, are important
milestones of cooperation between Myanmar and the
United Nations. We are of the view that the Secretary-
General's visit to Myanmar was successful. We fully
agree with the Secretary-General's remark that his
inability to meet with Daw Aung San Suu Kyi should
not be seen as the only benchmark for the success or
failure of his visit.

Myanmar today is steadfastly proceeding on its
chosen path to democracy. The challenges faced by
Myanmar are complex and multifaceted. When one
considers Myanmar's geopolitical location, one sees
that it is surrounded by countries with different
political systems, cultures and religions and that over
40 per cent of the world's population resides in our five
neighbours. Myanmar itself is a multi-ethnic and
multireligious country. Therefore, we must be neutral
and harmonize with all our neighbours for the stability
of the region. We have to consider, inter alia, the
various historical, geopolitical and multi-ethnic
backgrounds. Exerting undue pressure from the outside
without fully comprehending the challenges faced by
Myanmar will not be conducive to the country's home-
grown political process.

It cannot be stressed enough that no one can
address the complex challenges that Myanmar is
currently facing better than the Government and the
peoples of Myanmar. We are making significant strides
in the national reconsolidation and democratization
process. Thus, Myanmar is nearly in the final stage of
achieving our ultimate goal. Myanmar is not a threat to
international peace and security, so no Security
Council action is warranted.

I should like to close by reaffirming our
commitment to continuing our cooperation with the
United Nations and with the good offices role of the
Secretary-General. The continued support, understanding
and cooperation of the United Nations and the
5
international community will best assist our endeavour
to establish a democratic nation.

