Mr. Djedje (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): I
thank you, Mr. President, for the honour of presiding
over our meeting today. I also welcome the presence
of Mr. Stephanus Abraham Blok, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Netherlands, and Mr. Pavlo Klimkin,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Ukraine. I also thank
Under-Secretary-General Rosemary DiCarlo, Assistant
Secretary-General Ursula Mueller and Ambassador
Apakan for their excellent briefings on the situation
in Ukraine.

My country notes with regret the deterioration of
the security situation in Ukraine. The recent upsurge
in fighting along the line of contact in eastern Ukraine,
which has resulted in the loss of human lives and the
destruction of civilian infrastructure essential to the
provision of basic social services to the population,
is a challenge to the entire international community,
and particularly to the Security Council. Above all,
my delegation deplores the lack of progress in the
implementation of the Minsk agreements, signed on
12 February 2015, including the recurrent violations
of the ceasefire and the obstructions to the movement
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE) Special Monitoring Mission. These
facts undeniably constitute major obstacles to the
implementation of the agreements, which to date
remains the appropriate framework for resolving the
crisis in Ukraine.

Cote d'Ivoire, which is in favour of a peaceful
resolution of the crisis in Ukraine, calls for respect for
the ceasefire in force by the various parties involved,
and above all for the full implementation of the Minsk
agreements, within the framework of the Normandy
format. My country also supports the efforts of the
OSCE Monitoring Mission and the Joint Centre for
Control and Coordination to de-escalate the conflict.
Against that backdrop, my delegation calls on the parties
to the conflict to take all appropriate steps towards the
casing of tensions, in particular by enabling the Joint
Centre for Control and Coordination to play its role in
supporting OSCE monitors and following up on the
ceasefire agreements.

The humanitarian situation is also worrisome, given
the resumption of fighting in eastern Ukraine since the
beginning of May. The shelling has interrupted the gas
and electricity distribution systems, affecting the living
conditions of all of the people. Since the outbreak of
the conflict, in 2014, civilians have suffered frequent
water and electricity cuts around the line of contact and
in internally displaced persons centres. On 18 April,
350,000 civilians had their water supply disrupted by
damage to the Donetsk water filtration station. The
station is still down and presents increased risks of
contamination due to the numerous attacks to which it
is subjected. My delegation condemns those acts, which
constitute violations of international humanitarian law,
and urges the parties to the conflict to safeguard critical
water infrastructure and the provision of basic social
services, such as water, gas and electricity.

My country welcomes the efforts of the international
community to fill the funding gap in the humanitarian
response plan in eastern Ukraine, estimated at
$186 million, to help the 2.3 million people in need of
assistance in 2018.

In conclusion, Cote d'Ivoire reiterates its support
for all efforts to find a political solution to the crisis in
Ukraine. To that end, it encourages all parties to respect
the commitments they have undertaken with a View
to ensure the effective implementation of the Minsk
agreements and resolution 2202 (2015), of 17 February
2015, which supports those agreements.

