The President: Before adopting the agenda, I
would like to take this opportunity to recall the tragic
disappearance of Mr. Alioune Blondin Beye, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Angola, on
29 June 1998. Today is 29 June. On this occasion we
commemorate his valuable services to the United
Nations and to the cause of peace. We would like to
convey to the family of Mr. Beye our remembrance of
his services and our gratitude to them for what he did
for the United Nations and for all of us.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

The situation in Burundi

The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of Burundi in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the discussion on the item on
the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice I propose, with the consent of the Council to
invite that representative to participate in the
discussion without the right to vote, in accordance with
the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Nteturuye
(Burundi) took a seat at the Council table.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.

Following consultations among members of the
Council, I have been authorized to make the following
statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council calls for an
immediate suspension of hostilities in Burundi.

"The Security Council calls on the armed
groups to enter into negotiations.

"The Security Council reiterates its
profound concern at the continuation of the
conflict in Burundi and its toll on the civilian

population. In that context, the Security Council
stresses once again its support for the Arusha
process and the efforts of the Facilitator, Nelson
Mandela.

"The Security Council strongly emphasizes
to the parties to the Arusha Peace and
Reconciliation Agreement of August 2000
(Arusha Agreement) the need to implement all
the immediately applicable provisions of the
Agreement, including the provisions for the
establishment of new institutions.

"The Security Council calls upon the parties
to the Arusha Agreement to continue searching,
together with all parties concerned, for solutions
to outstanding issues in the Agreement.

"The Security Council expresses grave
concern at continuing human rights abuses and
violations of humanitarian law, and stresses the
need for all parties to ensure respect for human
rights and humanitarian law. In particular, it urges
the belligerents to commit themselves
immediately to the protection of civilians, in
particular their life, physical integrity and the
means necessary for their survival. It also
reiterates its call for safe and unhindered access
for the delivery of humanitarian aid to all people
in need.

"The Security Council encourages the
Secretary-General through his representatives to
continue to engage the armed groups and
contribute to coordinated efforts to bring about a
political settlement of the conflict.

"The Security Council reiterates its call to
the donor community to increase its humanitarian
and development assistance to the people of
Burundi, in keeping with their pledges given at
the Paris Donor Conference on 11-12 December
2000.

"The Security Council remains actively
seized of the situation in Burundi, and in this
context, will continue to receive regular reporting
from the Secretariat on developments in and
around the country. The Security Council stands
ready to consider, in the light of progress in the
above areas, further contributions to the peace
process, and the implementation of the Arusha

a,
Agreement.
This statement will be issued as a document of The Security Council has thus concluded the
the Security Council under the symbol present stage of its consideration of the item on its
S/PRST/2001/17. agenda.

The meeting rose at 12.35 pm.

