Mr. Fonseca (Brazil): I wish to thank the
Secretary-General for his statement, which contained very
useful and precise suggestions on how to prevent armed
conflict.

In his report to the General Assembly at its fifteenth
session, in 1960, Secretary-General Dag Hammarskjold
pointed out that

"in the end, the United Nations is likely to be judged
not so much by the criterion of how successfully it
has overcome this or that crisis as by the significance
of its total contribution towards building the kind of
world community in which such crises are no longer
inevitable".

His words explain in an eloquent and brief way why
we are gathered here today. But there is a more immediate
reason. The long and difficult agenda of the Security
Council demonstrates that the ideal of prevention has not
been achieved; it is still distant. Instruments of prevention
must be refined and strengthened. But, most of all, we have
to curtail the deficit of collective will that is still the
fundamental problem we face in creating a culture of
prevention.

That is why I wish to congratulate you, Mr. President,
on convening this open meeting. Today's meeting will mark
another positive event in what has been a very fruitful and
competent Slovenian presidency of the Security Council.
Your initiative of also inviting the broader United Nations
membership to discuss the issue of the prevention of
conflicts should also be commended.

In discussing the means to prevent armed conflict,
we should be clear about what tools are available to the
Security Council in this endeavour. The first one - the
one with uncontested legitimacy - is diplomacy. Guided
by the provisions of Chapter VI of the Charter, the
Security Council is in a unique position to promote,
through negotiation and persuasion, the ascendancy of
reason where intolerance and misunderstanding prevail.
Missions by Security Council members, on the model of
that led by Ambassador Andjaba to Timor and to
Indonesia, should also perhaps be a more common
practice.

As a contribution to prevention, Article 99 of the
Charter offers the Secretary-General a most valuable
instrument for engaging the Council in preventive actions.
And the Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi Annan, is fulfilling
his mandate with responsibility, courage and wisdom. The
role played by his special representatives and by his
missions of good offices is also to be underscored.

Preventive deployment, as occurred in Macedonia,
and disarmament are equally useful means of prevention.
We know well the destabilizing consequences of the illicit
trafficking in and excessive accumulation of small arms.

We should not forget the need to reestablish a global
atmosphere propitious to the exercise of preventive
diplomacy. The strengthening of all disarmament treaties
can be a decisive factor in that direction. The current
paralysis in the global disarmament agenda should be
overcome.

Conflicts are often caused by an abuse of power on
the part of those in positions of authority. Justice is
therefore very important for the maintenance of a climate
of compliance with basic human values. The Tribunals for
Rwanda and for the former Yugoslavia are having an
impact as instruments of deterrence. We are hopeful that
this positive impact will soon be greatly enhanced by the
entry into force of the Statute of the International
Criminal Court.

In preventing conflicts, the United Nations can also
have recourse to regional organizations and arrangements,
on the basis of Chapter VIII of the Charter, which
provides that no enforcement action shall be taken
without the authorization of the Security Council. In this
regard, we share the assessment of the Secretary-General
that conflict prevention, peacekeeping and peacemaking
should not become an area of competition between the

 

United Nations and regional organizations. Cooperation, not
competition, is in the spirit of the Charter.

Brazil is of the View that the preventive action of the
Council has to observe some basic principles in line with
the United Nations Charter. First of all, conflict-prevention
measures have to be predicated on the consent of the
Government or Governments concerned, with full respect
for their sovereignty. Secondly, progressive engagement of
the Security Council, in which preventive measures are
adopted gradually, is always preferable. Thirdly, the
Council should keep a sense of proportion between the
situation it intends to address and the measures it considers
applying. And finally, in the face of extreme situations the
Security Council might be compelled to resort to
enforcement measures based on Chapter VII. In those cases,
everything must be done to preserve the authority of
enforcement action taken in the name of prevention and to
ensure that it is in conformity with the principles of
international law.

The means at the disposal of the Security Council are
vast and should be applied without selectivity, because
universality is the most solid foundation of legitimacy in
any United Nations activity. But Security Council measures
are not the only means available for the prevention of
conflict. Other United Nations bodies too have a
responsibility with regard to conflict prevention.

There is no single formula for conflict prevention.
Preventive action, thus, should be taken after an assessment
of the specifics of each situation. If we are to develop an
encompassing strategy, it will no doubt have to be based on
a deep understanding of the multiple roots of conflict.

The Secretary-General reminded us today of his recent
remarks to the staff of the World Bank:

"While war is the worst enemy of development,
healthy and balanced development is the best form of
conflict prevention". (supra)
Brazil fully shares the Secretary-General's perception.

Moreover, when prevention fails, the impact of
conflicts has a negative effect on economic cooperation
worldwide. Even regions not affected by conflict suffer
from the lack of funding, since financial resources that
should be devoted to development assistance are drained to
conflicts. It is to be hoped that the conditions for a strong,
concrete basis for a comprehensive, long-term conflict-
prevention strategy will be created when the eradication of
poverty is no longer a vague ideal but a common
endeavour of the international community, and when
respect for human rights becomes a universal concern in
daily life in all countries of the world. Lack of
development should never be used to justify the horrors
and atrocities we have seen in recent conflicts.

We recognize that present conflicts should be dealt
with using the instruments now available and that we
cannot wait to take preventive action until all conditions
are present.

The ideal of perpetual peace, devised by Kant, was
founded on the universalization of republican ideals - in
today's words, the universalization of democracy. The
realization that most of today's conflicts are internal,
although with obvious international impact, creates room
for a renewal and an update of Kant's concept of
democracy as the key to peace. From that perspective, the
establishment of democratic regimes is positive not only
internally: it also carries its consequences beyond borders.
More than ever, democracy is proving itself to be the
most appropriate political model for a harmonious
international order.

The presidential statement we are to adopt confirms
that the Security Council is committed to developing a
culture of prevention, which will take root when a simple
idea once clearly expressed by Elie Wiesel becomes
universally accepted: that the other is not my enemy.

