Mr. Arias (Panama) (spoke in Spanish): Like
preceding speakers, I should like to thank Under-
Secretary-General Holmes for his clear, detailed and,
especially, powerful briefing.

I welcome the fact that no Council member has
said that this issue belongs within the purview of other
forums of the Organization. It seems that when human
suffering crosses borders, that fact alone makes it an
issue that the Security Council must address. Let us not
forget that, while borders are interesting to diplomats,
politicians and mapmakers, borders are of little or no
importance to the people who live in a region such as
this.
Panama emphasizes that we must seek
mechanisms to ensure that various United Nations
organs and forums act in a more coordinated manner.

That applies in particular to the Security Council and
the Human Rights Council. Recently, the Human
Rights Council sent a mission to the Sudan, which was
not permitted to enter. This Council and the rest of the
Organization ignored that deplorable situation.
Moreover, the Human Rights Council has just adopted
a resolution on the Sudan, and here we have not taken
official note of it.

Panama also reiterates that the declaration of our
heads of State or Government of 2005 (General Assembly resolution 60/1), which linked security,
development and human rights and established the
principle of the responsibility to protect, must have
some practical effect. Mr. Holmes, at the end of his
presentation, stated that the tragic human rights
situation in the region is clearly linked to the political
situation.

The tendency in the Organization is for political
problems to be dealt with bureaucratically and by the
Secretariat or by the diplomats - a trend that we are
following today. I wonder whether it would not be
appropriate for the Organization to ensure that the
current political leaders in various regions and
countries, in addressing situations like these, take
matters more directly in hand; to ensure that visits to
these countries strengthen not only bilateral political
and economic ties, but also somehow the ties between
political leaders; and to ensure that such leaders -
who, like diplomats, have a way of communicating
with one another - more resolutely and energetically
confront the problem of human rights violations.

Would Mr. Holmes like to make any response
concerning those issues?

