Mr. Nieto (Argentina) (interpretation from Spanish):
The resolution we have just adopted resulted from an
arduous process of consultations and negotiations, in the
course of which the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina
has not improved. On the contrary, the parties have
steadily distanced themselves from the options presented
to them for a peaceful settlement of the conflict between
them. We say this because it is clear that one of the
parties in Bosnia has done more than to withdraw its
consent for a United Nations presence; it has in fact gone
much further, having described the United Nations as an
enemy and having regarded the hostages it took as
prisoners of war. We regret that long after the beginning
of this deplorable episode we are still obliged to address
it in paragraph 1 of tonight's resolution.

We are also concerned about recent reports of
military preparations by the Government of Bosnia and
Herzegovina which can be understood as tending towards
renewed, and heightened, confrontation. One might also
ask whether the United Nations Protection Force
(UNPROFOR) has any real chance to fulfil its mandate
if the fears aroused by those facts turn out to be justified.

We are grateful to the Member States and Secretariat
staff who designed and formulated the option set out in
this resolution. They had to evaluate innumerable factors
in deciding to create a rapid-reaction capability. We
understand that this is a compromise between the
requirements imposed by the realities of the conflict and
the functional limits inherent in peace-keeping operations.
We are confident that, after an evaluation of all the
factors at issue, this decision was taken on the basis of
the recent lessons learned by the Security Council in its
experience with this conflict.

In our view, the first lesson is that the contradictions
between the mandate of a peace-keeping force and what
that force may be asked to do on the ground can be very
costly. In most instances, such contradictions arise from

 

the actions of the parties to the conflict, who ask or demand
that peace-keepers take action beyond, or even contrary to,
their agreed mandate, and who, if their demands are not
met, direct their displeasure at what they call the Council's
lack of effectiveness - causing damage to the image of
this body.

Contradictions resulting from the conduct of the
parties underlie every conflict, but the Security Council
must not become involved in those contradictions, lest it
lose its capacity to act and its credibility.

We fully agree with the Secretary-General's view,
stated in his most recent report on UNPROFOR, that the
process should be relaunched and intensified through new
political initiatives, through which the work of the peace-
keeping force could be affirmed. To attempt the opposite by
seeking political results as a result of the activities of the
peace-keeping forces would not reflect a correct perception
of the mandate of those forces. That is why we attach
particular importance to paragraph 2 of the resolution.

These recent experiences also indicate that
UNPROFOR's action in fulfilment of its mandate must be
based on the following premises.

The will of the parties for conciliation can come only
from those parties, as reflected in paragraph 3 of the
resolution.

We must take the greatest care to preserve a precise
relationship between the mandate of our peace-keeping
forces and the tasks entrusted to them. In that context we
attach particular importance to the resolution's reference to
UNPROFOR's impartiality.

Among the matters addressed by the resolution, my
delegation attaches particular importance to the reference to
safe areas. We recall that for some time the Secretary-
General has been making proposals with reference to this
concept, and has submitted two reports which we have not
yet studied. Obviously, it is necessary to guarantee the
protection of those areas and to guarantee their
humanitarian needs. Here, the Council's concern is clearly
expressed in operative paragraphs 6 and 7; we hope that
their provisions will lead to concrete actions by the parties.

The other concept to which we want to refer relates to
the use of force, especially through the rapid-reaction
capability established by this resolution. We believe that the
use of force should be restricted to self-defence and should
be engaged in with great care, lest the delicate line between
peace-keeping and peace-enforcement is crossed. The
situation that would be created by crossing that line
would be very difficult to reverse, and we hope that this
will be taken into account by the contingents operating in
the framework of the rapid-reaction capability.

It only remains for us to hope that, unlike what has
taken place on other occasions, our capacity to act will
not be overtaken by events.

