Mr. Chungong Ayafor (Cameroon) (spoke in French): I would first like to thank Secretary-General
Kofi Annan for having come personally to introduce
his report on children and armed conflict
(S/2002/ 1299). This proves, if proof were still needed,
that he is determined to keep the issue of children
affected by armed conflict as one of the top priorities
of the international community. I would also like to pay
high tribute to Ms. Carol Bellamy, Executive Director
of the United Nations Children's Fund, for her
important contribution to the debate. Finally, I would
like to thank Mr. Olara Otunnu, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict, for his excellent statement.

Today, most conflicts, particularly those in
Africa, are within States, and their major source is
intolerance based on ethnic, linguistic and religious
differences. Moreover, they are generally fuelled by
illicit economic activities. These conflicts lead to the
dissemination of large quantities of light weapons and
involve many non-State actors. The combination of
these factors exposes children to great risks, including
torture, rape, sexual slavery, prostitution, trafficking
and, especially, forced recruitment by unscrupulous
warlords.

As is rightly stressed in paragraph 21 of the
report of the Secretary-General,

"When war displaces families and communities,
children often spend their entire childhood in
camps where they are at risk of exploitation and
forcible recruitment by armed forces or groups."

According to UNICEF estimates, 300,000 girls
and boys have in recent times been involved in some
30 conflicts. This situation is particularly alarming and
indeed tragic. That is particularly disquieting, since the
international community has established a substantial
normative framework for the protection of children,
including, for example, the Convention on the Rights
of the Child and its Optional Protocol on the
involvement of children in armed conflict, as well as
the Statute of the International Criminal Court.

The Statute makes the forced recruitment of
children in armed conflict a war crime. That is an
important milestone in suppressing such ignominious
actions. Thus one of the major challenges that we face
today is the effective implementation of those various
instruments.

My delegation welcomes with real satisfaction
the Secretary-General's report, which emphasizes the
era of application of new, stricter norms to protect
children in armed conflict. The report highlights
progress made in this area, as well as in implementing
the relevant Security Council resolutions. My
delegation welcomes in particular the fact that a list has
been drawn up of parties to armed conflict that recruit
or use child soldiers. That list is a stark warning to
parties that violate norms for the protection of children.
It makes clear that those who carry out such grave
violations will no longer be protected and will have no
impunity.

The delegation of Cameroon also welcomes the
increased access given to humanitarian services in
conflict areas. Efforts made in that respect go a long
way towards increasing vaccination coverage, reuniting
children separated from their families and providing
children in distress with essential goods, thus
improving their living conditions.

We would like to congratulate Mr. Olara Otunnu,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, on the
very constructive dialogue in which he has engaged
with certain parties to conflict and on the results thus
obtained.

Cameroon belongs to a region that is dealing with
many armed conflicts. That is why we have adopted
several measures to protect civilians in general and
children in particular, especially in situations of armed
conflict. My country has ratified almost all of the
conventions relating to the protection of children. We
have signed the Statute establishing the International
Criminal Court and are preparing to ratify it. Cameroon
remains committed to its tradition of hospitality and
takes in thousands of refugee children, whether
accompanied or not, coming from several countries of
Central Africa and elsewhere. Acting in close
cooperation with United Nations agencies and bilateral
partners, it provides them with all necessary assistance.

Furthermore, the Government of Cameroon is
continuing its policy of protecting children through the
prevention of conflict by means of preventive
diplomacy with other States of the region within the
framework of the subregional organizations, the United
Nations Standing Advisory Committee on Security
Questions in Central Africa and the Subregional Centre
for Human Rights.

Cameroon, like other countries of Central Africa,
has taken a number of measures to promote a culture of
peace and dialogue. Of course, all of those actions
supplement - indeed, dovetail with - all efforts to
eradicate poverty and to promote sustainable economic
and social development.

In conclusion, Cameroon would like to call upon
the international community to continue its efforts to
implement norms relating to the protection of children
in armed conflict.

