Mr. Park (Republic of Korea): At the outset, I
would like to acknowledge the efforts of the members of
the Contact Group to provide the framework for the two
draft resolutions now before us.

With respect to the draft resolution concerning the
establishment of the United Nations Transitional
Administration for Eastern Slavonia, Baranja and Western
Sirmium (UNTAES), of which the Republic of Korea is
pleased to be a sponsor, my delegation would like to

 

touch upon several points to which we attach particular
importance.

First, in the light of the interrelated nature of the
situations in Eastern Slavonia, Bosnia and other regions of
the former Yugoslavia, the United Nations operation in
Eastern Slavonia must be undertaken in the broader context
of peace and security for the region as a whole. We are
aware that the operation in Eastern Slavonia and the one
currently under way in Bosnia and Herzegovina affect each
other. In this regard, we note with satisfaction that, despite
some misgivings over the new international operation in
Bosnia and Herzegovina, the situation there appears to be
unfolding in a relatively peaceful manner thus far. This
positive development augurs well for the stability of the
peace process in Eastern Slavonia.

In this connection, we are pleased with the
establishment, through this draft resolution, of a close
relationship between UNTAES and the Implementation
Force (IFOR). In particular, we believe that IFOR should
be one of the key players in maintaining the security of
UNTAES personnel.

Secondly, my delegation is of the strong view that any
individual who has committed crimes against humanity
must be brought to justice. We note that UNTAES will be
the sole governing authority in Eastern Slavonia, Baranja
and Western Sirmium during the transitional period and
that, in accordance with the provisions of this draft
resolution and the Statute of the International Tribunal, it
therefore has the authority to deal with war crimes
committed in the former Yugoslavia.

Thirdly, my delegation fully supports the principles
that underlie the Basic Agreement: the territorial integrity
of Croatia, the protection of the human rights and
fundamental freedoms of the entire population, irrespective
of ethnic origin, and peaceful coexistence in Eastern
Slavonia. We wish to emphasize that respect for human
rights and fundamental freedoms, particularly those of the
minorities in the region, is a crucial factor for progress
towards a lasting peace.

Fourthly, we also fully support the importance this
draft resolution attaches to the development and economic
reconstruction of Eastern Slavonia. We are of the view that
peace and development will go hand in hand in the long
run.

Finally, we firmly believe that the success or failure
of the peace process in Eastern Slavonia rests squarely with
the parties to the Basic Agreement. While they are clearly
assured of the support of UNTAES and the entire
international community, it will be only through their
political will and untiring efforts to reconcile and rebuild
a harmonious multi-ethnic society that real progress can
be achieved over the long term.

I should now like to turn to the other, technical draft
resolution before the Council. We are well aware that the
situation on the Prevlaka peninsula and the issues related
to it are among the key elements in the basic relations
between the Republic of Croatia and the Federal Republic
of Yugoslavia. For this reason, my delegation expresses
its support for the continued deployment of United
Nations military observers to the area in the belief that
such a measure will contribute to the stability of the
peninsula, thus providing a basis upon which the parties
concerned can work towards a peaceful settlement of their
differences.

In the light of the foregoing, the Republic of Korea
will vote in favour of the two draft resolutions before us
today.

I wish to conclude by saying that my delegation very
much looks forward to a time when the citizens of
Eastern Slavonia and elsewhere in the former Yugoslavia
can put behind them the pain and suffering of the last
four years and begin to rebuild their lives and
communities in a spirit of mutual trust and reconciliation.

My delegation would like to take this opportunity to
pay high tribute to the personnel of the United Nations
Confidence Restoration Operation in Croatia (UNCRO),
without whose sacrifices and dedication the peace process
now taking shape in the former Yugoslavia would not
have been possible.

