Mr. Valle (Brazil): I would like to thank Under-
Secretary-General Jean-Marie Guehenno for his very
informative update. My delegation is also grateful to
you, Sir, for sharing with the members of the Council
your views on the encouraging results of the Berlin
international conference, held from 31 March to
lApril 2004. I take this opportunity to congratulate
you, Ambassador Pleuger, for assuming the presidency
of the Security Council during the month of April. In
addition, I extend compliments to Ambassador Jean-
Marc de la Sabliere, for successfully conducting our
work during the very cumbersome month of March.

Brazil commends Germany and Afghanistan, as
co-sponsor countries, and also the other co-chairs for
their work in creating a privileged opportunity to
discuss the next steps in the effort of reconstruction.
We are heartened by the remarkable results reached in
Berlin. The pledged contributions of $8.2 billion over
three years are a very positive sign of renewed
commitment by the international community to
Afghanistan. The amount of announced funds should
prove to be decisive for the effort of rebuilding the
country's economy and infrastructure.

The international community is being matched by
the Transitional Authority's serious and tireless work.
In this context, the importance of the work plan
presented in Berlin by President Karzai cannot be
overemphasized. It lays down a comprehensive set of
objectives that will guide Government action in key
areas, such as disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration, combat against drugs, as well as voter
registration.

The international community must do its best to
support Mr. Karzai and his Government in
implementing the plan. Brazil welcomes the
announcement made by President Karzai to hold
nationwide elections next September. Truly
representative and credible elections in Afghanistan are
essential for building a democratic, participative
society. We believe that the work plan of the Afghan
Government very rightly focuses not only on the
holding of the elections, but also on issues such as
security, free exercise of political rights, civic
education and logistics, which are correctly perceived
as fundamental for creating political and security
conditions conducive to free and fair elections.

The expansion of peacekeeping forces throughout
Afghanistan will bolster security in the country.
Expansion on the ground is critical to halt deterioration
of the overall situation and prevent the recurrence of
recent violent incidents. Enhanced security is not only
a requirement for the success of reconstruction efforts,
but also a precondition for democratic, fair and
peaceful elections in September. We welcome in
particular the announced deployment of additional
provincial reconstruction teams (PRTs), which will
play a vital role in improving security and rebuilding
infrastructure in the most distant regions of the country,
as well as in ensuring the safe conduct of the electoral
process. We expect that the new PRTs will soon be
operative, providing help where it is most needed.

Afghan stability remains seriously threatened by
activities related to the drug trade. The threat is
aggravated by the illegal association of drug producers
and traffickers to warlords and terrorists, all of whom
contribute to undermine international efforts for
stabilization. We note with satisfaction that the Afghan
Government proposes integrated strategies to tackle
this complex problem based on combating drug-related
organized crime, the promotion of alternative
livelihoods, the reduction of demand and the
strengthening of the rule of law.

The Berlin counter-narcotics declaration marked
the confirmation and strengthening of the agreement of
Afghanistan and its neighbours - China, Iran,
Pakistan, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan and Uzbekistan -
to work together in the fight against drug trafficking.
We note in this context the convening of the conference
on regional police cooperation, to be held in Doha next
May. We expect that, with tighter border controls and
improved information exchange provided by the
renewed alliance, Afghanistan and its neighbouring
countries will be better equipped to face the challenge
of eliminating the illicit drug trade and production.

The Berlin conference was a very successful step
forward. It reaffirmed the strong commitment of the
international community to helping the Afghan people
to rebuild their nation. We hope that, in the coming
months, that extraordinary diplomatic achievement will
be translated into the concrete improvement of the
situation of that struggling nation.

