Ms. Loj (Denmark): Let me begin by thanking
you, Sir, for your presence and for convening this
meeting and thereby once again focusing the attention
of the Security Council on the hardship and suffering
of children in armed conflicts.

I would also like to express our gratitude to the
Secretary-General for his latest annual report and to his
Special Representative for Children and Armed
Conflict, the United Nations Children's Fund, as well
as other United Nations agencies that have assisted in
preparing it.

Finally, I should like to associate my delegation
with the statement to be delivered later in the debate by
the Permanent Representative of Luxembourg on
behalf of the European Union.

We all know that the issue of children and armed
conflict is one of great complexity. A solution to the
problem can be reached only by taking a
comprehensive approach including legal, political, as
well as socio-economic measures. We need to address
the demand side of the equation by taking action
against Governments and other entities that either
recruit or force children to become armed combatants,
but we also need to be cognizant of the supply side,
particularly the close interlinkage between security and
development.

Children affected by armed conflict must be
provided with real alternatives to the harsh reality of
war. It is consequently of key importance that all
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
processes address the special needs of child soldiers. A
long-term solution depends on the creation of
incentives and possibilities for child soldiers, including
the possibility to get education, vocational training
and, in the end, realjobs.

The report of the Secretary-General is indeed
sobering reading. As we speak, thousands of children
in places like the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Darfur, northern Uganda and Sri Lanka are being
forcibly recruited to participate in the killings of
innocent people or are being killed themselves.
Children are being raped or exposed to other kinds of
grave sexual violence. Places where our children
should feel safe, such as schools and hospitals, have
become the targets of deliberate armed attacks and
unspeakable atrocities.

It is clear that, in the absence of direct and firm
national and international involvement in the solution
to that multifaceted problem, anarchy, brutality and
impunity will continue to reign. What immediate
actions can the Council take to address the present
deplorable situation regarding children in armed
conflict? I would like to point to three areas.

First, as repeatedly reported by the Secretary-
General to the Council, the situation of children in
armed conflict around the world is not improving. On
the contrary, impunity is widespread. Parties to a
number of armed conflicts show no will to respect their
international obligations either with regard to the
norms of relevant legal instruments or to the decisions
and repeated demands of the Security Council.

However, the credibility of the Security Council
rests on its ability to follow up on its previous
decisions and effectively to address the widespread
impact of armed conflicts on children. For those
reasons, we believe that the time has now come for the
Security Council to take action.

In that respect, we note the recommendation of
the Secretary-General that the Security Council should
move to take targeted and concrete measures where
insufficient or no progress has been made by parties
named in the lists annexed to the Secretary-General's
report. What the exact nature of those measures should
be and how they could most effectively be
implemented are some of the issues which we look
forward to discussing in more detail during the
forthcoming deliberations of the Security Council on
the draft resolution to follow this debate.

Secondly, as we move to consider targeted
measures against the worst offenders, we must also
ensure that we continue to receive systematic, reliable
and accurate information on the situation on the
ground. In that regard, we find it of key importance
that the Security Council should endorse a mechanism
to monitor and report on the use of child soldiers and
on other violations committed against children affected
by armed conflict.

The Council has repeatedly called for the
establishment of a monitoring mechanism within the
United Nations system and the Secretary-General has
in his report accordingly provided the Council with an
action plan for the setting-up of that urgently needed
mechanism. Denmark will work to ensure that the final
result is one that will be effective.

Parallel to the action plan, we must also make
sure that the Security Council's earlier decisions on
that issue are effectively implemented. More needs to
be done in that field, including the designation of
specific focal points in situations of armed conflict,
enhanced dialogue with Governments and armed
groups using child soldiers, and the development of
concrete action plans at the national level to halt the
recruitment and use of child soldiers.

Finally, I would like to point out that, while
striving to find ways to effectively address the
atrocities committed against children by parties to
armed conflicts, we must not lose sight of the
shortcomings of the international community's own
efforts to protect children in war-torn societies.

A particularly grim experience in that regard is
the serious allegations of sexual exploitation and abuse
of women and children that has been made against
United Nations peacekeeping personnel. Such abuse is
a complete betrayal of the trust which the victims of
war must always be able to place on those who come to
protect them and support the peacebuilding process.
Firm measures and a policy of zero tolerance are
needed to prevent and put an end to all sexual
exploitation and abuse by United Nations peacekeeping
personnel. Those who have perpetrated such conduct
must face disciplinary and criminal prosecution.
Denmark is confident that the Secretary-General will
continue to take the appropriate steps needed to
address the problem.

Much more could be said, but let me conclude by
reiterating that the time has come for the Security
Council to act. A monitoring and reporting mechanism
should be endorsed and the Council should move to
take targeted and concrete measures pursuant to the
recommendations of the Security General. It is time for
the Security Council to take action to reverse the
deplorable situation of an increasing number of
children worldwide trapped in the midst of armed
conflict.

