Mr. Dejammet (France) (interpretation from French): The French delegation would like first of all to
welcome the ministerial delegation of the Southern
African Development Community (SADC), which
requested the holding of this debate. We have listened
very attentively to the statements made the by the
members of that delegation, who represent the countries
of the region. The French delegation shares the concerns
the Ministers have just expressed. We understand that
these Ministers are expressing the desire, as they stated
with such great conviction, to promote within SADC both
development and democracy in southern Africa.

Nearly 10 years ago southern Africa was still
devastated by war and exclusionism. In a decade,
immense progress has been achieved thanks to the
determination of those who have succeeded in building a
better future for themselves and for all of Africa. The
United Nations has contributed actively to this
development, and as a result, first Namibia and then
South Africa and Mozambique have had to go through
radical and positive changes, as also happened in other
countries in the region. Today we venture to hope that
Angola, in turn, is on the way to joining this group of
States that have courageously turned a page in their
history.

In Angola a complex process has been going on for
several years now. It has been interrupted on several
occasions. All hopes today are pinned on the full and
complete implementation of the Lusaka Protocol, which
was signed by the Angolan Government and UNITA on
15 November 1994. To support these hopes, the
international community has committed substantial
resources. The United Nations has deployed in the
country what is the largest peacekeeping operation now
under way. This is why it is imperative that all these
efforts succeed.

 

It is this determination to succeed which today leads
us here in the Council to state once again our concerns. The
Government of Angola - and we should like to commend
it most earnestly for this - has made praiseworthy efforts
to meet, sometimes in advance, the obligations incumbent
upon it pursuant to the Lusaka Protocol. This attitude,
unfortunately, has not been adopted by UNITA.

The French delegation deeply deplores the repeated
delays in UNITA's fulfilment of the obligations it has
entered into. We call once again on Mr. Savimbi's group to
make a priority of fulfilling the military commitments it
agreed to quite a few months ago. We have of course taken
note with satisfaction of the new commitments UNITA
recently made to discharge its obligations. We earnestly
hope that this time we will not be disappointed and that this
will be made clear by Mr. Jonas Savimbi's actions in the
months to come. We earnestly hope, of course, for a
meeting between President Dos Santos and Mr. Savimbi. In
this regard, we note that the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Maitre Blondin Beye, is present in this
Chamber, and we would like to commend the tireless
efforts he has made to carry out successfully the peace
mission in Angola entrusted to him by the United Nations.

For all these reasons, France is in favour of the
Council's renewing, for a period of just two months, the
mandate of UNAVEM. III, which remains in Angola as a
guarantor of peace and stability. France would also like the
Council, in the draft resolution it is to adopt between now
and 11 October, to take an unambiguous stand in cautioning
UNITA.

The French delegation is therefore prepared to give
favourable consideration to the proposals submitted to it by
the SADC ministerial delegation, including those on the
strong warning that, under certain conditions, the imposition
of sanctions might be considered.

It goes without saying that the French delegation is
also prepared to take into consideration the views of
Member States which bear particular responsibility for this
item. It would support any draft resolution acceptable to the
members of the Southern African Development Community,
who are interested above all in a final settlement to the
Angolan conflict.

