Mrs. Raz: At the outset, on behalf of the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People, I would like to congratulatethe delegation of Viet Nam on its able conduct of the presidency of the Security Council this month. I also wish to thank Viet Nam, as a brotherly observer State of the Committee, for its long-standing support of the just Palestinian cause. The Committee would also like to congratulate Estonia, the Niger, Saint Vincent and Grenadines and Tunisia on taking up their seats on the Council and to wish them every success in upholding their important responsibilities. We thank Under-Secretary-General Rosemary DiCarlo for her briefing on the situation in the occupied Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem. Let me also thank Ms. Ursula Mueller, Assistant Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs, for her comprehensive briefing on the humanitarian situation (see S/PV.8706). As we gather in the Council in this new year and decade to consider the situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question, the heightened geopolitical tensions and turmoil in the region remind all of us that peace must never be taken for granted and that it must be preserved and nourished. We must uphold and fulfil the values enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations, which remain our shared framework for preventing and resolving conflict and injustice. Recent developments underscore the need, now more than ever, for today's debate on the Palestinian question lest it be sidelined or forgotten in the face of the current turmoil. May I remind representatives that, in the context of the stalled peace process and the evolving dangerous realities on the ground, leaving this question unresolved constitutes a serious negligence of our collective duties under the Charter and a threat to the peace and security of the region and beyond. In particular, in the current volatile environment, the ongoing illegal occupation of the Palestinian territory and the worsening situation on the ground cannot be ignored as "business as usual". The year 2019 saw a 45 per cent increase in demolitions and confiscations of Palestinian homes in the West Rank, including East Jerusalem, as compared to 2018, according to figures released by the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs. Moreover, at the beginning of this month, Israel approved the construction of an additional 1,936 new settler units in illegal settlements across the occupied Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem. Allow me to reiterate in the strongest terms that Israeli settlements in occupied areas are illegal under international law, as affirmed, inter alia, in resolution 2334 (2016). Claims that settlements are not illegal and may even advance Israeli-Palestinian peace are totally unfounded and offensive. Israel must halt settlement construction and expansion immediately and completely. The reports of the Secretary-General on the implementation of resolution 2334 (2016) should include reports by Member States on how they comply with operative paragraph 5, which calls on Member States to distinguish, in their dealings, between Israel and the occupied Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem, as well as with regard to settlement activities. Similarly, tensions triggered by attacks by the Israeli occupying forces on worshippers inside the Al-Aqsa Mosque compound threaten further destabilization, which must be averted. The Islamic Jerusalem Wadf is the sole institution responsible for administrating the affairs of the Al-Aqsa Mosque compound, including the maintenance of its interior and exterior walls. The Committee urges Israel, the occupying Power, to abide by all its obligations under international law and avoid actions that undermine an already fragile status quo. In a positive development, on 13 December 2019, the General Assembly voted to extend the mandate of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) until 2023 (General Assembly resolution 74/85). The overwhelming vote in favour of the extension is an indication of the unwavering support of the international community for the Agency's mandate and necessary work in support of 5.5 million Palestine refugees. The Committee reiterates its call to all Member States to provide UNRWA with the reliable and sustainable funding necessary to deliver critical humanitarian services to the Palestine refugees, thereby contributing to the stability of the region. Moreover, in December, the General Assembly adopted with an overwhelming majority all the resolutions on the question of Palestine, including those on this Committee's mandate (General Assembly resolution 74/10) and on the right of the Palestinian people to self-determination, including the right to their independent State (General Assembly resolution 74/11), which gained the support of almost 90 per cent of the United Nations membership. That is once again a testament that such resolutions are firmly rooted in the United Nations Charter, international law and humanrights law and confirm the support of most of the world. That international consensus must be upheld and serve as the focal point for all of our collective efforts to promote a just, lasting and peaceful solution. On 20 December 2019, the Chief Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court, based on a referral from the State of Palestine and following a thorough, independent and objective assessment of all reliable information available to her Office, decided to proceed with the investigation into alleged war crimes committed in the West Bank, including East Jerusalem, and the Gaza Strip. The Committee welcomes the announcement by the Chief Prosecutor and trusts that such an investigation will serve the interests of justice and peace. The humanitarian and economic situation of the 2 million Palestinians in the Gaza Strip continues to deteriorate and has reached the critical juncture of which the United Nations country team warned in its report "Gaza 2020: A liveable place?", necessitating urgent humanitarian and political action. We reiterate our strongest calls for the lifting of the 12-year Israeli blockade of Gaza. Allow me also to reiterate the support of the Committee for the reconciliation process led by Egypt and others, which are sparing no efforts in that regard. The Committee also expresses its full support for the holding of general elections in the State of Palestine, including East Jerusalem, with a view to reuniting the Palestinian people under a single, legitimate and democratic Palestinian national Government. In these uncertain times, when the Middle East faces unprecedented levels of tension, we call on the Council, as the guarantor of international peace and security, to take up its responsibilities, to implement its relevant resolutions and to take overdue action on the Palestinian question for the sake of generations of Palestinians and Israelis who seek to live side by side in peace and security, along the pre-1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as the capital of the independent Palestinian State.
