Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): In
expressing my appreciation for the convening of this
important discussion, I would also like to thank
Mr. Abdel Fatau Musah and Mrs. Florentina Adenike
Ukonga for their briefings and Under-Secretary-
General Lynn Pascoe for his important comments on
the report of the Secretary-General on the assessment
mission on piracy in the Gulf of Guinea (see S/2012/45).

Piracy and armed robbery in the Gulf of Guinea
region affect the security of international shipping and
threaten the trade and economic development of the
countries of the region. Piracy affects not only coastal
States, but also landlocked countries that depend on
access to the sea for their imports and exports.
According to the report, piracy results in an annual loss
of about $2 billion to the economy of the West African
subregion.

The problem of piracy and armed robbery in the
Gulf of Guinea cannot be tackled in a unilateral or
isolated manner. All affected countries should combine
their efforts to avoid the success of one country
resulting in piracy activities relocating to more
vulnerable countries.

For that reason, any lasting and effective solution
must include genuine, coordinated regional and
international efforts to develop a comprehensive
strategy aimed at strengthening the capacities of the
countries in the region in the fight against that crime.

Piracy attacks in the Gulf of Guinea are neither
opportunistic nor isolated events. Quite the contrary,
there is increasing evidence that piracy activity is
systematic and organized. Therefore, precise, detailed
and verified data on the scope, modalities and specific
zones of the incidents is necessary in order to form a
better idea of the character and nature of the
phenomenon before us and develop initiatives adapted
to the particularities of each case.

The international community should support the
efforts of States of the region in exercising their
sovereign responsibility to fight piracy. In that regard,
it is essential to maintain the leadership role of the
States concerned in applying solutions against that
scourge.

Technical assistance for strengthening legislative
and judiciary systems in fighting this crime is of major
importance. Equally important are the exchange of
information and the establishment of a framework to
gather, analyse and disseminate information. At the
same time, technical, material and financial support
must be provided towards building capacities in the
maritime security sector of various States of the region.

We believe that any lasting and effective solution
to the problem of piracy in the Gulf of Guinea requires
the implementation of a regional approach to maritime
security that includes the various initiatives developed
by the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), the Economic Community of Central
African States (ECCAS) and the Commission of the
Gulf of Guinea, as well as the participation of the
African Union.

As is the case in other situations considered by
the Council, a viable response to that crime should
include factors identified by the assessment mission,
such as high rates of youth unemployment, wide
income disparity within society, the uncontrolled
circulation of illegal weapons and the prevalence of
corruption.

Colombia supports the early convening of a
regional summit of heads of State of the Gulf of
Guinea, as an appropriate forum to further develop a
broad regional strategy to combat piracy. In that
regard, the United Nations is called upon to provide
assistance to national authorities and regional
organizations in relation to the matter and to coordinate
international assistance in support of regional efforts
aimed at fighting that crime.

