Mr. Owada (Japan): Today, the Security Council is
adopting a draft resolution which will increase the
resources for the oil-for-food humanitarian programme
envisaged under its resolution 986 (1995) of 14 April
1995. Resolution 986 (1995) was conceived as a
temporary measure to provide for the humanitarian needs
of the Iraqi people until the fulfilment by the Government
of Iraq of the relevant Council resolutions, including,
notably, resolution 687 (1991) of 3 April 1991.
Unfortunately, the non-compliance by Iraq with its
obligations has so far made impossible the lifting of
sanctions. It should be noted that under these
circumstances such a temporary measure has been
necessary up until today.

We in the Security Council have all supported the
oil-for-food programme under resolution 986 (1995) in
order to meet the need to avoid the deterioration of the
humanitarian situation of the Iraqi people brought about
under the circumstances. In this context, we note with
concern the report of the Secretary-General of 1 February
1998, which states, in relation to the current sum
available for humanitarian purposes, that

"it has become increasingly apparent that this sum is
inadequate to prevent further deterioration in
humanitarian conditions and cannot effect the
improvement in the health and nutritional status of
the Iraqi population the Council hoped for when it
unanimously adopted the measure." (S/ 1998/90, para. 66)

The Secretary-General recommends that

"expanded assistance is urgently required to address
the humanitarian situation in Iraq" [ibid].

Japan concurs with the provision of additional resources
in accordance With his report.

In the view of the delegation of Japan, in order to
achieve the objective of resolution 986 (1995), it is
important to facilitate the effective and practical
implementation of the oil-for-food programme, so that the
Iraqi people may benefit fully from the available
resources. From this standpoint, Japan supports the
Secretary-General's proposals to deal with the
humanitarian needs in a targeted manner and to further
expedite the implementation process. It is the expectation

 

of Japan that the concrete arrangements contained in the
provisions of this draft resolution, notably in paragraph 2,
will prove to be adequate to meet our common objective in
the Council of avoiding a further deterioration of the
current humanitarian situation.

At the same time, I wish to emphasize that for the
effective and efficient implementation of this oil-for-food
programme, it is essential that the United Nations
observation process be handled in such a way as to provide
the required assurance to the Council of the equitable
distribution of the goods produced in accordance with this
draft resolution and that all supplies authorized for
procurement are utilized for the purpose for which they
have been authorized.

It is earnestly hoped that all parties, particularly the
Government of Iraq, will provide their full cooperation for
the effective implementation of this programme. As a
member of the Committee established pursuant to resolution
661 (1990), Japan will continue to participate actively in
the efforts to further promote the implementation of the
programme. It is also important in this context that the
Committee ensures that the measures with respect to
refining and clarifying its working procedures, as referred
to in its report of 30 January 1998, are implemented and
that the relevant observations and recommendations referred
to in the Secretary-General's report of 1 February 1998 are
considered, in particular with a view to reducing the delay
between the export of petroleum and petroleum products
from Iraq and the supply of goods to Iraq in accordance
with this draft resolution.

On 18 February, the Security Council heard from the
Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi Annan, about his intention to
visit Baghdad and unanimously expressed its full support
for his mission. As a member of the Council, Japan
earnestly hopes that his visit, which is the determining step
for a peaceful solution to the present crisis, will be
successful in bringing about Iraq's full and unrestricted
cooperation with the United Nations Special Commission
(UNSCOM) in accordance with all relevant resolutions. It
is the sincere desire of Japan that the day will come as
soon as possible when the sanctions currently applied to
Iraq will be lifted through Iraq's full compliance with its
obligations under the relevant resolutions.

The adoption of this draft resolution at this precise
juncture, when the Secretary-General is meeting with the
leadership of the Government of Iraq, is particularly
significant in this context as an important signal from the
Council and from the international community to the Iraqi
people.

For these reasons, my delegation will vote in favour
of this draft resolution.

