We thank Under-Secretary-General Nakamitsu for her briefing. My delegation notes that the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) Technical Secretariat is continuing its mandated activities related to the Syrian chemical-weapons programme despite the travel restrictions due to the coronavirus disease pandemic. We appreciate the efforts to ensure the continuity of the relevant activities in that regard without compromising the safety and the health of the OPCW personnel. We note the eighty-fifth monthly report of the Director General of the OPCW (see S/2020/1056, annex). In that regard, we wish to highlight the following points. First, my delegation appreciates the holding of the twenty-third round of consultations between the Declaration Assessment Team and the Syrian National Authority in Damascus last month. Indonesia hopes that more substantive discussions can be held regularly to address all the outstanding issues regarding Syria's initial declaration. My delegation has been consistent in encouraging constructive engagement and dialogue between the Syrian Arab Republic and the OPCW. Indeed, the continued consultation and cooperation between both parties cannot be further emphasized. Secondly, we recognize that the Fact-Finding Mission in Syria (FFM) continues to study all available information related to allegations of the use of chemical weapons in the Syrian Arab Republic. We note the recent report of the OPCW FFM regarding the incident in Saraqib in August 2016 and in Aleppo in November 2018 (see S/2020/1082, annex). Both reports stated that the results of the analysis of all available data did not enable the FFM to establish whether or not chemicals had been used as weapons in the incidents. My delegation looks forward to receiving future results of the FFM's work. Without comprehensive analysis, it is always important to avoid the temptation to jump to any conclusion and adopt a one-sided interpretation of the OPCW technical reports. Thirdly, the support of all relevant parties, including the Security Council, based on good faith and without politicization of the issue, is key to advancing the progress of this dossier. Indonesia also notes the report of the OPCW Director General, dated 16 October, regarding the implementation of the OPCW Executive Council decision, adopted on 9 July 2020 (see S/2020/1033, annex). In addition, we note the response letter, dated 4 November, from the Syrian Arab Republic to the Director General of the OPCW and Syria's commitment to continue working with the OPCW Technical Secretariat. Again, enhancing communication and coordination between the OPCW and the Syrian authorities is of the utmost importance. Before concluding, Indonesia wishes to emphasize the importance for the Council to continue the discussion on this issue in a comprehensive manner, consistent with the ongoing process in The Hague. My delegation believes that our monthly discussion in the Council must add value to the relevant work of the OPCW and eventually assist in permanently closing this issue. We believe that this idea is becoming more relevant now, especially prior to the convening of the Conference of the States Parties of the Chemical Weapons Convention in The Hague by the end of this month. In that regard, the unity of the Council is something for which we all must strive. Lastly, I would like to take this opportunity to once again state my delegation's firm position that the use of chemical weapons anywhere, at any time, by anybody and under any circumstances cannot be justified and that the perpetrators must be held accountable.
