Ms. Qwabe (South Africa): We join others in
congratulating you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council. We also thank the
delegation of Viet Nam for the good work done last
month. In addition, we thank Mr. Pascoe, the
representative of the United States and the Permanent
Representative of Iraq for their briefings.

We note the relatively positive developments that
have taken place over the past few weeks in Iraq.
These include enhanced cooperation, both among
political groups in Iraq and between Iraq and
neighbouring countries. However, notwithstanding
those positive developments, fundamental challenges
remain. As the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2008/495) indicates, high levels of violence
continue and civilian casualties remain unacceptably
high.

The Secretary-General also reports that the
human rights situation remains serious, particularly the
violations of the human rights of civilians and
detainees. Moreover, the dire humanitarian situation
continues to have a negative impact on Iraqi and
regional stability. A recent report from Refugees
International indicates that more than 2 million Iraqi
refugees live in neighbouring countries and that almost
3 million Iraqis are internally displaced. The continued
delays regarding the finalization of the electoral and
hydrocarbon laws, which are central to equitable
representation and the equitable distribution of natural
resources, are a further destabilizing factor.

We welcome the initiatives of the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) to establish a
process for addressing disputed internal boundaries in
Iraq. We also support all of UNAMI's efforts to assist
the Iraqi people and Government in strengthening
institutions for a representative Government, in
promoting political dialogue and national
reconciliation and in engaging with neighbouring
countries. Indeed, the work of the United Nations in
Iraq is testament to the international community's
determination to help the Iraqi people move beyond the
current crisis.

South Africa therefore continues to support the
presence of UNAMI in Iraq under its present mandate,
in line with our commitment to multilateralism and
conflict resolution. We believe that the United Nations
has a particularly important role to play with regard to
national reconciliation in Iraq. As the Secretary-
General has previously indicated, the United Nations
not only enjoys good relations with all parties across
the political spectrum in Iraq, but also brings to the
table its considerable experience and best practices
gained from operating in other conflict situations.
However, an expanded role for the United Nations, as
foreseen in resolution 1770 (2007), can be realized
only as circumstances permit. The safety of United
Nations personnel must be an overriding consideration.

We conclude by reiterating the observation made
by the Secretary-General in the present report that the
gains made so far need to be sustained through
meaningful political dialogue and national
reconciliation. Time is of the essence, and Iraq can no
longer afford continued delays in finding political
solutions.

