Ms. Cook: I thank the Security Council for
inviting me here today to discuss the report I recently
co-authored with Gina Vale. It is an honour for me
to present our research on the strategic, tactical and
operational engagement of women and minors by
Da'esh, an issue which we believe requires immediate
and urgent attention. While this is a critical concern
related to Da'esh in particular, it is also increasingly
reflected in otherjihadist groups today.

Our research has demonstrated the scale of this
concern. For the first time, we are able to demonstrate
with evidence that across 80 countries and of the
estimated 41,490 foreign citizens that became affiliated
with Da'esh, 13 per cent are women and 12 per cent
are minors. That includes at least 730 infants born
in-theatre to foreign parents. Women and minors
therefore represent one in four recorded foreigners
to become affiliated with Da'esh. These figures are
unprecedented for a terrorist organization, and also
serve to emphasize the need to consider the broader
networks of persons affiliated with such groups beyond
only fighters.

We believe this to be a vast underestimation,
based on current gaps in data. Of the 80 countries
reviewed only 26 provide publicly reliable figures
for both women and minors. We therefore still do not
have a full understanding of the scale and scope of
this concern. Thos statistics also exclude those who
were prevented from traveling to Iraq and Syria and
local women and minors within the conflict zone who
may have become affiliated with Da'esh -whether
willingly or coercively. Women and minors are vastly
underestimated and underanalysed groups. As such,
they risk being neglected in all assessments and full-
spectrum responses related to Da'esh.

Why were so many women drawn to Da'esh? By
presenting itself as an ideologically pure, State-building
project and holding and administering territory between
2014 up to late 2017, it gave women an opportunity, a
perceived stake and sense of purpose in building that
proto-State. It drew persons as diverse as schoolgirls
to grandmothers from five continents. Those women
expressed feelings of discrimination, oppression and
disenfranchisement in the communities they left behind,
and believed Da'esh offered them something meaningful
through roles ranging from citizens, mothers and wives,
to public sector workers. Women within that territory
and abroad also sought and carried out more nefarious
roles and acted as police, recruiters, fundraisers and
disseminators of propaganda, mobilizing both men and
women for Da'esh.

Da'esh achieved the support of women through
targeted, gendered recruitment efforts in its multilingual
propaganda, which utilized language and imagery that
emphasized women's rights, empowerment and a sense
of purpose and belonging offered by their caliphate. It
also exploited their personal and political grievances,
framed their participation as a religious obligation and
promised services ranging from free health care and
education to marriage arrangements, among others.

The factors that pushed individuals out of their
societies and pulled them towards Da'esh and its
ideology are diverse, complex and have to be understood
and assessed on an individual basis. We also recognize
that levels of agency and motivation differed for each
person. Some women were ideologically committed
and actively sought to support Da'esh, travelling
independently or with their children or families, while
others were subject to varying levels of coercion.

Da'esh also sought to promote the recruitment
of minors within and beyond its physical territory,
raising its "cubs" as the future fighters and ideological
guardians of its caliphate project. The group's
propaganda has displayed systematic indoctrination
of boys and girls throughout its education system.
For boys in particular, enrolment in military training
camps was mandatory, with the aim to psychologically
and physically recondition young recruits to fight
and engage in violence. Through such efforts, Da'esh
has sought to project an image of strength, bolster its
fighting force and even weaponize minors.

Similar to women, minors are not a homogeneous
group. They experienced diverse recruitment pathways
into Da'esh and held varied roles. Those roles range
from passive citizens of the so-called caliphate and
child brides, to spies, combatants and executioners.
We therefore recommend three sub-categories of
Da'esh-affiliated minors in line with gender and age
considerations as an indicator of the various levels of
individual agency and, therefore, accountability. These
categories are infants under 4 years of age, many of
whom were likely born inside Da'esh territory; children
aged 5 to 14, who mostly appeared to be taken by their
parents or guardians; and teenagers from ages 15 to 17,
some of whom travelled independently.

The physical fall of the so-caliphate represented a
significant turning point for the group. However, we do
not believe this to be the end ofits relevance or activities,
only a period of evolution, and therefore a particularly
important time to assess the current and future status
of its affiliates, including women and minors. An
estimated 7,366 Da'esh affiliates, or 20 per cent, have
now returned to their countries of departure, or appear
to be in repatriation processes to do so. However, only
256, or 4 per cent, of total returnees are recorded as
women. In contrast, up to 1,180 f 17 per cent i of
total returnees are recorded as minors, suggesting that
some Member States have prioritized the repatriation
of minors.

The current status of the significant number of
women and minors beyond returnees also requires
immediate attention and clarification. We have
identified women and minors as detainees in Iraq and
Syria, in internally displaced persons camps, as persons
still associated with Da'esh in Iraq and Syria, as those in
third-party countries, and some who have been killed.
More concerning perhaps are the vast numbers whose
status remains unknown. We also highlight important
concerns related to the status of orphaned and stateless
minors, whose only identity may have been one
affiliated with Da'esh and who require particularly
targeted and tailored interventions.

We believe that women are poised to play an
important role in carrying forward the ideology and
legacy of Da'esh. That view is based on a number of
considerations, including the motivation of some to
pass on that ideology to their children, the nefarious and
support roles they held in Da'esh, shifting discourses
related to women's roles within the group, and the
combat training some women received under Da'esh.
Numerous attacks - both successful and foiled - have
served to demonstrate the security risk some women
can pose.

Minors have likely been largely traumatized by
the Da'esh violence they witnessed and, in some cases,
actively conducted. There is evidence that male-child
and teenage "cubs" have already been engaged in
suicide attacks beyond Da'esh's immediate territory,
and the group's propaganda continues to call for,
and inspire its soldiers of all ages to conduct, guided
and independent attacks overseas. However, we also
recognize that many women and minors are unlikely
to become security threats, and may instead seek
to disengage from the group and its ideology. Our
research has reaffirmed the critical importance of
integrating considerations related to gender and age in
assessing the range of threats posed by Da'esh and its
affiliates, while ensuring that is reflected in common
vulnerabilities and exposures, and military, criminal
justice, rehabilitation and reintegration efforts.

This moment presents both exceptional challenges
for us as an international community as well an
opportunity. We now have an evidence base that
recognizes that women and minors, as two distinct
and nuanced groups, must be accounted for in our
understanding of contemporary terrorist and violent
extremist groups. Only by having a stronger evidence
base, both qualitatively and quantitatively, will
we be able to develop more effective, holistic and
sustainable responses.

