Mr. Sardenberg (Brazil): I would like to express
the special satisfaction of the delegation of Brazil at
seeing you, Mr. Minister, presiding over the work of
the Security Council on this timely and important item.
I am also grateful to the delegation of Greece for the
very useful background paper that it has provided as a
basis for our discussions today.

This meeting of the Security Council provides
clear evidence of the growing international awareness
of the need to strengthen our capacity to respond to
international humanitarian crises. Brazil is pleased to see
notions such as conflict prevention and peacebuilding,
which arose some 10 years ago, being firmly
incorporated into the United Nations agenda. The
United Nations, and the Security Council in particular,
must adapt to contemporary realities and be better
equipped, at both the institutional and the conceptual
levels, in order adequately to address fast-increasing
contemporary challenges and threats. Such ideas are
likely to be reflected in the important decisions that our
Governments are to take in the coming months through
the end of 2005. Brazil is firmly committed to this
opportunity to improve, in a comprehensive manner,
the collective security mechanism, rendering it more
effective and more efficient.

Efforts by the Security Council to break conflict
cycles and to prevent relapses in the context of
humanitarian crises have had mixed results in recent
years. It is therefore important to look at the lessons
learned so as to identify winning strategies, as well as
shortcomings, in our approach, as your delegation,
Mr. President, has proposed. First - this can never be
overstated - we must resist the temptation of one-
size-fits-all policies.

Every situation is characterized by cultural,
political, social, economic and sometimes religious
diversities. Information is a key requirement, and the
Council can certainly benefit from views on various
situations, not only from the Secretariat, as we do, but
also from individual Members, especially those from
the regions affected, and from the regional and
subregional organizations directly involved.

A second aspect is to recognize the complexity of
the tasks to be undertaken. Recent issues under
consideration by the Council tend to demonstrate that, in
parallel with security-oriented efforts, growing attention
should necessarily be given to promoting democratic
institutions, dialogue and national reconciliation and to
addressing the social and economic roots of conflict.
That is why Brazil and other States have, throughout
the years, advocated greater and more systematic
coordination between the Council and other United
Nations organs as well as other international actors.

Ultimately, we believe, peace is contingent not
only on political and security factors, but also on
economic development with justice and on the
provision of equal opportunity for all. An effective
collective system should therefore be based on a
comprehensive vision that can be sustainable in the
long term. The proposed creation of a PeacebuiIding
Commission - by including the Economic and Social
Council and the Bretton Woods institutions, as well as
other stakeholders - can help to bridge the
institutional gaps we face in the social and economic
fields. We certainly favour the ongoing debate on
issues related to transition and on the need to address
the funding and strategic planning gap between relief
and development, particularly in post-conflict settings.

Prevalence of the rule of law, the strengthening of
national security sectors and programmes of
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR)
can be catalysts for the promotion of economic
development and justice.

National ownership of the transition process from
the end of a conflict to the attainment of lasting peace
and sustainable development is crucial. My country is
committed to the establishment of a democracy fund at
the United Nations.

In post-conflict situations, it is essential that
national pacts be forged, fostering inclusiveness and
participation. Such arrangements should be freely
discussed and should aim at long-term stability. The
institutions to be established should be based on
compromise and common interest.

The rule of law must be absolutely consistent
with international human rights norms and standards,
and the rights of victims and vulnerable groups must be
fully upheld. In fragile post-conflict settings, an
independent, impartial, accountable and effective
judiciary system is, we believe, indispensable.

Tangible results can be achieved only with the
necessary financial resources and highly qualified
personnel for a solid investment in justice and the rule
of law. In addition, the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights should be given
more resources to work with countries in order to
strengthen the institutions that uphold the rule of law.

Over the years, the Council has applied various
modalities in promoting justice and addressing abuses
in order to achieve reconciliation. Those modalities
include the strengthening of local courts, support for
truth commissions, the establishment of international
tribunals, support for the establishment of mixed
tribunals and referral to the International Criminal
Court. Yet the dynamics are different in every
experience. Local ownership and local consultation are
crucial, as the Secretary-General stressed this morning.
True reconciliation may require a delicate balance
between the values of justice and those of peace,
however difficult that may be to achieve.

Reform of the security sector through the
restructuring and training of military and civilian
police forces is also essential. Foreign assistance -
financial, technical or both - can prove to be useful
and positive. But our attempts should also seek to
ensure that security forces, like governmental
institutions at any other level, are sensitive to the views
of society at large. Most important, they should be
clearly subordinate to civilian oversight.
DDR activities and their variants, including
resettlement and repatriation, are a matter of the
highest importance. The core components of DDR
programmes should be funded from the assessed
budget for peacekeeping operations in order to
guarantee predictable funding. As a matter of fact,
DDR programmes remain continuously under-
resourced, especially in the reintegration phase.
Experience shows that effective alternatives for
subsistence should be provided to ex-combatants. In
that connection, we stress the importance of quick-
impact projects on the ground that can provide
affordable housing for them. Providing affordable
housing is a key element of peacebuilding.
Reintegration into civilian life will be effective only if
conditions are provided that enable ex-combatants to
live in safety, to participate in the political process and
to pursue economic activities that yield social benefits.

As I stated at the outset, the Council has a mixed
record in undertaking these activities. I would add that
that is not necessarily the fault of the Council itself,
but rather is a symptom of the deficiencies of an
inadequate structure that Member States are now
willing to correct. Considering the current needs in this
field, we also believe that States that are in a position
to assist should seek to formulate new policies and
create or revamp their domestic institutions for that
purpose. Enhanced participation by as many States as
possible in that process would have beneficial effects,
including that of providing options for the countries to
be assisted. This is a potential area for international
cooperation with the participation of the Secretariat,
including the appropriate United Nations programmes
and agencies.

My delegation is thankful for this opportunity to
address, in wider terms, the challenges that the
Security Council has to address in its daily work. This
is a task that the Council must undertake in order to
comply with its mandate, and we must be adequately
prepared and equipped in order to perform effectively.

