Mr. Richardson (United States of America): The
United States shares the concern about the developments in
the Middle East that have brought us together today in this

 

Chamber. Having worked intensively on behalf of a just,
comprehensive and durable Arab-Israeli peace, we are all
too aware of the consequences specific actions can have
on the Middle East peace process, particularly where such
actions involve an issue of permanent status.

One such issue, of course, is Jerusalem, which
represents one of the most sensitive and emotionally
charged issues in the Arab-Israeli peace process. This is
one of the reasons that Israelis and Palestinians agreed in
their Declaration of Principles in 1993 to defer this issue
to those negotiations. Logic suggests and reality demands
that no action be taken that would prejudge or prejudice
an issue of such sensitivity.
It is in this context that we regret the announcement
by the Government of Israel that it intends to create an
"umbrella municipality" and to broaden the jurisdiction
and planning boundaries of Jerusalem. The United States
views Israel's decision as unhelpful at this delicate stage
of negotiations. We reiterate that all parties should refrain
from any unilateral action which could prejudge the
outcome of the permanent status negotiations. In this
connection, we welcome the statement by the Government
of Israel that there will be no change in the political
status of Jerusalem pending the outcome of the permanent
status negotiations.

It is no secret that the Middle East peace process has
faced severe difficulties and has been mired in a
prolonged stalemate for many months now. That is not
remarkable; given the daunting challenge of bringing a
just, lasting and comprehensive peace to this region,
major challenges and even setbacks were expected. What
is remarkable is that the parties have managed, through
good times and bad, to keep alive the possibility of
negotiating their differences rather than confronting one
another.

We ask them now to recommit themselves once
again to this process of negotiation and agreement. The
United States has offered a fair and balanced set of ideas
to break the stalemate. The Palestinians have said "yes"
in principle to our ideas. We are now working with the
Israelis to determine whether they can also accept what
we have outlined so that both sides can begin the
challenging task of negotiating the core issues of
permanent status. Only negotiation can resolve these
issues, and we call upon Israel - as well as the
Palestinians - not to take action that would make these
negotiations harder to begin and to conclude.

 

Should the parties demonstrate their readiness to move
forward on this basis, they will not find the Council lacking
in either the will or the enthusiasm to help them along the
way. In the end, of course, the Council cannot and should
not interject itself into issues that the parties themselves
have decided will be dealt with in face-to-face negotiations.
It is up to the parties to return to those negotiations, and the
sooner the better. But the Council can and should continue
to offer the parties its unqualified support and
encouragement as they seek to bring an end to the
bitterness and pain that have divided them for so long.

