Mr. Raza Bashir Tarar (Pakistan):
Mr. President, I should like at the outset to thank you
for convening today's debate. Allow me to express, on
behalf of the people and the Government of Pakistan,
our deepest condolences and commiseration to the
people and the Government of Norway in connection
with Friday's terrorist atrocities. Such dastardly acts
only harden our resolve to combat terrorism in all its
forms and manifestations.

We align ourselves with the statement delivered
by the Permanent Representative of Egypt on behalf of
the Non-Aligned Movement, as well as with the
statement to be delivered by the Permanent
Representative of Kazakhstan on behalf of the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation.

Pakistan believes that the time is ripe for a lasting
solution to the Israeli-Palestine conflict, based on two
independent and sovereign States living side by side
and at peace with each other.

The Palestinian Authority's progress in
establishing State institutions is an auspicious augury
for peace. Numerous independent sources have
confirmed that Palestinian statehood by September
2011 is well within reach. This has been acknowledged
in the reports of many international bodies and
mentioned in past statements of the Middle East

Quartet. The relative reduction of violence in the
region recently has also helped strengthen the
conditions necessary for lasting peace. It is in our
common interest to embrace and strengthen the
achievements of Palestine as an invaluable opportunity
for lasting peace in the region.

The positive developments in Palestine can be
sustained only with an active engagement on the part
of the international community. In order for a durable
peace in the Middle East to be achieved, it is
incumbent upon the Security Council and the Middle
East Quartet to honour their long-standing
commitments to a final settlement and to work in
tandem to achieve this goal. The well-known terms of
reference of the Middle East peace process provide a
navigational guide for the road to peace in the Middle
East. Despite the clarity of our common goal and near-
unanimity on the rules of engagement, the Security
Council and the Middle East Quartet increasingly
appear unable to act. This does not augur well for the
region. Their inaction may cause the present
opportunity for peace to be lost and lock the region
once again in cycles of violence and mistrust.

The challenges to peace in the Middle East are
not due only to the international community's inaction,
but are rooted also in Israel's expansionist policy,
characterized by the planning and building of new
settlement areas. The recent approval of new
construction areas in occupied Jerusalem, Bethlehem
and Nablus are cause for serious concern. The
demolition of Palestinian homes and structures in East
Jerusalem and the Jordan Valley has resulted in the
displacement of many Palestinian families.

Settlement activity is a clear violation of
international law and should be treated as such. Each
block of these settlements constitutes a major
roadblock in this journey to peace. Israel must stop
building new settlements and using settlement activity
as a political tool in the peace process. Settlement
activity and the peace process cannot move ahead
together.

Israel's continuing blockade of Gaza is neither
conscionable nor tenable. We call for the full
implementation of Security Council resolution 1860
(2009). Life in Gaza cannot return to normal without
the free movement of persons and goods, including
essential reconstruction material. We hope that Israel
will facilitate the completion of reconstruction

projects, including those undertaken by the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East.

Pakistan is supportive of lasting peace for all the
inhabitants of the Middle East, irrespective of religion,
ethnicity or nationality. The framework for peace in the
Middle East is laid down elaborately in Security
Council resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973), 1397
(2002), 1515 (2003) and 1850 (2008); the Madrid
terms of reference; the Arab Peace Initiative; and the
Quartet road map. Mustering and sustaining the
political will to implement the framework is
imperative.

We hope that the Security Council and the Middle
East Quartet will engage meaningfully with the
protagonists concerned to realize the collective
objective of the international community: an
independent, sovereign and viable State of Palestine,
with Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its capital, living side by
side and in peace with all of its neighbours. Pakistan
shares and supports this objective.

