Mrs. Holguin (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
Mr. President, I wish to congratulate you on your
presidency and to thank you for convening this meeting
and allowing participation in the open debate.

We are grateful for the briefings on the activities
of the three Committees, chaired by the representatives
of Denmark, Argentina and Romania, and for their
work, activities and commitment. In this regard, as
stated in our report on compliance with resolution 1267
(1999), my Government has passed on to all competent
authorities the lists requested by the Committee, and

the updated lists as well, so that the corresponding
action can be taken.

With regard to the Counter-Terrorism Committee
(CTC), Colombia is committed to the decisions
adopted in resolution 1373 (2001) and has submitted
four reports. We have complied with resolution 1540
(2004), and we welcome resolution 1624 (2005),
adopted on 14 September.

Colombia has always condemned, and continues
to condemn, terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations, regardless of its motivation or authors.
We believe that States must agree to a strategy to
combat terrorism, which will have immediate results
for peoples who suffer from and are victims of this
threat. We hope that the report of the Secretary-General
expected in 2006 will offer proposals to be considered
by the General Assembly and the Security Council to
strengthen the system to better support States in their
struggle against terrorism. Similarly, we hope that
States will begin to work together, which will enable
them to strengthen their consensus on ways to combat
terrorism in all its forms.

To be successful, cooperation to eliminate this
scourge must be unequivocal and universal. For the
United Nations to be effective in supporting States in
the global struggle against terrorism, it must work
closely with them, improve internal cooperation and
avoid duplication of functions and tasks. It must seek
clarity for ensuring implementation of a counter-
terrorism strategy that will include all countries and
organizations. States cannot combat this scourge in an
isolated fashion; joint and concerted action is required
to ensure success. Confidence-building is essential for
making progress in the exchange of information and
judicial cooperation. These are essential elements in
any counter-terrorism strategy.

More than analysis and general statements, what
the system and the States require is concrete initiatives
that establish commitments and possible and
achievable actions. In some cases, countries cannot
afford to exhaust themselves in trying to prove to the
world that terrorists who carry out terrorist actions in
their territories are, in fact, terrorists. While the
international community deliberates and persuades
itself, terrorist actions against the civilian population
continue. We therefore need to strengthen the
mechanisms that build confidence among States, with
the understanding that combating terrorism must be
done in compliance with international standards and
must be unrelenting.

We are still surprised at terrorist acts. We
continue to reject any act of that nature. The people of
Colombia have suffered from terrorism for a number of
years. What is mere theory or news for many is a
reality for us. Thousands of individuals have been
affected. Recently there was a second terrorist attempt
on the life of the former President of the Senate, in
Bogota. The State and the Government are determined
to combat terrorism and protect the Colombian people
from this threat.

In a democratic system, with a guarantee of open
and free political participation, there is no justification
for committing acts of violence or terrorism. Idealism
of former times is not an argument for maintaining
struggles based on terrorism.

In the past, a Danish non-governmental
organization sent funds to an illegal armed group that
carried out terrorist acts. Colombia began a process of
dialogue with Danish authorities, and I take this
opportunity to publicly thank the Government and
Danish justice for their cooperation in shedding light
on this matter and putting an end to this sort of
practice.

We must now recognize and apply the principle
of shared responsibility in preventing and eliminating
terrorism. It is time to take concrete and decisive
actions to criminalize any act to facilitate and finance
terrorism, because there is no doubt that terrorist
groups are increasingly participating in various forms
of organized crime to finance their activities through
trafficking of illicit drugs, money-laundering and arms
trafficking, inter alia.

