Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese):
Mr. President, I thank you for organizing today's
meeting. I also listened attentively to Special
Representative Honore's briefing.

Thanks to the strong support of the international
community and the preparations made in all walks of
life in Haiti, the first round of the legislative elections
took place in August. The elections as a whole were
peaceful and orderly, which was positively received by
the international community.

Atpresent, the security situation in Haiti is stable. Its
economy continues to grow. These are positive factors
that are laying a foundation for the smooth conduct of
elections in Haiti. Nevertheless, the situation in Haiti
remains complex and fragile. Cases of cholera are on
the rise. The task of providing humanitarian relief to
displaced people who need to be resettled remains
enormous. Peacebuilding has a long way to go.

China hopes that the international community will
focus its assistance in the following three areas. First,
active efforts should be made to move forward with
Haiti's elections. The second round of the legislative
elections, the presidential runoff and the local polls
will take place on 25 October. Whether this round
of elections will turn out to be successful will bear
significantly on the political process in Haiti.

China hopes that all the Haitian parties will refrain
from violence, maintain their unity and work together
to create a good atmosphere for the elections. We hope
that the international community and the regional
organizations concerned will continue to provide
vigorous support and help for the elections in Haiti by
providing monitoring and coordination on the basis of
respect for Haiti's ownership role.

Secondly, efforts should be focused on helping
Haiti in its development. Lack of development is the
root cause of Haiti's political and social problems. Only
development can solve these problems and provide
effective guarantees for the fundamental rights of the
Haitian people. The Government of Haiti should take
advantage of the current momentum in economic
growth to scale up infrastructure construction, build
its capacity in the fields of health, disease prevention
and disaster reduction, safeguard food security and
improve the humanitarian situation on the ground.
The international community should deliver on its
commitment of assistance to Haiti in support of the
country's efforts to achieve accelerated economic
and social development and to establish the rule of
law, helping Haiti achieve poverty reduction and
independent development in the near future.

Thirdly, the United Nations Stabilization Mission
in Haiti (MINUSTAH) should play its full role. Under
the leadership of its head, Ms. Sandra Honore, the
Mission has played an important role in promoting
elections in Haiti and in enhancing Haiti's security and
stability. China expresses its appreciation in this regard.
We hope MINUSTAH will continue to communicate
and coordinate with the Government of Haiti, step up
its training of the Haitian National Police and improve
the country's own capacity for security, thus making a
greater contribution to the achievement of lasting peace
and stability at an early date.

