Mr. De La Sabliere (France) (spoke in French): I
would like to thank you, Madam President, for taking
the initiative in organizing this debate. The protection
of civilians is an issue which current events bring
before us almost every day, and it is useful to stand
back for some perspective at regular intervals. I also
wish to thank Mr. Egeland for his remarks, which as
always are very trenchant and useful.

Two months ago, the Security Council adopted
resolution 1674 (2006), on the protection of civilians,
which endorses in particular the responsibility to
protect. I applaud the perseverance of the United
Kingdom in presenting and bringing that project to
fruition, with the full support of my delegation. It is
now time to examine how to implement this new
roadmap for the protection of civilians.

Allow me, in that regard, to limit my comments
to three simple ideas.
The protection of civilians has become an
important element in how the action of the Security
Council is perceived. Certain well-known studies have

reported a drop in the number of conflicts in the world.
However, it is clear that the number of refugees and
displaced persons, and more generally the number of
civilians in vulnerable situations, has not
diminished - far from it. Fighting is often no longer
one army against another but targets civilian
populations considered close to the enemy, with no
regard for the elementary principles of international
humanitarian law. The credibility of Security Council
action is therefore perceived to a large extent according
to the degree of protection that civilians have in a
given region, and not solely through the Council's
capacity to impose a ceasefire or a peace agreement.
The response to the crisis in Darfur is the obvious
illustration of that.

Based on that observation, I draw two
conclusions in terms of operations.

The first is that each time the mandate of an
operation is revised we must ask ourselves about the
protection of civilians in the field and what the United
Nations can do to improve it. Most of the time, the
Security Council must intervene in an extremely
sensitive context, including the inability of the
established authorities to ensure the protection of
civilians - which is their primary responsibility - or
ceasefire or peace agreements that are centred on
power-sharing and neglect the fate of civilian
populations.

Thus it is extremely important for the Council to
take the opportunity of every mandate review to think
about the balance between the force's missions and the
state of protection of the people on the ground. There
should never be a situation in which Blue Helmets
helplessly watch the massacre of civilians a few
hundred yards from their headquarters. While the
assets allocated to the peacekeeping operations cannot
be extended at will, on the other hand no one should
doubt the resolve of the United Nations to protect all
those who can be protected insofar as the capacities
deployed on the ground permit. I believe that that
concern is taken into greater account today by the
Council, as can be seen, for example, in the changes
made to the mandate of the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUC).
So we need to have a reflex - what I would term
a protective reflex for civilians - to use in all aspects
of an operation. MONUC's support to the International
Criminal Court investigators in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo is one example of the actions of
a peacekeeping operation assisting in the protection of
civilians via the fight against impunity, which deserves
to be emphasized.

The second conclusion, in terms of operations, is
that we must integrate the protection of civilians in the
Council's actions as far ahead of time as possible.
Regularly adjusting mandates to the issues of civilian
protection is the minimum that the Council can do.
However, we must still do more, as far ahead of time as
possible. First, we must press all the actors in a conflict
to respect the sacrosanct nature of protecting civilians
during their military actions and in all peace
negotiations. If ceasefire agreements take the lot of
civilians into proper account, then we are halfway
there.

Secondly, when we draft the initial mandates, we
must be very careful to ensure that the United Nations
does not find itself in the situation of helplessness I
have described while serious crimes are being
committed against civilians. Thus it is essential that the
initial mandates be realistic and clearly specify the
responsibility of the United Nations but at the same
time be commensurate with our duties vis-a-vis the
victims. A peacekeeping operation must have the legal
and military resources to discharge its mission to
protect the civilian population. That will be essential
when the Council decides on a resolution to relieve the
African Union in Darfur.

Lastly, in order to succeed, the Security Council
must rely on the entire United Nations family. Of
course, it is Jan Egeland and his staff who are the first
in line. But it is essential that the Department for
Peacekeeping Operations be a co-manager in this
dossier, along with the Department of Political Affairs.
So, I hope that at our next meeting, Jan Egeland will
not be alone in launching the debate.

