Mrs. DiCarlo (United States of America): I thank
you, Mr. President, for your presence here today and for
bringing us together on such a timely topic. I would also
like to thank the Secretary-General for his thoughtful
remarks.

It is a particular pleasure to have Secretary-
General Ihsanoglu join us. I commend his pioneering
leadership, including the 10-year programme of action
that has modernized the activities of the Organization
of Islamic Cooperation (OIC), bringing them from
primarily political and economic issues to those
concerning human rights, science and innovation. I am
also pleased to greet Secretary-General-elect Madani
and congratulate him on his election.

It is entirely fitting that the United Nations and the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation, the world's two
largest intergovernmental organizations, should consult
often and work together whenever possible. The United
States values the many contributions the OIC is making
on matters of global importance, and appreciates
the chance to discuss the prospects for even deeper
cooperation. I note at the outset that OIC members are
among the top troop-contributing countries to United
Nations peacekeeping missions, and that they are
playing a critical part in promoting international peace
and security in many areas of conflict.

The OIC also provides humanitarian assistance
to Afghanistan, Somalia and the Sahel region, as
well as other areas in urgent need. In doing so, it
reinforces the work of many United Nations agencies
and helps to address concerns that are priorities on
the Council's agenda. Last year, in recognition of
the central role played by the OIC as a representative
forum for more than 1.5 billion people, the United
States Agency for International Development (USAID)
signed an agreement with the OIC designed to increase
cooperation on such humanitarian issues as famine
in the Horn of Africa. In responding to emergency
situations, coordination is essential, and so is a broad
network of support. We hope to continue building on
the OIC-USAID partnership in years to come.

We also recognize the OIC's creation of an
independent human rights commission, and its
attention to child marriage, gender-related issues and
other pressing human-rights concerns within OIC
member States. In the work of the Security Council,
we have noted our appreciation for the OIC's effort to
foster a deeper sense of trust and cooperation between
Afghanistan and its neighbours, regional partners and
international organizations. We have also urged the
authorities in Mali to work closely with the OIC, as
well as with the Economic Community of West African
States and the African Union, in order to enhance
that country's capacity for effective mediation. And
on Somalia, we have commended the OIC for its keen
interest and steadfast backing for reconciliation and
recovery.

The United States also recognizes that the OIC
has become a strong and respected voice in the
international community's collective effort to counter
violent extremism, which has caused suffering and
strife on every continent. We particularly commend
Secretary General Ihsanoglu for speaking out firmly
against attacks on religious minorities and denouncing
acts ofterrorism. I note that the OIC recently co-hosted,
with the Council's Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1373 (2001) concerning Counter-Terrorism,
a meeting on implementing resolution 1624 (2005),
which is designed to curb actions that fuel hate and
incite terror.

No issue has been of greater concern to the Council
in the last few years than the ongoing crisis in Syria.
My Government welcomes the joint Arab League-OIC
statement expressing support for a "Geneva II"
conference and a peaceful solution to the crisis
based on the Geneva communique of 30 June 2012
(S/2012/523, annex). It is in keeping with the Council's
own position, as reflected in resolution 2118 (2013).
We also appreciate the Secretary General's strong and
timely condemnation of the chemical weapons attack
in Syria on 21 August. More recent statements have
endorsed the international plan to dismantle Syria's
chemical weapons programme and have called for
accountability for those responsible for the use of such
arms. I would also like to highlight the OIC's continuing
campaign to increase international contributions aimed
at meeting the immense humanitarian needs resulting
from the Syrian civil war. Those needs are growing at
an exponential rate, and my Government encourages
all to increase support for United Nations humanitarian
appeals.

Turning to Middle East peace efforts, I note that
in Cairo in February the OIC reiterated its support for
a just, peaceful and comprehensive settlement of the
Arab-Israeli conflict. It is significant that the OIC, with
its 57 members, has endorsed the Arab Peace Initiative
as the basis of Middle East negotiations. The support of
the Islamic world for a comprehensive and negotiated
peace can be a Vital contributor to the successful
outcome of talks between the parties. We interpret that
support as recognition that everyone in the region and
beyond has a stake in seeing that the negotiations go
forward in a positive and productive manner.

In conclusion, I note that the relationship between
the United Nations and the OIC is unique, not only
because ofthe OIC's size and reach but because the OIC
is an organization centred around one of the world's
largest religious faiths. The United States welcomes the
perspective of the OIC as a distinctive and leading voice
in the Muslim world, and looks forward to continuing
to work together, and with the Security Council as
appropriate, to address challenges to international
peace and security.

