Mr. Khoshroo (Islamic Republic of Iran): I would
like to begin by congratulating Malaysia on assuming
the presidency of the Security Council and for
organizing this open debate in a timely manner on the
very important matter of children and armed conflict.
I would also like to thank the Secretary-General for
presenting his annual report on children and armed
conflict (S/2015/409), which covers global trends on the
subject. My thanks go also to Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Zerrougui and the other briefers
for their valuable inputs to this debate.

The year 2014 was sadly one in which we saw
many setbacks in the fight to protect children in armed
conflict. As the recent report of the Secretary-General
and other reports in the United Nations system on this
issue indicat, that year was an especially horrific one
for children trapped in conflict zones and targeted by
warring factions and belligerent entities with no respect
for international humanitarian law and the welfare
of our children. Current world events indicate that
children are suffering in massive numbers as a result
of armed conflicts. It is most deplorable that armed
conflicts continue to take a heavy toll on children.

The progress made on this front has unfortunately
been more than overshadowed by the exacerbation of
conflicts and an increase in indiscriminate attacks in
some countries of our region. At the same time, we have
witnessed the proliferation and growth of extremist
groups that systemically violate the rights of children.
Those extremist groups pose a significant challenge
for our region. They perpetrate acts of Violence against
children, launch indiscriminate attacks on civilian
populations, target schools and health facilities and
abduct children in large numbers.
The trend of violent extremists infringing on the
rights of children should be of particular concern
to the international community. The nature of those
groups and their form and structure mean that many
standards and proven methods used by the international
community to protect children may be considerably
less effective, if not futile. The complete disregard for
civilians, including children, by Daesh, Jabhat Al-Nusra
and Al-Qaida affiliates, especially in Syria and Iraq,
has been particularly shocking, and the proliferation of
these tactics among such groups is worrisome.

Violent extremists have adopted widespread
abduction as a feature of their operations to inflict terror
and for the purpose of political brainwashing, ransom,
retaliation or sexual exploitation. The Boko Haram
gangs have been ravaging the parts of Nigeria and
surrounding areas primarily by terrorizing children.
The targeting of the children of religious and ethnic
minority groups is likewise a matter of grave concern.

The situation of children in Yemen is worrisome
as well. According to UNICEF reports, at least 279 of
the dead and 402 of the wounded have been children.
That marks an exponential and unacceptable jump
compared to the entire year of 2014 and makes clear
that the intensity of the conflict in Yemen can lead
to humanitarian crises for some time to come. The
systematic bombing and destruction of the logistical
infrastructure of a country that imports 90 per cent of
its food, for example, will undoubtedly have long-term
consequences.

As the Secretary-General's report indicates, and
as evidenced in reports by United Nations agencies, in
Gaza alone, between 8 July and 26 August 2014, 540
Palestinian children were killed and 2,955 injured,
among them 1,000 estimated to be permanently disabled
as a result of the latest Israeli invasion. The number
of schools, kindergartens and hospitals damaged or
completely destroyed by Israeli forces during the
same period is the highest recorded number of all such
situations in 2014. Israel's denial ofhumanitarian access
to the entire occupied Palestinian people endangers the
survival and well-being of Palestinian children, which
adds yet another record for the Israeli regime's ignoring
international humanitarian law without being held
accountable for its grave violations against children.

We would like to take this opportunity to call
for accountability for the war crimes and violations
committed by Israel during its recent military aggression
against the Palestinian civilian population and for the
wanton destruction of vital civilian infrastructure in
the Gaza Strip. The international community, including
the Security Council, should ensure serious follow-up
efforts to bring an end to Israel's impunity and to secure
justice for the victims.

The Security Council has identified six specific
criteria for grave violations that the Secretary-General
should use to update his lists of grave violators against
children in armed conflicts around the world, contained
in the annexes of his reports. The overwhelming
evidence indicates that systematic and gross human
right violations perpetrated by the Israeli regime and
army against Palestinian children under its occupation
clearly meet those criteria for listing. We therefore
join the many Member States that deeply regret the
decision not to list Israel in the annex of the most recent
report of the Secretary-General on children and armed
conflict, despite the recommendation of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General in that regard.

Warring parties must make greater efforts to
protect children from conflict. Respect by all parties
for the civilian nature of schools, the inclusion of
policies regarding the rights of children in peace talks
and treaties, and the regular institution of humanitarian
pauses in the fighting can be significant steps towards
achieving that aim. The international community must
redouble its efforts to protect children in conflict by
taking a more aggressive stance against those who
are persistent perpetrators and those who abduct and
victimize children. Nations need to show greater
leadership in countering the propaganda of violent
extremism, used for both the recruitment of children in
faraway places and the indoctrination of abductees, as
well as in protecting, rehabilitating and reintegrating
children saved from the grips of those elements.

Without strong action from the United Nations and
a genuine commitment from the community of nations,
this issue will have significant consequences and ripple
through generations. As the targeting of children has
become a growing trend among violent extremists
and an ever more prevalent feature of violent conflict,
the world should expect this issue to only grow more
brutal if it is not blunted by the will of the international
community.

