Sir Jeremy Greenstock (United Kingdom): The
United Kingdom is deeply concerned by the escalating
violence in the region and the resulting deaths of so
many innocent civilians on both sides. Terrorist
targeting of civilians, particularly, is beyond contempt.
Violence will result in nothing but more violence; it
serves only the interests of those on either side who do
not want peace.

Both communities have seen too many funerals. It
is way beyond time for Israel and the Palestinian
Authority to be thinking hard about where further
violence will lead and to be acting wisely and with
restraint. The only way forward is a cessation of
violence and dialogue. Tenet and Mitchell show the
way. It means a resumption of the political process
leading to a just, comprehensive and lasting settlement
of this long-standing dispute based on Security Council
resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973) and the
principle of land for peace.

The United Kingdom is committed to a settlement
in the Middle East that provides security for Israel
within recognized borders and allows the emergence of
a viable Palestinian State. This can be achieved only
through negotiations between Israel and the Palestinian
Authority which President Arafat heads. He is the
elected representative of the Palestinian people and the
key Palestinian leader with whom Israel can negotiate
peace when the time is right. It serves no one's interest
to undermine President Arafat or to weaken the
Palestinian Authority.

The Palestinian Authority has responsibilities. As
a first step, it must dismantle the Hamas and Islamic
Jihad terrorist networks. We again urge the Palestinian
Authority to crack down on the terrorists who are using
the Palestinian areas to launch attacks. They should be
arrested and brought to justice. We welcome President
Arafat's reported decision to take such action. These
commitments must be turned into reality.

Israel has a right to security and is entitled to take
steps to protect itself from terrorist attack, but it should
ensure that its actions remain proportionate and avoid
civilian casualties. As the European Union is making
perfectly clear this week at the highest level, Israel
must at once withdraw its military forces and stop
extrajudicial executions.

We urge Israel and the Palestinian Authority to
pull back from the brink and work together to end
violence, implement the recommendations of the
Mitchell Committee and return to negotiations. We also
urge them to work with United States envoy Zinni to
achieve this.

The United Kingdom will abstain in the voting on
the text in front of us because it does not reflect the
realities on the ground; does not specify one essential
next step for a resumption of meaningful negotiations;
and does not, as the European Union has done, define
the responsibilities which both sides must accept to end
the violence threatening the lives of civilians in the
region on a daily basis.

