Mr. Owada (Japan): As I address the Security
Council for the first time this month, Sir, the Council has
reached the final day of your presidency. Rather than
offering you the congratulations of my delegation on your
assumption of that high office, therefore, permit me to
commend you on the exemplary manner in which you
have led the work of the Council this month. Thanks in
large part to your wise guidance and evident diplomatic
skill, the Council has discharged its many important tasks
most effectively in the course of the month. I should like
also to take this opportunity to express my appreciation to
your predecessor, the Permanent Representative of
Argentina, for the wisdom and insight he brought to the
presidency during January.

We have witnessed dramatic breakthroughs in the
Middle East peace process over the last two years. The
agreement signed in 1993 in Washington by the leaders
of the PLO and the Government of Israel and the Israeli-
Jordanian peace agreement of 1994 were truly epoch-
making events that engendered cautious but nevertheless
genuine optimism throughout the international community.
Needless to say, we all understood that with these
achievements the process had by no means reached its
ultimate goal, but was, rather, setting out upon a fresh
path, one that would be marked by myriad dangers and
challenges.

Indeed, in the ensuing months we saw truly
disturbing developments, including terrorist activities, the
expansion of settlements and the redeployment of Israeli
forces. The parties directly involved, as well as the
broader international community, are now challenged to
ensure that the peace process remains Viable and
continues to make progress.

The peace process depends primarily, of course, on
the efforts and the political will of the parties concerned.
Thus, we welcomed the meeting in Washington on
12 February in which the representatives of Israel, Egypt,
Jordan and the Palestinian Authority reaffirmed their
determination to consolidate the breakthroughs achieved

 

in the Arab-Israeli peace process, to overcome obstacles
and disputes, and to push forward towards a just, lasting
and comprehensive peace in the region. Japan was
heartened by United States Secretary of State Christopher's
statement that same day, in which he affirmed that the
Israelis and Palestinians were committed to a real
partnership to reach real peace. He assured us that both
parties were clearly determined to fulfil all elements of
their agreements and to ensure their implementation. We
commend this firm determination by the parties and
strongly encourage them to maintain their resolve to reach
genuine peace in the Middle East.

The debate in the Security Council today provides us
with the chance to send a clear and decisive signal that the
international community is also committed to the peace
process. Indeed, it is incumbent upon the international
community to demonstrate to the parties concerned that
they have its full and steadfast support as they strive to
advance the peace process.

Among the gravest threats to that process are the
terrorist activities of those who are the enemies of peace.
Japan strongly condemns terrorism or violence which is
aimed at thwarting the peace process. It extends its
sympathy to the victims of terrorism and fully understands
the concerns of the Israeli people for their security. Japan
also understands that the security needs of the Israelis are
inseparable from the political and economic needs of the
Palestinian people. The peace process cannot be said to be
genuinely making progress unless all the people in the
region are able to pursue their lives in a safe and secure
environment, and in the knowledge that tomorrow will
bring a more stable life. To that end, it is necessary that the
international community strengthen its social and economic
development assistance to the region.

Job-creation for the Palestinians is an area to which
Japan attaches particular importance. Japan has already
disbursed $100 million out of the $200 million it pledged
in September 1993 for the Palestinian people, and it has
allocated $10 million to be expended through the United
Nations Development Programme for the creation of job
opportunities for Palestinians in Gaza.

The United Nations has been involved in the Middle
East situation almost since its inception. The multiple
problems in the region are deep-seated and complex; we
have learned that there are no easy answers, and that for
every two steps forward there may be one and a half steps
backward. But we must not allow ourselves to be
discouraged. I remain firm in my conviction - and recent

 

events confirm this conviction - that the path ahead
leads inexorably to the establishment of peace throughout
the Middle East.

