Mr. Haneda (Japan): Sir, I thank you for
convening this public meeting concerning the situation
in Bosnia and Herzegovina. I join previous speakers in
offering my thanks to the High Representative for
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Lord Paddy Ashdown, for his
comprehensive briefing and would like to pay tribute
to Lord Ashdown for his dedicated service over the last
three and a half years.

Japan welcomes the European Union (EU)
decision to approve initiation of the stabilization and
association agreement negotiation with Bosnia and
Herzegovina last week in the year marking the tenth
anniversary of the signing of the Dayton Agreement.
We recognize that Bosnia and Herzegovina has now
entered a new stage in its development, moving from
post-conflict rehabilitation towards integration into the
EU.

The remarkable developments in Bosnia and
Herzegovina during the past 10 years could not have
been achieved without the tireless efforts of the people
and political leaders of Bosnia and Herzegovina, the
High Representative and his staff and the entire
international community. The Government of Japan
would like to commend, in particular, the splendid
leadership of Lord Ashdown in that regard.

These achievements notwithstanding, there is still
much to be done in Bosnia and Herzegovina. It is
necessary to resolve the remaining problems, so that
Bosnia and Herzegovina will be able to stand on its
own feet. To that end, we expect the political leaders of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, with the cooperation of the
international community, to take the initiative to ensure
further progress in the most urgent tasks, such as the
restructuring of police, cooperation with the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) process, downsizing of the total
Government structure of Bosnia and Herzegovina and
further reform of the economy.

Japan has been actively contributing to the peace
implementation process in Bosnia and Herzegovina as
a member of the Steering Board of the Peace
Implementation Council. Currently, our assistance
projects are focused on three objectives. These are,
first, enhancement of the market economy; secondly,
improving the environment; and thirdly, consolidation
of peace. As part of the efforts to follow up the
Ministerial Conference on Peace Consolidation and
Economic Development of the Western Balkans, held
in Tokyo in April 2004, Japan co-hosted with Bosnia
and Herzegovina and the United Nations Development
Programme the second Regional Conference on
Tourism Development in the Western Balkans last
month in Sarajevo.

Japan, working with the international community,
intends to follow up on its commitment to the process
of achieving stability and prosperity in this region
through the aforementioned cooperative activities. It is
our firm belief that stabilization of the situation in
Bosnia and Herzegovina is essential for the stability of
the whole of south-eastern Europe.

