The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Kaberuka for his briefing.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
Minister of Foreign Affairs and Senegalese Abroad.

We have gathered once again to review the
cooperation between the United Nations and the African
Union (AU). We remain convinced of the importance
of the strategic partnership, which covers our mutual
efforts aimed at maintaining peace and security in
Africa. Based on that conviction, the President of the
Republic of Senegal, His Excellency Mr. Macky Sall,
felt that the matter of strengthening the partnership
should be a priority item on the Security Council's
agenda during the Senegalese presidency this month.

Today's debate therefore enables us to reflect on
how best to use that cooperation so as to meet the
current challenges. That leads me to thank the Assistant
Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations El-
Ghassim Wane, Permanent Observer of the African
Union to the United Nations Tete Antonio, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General to the African
Union Haile Menkerios, as well as the African Union
High Representative for the Peace Fund, Mr. Donald
Kaberuka, for their very relevant briefings, which
have strongly highlighted the challenges linked to
strengthening the cooperation between the United
Nations and the African Union. I would also like to
welcome the continuous commitment of the United
States and France to assist African States in seeking
solutions to the security challenges facing the continent.

The need to bolster cooperation between regional
and subregional organizations, in particular the African
Union, has been one of the joint recommendations to
come out of the various reviews aimed at making United
Nations peacekeeping operations more effective. As a
strategic partner of the United Nations in the areas of
peace and security, the African Union has demonstrated
its determination and ability to act as a first responder
to African crises. Indeed, the African Union has shown
its willingness and ability to provide primary responses
to the crises proliferating on the African continent.

That means that the African Union has become a
major player in collective security and is, furthermore,
endeavouring to create a structure for collective
security and to strengthen that security by way of
the African Peace and Security Architecture, which
is a comprehensive tool that seeks in particular
to prevent, combat and manage conflicts on the
continent. Establishing the African Peace and Security
Architecture represents a symbolic expression of the
African Union's genuine desire to tackle issues of peace
and security on the continent. That intention is clear,
in spite of the number and scope of the difficulties to
overcome, and is demonstrated by the adoption of the
AU Road Map 2016-2020, which seeks, among other
things, to prevent and remove obstacles impeding the
full functioning of the African Peace and Security
Architecture.

The peacekeeping operations of the African Union
are local responses to global challenges. Enhancing the
partnership between the United Nations and the AU
would therefore certainly assist the AU in acquiring the
appropriate means to conduct effective action, which is
in everyone's best interests. In that regard, strengthening
the partnership at the strategic and operational levels
is necessary for greater synergy and coherence, in the
light of the evolving security Challenges facing the
African continent.

Analysis indicates that, since its effective
implementation in 2004, the AU Peace and Security
Council, as well as the mechanisms of the African
Peace and Security Architecture, have been active in
various crises, in particular those in Burundi, Cote
d'Ivoire, the Comoros, Darfur and Somalia. However,
their actions are often limited by various constraints,
especially the crucial issue of financing. The African
Union is currently shouldering greater responsibility for
peace and security on the continent, and it is troubling
to note that the absence of predictable and sustainable
financing hampers the potential of the institution.

On that matter, in document S/2015/682, entitled,
"The future of United Nations peace operations:
implementation of the recommendations of the High-
level Independent Panel on peace operations", the
Secretary-General acknowledged, and rightly so, that
the growing responsibilities of the African Union and
the regional economic communities, as well as regional
mechanisms, in peace and security are a significant
human and financial burden for African countries.
The Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) Mission in Guinea-Bissau is relatively
symptomatic of the type of difficulties that regional and
subregional organizations face in securing predictable
and sustainable financing. I thank the European Union
for its invaluable contribution to the activities of that
ECOWAS Mission.

The constraints Ijust mentioned point to the need
to define the channels and ways to share the burden. In
other words, the United Nations should better support
the laudable efforts of the African Union in handling
the crucial issue of the financing of peacekeeping
operations, as well as in ensuring the operation of its
Peace and Security Architecture. With that in mind,
Senegal believes that the United Nations should invest
and play a more active role in ensuring the success of
African Union activities, as a strategic partner to assist
in finding often urgent solutions to shared concerns.
That requires, among other things, greater support
to the peacekeeping operations of the African Union
that are endorsed by the Security Council, as well
as through more predictable financing. That type of
approach is particularly appropriate, as the African
Union has resolutely committed to making significant
headway in resolving the issue of predictable
financing by committing to providing 25 per cent of
peacekeeping operation costs. The African Union High
Representative for the Peace Fund has just recalled
that those recommendations were adopted during
the twenty-seventh Assembly ofHeads of State and
Government of the African Union, held in Kigali in
July. Such laudable efforts must not be in vain. I would
like to hope that draft resolution S/2016/977, which
we are to adopt following this debate, will provide a
solid foundation for definitively settling the crucial
issue of financing for peacekeeping operations in
African Union countries. We are further encouraged by
the fact that the draft resolution rightly welcomes the
efforts of the African Union to bring its contribution
to 25 per cent for peacekeeping operations. That is a
strong political message from the Security Council to
the African Union, expressing the Council's readiness
as it moves in that direction. It offers genuine prospects
to better reflect on the best way to ensure lasting and
predictable financing for peacekeeping operations in
African Union countries.

To conclude, my delegation would like to welcome
the issuance of the Secretary-General's report in
document S/2016/809, on the United Nations-African
Union joint review of existing financing and support
mechanisms for African Union peacekeeping operations
authorized by the Security Council. The conclusions of
the report stress the importance of access to assessed
contributions as a way ofproviding reliable, predictable
and sustainable financing to cover the support costs of
African Union peacekeeping operations.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

