The President: Under rule 37 of the Council's
rules of procedure, I invite the representatives of
Bangladesh, Cuba, Ecuador, the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea, Egypt, Iceland, Indonesia, the
Islamic Republic of Iran, Israel, Japan, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Maldives, Malaysia, Morocco,
Nicaragua, Norway, Pakistan, Qatar, Saudi Arabia,
Tunisia, Turkey, Sri Lanka, the Sudan, the Syrian Arab
Republic, Uganda, the United Arab Emirates, the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela and Viet Nam to
participate in this meeting.

I should like to inform the Council that I have
received a letter dated 20 October 2011 from the
Permanent Observer of Palestine to the United Nations,
which will be issued as document 8/2011/653 and
which reads as follows:

"I have the honour to request that, in
accordance with its previous practice, the
Security Council invite the Permanent Observer
of Palestine to the United Nations to participate
in the meeting of the Security Council that will
be held on Monday, 24 October 2011, regarding
the situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question."

I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite the Permanent Observer of Palestine to
participate in the meeting in accordance with the rules
of procedure and previous practice in this regard.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

Under rule 39 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure, I invite Mr. Lynn Pascoe, Under-
Secretary-General for Political Affairs, to participate in
this meeting.

Under rule 39 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure, I invite His Excellency Mr. Abdou
Diallo, Chairman of the Committee on the Exercise of
the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People, to
participate in this meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure, I invite His Excellency Mr. Thomas
Mayr-Harting, Head of the Delegation of the European
Union to the United Nations, to participate in this
meeting.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda.

I give the floor to Mr. Pascoe.

