The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to participate in this meeting.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Maman
Sidikou, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and Head of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic; and
Mr. Taye-Brook Zerihoun, Assistant Secretary-General
for Political Affairs.

Mr. Sidikou is joining today's meeting via video-
teleconference from Kinshasa.

The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.

After consultations among Council members, I
have been authorized to make the following statement
on their behalf:

"Following the visit of the Security Council
to the Democratic Republic of Congo from 11 to
13 November, the President of the Security Council
made the following statement on behalf of the
Council regarding the situation in the country:

"The Security Council is monitoring very
closely the recent political development in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and remains
concerned about the risk for destabilization of the
country and the region as a whole in the absence
of a swift and consensual resolution to the current
political crisis, as illustrated by the violence of
19 and 20 September 2016.

"The Security Council thanks the Government
ofthe Democratic Republic ofthe Congo, the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO)
and all its interlocutors for the fruitful discussions
that have taken place during this visit.

"The Security Council acknowledges the
political agreement reached on 18 October 2016
and takes note of the appointment of the new Prime
Minister. The Security Council is encouraged by
the unanimous commitment of Congolese actors to
prevent destabilization and to continue inclusive
discussions in order to reach a broad consensus
towards free, fair, credible, inclusive, transparent,
peaceful and timely presidential and legislative
elections leading to a peaceful transfer of power
in accordance with the Congolese Constitution
for the stability, development and consolidation
of constitutional democracy in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.

"The Security Council further calls on political
groups that did not sign the political agreement to
remain engaged in dialogue. The Security Council
welcomes commitments to respect and preserve the
Constitution in letter and spirit and looks forward to
the implementation of further confidence-building
measures to ease tensions and build consensus.

"The Security Council welcomes the ongoing
mediation efforts led by the Conference episcopale
nationale du Congo (CENCO) and calls on all
political actors to continue working in good faith
and in a spirit of compromise towards a swift
political solution, before 19 December 2016, that
paves the way for peaceful, credible, inclusive
and timely elections as soon as possible in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. The Security
Council further encourages the region to pursue its
efforts in support of the mediation.

"The Security Council urges the Government,
as well as all relevant parties to ensure an
environment conducive to free, fair, credible,
inclusive, transparent and elections, as recalled in
resolution 2277 (2016), which includes a free and
constructive political debate, freedom of opinion
and expression, freedom of assembly, equitable
access to media, including State media, safety and
the freedom of movement for all candidates, as well
as for election observers and witnesses, journalists,
human rights defenders and actors from civil
society, including women.

"The Security Council calls on the authorities
to respect human rights and fundamental freedoms,
especially the right of peaceful assembly, and to
exercise maximum restraint in their response to
protests, and also calls upon the opposition forces,
for their part, to show responsibility by ensuring
the peaceful character of their demonstrations.

"The Security Council reiterates its call upon
all political parties, their supporters and other
political actors to exercise maximum restraint
in their actions and statements, to refrain from
violence, violent speeches or other provocations
and to address their differences peacefully. The
Security Council also calls on the Government
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo to hold
accountable those responsible for the killings on
19 and 20 September and for all human rights
violations and abuses. The Security Council takes
note of the recent visit to the Democratic Republic
of the Congo of the Office of the Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court.

"The Security Council stresses the importance
for the Government of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and its national partners to take all
necessary steps to accelerate the preparations for
the elections without further delays, including by
expediting the update of the voter registry.

"The Security Council is also deeply concerned
by the humanitarian situation, which continues to
severely affect the civilian population in eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
persistence of violence in that area, in particular in
North Kivu Province where nearly 840,000 people
were internally displaced as of 30 September
2016 and more than 700 civilians have been killed
since October 2014. The Security Council urges
authorities to hold accountable those deemed
responsible for the acts of violence.

"The Security Council calls on the Government
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo to take
further action, in accordance with international
law, including international humanitarian law and
international human rights law, as applicable, and
with the support of MONUSCO in accordance with
its mandate, to end the threat posed by the Allied
Democratic Forces, the Forces De'mocratiques
de Liberation du Rwanda and all other armed
groups operating in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. The Security Council encourages
further cooperation between the Forces Armees
de la Republique Democratique du Congo and
MONUSCO in tackling this violence and continue
their efforts to neutralize armed groups operating
in eastern Congo.
"The Security Council reiterates its full
support to MONUSCO and its appreciation for
the Special Representative's leadership in trying
to ease tensions. The Security Council urges
MONUSCO to fully implement its protection of
civilians mandate, including to respond to current
and ongoing security threats and reminds troop-
and police-contributing countries of the need for a
comprehensive approach and to take all necessary
measures to carry out MONUSCO's mandate as set
forth in resolution 2277 (2016).

"The Security Council welcomes the regional
initiatives and efforts by regional States to promote
peace, stability and democracy in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, to enhance cooperation
towards the neutralization of armed groups in eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo, including the
establishment by the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Kenya, Tanzania and Uganda of a Joint
Follow-up Mechanism and encourages further
action. The Security Council extends its thanks to
Angola, Chair of the International Conference of
the Great Lakes Region, for the fruitful discussions
held in Luanda on 14 November 2016. The Security
Council also welcomes in that regard the reform of
the governing mechanisms of the Peace, Security
and Cooperation Framework for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the Region, including
the decision to hold an annual high-level meeting of
the Regional Oversight Mechanism in a signatory
State, with a view to strengthening regional
ownership of the Framework.

"The Security Council expresses its
determination to continue to closely follow the
situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
in particular the security conditions on the ground
and the efforts to successfully conclude the
electoral process."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2016/18.

I now give the floor to Mr. Sidikou.

