The President: I shall now put to the vote the draft
resolution contained in document S/1999/1180.

A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:

Argentina, Bahrain, Brazil, Canada, China, France,
Gabon, Gambia, Malaysia, Namibia, Netherlands,
Russian Federation, Slovenia, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of
America

The President: There were 15 votes in favour. The
draft resolution has been adopted unanimously as
resolution 1275 (1999).

Before concluding the meeting, I would like to make
some brief remarks in my national capacity.

I believe that all those present at the formal meeting
today have seen once again that the Security Council is
intensely engaged in an effort to develop a new system
for dealing with the issues of Iraq. The explanations of
vote have been many and very pointed. My delegation,
like other delegations, is concerned over the fact that the
efforts to devise such a system have been going on for
months without a definitive result so far. All members of
the Security Council have participated in that effort. Some
have, while explaining their votes, referred especially to
efforts by Ambassador Celso Amorim of Brazil, who
chaired the panels earlier this year. That contribution to
the work of the Security Council has been of paramount
importance and constitutes the platform upon which a
proper decision of the Security Council can be developed.
In the subsequent efforts, non-permanent members
contributed a variety of ideas, which we continue to
believe are useful in the process of the preparation of the
draft resolution.

At this stage, the main part of the work is focused
on the efforts and negotiations among permanent
members of the Security Council. The reality of the
Council and the reality of the subject are such that they
require a period during which the permanent members
give particular attention to and accept a particular burden
in moving the process forward. But as the discussion
today has shown, there is a growing interest and a
growing need among members of the Council as a whole,
and among the Members of the United Nations at large,
to bring this process back into the Council, to finalize it
here and to adopt decisions which are long overdue.
 

I new resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

There are no further speakers inscribed in my list. The
Security Council has thus concluded the present stage of its
consideration of the item on its agenda.

The Security Council will remain seized of the
matter.

The meeting rose at 1.10 p.m.

