Ms. Meitzad (Israel): Israel cannot remain silent in
the face of the reckless and inflammatory allegations
about my country made earlier by several delegations.
Sitting here today in the Council, I was amazed to hear
that several Arab countries still insist that the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict is at the centre of the problems in
the Middle East. They say this while thousands of their
brothers are being massacred by the Syrian regime,
slaughtered and executed by the Islamic State in Iraq
and Syria, or terrorized by Hizbullah, Jabhat Al-Nusra
or Ansar Beit Al-Maqdis.

Turning to Lebanon, I find it amazing that the
representative of a country that for two years now has
failed even to elect a president has the nerve to criticize
the Prime Minister of a democratic country. Let us not

forget that in Lebanon a terrorist group that assists the
Al-Assad regime in slaughtering civilians is part of the
Government - half of the Cabinet, in fact.

Regarding Saudi Arabia, it is the height of audacity
for the representative of a country that routinely carries
out public beheadings, including of teenagers, to
criticize the measures that Israel takes to defend itself.
A young Saudi protester, Ali Mohammed Al-Nimr,
age 17, is set to be beheaded for encouraging protest
during the Arab Spring. This is a country that engages
in indiscriminate bombing and is attacking anything
that moves. It recently killed at least 70 civilians when
it bombed a wedding party in Yemen. Perhaps countries
that engage in the indiscriminate bombing of innocents
should not raise the issue of war crimes.

Earlier, we heard the representative of one of the
world's worst human rights abusers, Venezuela, accuse
Israel of abusing human rights. That Jeffersonian
democracy deprives its citizens of democratic rights by
repressing and imprisoning opposition members. Here
in the Council, Venezuelan leaders enjoy full freedom
of speech; the same is not true for their constituents
back home. Venezuela's accusations and conspiracy
theories cannot be answered in a brief right of reply.
It is disheartening that one of the 15 representatives on
the Council should utter such baseless accusations.

As for the Palestinians, it is unfortunate that they
are repeating their false accusations and breached the
protocol of the Security Council by disrupting the
Israeli representative's speech. Interestingly enough,
no one seemed surprised. The Palestinian observer did
not answer one particular question: Why does Palestine
refuse to negotiate? Its baseless accusations and
malicious lies have been answered time and time again,
including in our speech this morning, and I do not want
to waste the Council's time by discussing them. An
offer was made yet again in the Council for President
Abbas to discuss peace here at the United Nations or in
Ramallah, Jerusalem or anywhere else.

For those who have spent the entire meeting
listening to hateful incitement, let me repeat the words
of Israel's Permanent Representative: "Like people
everywhere, the people of Israel seek to live in peace
and to see their children prosper". Despite the difficult
time my country is facing, we remain confident in the
promise of Israel's future. We call on the Palestinians to
join us on the path to peace and reconciliation. Together,
we can create a better future for both our peoples. As
we said this morning, we aspire to peace and we are
committed to the status quo.

