I have the honour to submit this statement on behalf of the European Union (EU) and its member States. The candidate countries Turkey, the Republic of North Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia and Albania; the country of the Stabilization and Association Process and potential candidate Bosnia and Herzegovina; as well as Ukraine and the Republic of Moldova, align themselves with this statement. Respect for human rights, democracy and the rule of law is essential to ensure sustainable peace and security. As underlined in the Secretary-General's Action for Peacekeeping initiative, "lasting progress in strengthening security, national reconciliation, the rule of law, human rights and sustainable development needs to occur in parallel". The Security Council has an extensive set of tools at its disposal to promote respect for human rights, including through peace operations, but also commissions of inquiry, judicial mechanisms, visiting missions and sanctions. The EU calls on the Security Council to make full use of those tools in order to create and support the conditions for international peace and security. With regard to United Nations peace operations, the EU welcomes that most missions created or authorized by the Security Council have human rights tasks in their mandates. By monitoring compliance, reporting violations and abuses, protecting and offering assistance to people in vulnerable situations and building the capacity of State institutions, missions can effectively contribute to the realization of human rights. It is therefore crucial to ensure that human rights components are sufficiently funded and have the capacity to undertake their tasks. We commend the concrete impact of human rights components, such as the work of the human rights component of the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan, which was instrumental in creating the conditions for a dialogue with all parties. The United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo contributed to reconciliation efforts there, notably by helping establish a missing persons resource centre, bringing together for the first time representatives and families of missing persons from all communities. As part of an integrated approach aimed at building long-term peace, United Nations peace and security instruments must work in tandem with development, human rights and humanitarian efforts from the outset of a mission. Human rights violations and abuses can be drivers of conflict and restoring respect for human rights will often contribute to addressing root causes and to sustaining peace. Despite these positive examples, the EU regrets that peacekeepers often remain ill-equipped to identify and respond to human rights threats and to promote respect for international law. Analysis of best practices and of lessons learned shows that efforts are needed on several fronts to ensure that individual peacekeepers have the necessary skills and institutional support to respect and protect human rights. In terms of training, human rights and international humanitarian law are part of the predeployment training of all EU troop-contributing countries, to sensitize peacekeepers to rules and obligations under international law, codes of conduct and cultural awareness. The EU would welcome efforts to standardize that practice for all troop-contributing countries and to develop a more applicable training to enhance the operational human rights readiness for all Blue Helmets. The EU stresses the importance of the selection process for troop contribution, which includes the certification of vetting relating to international humanitarian law and human rights law as well as human rights screening. Turning to human rights-based threat assessment, monitoring and reporting undertaken by human rights components in peacekeeping operations should feed into threat assessments and strategies for the protection of civilians. Forward- looking threat assessments, including on human rights violations and abuses, can enable missions to prevent violence before it occurs, or mitigate its impact. Such assessments also contribute to stronger mandate implementation, improve civilian protection capacity and support transitional justice processes. In terms of gender mainstreaming, measures to advance gender equality must be mainstreamed, including at the early stages of operational planning. We welcome the recent Department of Peace Operations initiative to track progress and gaps on key women and peace and security outcomes as enshrined in the Department's 2018 gender policy, Action for Peacekeeping commitments and mandated mission tasks, with the use of 15 women and peace and security indicators that were institutionalized by all nine missions. When it comes to child protection, well trained child-protection focal points and the allocation of adequate resources are essential to ensure effective monitoring and reporting of grave violations and abuses, including through the speedy deployment of senior child-protection advisers and their teams. This is particularly important to prevent underreporting of certain trends and patterns of violations and abuses, and to ensure the implementation of the Security Council-mandated monitoring and reporting mechanism on children and armed conflict. Turning to modern technology at the service of the protection of civilians, if properly applied and integrated into United Nations peace operations, modern technology has the potential to change the face of peacekeeping with enhanced capabilities to detect threats, identify targets and improve situational awareness. The use of modern technology should take into account challenges in the areas of signal intelligence, cyberdefence, information fusion and big data, and ensure full compliance with human rights, including the right to privacy. The importance of an integrated assessment on human rights with the aim of incorporating all mission components into a comprehensive human rights approach cannot be overstated. In terms of organizational culture, the ways gender is represented and violence and abuse are understood within key institutions warrant increased attention. Harmful power structures ought to be examined and dismantled in order to prevent and fight against the institutionalization of impunity. Enhanced data collection and reporting on misconduct as well as actions against those who breach the agreed rules and guidelines are essential measures. Let me turn now to EU action. The EU is fully committed to these principles. The EU's external action is guided by the principles that inspired its own creation: democracy, the rule of law, the universality and indivisibility of human rights and fundamental freedoms, respect for human dignity, the principles of equality and solidarity and respect for the principles of the Charter of the United Nations Charter and international law. The EU Action Plan on Human Rights and Democracy for 2020-2024, which is under consideration at the EU level, foresees that a human rights due diligence policy will be developed to ensure that support to security forces is in compliance with the EU human rights policy and consistent with the promotion, protection and enforcement of international human rights law and international humanitarian law. Human rights mainstreaming forms an integral part of the mandates of the 11 civilian missions and six military missions and operations currently deployed by the EU. Human rights and gender considerations are addressed during the planning process for new missions and operations and assessed regularly through the strategic review processes. In addition, human rights and gender components are systematically included in EU predeployment training courses. The EU missions and operations engage on human rights and gender-related issues by supporting representative law enforcement, security forces and justice- sector institutions, promoting the equal and meaningful participation of women in those sectors, addressing discrimination on any ground and sexual and gender- based violence, and promoting awareness of and compliance with international humanitarian law. The EU Military Training Missions in Somalia, Mali and the Central African Republic all include human rights law and international humanitarian law in their training programmes for host country national armed forces and cooperate with United Nations peace operations on the ground in delivering training on human rights, the protection of civilians and other related fields. The EU Military Training Mission in Mali, for instance, has developed practical, gender-responsive scenarios for the application of human rights and has prepared a train-the-trainer manual on international human rights law and humanitarian law for the Malian armed forces. The same goes for the EU Civilian Capacity-Building Missions Sahel Mali and Sahel Niger, which have developed training materials and modules on human rights, international humanitarian law and children's rights and juvenile justice, which are regularly delivered to security forces. In Kosovo - this designation is without prejudice to positions on status, and is in line with resolution 1244 (1999) and the advisory opinion (see A/64/881) of the International Court of Justice on the Kosovo declaration of independence - the European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) has continued to support selected Kosovo rule-of law-institutions in line with the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child and other relevant international standards. In the context of its monitoring of criminal proceedings in cases of domestic violence and sexual abuse, the Mission has paid particular attention to the protection of the rights of child victims and witnesses, as well as to the effectiveness of referral mechanisms and of measures aimed at avoiding further victimization. EULEX has also monitored the rights of children in conflict with the law in the criminal justice system and in the correctional system, providing advice to the relevant institutions with the goal of ensuring the reintegration of such children and the primary consideration of their best interests. On EU-United Nations cooperation, the United Nations is best placed to play a leading role in coordinating the support provided by international and bilateral partners and the United Nations system to provide expertise, advice and training to the national security forces they support and to strengthen their capacity through human rights training. Human rights are a central element of the EU-United Nations Strategic Partnership on Peace Operations and Crisis Management. Through this Partnership, we have, notably, established a collaborative platform on women and peace and security to enhance coherence and integration of gender perspectives throughout our cooperation. We have also agreed to intensify cooperation on policing, the rule of law and security sector reform, as well as on the promotion of international humanitarian law and the protection of children and other persons in vulnerable situations in conflict and post-conflict areas. This cooperation is leading to tangible results on the ground. In Somalia, the Rule of Law and Security Institutions Group of the United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia and the European Union Capacity-Building Mission in Somalia have joined forces to support the efforts of the Somali Ministry of Women and Human Rights Development in promoting the role of women in the maritime sector. In the Sahel, the EU, through the African Peace Facility, supports the strengthening of peace and security structures of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel), including the College de Defense of the G-5 Sahel. We are working closely with the Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights to ensure that the curriculum of the College includes human rights law and international humanitarian law modules to support G-5 Sahel countries in preventing and responding to human rights violations. The EU strongly supports national oversight institutions, such as national assemblies and national human rights institutions, and is working closely with local communities and civil society to inform all its actions and to identify risks. We welcome that the Security Council is increasingly interacting with civil society representatives and human rights defenders. Discussions in the Council are better informed, mandates more precise and decisions more inclusive when civil society is involved. Despite these successes, however, it is clear that more needs to be done. We have learned, for instance, from the recent report of the Secretary-General on children and armed conflict (S/2020/525) that during 2019 over 25,000 grave violations against children took place. Of those, more than half were committed by non-State actors, and a third by Government or international forces. Similarly, conflict-related sexual violence persists as a challenge. We must join efforts to work harder against the ongoing abuse of children and women, and for respect of human rights of all. The ambitions and goals must be set higher for the years ahead.
