Mr. Motoc (Romania): Romania fully associates
itself with the statement to be made by the
representative of Luxembourg on behalf of the
European Union. In addition, I would like to make
some specific comments on the topic under
consideration today, but not before commending the
Secretary-General for his comprehensive report
(S/2005/69), whose recommendations we support. We
are grateful to Under-Secretary-General Nobuyasu Abe
for his valuable introduction of that important
document. A special word of appreciation goes to the
delegation of Japan for its work on the presidential
statement and for its overall engagement in support of
our debate today.

We have all come to the point where we realize
that the question of small arms involves not only
disarmament, but also development, democracy, human
rights and human security. We all are aware that the
illicit trafficking and uncontrolled flow of small arms
and light weapons are sources of instability. The
proliferation of such weapons has exacerbated conflict,
caused refugee flows and spawned a culture of
violence and impunity. Often, they pay for civil wars,
which in turn produce severe economic and social
consequences. In almost all the conflicts that took
place in the past decade, ranging from the Great Lakes
region in Africa to the Balkans and to Central and
South Asia, the weapons used by the various parties
have been mainly small and light weapons.

The humanitarian implications of small arms
have alerted the international community to the
urgency of curbing their illicit trafficking, thus
reducing violence and the risk of civil wars. Their
availability to parties may impact on the willingness of
those parties to negotiate peaceful solutions and may
limit the capacity of States and international or
regional organizations to engage in conflict-prevention
and peacebuilding efforts.

Small arms are also used by terrorists and
criminal groups. The illicit trade in small arms
becomes a threat not only to countries torn by internal
conflict, but also to States that are free from instability
but are routes of transit or trans-shipment for illegal
transactions.

On the other hand, countries retain the legitimate
right to self-defence in accordance with the United
Nations Charter. Arms production and transfers for that
purpose are licit. Legality of arms trading entails the
conduct of transfers in an even more responsible
manner. The arms industry must be carefully controlled
by government policy and regulations, and clear and
strict criteria on arms exports should be implemented.

There are no simple solutions, however, and no
single method for dealing with the impact of the illicit
small arms trade. Political commitments can make a
critical difference in conflict-affected countries and
regions.
In recent years, more States have committed
themselves to abide by and implement regional and
international standards to strengthen export controls to
prevent illicit trafficking in small arms and light
weapons. The United Nations Programme of Action,
the Document on Small Arms and Light Weapons
adopted in 2000 by the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe and the European Union Code
of Conduct on Arms Exports are thus the most relevant
standards in our region. Effective implementation of
such commitments is indeed a complex and
challenging task, which requires political will and
adequate resources. It also requires a great deal of
cooperation in order to identify and develop a common
understanding of procedures, standards and
mechanisms to enforce controls.

Most countries have already in place laws and
regulations that are used to control production, use and
transfer of small arms and light weapons. However, in
some countries existing laws appear to be inadequate,
or control procedures vulnerable to misuse.

Romania's policy on small arms will continue to
be focused on combating illicit trafficking, on pursuing
a responsible and transparent policy on legal transfers,
and on promoting the removal and continued
destruction of surpluses. In implementing its
commitments under the Programme of Action,
Romania started in early 2002 a programme of
destruction of its small arms and light weapons.

Romania, which is also concerned with
challenges related to small arms and light weapons in
its own neighbourhood, stands ready to share its
experience with all interested countries and to assist
other States in establishing and developing sound
export control systems.

Most weapons start out their lives legally. States
have to focus on regulating the legal production of, and
trade in, small arms and light weapons, starting at the
national level. Governments need to tighten legislation
and regulations governing production and trade, in
particular on marking and tracing, and then invest
significant resources in implementation. We also need
greater recognition that domestic laws and
international policies are interdependent and that each
country's relevant national laws have an impact on
neighbours and even on countries in other regions.

As indicated in the report of the Secretary-
General (5/2005/69), significant progress has been
achieved so far at the global, regional and national
levels. Yet many issues related to small arms and light
weapons are still to be discussed and agreed upon with
a view to formulating and enforcing international
norms and regulations in this field.

Further concrete measures should be undertaken
in several directions, such as better coordination
between various programmes managed by the United
Nations and those run by regional and subregional
organizations, in particular on issues such as
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR)
and illicit trafficking; the establishment of national
points of contact for information-sharing and
cooperation, in particular for the implementation of
relevant decisions adopted by the Security Council;
and the improvement of public awareness and
transparency by enhancing cooperation between
Governments and industry and by publishing annual
reports on arms transfers.

The Security Council has a major role to play in
making small arms a focus of global attention and
action. It could add value by improving the
effectiveness of its arms embargoes, by putting an end
to the economy of war, by encouraging moratoriums on
arms sales to conflict regions and by adopting
comprehensive regional approaches to DDR
programmes. The minimal requirement for
Governments to report to the United Nations on their
small arms activities, including on man-portable air
defence systems, must also be taken into consideration.

Finally, weapons management, and in particular
the control of civilian possession of small arms and
light weapons in post-conflict countries, is central to
longer term human security. This will be effective only
if it takes place within the framework of
comprehensive programmes of security reform, subject
to the authority of representative civilian Governments.

Those are only a few - but important -
elements that I believe we need to address in our future
undertakings as well.

