Mrs. Perceval (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I
wish to thank you, Mr. President, for having convened
this meeting on a topic to which Argentina attaches
great importance not only as a troop-contributing
country but also because we recognize the value of
regional organizations participating in maintaining
international peace and security.

Our way of working and our requirements and
responsibilities may seem paradoxical. Yesterday
evening, we met to address an emergency or an
urgent situation, namely, the tragic situation in Gaza.
We unanimously adopted a presidential statement
(S/PRST/2014/13), which you, Mr. President, issued
and in which the Council called for the immediate and
unconditional humanitarian ceasefire and for progress
towards the initiative for durable peace mentioned in
various resolutions of our Organization by countries
of the region, such as Egypt, and by various leaders
of different countries, groups of countries and the
Organization itself. Now we are undertaking a medium-
and long-term consideration. That is the ethical and
strategic challenge facing the Council. Holding such
debates with the increasing participation of the entire
membership of the Organization, with less dogmatism
and more innovative ideas, would perhaps contribute
to you, Mr. President, or whoever holds the presidency,
having to convene fewer emergency meetings or
meetings on urgent situations.

Regional organizations, such as the African Union
and the European Union, as well as our Latin American
and Caribbean organizations, in particular have views
on that necessary topic of the prevention of conflicts,
not their provocation, and cooperation, not competition
and controversies. I therefore believe that the convening
of this meeting is very timely.

The instrument that the Council adopted today
(resolution 2167 (2014)) should promote a theory and a
currentway oflooking atpeacekeeping operations. When
it presided over the Security Council, the delegation of
Pakistan, headed by its Minister for Foreign Affairs
and its outstanding Permanent Representative, took a
forward-looking approach to the topic, assessing the
achievements of the past and, on that basis, adopting
resolution 2086 (2013). That resolution continues to
guide our debates and decisions, such as the one that
we adopted today, which clearly will further strengthen
our action. The same was achieved by the resolution
adopted under the Pakistan delegation when it held the
Security Council presidency last year.

Forgive me for introducing that issue. It was not
in my text. I did so not because I am the last member
of the Council to speak but because I have once again
been able to learn from the thinking and the similar and
differing views that each member has expressed. All
of us have clearly underscored the elements on which
we agree, namely, that the participation of regional
and subregional arrangements and organizations in
maintaining peace is not a matter of preference or
occurrence but a strategic necessity in an increasingly
interdependent and interconnected world. We face
a complex and challenging perspective, in which
the area of our activity is much closer and becomes
globalized. International problems have an impact on
our communities, neighbourhoods and homes and on
our political decisions and way of seeing the world. The
dynamics of such a scenario have undoubtedly led to
a more plural world that acknowledges diversity and
can enjoy much broader cooperation in various areas,
from the economic to the social fields. African, Latin
American, Caribbean and South-South cooperation
provide an example of that, not to mention triangular
and North-South cooperation.

However, at the same time, we see and face new
forms of conflict, transnational and international
threats, violence and atrocities. It would therefore be
inept, to say the least, if not irresponsible to overlook
or minimize the fact that the Charter of the United
Nations promotes the Security Council's use ofregional
arrangements in order to meet its primary responsibility
to maintain international peace and security. That is to
say that not only has the past become the present with
the resolution adopted last year, but that the present
is part of the future, in that upcoming peacekeeping
missions will be intrinsically linked to the process of
the regionalization of peacekeeping operations.

We must highlight what various colleagues have
said. The involvement of regional organizations
cooperates and complements the work of the United
Nations and the Security Council through the inclusion
of such bodies but it does not replace it. Rather, it
incorporates a knowledge of the context, including a
better and deeper understanding of the causes of the
confict. That is of vital political interest in successfully
completing missions, not to say in saving lives and in
protecting oneself from the fear of loss of life.

Geographical affinity, the experience of a similar
and related way of life and cultural expression and the
feeling of trust that local actors can usually generate
are without doubt comparative advantages. We have
found them to be empirical evidence of great value
for the implementation of peace agreements and the
monitoring ofa cessation of hostilities so as to open the
way for negotiations and political and social agreements
and to help in the transition towards strengthening the
rule of law through stable and legitimate Governments
on the basis of democratic principles.

Such advantages also support humanitarian action,
promote efforts for the disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration of ex-combatants and contribute to
protecting and ensuring full respect for human rights.
We must ensure in particular that the rights of women
and children are respected, as the representative of
Luxembourg mentioned earlier. We must focus on
vulnerable persons, those who are discriminated
against, marginalized or excluded who, if they were
already in that situation in times of peace, are even
more exposed in times of unrest and war.

The United Nations brings and must bring
universality and legitimacy, to which we should add
its great experience and operational capacity. The
Security Council's monopoly on authorizing and
deploying peacekeeping operations and implementing
mandates and conditions for deployment implies that
operations led by regional or hybrid organizations
must be subject to United Nations mandates and
objectives. They must respect the unity, sovereignty
and territorial integrity of countries in accordance
with the provisions of international humanitarian law,
human rights law and refugee law, and they must meet
the obligation of regional organizations to keep the
Security Council informed of their activities. That will
make it easier to understand how to act. It is sometimes
also necessary - clearly necessary - that there be
accountability, and not just financial accountability.
The accountability of peacekeeping operations must be
measured in terms of human lives that are protected,
saved and taken care of.

I know that there are many speakers still waiting
to take the floor and that we have many activities
scheduled for today, but I believe it is important to set
out three principles that are essential for my country.

First, in the process of outsourcing the association
between the United Nations and regional and
subregional organizations based on non-discriminatory
and balanced cooperation, we must surely include
conditions such as the provision of technical,
specialized assistance by the United Nations in the
planning and deployment of regional peacekeeping
operations, as well as the application of its concept of
operations and the establishment of the headquarters
ofa mission to strengthen the administrative command
and control arrangements, improve communications
and information technology infrastructure and provide
training in all necessary areas, including human rights.

Secondly, appropriate coordination mechanisms
between the United Nations and regional organizations
must be established.

Thirdly, financing mechanisms that will provide
appropriate levels of predictability, sustainability,
viability and dignity should be put in place, and not
just sufficient financing for equipment but also for the
living and working conditions of our peacekeepers.

Our colleague from Chile mentioned this point
so I will not repeat it, but, naturally, Latin America,
our region, is a region of peace, which is not a gift of
nature, but rather a joint decision of our societies that
is sustained by public policies that favour democracy
and human rights. All of this has made peace a value
for us, and conflict is not a value when it comes to
solving problems, disputes and controversies. Our
diverse organizations, such as the Community of Latin
American and Caribbean States and the Union of South
American Nations and the Southern Common Market,
show that, in addition to conflict prevention, we have
signed onto the democratic clause.

We await the second biannual report of the
Secretary-General on cooperation between the
United Nations and regional, subregional and other
organizations, as well as recommendations on methods
to strengthen that cooperation.

We wish to thank the delegation of Rwanda.
We support resolution 2167 (2014) because of its
contribution to our current thinking about the future
needed to ensure peacekeeping operations and to create
a more consistent framework.

In the Fifth Committee, there is a debate about the
budget. There are discussions at each meeting on on
the precise meaning of the term "robust". There are
debates about not contradicting the essential nature of
peacekeeping operations pursuant to the Charter, and
issues that seem to be distanced from those mandates.
There are debates on whether the leadership should go
to the United Nations or to the regional organization.
There are debates about how to train. There is tension
about the use of the new technologies, such as drones,
which Argentina considers fundamental, as long as
they are deployed within an ethical framework and with
reliable manuals of procedure. Given all those ongoing
debates, I believe that this one is very timely.

