Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I want to thank you,
Mr. President, and everyone else, all our colleagues,
for expressing and sharing their deepest condolences
to the families and friends of Michael Sharp and Zaida
Catalan. I fully share the sense of loss, of sorrow and
despair at this very difficult moment.

Zaida was a Swedish-Chilean national who
dedicated her life to peace and justice. She combined
professionalism with compassion and she risked her
own life to save others. As a member of the United
Nations Group of Experts, Zaida worked tirelessly
to contribute to the understanding of the causes of
conflict and insecurity in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. We will honour her memory by continuing
to support the work of the Group of Experts and the
whole United Nations family in that country.

The circumstances surrounding this attack must
now be thoroughly investigated. The four Congolese
citizens who remain unaccounted for must be found.
Sweden fully supports the investigation by the United
Nations and the Democratic Republic of the Congo
to ensure that the facts are established and that those
responsible are held to account.

We welcome the unanimous adoption of resolution
2348 (2017) today. In the current fragile situation in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the agreement
by the Council on a clearly prioritized mandate for
this vital United Nations Mission is crucial. We thank
France for its able leadership during the negotiations.
The resolution contains two clear priorities. First, the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo has received
a robust efficient and updated mandate to protect
civilians and, secondly, the resolution provides support
to the political process by making it a key priority for
the operation. There is now a need to reduce the current
unacceptable levels of violence and to fully implement
political agreement as a basis for moving towards free,
democratic and peaceful elections, which is essential.

The situation in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo is a long-standing item on the Council's agenda.
The future of the country is ultimately in the hands
of the leadership and the people of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. However, we hope that today's
action by the Council can help contribute to moving the
country one step closer to the stability and prosperity
that its people deserve.

