Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): I wish to thank our
briefers today - Ambassador Fall for his report and
for his team's work in this challenging region, and
Ambassador Allam-Mi for his comments. I welcome
him to the Security Council; it is good to see him today,
because regional organizations like his are essential,
and we are pleased that he has been able to demonstrate
today the cooperation between the regional group and
the United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa
(UNOCA).

The United Kingdom remains concerned by the
security and political situation in Central Africa.
Many of those concerns are reflected in the Secretary-
General's report (S/20l8/52l), including the threats from
terrorist groups, such as Boko Haram and other groups
in the Lake Chad basin and the Lord's Resistance Army
in the Central African Republic and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. We note with horror the use of
women and girls as suicide bombers by Boko Haram.

As we have discussed on many previous occasions
in the Security Council, both military and non-military
action is required so as to address such threats. We must
understand their root causes and the political, economic
and humanitarian needs of the population. It is essential
that we adopt a coherent and whole-of-United Nations
approach in order both to tackle the existing problems
and to prevent further deterioration in the region.

Ten million people are in need of humanitarian
assistance in the Lake Chad basin this year. The United
Kingdom has committed £300 million to tackling
the crisis over the next five years. We call on other
international donors to help to make up the funding
shortfalls for humanitarian operations across the region.

We are also concerned about the situation in
Cameroon and the number of casualties that have
resulted among both civilians and the Cameroon
security forces. Citizens have the right to peaceful
protest. It is the Government's responsibility to protect
demonstrators, while also protecting the safety and
security of all citizens. We call for all parties to reject
violence, pursue dialogue and urgently take action to
reduce tensions. Failure to do so will only cause the
already concerning situation to deteriorate further.
In that regard, we welcome the New Year
announcement by President Biya to pursue dialogue,
decentralization and restraint. We strongly encourage
the Government to take further steps to give effect
to that announcement. We commend the support of
UNOCA as part of broader international efforts to
find a lasting solution to the current crisis. We would
encourage the intensification of those efforts. We ask
that we be kept regularly informed on progress.

We recognize the efforts of UNOCA in other areas
in the region, including the mobilization of support for
the African Initiative for Peace and Reconciliation in
the Central African Republic with regional partners.
We encourage such support to continue. UNOCA also
has a crucial role in supporting States in the subregion
to hold timely, transparent and inclusive elections and
the efforts of the Economic Commission for Africa to
lay the groundwork for the structural prevention of
election-related violence.

We are concerned about the threat of piracy in the
Gulf of Guinea, and we appreciate UNOCA reporting on
that matter. Further and more detailed reporting on the
problem and the work being done to combat it should be
carried out given the heightened and significant threat
to international shipping and regional prosperity.

In addition to regional Governments, regional
organizations, including the African Union, the
Economic Community of Central African States
(ECCAS), the Central African Economic and Monetary
Community, the Gulf of Guinea Commission and
the Lake Chad Basin Commission, are essential to
addressing the challenges to peace and security,
promoting democratic governance and enhancing
regional cooperation. Interregional cooperation,
particularly on issues such as the Sahel, are also crucial.
We welcome the announcement that ECCAS and the
Economic Community of West African States will hold
a joint summit in July. We encourage UNOCA and the
United Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel to
continue to support that interregional approach.

UNOCA has demonstrated that it can be a valuable
partner to regional Governments and organizations. In
order to make the best use of the resources available,
UNOCA should focus on building the capacity of
regional entities to deliver crisis-prevention work, such
as preventative diplomacy, early-warning mechanisms
and mediation, and to support United Nations agencies
in priority thematic areas, including gender.

The United Kingdom appreciates the efforts of
UNOCA in the region. We encourage UNOCA to
improve its communication of that good work. That
would ensure that those outside the United Nations
system can better understand UNOCA's ongoing work
and support it wherever possible.

