Mr. Al-Hassan (Oman) (spoke in Arabic): The
Permanent Representative of Oman was to have
spoken, but unfortunately, he had to leave for a few
minutes. He will be back soon.

Allow me at the outset, and on behalf of my
delegation, to warmly congratulate you, Mr. President,
on presiding over the Council this month. We have
confidence in your diplomatic skill and in the positions
adopted by your friendly country, the Russian
Federation, which will enable the Council to attain its
intended objectives, primarily, the maintenance of
international peace and security. I cannot fail to
congratulate your predecessor, the Ambassador of
Norway, Mr. Peter Kolby, and the members of his
delegation for the exemplary manner in which they
guided the work of the Council during the previous
month.

My delegation also thanks you, Mr. President,
and the other members of the Council for heeding the
request of the Arab Group and convening this
emergency meeting to examine the situation in the
occupied Arab territories, and in Palestine in particular.
We trust that this meeting will lead to concrete results
and the adoption of resolutions that will be possible to
implement.

It goes without saying that the holding of this
meeting has not come about by chance. It is in response
to the extremely dangerous situation that is developing
in the occupied Arab territories. This meeting has also
come about as a result of Israel's refusal to implement
the recent Security Council resolutions 1397 (2002)
and 1402 (2002) and to respect a ceasefire, withdraw
from the occupied territories and lift the siege on
President Arafat. This comes as no surprise; it is not
the first, second or even the third time that the
Palestinian people have had to appeal to the
international community for protection from Israel's
brutal practices. The Council's past inability to respond
has made it necessary to hold this meeting today.
Under the Charter, the Security Council is responsible
for containing the current situation that has led to
towns and villages being besieged, people being killed
and an entire people being plunged into a state of fear
and isolation.

Two important resolutions have recently been
adopted, 1397 (2002) and 1402 (2002). By those
resolutions, the two parties concerned have been asked
to refrain from violence and to return to the negotiating
table.

As usual, Israel has turned its back on the
resolutions. In fact, as soon as resolution 1402 (2002)
was adopted, Israel escalated its effort to reoccupy
Palestinian territories and deployed even more forces
to other parts of the West Bank, including Bethlehem,
Qalqiliyah, Tulkarm, Nablus, Jenin and other
Palestinian areas that have become battlefields in the
theatre of confrontation between Israeli forces and an
unarmed, besieged people whom Israel is trying to
eliminate by any means at its disposal. That is Israel's
response to the Council's resolutions. What is the
Council going to do about the situation? What is it
going to do when a State does not comply with its
resolutions, when, in fact, it ignores them, flouts them
and turns its back on them?

We once again appeal to the Security Council to
fully shoulder its responsibilities, face up to the
situation as a threat to international peace and security,
take its responsibilities seriously and truly seek to
implement its resolutions with the same resolve it has
displayed in other situations that have given rise to
other resolutions and that have led to follow-up,
monitoring mechanisms and the establishment of
committees. We ask the Council to heed the request of
the valiant Palestinian people, who are so bravely
holding off the Israeli occupier and who are the victims
of brutal practices such as collective punishment and
attempts to physically liquidate them. We therefore ask
the Council to ensure the genuine implementation of all
the resolutions that have been adopted against Israel's
activities and to look into the possibility of finding
concrete measures that will genuinely protect the
Palestinian people from the abuses perpetrated by
Israeli forces.

The credibility of the Council is being tested
today more than ever before. Israel must be held to the
same standards as others: otherwise we are looking at a
situation in which there are two completely different
ways of acting - a phenomenon that is becoming
habitual and which has seriously damaged the
Council's credibility.

One thing must be made clear: Palestinian
territory is being occupied and the Palestinian people
are bearing the burden of occupation and must be
protected by international law, including the 1949
Geneva Conventions and resolutions 242 (1967) and
338 (1973). All those international instruments and
resolutions have in fact been adopted; they exist. But
what is the result today? Where does a people's right to
self-determination and to live in peace stand today? We
appeal to the Council, and to the permanent members
in particular, to discharge their responsibilities and to
address a message to Israel with one voice to tell it that
it is not above the law or international legality. Israel
must withdraw from all occupied Palestinian towns and
villages. It must immediately end its siege of the
Palestinian Authority and of Mr. Arafat, who is the
symbol and highest representative of the Palestinian
people and their heroic struggle. That is the only way
to truly implement the resolutions of international
legitimacy.

My country will be speaking in the name of the
friendship and candour that characterize its relationship
with the United States. We are worried about the
United States position. The United States is not
condemning Israel with the same severity with which it
condemns Palestinian acts. The leaders in the United
States continue to call upon Mr. Arafat to exert greater
effort to condemn acts of violence and terror, whereas
his freedom of movement is severely curtailed by
Israel's security forces and their barbaric acts. How is
he expected to put an end to acts that have been
unleashed by the sense of despair felt by the
Palestinian people when confronted by Israeli
occupation? We call upon the international community,
the Security Council, and the United States of America
in particular - with all the influence it has on Israel -
to bring all their influence to bear, in the interests of
both the Palestinian and the Israeli peoples, in order to
make the realities on the ground understood clearly,
publicly and in a balanced manner. The option of peace
is, and remains, the only viable path towards a
settlement of the problem in the region. Political
solutions must be implemented in the context of
respect for international legality and existing peace
processes, in particular the peace initiative announced
most recently at the Arab summit in Beirut.

In conclusion, my delegation, along with those of
all peace-loving States, hopes that the Security Council
will be able to put an end to narrow political thinking
and live up to its responsibility to protect international
peace and security. The Council's efforts must be
invested in protecting the safety and security of peoples
who are occupied and subjected to arbitrary behaviour.

