Mr. Heusgen (Germany): At the outset, I too would
like to thank Mr. Martin Griffiths for his work and
what he achieved in Stockholm. In addition, I would
like to thank not only Mr. Mark Lowcock for his
briefing on what he has done, but also, through him, all
the humanitarian aid workers on the ground, as we must
not forget that this is the greatest humanitarian crisis in
the world today. All of their efforts are very important.

I listened very carefully to Martin Griffith's
briefing. He said that the Stockholm Agreement has
been largely adhered to. I believe that that is very
encouraging. I agree with his statement that progress can
be only gradual, and of course we support everything
that he is trying to do there. At the same time, I would
like to endorse the statement made by the representative
of the United Kingdom to the effect that we have to take
accelerated steps, not content ourselves with where we
stand and continue our work in that regard. I very much
welcome the fact that she is proposing a technical draft
resolution so that the people on the ground can be safe.

I would also encourage acting in accordance with
what Martin Griffiths and others around the table have
said, namely, that, starting from the local ceasefire
situation in Al-Hudaydah, we have to go further,
address the fundamental issues and come to an overall
agreement. In that regard, as Ambassador Delattre said
earlier, I believe that it is important that the Security
Council remain united as it was in its adoption of the
earlier resolution regarding Yemen and that we stick to
that path in order to move forward.

In the process, I would highlight something that
is very dear to our heart, as echoed by Ambassador
Meza-Cuadra. In the peace process, I would ask
Martin Griffiths to involve women and young people in
negotiations. They are the most effective in that regard,
and they should have a seat at the negotiating table on
the way forward. In that regard, I would like to highlight
the fact that Germany and Peru are co-chairing the
Informal Expert Group on Women, Peace and Security,
in close coordination with the United Kingdom. We
have decided to focus the first meeting of this year on
the situation of women in Yemen.

Concerning the humanitarian situation, Mark
Lowcock mentioned some of the progress that has
been made, but he also said that the situation is still
catastrophic. In a German newspaper, the UNICEF
regional director was quoted as saying that Yemen
for children is hell on Earth and that approximately
100,000 children are close to starvation in Yemen. We
therefore have to do everything possible to improve the
situation. In that connection, Mark Lowcock mentioned
the obstruction of the mills and harbours and cases
of diversion. I believe that that is unacceptable and a
scandal. We must spare no effort to stop it. Concerning
what Mark Lowcock said with regard to the water
situation, which is a nightmare in Yemen, where we
are up against cases of cholera. We once again see the
effect of climate change on security. It is necessary to
drill 1,500 metres deep to reach water in Yemen, which
accounts for yet another dreadful situation.

Germany stands ready to support the political
process. We are one of the major donors in terms of
humanitarian aid. We also look beyond immediate
humanitarian aid towards stabilization to increase our
chances of success in negotiations and the stabilization
dimension of Yemen.

