Mr. Ileka (Democratic Republic of the Congo) (spoke in French): First of all, I have the pleasant duty
of expressing my delegation's satisfaction at seeing
you, Sir, presiding over the Council for the month of
May. While paying tribute to the skills of your
predecessor, the representative of the Russian
Federation, I should like to say how grateful we are
that you agreed to convene this public meeting to
consider the report of the Security Council mission to
the Great Lakes region. Coming at a critical moment in
the timetable for the implementation of the Ceasefire
Agreement in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and, therefore, in the peace process in my country, I
have no doubt that today's meeting will allow us to
assess, together, the situation in my country and to
analyse the prospects for peace, which, thanks to the
support of the Council, no longer seem like an
unattainable ideal for the entire population of my
country.

We have just been listening to the Permanent
Representative of France, Ambassador Jean-David
Levitte, who with his usual eloquence and clarity
introduced the report of the mission that was recently
conducted in the Great Lakes region - a region that
has been tormented for more than a decade, yet where
all the peoples affected aspire only to peace and a
return to the traditional ties of friendship and fraternity
that characterized the peaceful nature of their relations
in the past. I should thus like to thank Ambassador
Levitte for his statement, which was useful, solidly
founded and well advised.

This major United Nations body, which is
responsible for the maintenance of international peace
and security, has dispatched three missions to our
subregion in the space of two years - a rare
occurrence in the history of the Security Council. My
Government is convinced that this demonstrates how
concerned the Council is to ensure for the peoples of
the Great Lakes region in general and, in particular, of
the Congo - where the people have been beaten down
by the devastating effects of a four-year war of
aggression - the right to peace, as well as to
development, enabling them to enjoy in peace their
natural resources, without which there will be no
economic renewal.

My Government is therefore grateful to the
international community, which was represented in all
its diversity in the Security Council mission, for having
taken the time to visit the subregion once again in order
to gauge the progress made since the signing of the
Ceasefire Agreement in the Democratic Republic ofthe
Congo and to give an impetus, which we hope will be
decisive, to the search for a long-lasting solution and
an end to the crisis that is gripping the entire Great
Lakes region, whose prolongation represents a war of
aggression of which my country is the sacrificial
victim.

The Democratic Republic of the Congo welcomes
the report of the Security Council mission. We
appreciate in particular the fact that, in following up on
earlier reports of various Council missions to our
subregion, this report has the added benefit of
informing the international community of the efforts
and immense sacrifices made by my Government to
restore peace and normality in my country and to
promote actions to return justice and dignity to the
Congolese people.

The Security Council mission coincided with the
end of the activities of the inter-Congolese dialogue.
Those activities were sanctioned by the adoption of
some 40 resolutions relating to the organization of the
transition, as well as the signing of the political
agreement for the consensual management of the
transition in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
better known as the Framework Agreement.

I should like at this point to express the sincere
gratitude of my country to Sir President Ketumile
Masire for having conducted the facilitation dialogue
that made possible that inter-Congolese agreement. The
achievements, and the progress made in Sun City, will
doubtless form the foundation of the renewal and
rebirth ofthe Congolese nation.

My Government would also like to thank
President Thabo Mbeki of the Republic of South
Africa, who hosted the dialogue, not only for all his
efforts, which have been constant and which he
continues to make for peace in my country, but
especially for his personal involvement in the search
for an acceptable solution for the majority of the
participants.

The lights have dimmed on Sun City and on the
inter-Congolese dialogue. At present, we must continue
to move forward towards the complete success of the
remaining stages of the implementation calendar of the
Lusaka Agreement for the greatest possible benefit of
the Congolese people. I am thinking in particular of the
process of creating new institutions; of deploying the
United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC) in phase
III; of disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and
repatriation or resettlement; of the orderly withdrawal
of all foreign troops; of re-establishing the
administrative authority of the State throughout the
entire national territory; of the disarmament of non-
military personnel; and of measures to normalize the
security situation along the internationally recognized
borders.

I must affirm that the framework agreement,
agreed to by 80 per cent of the participants in the
dialogue, is open to components and parties that have
not yet joined it. Discussions must continue on this
point. I can assure the Security Council that the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
will spare no effort to convince our brothers and sisters
who have not yet done so to associate themselves with
the majority. In order to do this, Major General Joseph
Kabila has given the Council every assurance that he
will seek to persuade the remaining entity and parties
to join the national camp. The President of the
Republic has noted the Government's willingness to
pursue discussions across the board with those who
have not yet signed the framework agreement. Contacts
of that type have occurred, similar to those that took
place on 2 May in Luanda, Angola, alongside the joint
meeting of the Political Committee and the Security
Council.

Moreover, the President of the Republic has also
noted his firm desire to associate that entity and those
parties, even as observers, with the entire process that
has been largely begun to establish and create new
republican institutions. Finally, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo is confident that the Security
Council, for its part, will remain active in helping to
make the agreement fully inclusive, in a spirit of
openness and understanding.

It is true that history will judge us on our ability
to achieve national reconciliation. In the higher interest
of the Congolese nation, we must make national
reconciliation succeed, but we must also be aware that
it will work against the demands of justice, for which
history will judge us even more harshly.

One principle dear to President Joseph Kabila is
that of keeping one's word. Under his leadership,
significant progress has been possible in the peace
process; the inter-Congolese dialogue took place; the
military front has remained calm and the ceasefire has
been fully respected; and the disengagement and
redeployment of all forces has been observed, except
by Rwanda, which, contrarily, is strengthening its
positions and is now fighting the Banyamulenge, whom
it claimed to protect.

It is important that the Council be able to follow
up on the request made by the Political Committee on 2
May that all parties be required to comply with the
relevant provisions of resolution 1399 (2002), adopted
unanimously, and with the measures and practical
decisions adopted by the Political Committee at its
meeting in Lusaka on 20 and 21 March. The Congolese
people and its President hope that 2002 will be the year
when peace is restored. In that respect, the Government
has welcomed the idea set forth by the Council mission
to create buffer zones that would promote the orderly
withdrawal of all foreign troops and allow us to find a
solution to the military aspect ofthe war of aggression.

Any new mandate for MONUC should be steeped
in that reality. In other words, the mandate to be
extended in the coming weeks should include a
timetable for the withdrawal of foreign troops, a
detailed description of a joint monitoring mechanism
and a necessary proposal to strengthen MONUC
staffing significantly so that it may fulfil its mandate
effectively. Similarly, in order to succeed in
establishing peace, my Government has implemented
to the letter the Kampala Plan and its Harare sub-plans
concerning disengagement and redeployment. We have
gone even further by cantoning Rwandan ex-
combatants at Kamina. Some 20 of these have
volunteered to go to Rwanda and we continue to await
the authorization of the Kigali authorities to enable
their return to their own country.

President Kabila has stated and I reiterate that my
Government does not and will never support armed
groups that could destabilize their country of origin.
MONUC can verify that. My Government is deeply
determined to continue acting to consolidate the peace
process in the Great Lakes region. It is in that context
that the recovery and destruction of the weapons of the
Rwandese ex-combatants should be seen, for which a
symbolic ceremony was held in Kinshasa in the
presence of the members of the Security Council. It is
also in that context that my Government invited the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda to establish
a presence in the Democratic Republic ofthe Congo in
order to facilitate its enquiries and to eliminate any
new pretext for a permanent occupation of a portion of
our national territory.

From our point of view, and with respect
particularly to armed Rwandese, whoever they may be,
we must be certain that they all leave Congolese
territory and return to their own country. The
Democratic Republic of the Congo wishes to live in
peace and good relations with its nine neighbours and
will not accept that three among them want it
otherwise. The warming of relations with our sister
Republic of Burundi proves that this is possible.

I will not dwell on the thorny issue of the
demilitarization of Kisangani. So much has been said
and written about it. If the Security Council is to
restore its credibility on this issue, it must act and act
quickly. The entire Democratic Republic of the Congo
is watching the Council and expecting it to take bold
decisions. However, Kisangani is the mirror, or rather
the reflection, ofthe despair and terrible suffering of an
entire dying people. The social and humanitarian crisis
in my country has grown to disturbing proportions that
particularly affect the vulnerable sectors of the
population: women and children. It is to the credit of
the members of Council mission that they have noted
this human disaster and recognized the broader
problem of the urgent need for economic and
reconstruction assistance for the Democratic Republic
ofthe Congo.

The Security Council's visit was a barometer and
the members of the mission were able to see for
themselves the desire of the Congolese people to a
better life. Thanks to the mission, river traffic has
resumed on both banks of the Congo River all the way
to Kisangani, where the mission met a humanitarian
convoy. Since then, air traffic has resumed, albeit
slowly, over 70 per cent of the national territory.

While the immediate challenges before us may be
the reunification of the country, the consolidation of
peace and stability and the organization of free and
democratic elections in order to put an end to the crisis
of legitimacy, they will be difficult to achieve without a
significant renewal of economic activity and a
resumption of bilateral and multilateral cooperation.
Today all of the country's infrastructure has to be
rebuilt, mainly its roads and railways.

The international community must attach the
same importance to the economic development of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the countries of
the Great Lakes region. This question is crucial if we
truly wish to break forever the link between poverty
and the breaches of the peace and security in our
subregion.

My Government shares the Council's opinion that
an international conference on peace, security,
democracy and development in the Great Lakes region
organized under the auspices of the Secretaries-General
of the United Nations and the Organization of African
Unity would help the countries of our subregion to re-
establish balance, which would serve the interests of
our peoples.

Before I finish my remarks, allow me to
paraphrase the Minister for Foreign Affairs and
International Cooperation, Mr. Leonard She Okitundu,
who, in reminding the members of the Security
Council's mission that the well-being or suffering of
the Congolese people would depend significantly on
the decisions that the Security Council would soon
take, emphasized that the Council's mission raised new
hopes in the hearts of the Congolese people -
particularly among those in the occupied territories.
Those hopes include, in particular, the hope of seeing
the aggressor foreign troops leave the Democratic
Republic of the Congo once and for all; the hope of
seeing the city of Kisangani demilitarized at last and
getting the third phase of the deployment of the United
Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUC) done; the hope of
seeing the Congolese people peacefully enjoying their
right to decide their own affairs independently and in
full sovereignty; the hope of an entire people that their
country will once again find its place among the
community of nations to meet the challenges of
national reconstruction and globalization; and the hope
finally to live in a good-neighbourly fashion with the
countries around them in conformity with their calling
to be the cradle of African integration.

It is my hope that all the recommendations
contained in the report of the Security Council mission
will be followed-up and implemented. For our part, I
can assure the Council that the Democratic Republic of
the Congo is prepared to play its role, as we are firmly
convinced that, above all, we must respect the deep
aspirations of the Congolese people as a whole for
peace, stability and national reconciliation.

I cannot conclude without expressing my
Government's thanks to Secretary-General Kofi Annan
and to his Special Representative in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Mr. Amos Namanga Ngongi -
whom I am happy to see here today - for their active
support for the peace process in my country. I cannot
fail to mention all the staff of MONUC and all the
associated humanitarian persons for their tireless
efforts to find lasting peace and security for my
country. To all of them I wish to express my
Government's gratitude for their full dedication to the
cause of peace and the restoration of dignity to the
Congolese people.

