Mr. Ahmad (Pakistan): Thank you, Mr.
President, for accommodating me at this late hour. I
know that we are all running against time. I promised
that I would be brief, and I will be.

First, my congratulations go to you, Sir, on your
presidency. Then, I express profound appreciation to
my colleague, Ambassador Peter Kolby, for a very
productive presidency, at the last meeting of which the
Council produced its resolution 1402 (2002).

The question is, how long shall we continue to
repeat our scripts one after the other? The time has now
come for action. The Security Council must address
itself to how to enforce its decisions. These debates
reflect international sentiment both here in the
Chamber and in the outside world, but now the
Security Council must meet in some other room and
seriously address the question of the enforceability of
its decisions.

The Council met only last Friday to consider the
grievous situation in Palestine. Resolution 1402 (2002)
was adopted to reverse the spiralling violence and
bloodshed. Painfully, there has been no let-up in the
scale of carnage. Many more people have died, and
violence has generated more violence. This only
demonstrates how helpless the Security Council has
become and how scanty is the respect for its
resolutions and decisions. This trend is not only a
cause for serious concern, but it is also alarmingly
indicative of the inability of the Council to uphold its
moral authority and its Charter obligations.

What is being said today by most of my
colleagues one after the other was said at the last
meeting and at earlier meetings, so I shall not repeat all
the things I said in my last statement. I would only say
that it is time to seriously address the question of
implementing the outstanding resolutions of this
Council without selectivity or delay. The very
credibility of this body depends on that.

We strongly urge all concerned to fulfil their
Charter obligations and to take the necessary steps to
implement Security Council resolutions 1397 (2002)
and 1402 (2002), ensuring an immediate and effective
ceasefire along with an Israeli withdrawal from
Palestinian cities, followed up with the resumption of
the peace process, including the implementation of the
Tenet work plan and the Mitchell report
recommendations.

