Mr. Mladenov: Too often we have met in this
Chamber and said that the Palestinian-Israeli conflict
is at a critical stage, that the situation on the ground is
unsustainable. We have all fallen into the paradigm of
managing, rather than resolving, the conflict. There are
those who believe that the conflict can be solved through
peaceful bilateral negotiations and compromises by
addressing the final status issues of borders, security,
refugees and the status ofJerusalem on the basis ofprior
agreements and the relevant United Nations resolutions.
They believe that to resolve the conflict one must have
two States, living side by side in peace, security and
mutual recognition. Some believe in making unilateral
moves that can lead only to a one-State reality that is
incompatible with the aspirations of both peoples.

And there are those who believe in violence, who
are convinced that confrontation is the only option.
They do not recognize that both Palestinians and
Israelis - Jews, Christians and Muslims - have a
legitimate national, historic and religious connection to
this land. They believe that one side has to lose for the
other to win; that the land can, and should, belong to
only one people.

We - the United Nations, the Security Council,
the international community - have a responsibility
to prove that those who believe in violence and
confrontation are wrong. We have a responsibility
not only to prove them wrong, but to work with the
Palestinian and Israeli leaders to effect a return to the
negotiations table and to quickly show tangible results
that will empower those who believe in peace and
thwart those who uphold terror.

This year will mark the twenty-fifth anniversary
of the Oslo Accords. While its daring vision for peace
remains to be fulfilled, now is not the time to give
up on Oslo. The alternative is not a better deal, but a
worsening reality of occupation and humiliation. Now
is the time to push for policies on the ground that rebuild
trust; now is the time to engage on final status issues on
the basis of international consensus; now is the time to
show political leadership to remove the obstacles to a
sustainable solution. And what is a sustainable solution,
some may ask? I believe it is one that resolves all claims

and allows Israelis and Palestinians to separate and live
in peace as neighbours and partners whose security
will be forever linked, yet who each manage their own
affairs in a State of their own.

Now is the time for leadership. Make no mistake:
while the current negative environment and dynamics
may have been exacerbated by rhetoric and recent
events, they are not new. The lack of political will
to take meaningful action, to restore confidence
and resume negotiations and the propensity to take
unilateral decisions have been there for years. During
that time, various peace efforts have repeatedly
floundered - victims of political agendas designed
to sabotage progress towards realizing a two-State
solution, or victims of the fear of making historic
compromises with the past in the interest of the future.

That paralysis has elicited a heavy price, namely,
continued violence and insecurity; an ever-expanding
settlement enterprise; a persistent Palestinian political
divide; and a deteriorating, unsustainable situation
in Gaza under the control of Hamas. Taken together,
those elements kill hope, breed frustration and increase
radicalization on the ground. Our choice today is
clear. We either take urgent concrete steps to reverse
that perilous course, or risk another conflict and
humanitarian disaster.

In that regard, let me begin today by expressing
my deep concern about funding for the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East (UNRWA) this year. While the recent pledge
by the United States of $60 million is appreciated, it
represents a significant reduction of its traditional
contribution, thereby increasing anxiety for the
community of 5.3 million Palestine refugees, who have
already suffered the longest protracted refugee crisis in
the world - 70 years.

Given tensions on the ground, I welcome UNRWA's
firm commitment to continue providing services to
Palestine refugees on an uninterrupted basis. Shutting
down or reducing services at this critical time would
further destabilize a region riddled with conflict,
insecurity and radicalization. On 22 January, UNRWA
launched a global fundraising campaign aimed at
raising approximately $500 million to keep its schools,
clinics, relief and other services open throughout
2018 and beyond. I thank the Member States that have
already joined this global campaign to further support
UNRWA, and I encourage others to follow suit.

The Israeli-Palestinian conflict continues to exact
a steady human cost on the ground. Protests and a
relatively low level of violence across the West Bank
and Gaza have continued following the United States
recognition of Jerusalem as the capital of the State of
Israel, on 6 December.

Since 18 December, seven Palestinian civilians,
including three children, have been killed by the Israeli
security forces during protests and clashes - four in the
Gaza Strip and three in the West Bank - and another
two Palestinians died of wounds sustained in protests
during the previous two weeks. I note the concern
expressed on 19 December by the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights that the use of force
must be calibrated and that lethal force should be used
only as a last resort, in situations of imminent threat
of death or serious injury, with any resulting fatalities
properly investigated by the authorities. I urge the
Israeli security forces to exercise maximum restraint to
avoid casualties in such circumstances.

On 9 January, an Israeli civilian was shot dead
in a drive-by shooting attack near Nablus. There is
no justification for terror or for those who condone,
praise or glorify it. The perpetrators of that attack
must be brought tojustice. Subsequently, on 18 January
in Jenin, one Palestinian was killed and several
others arrested during a raid that the Israeli military
conducted reportedly in search of the perpetrators of
the 9 January attack.

The reporting period also saw Palestinian militants
fire eight rockets and mortars from Gaza, with three
falling inside Israel, causing damage but no injuries.
In response, the Israel Defence Forces (IDF) targeted
Hamas military sites in Gaza, with no reported injuries
as well. The IDF also destroyed a tunnel from Gaza
extending into Israel and Egypt under the Kerem
Shalom crossing, the third such action over the past
three months. I have repeatedly stated that all militant
activity, including the digging of tunnels and the firing
of rockets, in Gaza must cease. It threatens the lives
of Israelis and Palestinians alike, increases the risk
of a new escalation of hostilities, undermines calls
for lifting the closures and ultimately damages the
prospects for peace.

Israel's settlement activities continue despite broad
international condemnation. On 10 January, the Israeli
planning authorities advanced plans for over 1,400
housing units in Area C settlements. Additionally, one
plan for nine housing units in Psagot was approved for
construction. Separately, four tenders were published
for approximately 500 units that had been processed
in 2017. In comparison, tenders for only 50 units
were opened for bidding in the whole of last year. In
addition, the authorities announced that some 10 new
tenders for 880 housing units in seven settlements will
be published in the coming weeks.

Settlement construction is illegal under international
law and is one of the major obstacles to peace.
Settlement-related activities undermine the chances for
the establishment of a viable, contiguous Palestinian
State as part of a two-State solution. Two recent
developments further fuelled perceptions that the
forces that want to block a two-State solution in Israel
are gaining ground.

On 31 December, the Central Committee ofthe Likud
party adopted a resolution calling for "unhindered"
settlement construction and to "extend Israeli law and
sovereignty in all the areas of liberated settlement in
Judea and Samaria". While not binding, the resolution
increases the political pressure for annexation of parts
of the West Bank and further undermines Palestinian
beliefin peace efforts. Days later, the Knesset passed an
amendment to the Basic Law: Jerusalem, which is likely
to make it more difficult in any future peace agreement
for Israel to transfer control over areas currently within
the area it defines as Jerusalem's municipal jurisdiction
to Palestinian authority.

The demolition of Palestinian-owned structures has
also continued, with 16 structures demolished due to the
lack of building permits that are nearly impossible to
obtain, as noted in the Quartet report of 2016. Fourteen
Palestinians have been displaced by these actions. Four
additional structures were destroyed during a military
operation in Jenin, displacing another 16 Palestinians.
Of particular concern is the risk of demolition of
46 school structures in Area C and East Jerusalem.

As the security forces continue to arrest Palestinians
in various security operations - some 400 have been
detained over the past month - I want to highlight one
particular case. On 1 January, 12 charges were brought
against Ahed Tamimi, a 16-year-old Palestinian girl
arrested in December. Her detention followed the release
of a video in which she was seen slapping and kicking
two Israeli soldiers in her front yard. On 17 January,
an Israeli military court ruled that she would be held
until the end of legal proceedings against her. As stated
by the Office of the High Commissioner for Human
Rights on 16 January, the detention of a child must only
be used as a measure of last resort and for the shortest
possible time. I reiterate the High Commissioner's
call that the treatment of all minors be in accordance
with international law and the special protection that it
grants to children.

On the Palestinian political front, I want to report
to the Council that in response to the United States
decision to recognize Jerusalem as the capital of
Israel, and following the General Assembly vote on
21 December, the Palestinian Central Council met in
Ramallah on 14 and 15 January. In its final statement, the
Central Council, inter alia, rejected the United States as
a partner until it cancels this decision and rescinds both
the designation of the Palestine Liberation Organization
(PLO) as a terrorist organization and the closure of the
PLO office in Washington, DC. The Central Council
further declared that the Oslo process was no longer
valid and tasked the PLO Executive Committee to
suspend the recognition of Israel until it recognizes
the State of Palestine and annuls its annexation of
East Jerusalem, to halt security coordination and to
revisit economic relations with Israel. We are yet to see
whether these decisions will be adopted by the PLO
Executive Committee and implemented. Under the
current circumstances, however, I encourage all parties
to refrain from action and rhetoric that would further
undermine the chances of returning to meaningful
negotiations and to continue their engagement in the
interest of peace.

Turning to Gaza, the worsening humanitarian
and security crisis continues to feed a deteriorating
situation. The implementation of the Egyptian brokered
intra-Palestinian agreement has effectively ground
to a halt. The two sides have been unable to reach
agreement, particularly on key obstacles including the
collection of taxes, the integration of and payment of
salaries to public-sector employees, the status of the
return of Government administration in the ministries
and other institutions and, ultimately, security control
of Gaza. These challenges must be quickly overcome or
the process risks being derailed entirely, leaving Gaza
primed for a new escalation.

Despite these setbacks, I am encouraged that
the Gaza crossings continue to be controlled by the
legitimate Palestinian authorities after their handover
on 1 November. I also welcome the decision of
the Palestinian Authority on 3 January to resume
payments for the full amount of electricity - 120
megawatts - purchased from Israel for Gaza, allowing
for an increase in supply to six-to-eight hours of
electricity per day.

The humanitarian situation, however, remains
dire. With the current funding available, the United
Nations will not be able to provide fuel to hospitals
and critical infrastructure in Gaza beyond the end of
February. I also take note of Israel's decision to approve
some 85 private-sector projects through the Gaza
Reconstruction Mechanism since the start of the year.
Yet, these positive developments are not an alternative
to the lifting of closures on Gaza and to returning the
Strip to the full control of the legitimate Palestinian
Authority. The combustible cocktail of humanitarian,
political and security challenges must be addressed
urgently and effectively.

In an effort to support the peace process and address
the dire situation in Gaza, Norway and the European
Union will convene an extraordinary session of the
Ad Hoc Liaison Committee for the Coordination of
International Assistance to Palestinians on 31 January
at the ministerial level. This important meeting aims
to bring all parties together to discuss measures to
accelerate efforts that could underpin a negotiated two-
State solution and to enable the Palestinian Authority
to resume full control over Gaza. I call on the parties
to work constructively and produce tangible outcomes
that support these objectives.

Turning to Lebanon, efforts there continue to
consolidate stability following the return of Prime
Minister Hariri. As part of the implementation of
the 8 December Paris International Support Group
communique, preparations are under way for a
conference in support of the Lebanese Armed Forces
and security institutions, to be hosted by Italy in late
February. Preparations also continue for parliamentary
elections in May.

The situation in the area of operations of the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) remains
generally quiet. Following the stated intention by the
Israel Defense Forces to conduct infrastructure work
south of the Blue Line, including in certain areas
where Lebanese officials have raised strong objections,
UNIFIL's leadership has been engaged with both
parties through the established liaison and coordination
arrangements. The matter will be discussed at the next
tripartite meeting.

In closing, I wish to emphasize the gravity of the
current challenges.
Twenty-five years after the Oslo Accords, we
are at a critical point in the peace process. The
uncertainty and volatility of the current environment
are hardening positions and sharpening the rhetoric
on all sides - a situation that plays directly into the
hands of extremists and increases the risk of another
conflict. Absent a credible proposal that could become
the basis of final-status negotiations, the international
community must continue to build the conditions
necessary for a resumption of talks. We must also
reaffirm the international consensus that the two-State
solution remains the only viable option for a just and
sustainable end to the conflict. We must be unwavering
in this position.

At the same time, it is vital to maintain support for
strengthening Palestinian institutions and enhancing
service delivery to Palestinians in the West Bank and
Gaza. Allowing the Palestinian project to backslide at
this delicate stage risks further destabilizing an already
precarious situation. The recent cuts to the funding
of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East only reinforce
these concerns.

As far as Gaza is concerned, I call on the international
community to support efforts to return the Strip to
the control of the Palestinian Authority. If the process
stalls, the people of Gaza will face increasingly
desperate conditions and will lose hope of any progress.
I commend Egypt for its leadership role and continued
commitment to this process.

We can wait no longer to reverse the current negative
trajectory of the conflict. Every illegal settlement
advancement, every person killed and every failed
effort in Gaza makes it more difficult for Palestinians
and Israelis to overcome their divisions, rebuild trust
and invest in the goal ofresolving the conflict. It is time
to break the destructive pattern and begin again to lay
the foundations of peace.

