Mr. Konuzin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are grateful to the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Kamalesh Sharma, for
the detailed information he has given us on
developments in Timor-Leste, and we welcome the
stabilization of the situation in that country.

We welcome the successes achieved by the
authorities of the new Government, with the active
support of the United Nations Mission of Support in
East Timor (UNMISET), and the fact that foundations
have been laid for a functioning civil service, police
force, judicial system and army.
However, we note that the emerging State
institutions in Timor-Leste remain fragile. We welcome
the positive changes in the relations between Timor-
Leste and Indonesia, especially as concerns such
important issues as border demarcation and regulation
of the common border regime.

The establishment and maintenance of good-
neighbourly and mutually advantageous relations with
neighbouring countries is a precondition for the
successful establishment and development of the young
State of Timor-Leste.

It is extremely important to create and strengthen
a national army and the National Police of Timor-Leste
in order to establish a viable and independent State. We
approve of the efforts of the United Nations Mission of
Support in East Timor to develop and train Timor-
Leste's military and police forces. We welcome the
expansion of areas of responsibilities for the fledgling
army and police forces of Timor-Leste, which is taking
place according to schedule and without serious
difficulties.

The promotion by multilateral and bilateral
donors of the social and economic development of
Timor-Leste is of vital significance for the country's
long-term stability. In that connection, we emphasize
the need to build up donor support for the Government
of Timor-Leste in its efforts to achieve the major
objectives of its national development plan.

The success of United Nations peacekeeping
activities in Timor-Leste and the achievements of
national authorities in the area of nation-building
should not be confined solely to that country. The
Security Council must address difficult situations, such
as the situation being successfully resolved in Timor-
Leste, in other parts of the planet as well. That includes
strengthening State administration; developing
democracy; prosecuting serious crimes; national
reconciliation; transferring responsibility for security
to national structures, including the establishment of a
reaction capability to counter armed groups; the
implementation of economic recovery programmes;
ensuring employment for former combatants;
normalizing relations with neighbouring countries; and
strengthening border security and other aspects of the
border regime. That list is far from exhaustive. The
experience built up in those areas in Timor-Leste must
be put to good use. The Security Council will promote
that in every possible way.

In conclusion, we would like to wish the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Kamalesh
Sharma, and all the staff of the United Nations Mission
of Support in East Timor further success in carrying
out the tasks entrusted to them.

