Mr. ngowe (Botswana): The conflict in the former
Yugoslavia does not lend itself to easy solutions.
Yesterday, the international community witnessed a
human tragedy of epic proportions in Srebrenica and
Zepa, in the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina, when
the Bosnian Serbs drove innocent civilians in their
thousands from the comfort of their homes and put them
on a journey into the unknown. Today, a similar
catastrophe has befallen the Krajina Serbs in Croatia as a
result of a broad military offensive launched by the
Government of Croatia against Krajina, in blatant
violation of Security Council resolutions. In both cases,
the authority of the United Nations was undermined and
defied with disdain.

Not only that, but the Croatian forces have clearly
demonstrated disrespect for the authority of the United
Nations by moving into the zones of separation and
engaging in deliberate attacks against United Nations
personnel. According to some reports, the United Nations
forces, crouching in their bunkers to escape crossfire,
were sought out, physically threatened and harassed by
the forces of the Government of Croatia.

In the most unacceptable act of all, some of the
peace-keepers were made to walk in front of the
advancing Croatian military columns to serve as human
shields. It is therefore most fitting that the draft resolution
before us condemns in the strongest terms attacks against
personnel of the United Nations Confidence Restoration
Operation in Croatia (UNCRO) by Croatian forces,
including those that resulted in the death of one Danish
and two Czech peace-keepers. My delegation wishes to
convey its heartfelt condolences to the Governments of
Denmark and the Czech Republic and, through them, to
the bereaved families. We call upon the Government of
Croatia to respect United Nations personnel and to ensure

 

UNCRO's safety, security and freedom of movement to
fulfil its mandate in accordance with Council resolutions.

We fully appreciate the frustration of the Government
of Croatia with the continued occupation of its territory, but
we do not believe that a military solution was the best
answer. The use of force to resolve disputes is unacceptable
to my delegation and we strongly deplore the forcible
annexation of Krajina by Croatian Government forces. In its
presidential statement on 3 August 1995, the Security
Council urged the parties to exercise restraint and give the
political process started by Ambassador Stoltenberg,
Co-Chairman of the International Conference on the Former
Yugoslavia, a chance to succeed, especially since the
proposals were acceptable to the Krajina Serbs as a basis
for further negotiations. It is most unfortunate that Croatia
not only refused to explore all political avenues available
and heed the advice of the United Nations, but went ahead
and launched a military offensive against Krajina with
tragic consequences for the local Serb population.

We have been shocked beyond belief by reports of
direct shelling of civilian targets with heavy weapons and
by further reports that in some cases fleeing refugees were
intercepted and massacred in cold blood. Some 120,000 or
more refugees are reported to have fled Krajina, causing a
humanitarian tragedy of unprecedented magnitude. It is
therefore not surprising that this tragedy has been described
in the media as the worst incident of "ethnic cleansing"
since the beginning of the war in the former Yugoslavia.
There are also reports of looting, plunder and the general
destruction of Serb property; this is not likely to encourage
Croatian Serbs to remain in the country or to return if they
have already fled. Nor does it augur well for the future
peace and stability of Croatia. An imposed peace is unlikely
to work, as the Croatian Serbs would seek retaliation,
perhaps not today, tomorrow or next year, but in
generations to come. This is why we are opposed to
military solutions: they do not contribute to future peace,
but tend to mortgage the lives of posterity to a future of
hatred and uncertainty, which would make today's military
success appear a pyrrhic victory several generations later.

We call upon the authorities in Zagreb to hold
inviolate the civil and human rights of the local Serb
population and to treat all prisoners of war in accordance
with accepted standards of international law governing the
rights of military personnel in conflict situations. All people
of Serb origin who wish to leave should be allowed to do
so without let or hindrance. Equally, those who wish to stay
or return should be allowed to do so in conditions of safety
and without discrimination or harassment based on ethnic
origin.

In its short history of almost three decades,
Botswana has fought for and defended the right of all
peoples to political freedom and human equality. We have
done this because of our innate belief in the equality of
all human beings and the indivisibility of freedom and
justice. Two wrongs never make a right. For us, the
sanctity of and respect for human life extend to all
peoples irrespective of creed, race or ethic affiliation.
Thus, while we fully share the pain and suffering
experienced by the peoples of both Bosnia and
Herzegovina and Croatia because of the wars raging in
their countries, we have at the same time maintained a
balanced position vis-a-vis the conflicts in those countries.
We have joined in the condemnation of all violations of
international humanitarian law committed in these
conflicts irrespective of who may have committed them.

We believe that all the States that emerged from
former Yugoslavia would contribute to peace if they
recognized each other's right to exist within secure
borders as sovereign nations. We think that recognition of
the right of each Republic to exist would help eliminate
the current conditions of insecurity in the Balkans, but we
cannot be prescriptive here, because it is the sovereign
right of each State, whether a Member of the United
Nations or not, to decide how it wishes to conduct its
external relations. We can only appeal for the recognition
of the right of each State to exist for the sake of stability
in the area, and can only hope that this would help end
the unfortunate human tragedy that has been unfolding in
the former Yugoslavia. But we can do no more.

Having said that, my delegation will vote in favour
of the draft resolution before us. We believe the Security
Council is sending the right message: that civilians have
the right to protection in any war, whether a war of
aggression or a war to defend territory against aggression.

