I would like to express our appreciation to the Secretary-General for his latest report (S/2020/964) and Mr. Zahir Tanin, Special Representative of the Secretary- General and Head of the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), for his valuable briefing. I thank Mr. Daeic, First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia, and Ms. Haradinaj-Stublla for their contributions. Viet Nam welcomes the official resumption of high-level dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina since July 2020 and subsequent agreements that have been reached, including the joint statement on 7 September and commitments expressed by parties on 4 September to promote normalization of economic relations. Yet it is regrettable that there is still lack of implementation. We would like to stress the importance of previous signed agreements on key areas and look forward to the implementation of these agreements, together with recent commitments. We urge both parties to take this opportunity to push forward further dialogue and overcome the remaining differences and long-lasting obstacles. The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic continues to loom over all corners of the world, affecting billions of lives. We would like to express our sympathy for the loss of lives and are concerned about reports of the rising number of cases in Kosovo since June and the disease's continuing heavy impact on the socioeconomic development and well-being of the people in Kosovo. In that regard, we welcome UNMIK's efforts to maintain its operations, protect its personnel and support local authorities in their COVID-19 response, including risk-reduction measures. We call onallrelated parties to continue their efforts to overcome socioeconomic challenges in responding to the COVID-19 pandemic and the legitimate concerns and interests of communities in Kosovo. We call on the parties to engage in good-faith dialogue and peaceful negotiations to resolve their differences. We support efforts aimed at a durable and comprehensive solution to the issue, in accordance with the fundamental principles of international law, the United Nations Charter and resolution 1244 (1999), for sustainable peace and development for all peoples in Europe. In that regard, we highly value the European Union-facilitated dialogue, which greatly contributes to international and United Nations efforts to resolve long-standing differences with a view to achieving peace, stability and long-term development for Belgrade and Pristina, the Balkans and Europe. We also commend and support activities undertaken by UNMIK to promote confidence and trust- building measures, encourage cooperation between Belgrade and Pristina, as well as to assist communities in Kosovo amid the COVID-19 pandemic.
