Mr. Brammertz: This morning, I will address the
Council on the key elements related to the completion
of our mandate, which has moved into a significant
new phase. More specifically, I will speak briefly on
the status of our trials and appeals; the cooperation
between the Office of the Prosecutor and States; our
capacity-building efforts throughout the region; and,
lastly, our plans to downsize my Office in the coming
years.

At present, the Office of the Prosecutor is
working on eight trials involving 17 accused. The last
trial to start at the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia, except the trials of the fugitives, is
scheduled to commence on 17 December this year.

On 27 October 2009, the trial in the case against
Radovan Karadzic' started, with the prosecution
presenting its opening statement. The prosecution is
prepared and remains ready to proceed with its first
witness. As with other cases, my Office has balanced
various competing requirements associated with such
large cases. It will present a case that is representative
of the crimes committed, yet streamlined and
manageable.

The Karadiie indictment charges crimes arising
from the ethnic cleansing of Bosnia and Herzegovina,
the shelling of Sarajevo, the hostage-taking of United
Nations peacekeepers and the attack on the United
Nations safe area of Srebrenica. Because of Karadzic's
senior position and the magnitude and gravity of the
crimes charged, his trial is important not only to the
victims of the crimes, but also to the international
community as a whole.

At the start of the trial against Karadzic', I met
with representatives of victims associations. I was
encouraged to hear that they continue to support the
efforts of the Office of the Prosecutor. For the victims,
the crimes remain in the present and are not historical
events of the past. As we proceed with the evidence of
what happened, we are reminded of the fact that
Mladie is still to be arrested. As an indicted accused,
Mladie's place is before the Trial Chamber, with
Karadzic'.

The arrests of Ratko Mladie and the other
remaining fugitive, Goran Hadzic', remain one of my
Office's foremost priorities. Prosecution lawyers are
currently reviewing the Mladie indictment and I expect
to file a proposed amended indictment shortly.

There are currently five cases on appeal. During
the next biennium, appeals cases are expected to
double. Plans have been implemented to transfer posts
and necessary resources to the Appeals Section of my
Office in order to address that increased workload. As
a result, my Office is fully prepared to meet the work
as appeals hearings increase in number and continue
into 2013.

The cooperation of States remains a key
condition to the successful accomplishment of our
mandate and to meeting the completion strategy goals.
In recent weeks, I met with the authorities of Bosnia

and Herzegovina, Croatia and Serbia at the political,
judicial and operational levels to assess their level of
cooperation with my Office. The purpose of the
missions was also to further our relations with national
prosecution services.

Since the last briefing to the Council, Serbia's
cooperation with my Office has continued to progress.
Prosecution requests to access documents and archives
are being dealt with more expeditiously and effectively.
It is important that the authorities continue to provide
that level of assistance, which will remain crucial
during current and future trial and appeals work.

The most critical aspect of Serbia's cooperation is
the need to apprehend the fugitives. My Office
recognizes the professionalism and commitment of
operational services tasked with the tracking of
fugitives. I am in regular and direct contact with
officials in charge of these operations. These services
are now working more efficiently and in a coordinated
manner. Moreover, a variety of operational activities,
including search operations, are currently being
conducted. Serbia must maintain these efforts with the
clear objective of apprehending the fugitives.

With regard to Croatia, we continue to work on a
regular basis with the Ministry of Justice and the
Office of the State Prosecutor, which are assisting in
responding to the prosecution's requests. The central
issue of concern remains the still unresolved request to
locate and obtain key military documents related to
Operation Storm of 1995. I welcome, however, the
personal initiative of the Prime Minister of Croatia to
establish in October an inter-agency task force aimed at
locating these documents, particularly as there had
been virtually no activity in the administrative
investigation since my last briefing to the Security
Council in June (see S/PV.6134). A report of the task
force received this week is helpful in revealing gaps in
the administrative investigation and in identifying
further investigative steps to be taken. These and all
other available investigative steps must be urgently
undertaken in order to complete a comprehensive and
credible investigation into locating the missing
documents.

Bosnia and Herzegovina continues to respond to
all prosecution requests. My Office interacts on a
regular basis with the Special Department for War
Crimes of the State Court. I am, however, concerned
about the possible departure of international personnel

and support staff from the Special Department for War
Crimes. Despite repeated requests from judicial
institutions in Bosnia and Herzegovina, the mandates
of international staff ending in December have not
been renewed due to the lack of political will. If this
matter is not urgently addressed, ongoing trial
proceedings and war crimes investigations could be
jeopardized. There will also be serious repercussions
for the Tribunal's work, since they also act on
investigative material transferred by my Office.
Immediate action is needed.

My Office will soon complete the hand-over of
investigative files to prosecutors in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Croatia and Serbia. In addition to the rule
11 bis cases transferred on the basis of judicial
decisions, in total my Office has handed over
17 investigative files involving 43 suspects to
authorities throughout the former Yugoslavia.

A fundamental aspect of the Tribunal's
completion strategy is the strengthening of the judicial
systems in the States of the former Yugoslavia. As a
concrete example, I would like to mention the
successful project for national prosecutors and young
professionals from the former Yugoslavia. This project
was set up jointly by my Office and the European
Commission. In June, three prosecutors from the
region - one from Bosnia and Herzegovina, one from
Croatia and one from Serbia - began working as
liaison prosecutors within my Office.

Domestic prosecutors have to continue the work
that my Office had originally undertaken, for instance,
by working on cases and material that have been
transferred to the region. As I have indicated in the
past, national prosecution services and judiciaries
continue to face significant legal obstacles and
challenges with regard to the prosecution of war
crimes. The prohibition on extraditing nationals to
other States threatens successful investigations and
prosecutions, as do legal barriers to the transfer of war
crimes cases between States. State prosecutors are
encouraged to maintain an open dialogue and to find
ways to cooperate in the most efficient and
professional manner possible.

Downsizing mechanisms have been agreed and
communicated to staff and will be implemented
starting 1 January 2010. Initial staff reductions in the
Office of the Prosecutor will start immediately in the
new year and will increase throughout the year,

reflecting the completion of trials. My Office's budget
proposal for 2010-2011, which was discussed with the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions, proposed a series of cuts in staff numbers as
trials are completed. Specifically, we have called for a
nearly 40 per cent reduction in the Office of the
Prosecutor as trials end over the course of the next
year, including abolishing one of the two director posts
within my Office. Over the next two years, there will
be a reduction of 60 per cent of staff positions within
the Office of the Prosecutor. In the meantime,
prosecution trial and appeals teams will continue to
work at maximum capacity to ensure that trials proceed
expeditiously and in accordance with the completion
strategy.

I thank members for their attention. On behalf of
everyone in our Office, I would like to express my
appreciation for the Council's ongoing support of our
work.

