Mr. Cohen (United States ofAmerica): I especially
thank today's briefers for their exceptionally sobering,
compelling and powerful presentations. As always, we
are grateful for the hard work that they and their teams
do on the ground every day in Yemen.

While these briefings add devastating clarity to our
view of the crisis, they also reinforce the central lesson
from over four years of conflict: the only enduring
solution to this man-made - yes, man-made - crisis
is a political settlement. This war must end soon, and
it will not end on the battlefield. As United States
Secretary of State Mike Pompeo has made clear, the
United States seeks a cessation of hostilities in Yemen.

With that lesson in mind, the United States renews
its call on parties to the conflict to engage with Special
Envoy Griffiths as soon as possible, and its call on all
Member States to assist. We are fully supportive of the
Special Envoy's work to bring the parties to the table
for consultations to discuss a framework for a political
settlement to this war. The parties need to stop debating
conditions for talks, and instead sit down at the table and
engage on the Special Envoy's reasonable proposals. We
furthermore welcome the Special Envoy's offer to share
the framework with the Council when appropriate.

We also welcome reports of progress towards
allowing select wounded Houthis to travel to Oman for
medical care. We expect that the coalition and Oman
will do everything they can to support that arrangement.
Special Envoy Martin Griffiths has worked for
months to build an environment conducive for the
consultations to begin. The Houthis must reciprocate
immediately, without additional preconditions, and
agree to participate in political consultations with the
coalition in Sweden as soon as possible.

As political talks take place, the parties must ensure
that the flow of assistance and commercial goods
remains unimpeded. Fighting around Al-Hudaydah
has shown us the immense risk of escalation. It is
irresponsible for the Houthis to place their fighters on
the rooftops of hospitals, warehouses and other civilian
infrastructure. Thousands of civilians are threatened by
the fighting, and it is getting harder and harder to move
supplies from the port to the Yemenis who need it.

It is particularly important that the parties take no
steps that could make this precarious situation worse.
The Houthis need to lift the wide range of bureaucratic
obstacles that make deliveries of assistance difficult and
stop interfering with United Nations relief efforts. Both
sides of the conflict must help facilitate the movement
of aid workers and journalists. The mistreatment of
Baha'i and adherents of other religions must stop.

We also call on the Yemeni Government to work
with its partners to stabilize the Yemeni rial and re-build
the capacity of the Central Bank. It is critical that the
Government avoid taking any steps, even inadvertently,
that could make it harder for importers to get food and
fuel into the country.

There can be no more excuses for delaying work
on a settlement. We know that for the millions of
Yemenis facing the risk of starvation and disease
there is no substitute for immediate humanitarian
relief. We commend the tireless efforts, in dangerous
circumstances, by David Beasley, the World Food
Programme and its implementing partners and Lise
Grande and her team on the ground.

The United States will continue its leadership
in supporting critical aid and efforts to address the
economic crisis. We urge all Member States to join us
in that work. It is work that must happen regardless of
the state of the conflict. In the same vein, we remind
all parties to the conflict of their obligations under the
law of armed conflict, including the obligation to take
all feasible precautions to minimize the risk of harm to
civilians and civilian infrastructure.

The Security Council remains deeply divided on
many issues, but as we are hearing today, not so on
Yemen. All of us around this table have emphasized
a common theme: that the time for progress on the
political track is now, that we stand behind Special
Envoy Griffiths and his efforts and that we are united
in our demand for Mr. Lowcock's five asks, including
for unfettered humanitarian access and for a cessation
of hostilities. The United States and the members of
the Council will be watching the situation closely in
the weeks to come, particularly whether the parties
cooperate with the Special Envoy's work. We must all
use our collective and individual influence to make
sure that they do.

