Mr. Urbina (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): I
wish to begin by welcoming among us President Tadic'
and Foreign Minister Jeremic', and by reaffirming
Costa Rica's recognition of their positive leadership
and their commitment to peace. Leadership like
theirs - committed to peace and human rights,
especially the rights of minorities - could perhaps
have prevented the tragedies whose echoes have given
rise to today's meeting. We are confident that, under
the leadership of President Tadie, the difficult situation
in Serbia and the wider Balkans will be overcome, to
the benefit of all the peoples of the region.

We also welcome the presence among us of the
Secretary-General and we thank him for his
presentation.

Kosovo's declaration of independence has been a
source of tension within the Security Council. Costa
Rica would have preferred that not to be the case and
would have preferred the matter to have been resolved
through dialogue between the Serbian and Kosovo
authorities. We regret that conditions did not permit a
definition of the final status of Kosovo that would have
been acceptable both to the parties and to the Security
Council. The fact is that today, almost nine years after
the adoption of resolution 1244 (1999), we find
ourselves with a fait accompli. That should surprise no
one: for months, the international community has
known that this day would come.

In the Council today, Costa Rica must take a
position consistent with its record within the United
Nations - a position that can make a contribution to
the cause of peace and security in the Balkans, to the
welfare of the region's inhabitants and to the integrity
of international law. We are conscious of our
responsibilities, and we have carefully analysed the
legal arguments made by those who support Kosovo's
declaration of independence and by those who call for
its nullification. We understand the logic behind both
lines of reasoning, and we recognize the good
intentions of those supporting both positions. We know
that this is not a sordid struggle for power, for strategic
position or for access to precious resources. We
recognize an ethical motivation in both parties.

However, the circumstances oblige us to take a
position and shoulder our responsibility, and we have
done so. My Government has taken the decision to
recognize Kosovo's independence. We are convinced
that resolution 1244 (1999), the 1999 general
principles on a political solution to the Kosovo crisis
set out in annexes 1 and 2 of that resolution, and the
Interim Agreement for Peace and Self-Government in
Kosovo contain sufficient legal foundations to enable
us to recognize the independence proclaimed yesterday.

We believe that with this recognition, we are
responding primarily to the will of the people of
Kosovo - a people who find it impossible to live
together with the Serb majority in the same country
after the 1998 campaign of ethnic cleansing, as their
Prime Minister indicated to us in this very Chamber.
That is a reality that Costa Rica cannot ignore and that
the membership of the Organization must take
carefully into account.

We continue to hope that, living in two different
countries, Serbs and Kosovars will be able to more
swiftly build together a mutually beneficial
relationship of respectful coexistence and cooperation.
We hope that, together, both of their countries will
respect international law and protect the human rights
of all their inhabitants, particularly minorities. We also
believe that we are contributing to the progress and
well-being of the people of Kosovo, who, like the
people of Serbia, should find a better future within the
European Union.

The international community must shoulder its
responsibility and act with solidarity within the
framework of international law, including the
provisions of resolution 1244 (1999). We all must
strive to ensure that what brought us together here
today is the end of a painful chapter in the history of
the Balkans, not the prologue to a new drama. We also
believe that international peace and security will be
better served through this bi-national and multi-ethnic
plan.

We are acting out of the conviction that our
reasoning is correct. We do not want our position today
to have negative consequences for anyone. Nor do we
want this conduct to be invoked in the future as a
precedent that undermines the integrity of international
law. To the best of our ability, we will seek to ensure
that that does not happen.

