Mr. Ouane (Mali) (spoke in French): At its 10
January 2000 meeting devoted to examining "The
impact of AIDS on peace and security in Africa", the
Security Council received an important message from
His Excellency Alpha Oumar Konare, President of the
Republic of Mali and the Chairman-in-Office of the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS). I would like to recall the substance of that
statement. (S/PV.4087 (Resumption 1), page 11)

President Konare started by saluting the holding
of this meeting as an initiative that

"makes it possible to break the complicitous and
unacceptable silence that allows AIDS to develop
today".

He stressed "the well-known insufficiency of the
resources applied until now to eradicate this scourge"
whose scope and gravity are evident to all. In
conclusion, President Konare launched an appeal for
the international community to launch a crusade
against the AIDS pandemic in order to step up research
on this disease, to increase prevention and "to provide
the necessary support to the millions of persons who
are affected by HIV/AIDS, in particular the men,
women and children of Africa infected by the
pandemic".

What is the situation now, six months later? The
international community of course has not remained
passive. The General Assembly has placed the question
of HIV/AIDS under all its aspects on the agenda of its
fifty-fifth session. The Economic and Social Council
devoted a special session on 28 February 2000 to the
topic, and the Thirteenth International AIDS
Conference has just concluded in Durban, South
Africa. We welcome the remarkable work
accomplished by the Joint United Nations Programme
on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS) in these regards and
elsewhere. I would also like to welcome Dr. Piot and
thank him for his very informative statement.

In the framework of today's meeting on "The
responsibility of the Security Council in the
maintenance of international peace and security:
HIV/AIDS and international peacekeeping operations",
I would like to say, first, that we support the plan of
action prepared by the Inter-Agency Standing
Committee and the UNAIDS Secretariat, which fully
integrates HIV/AIDS in humanitarian actions and
focuses on the part played by the military and
peacekeeping forces in both the prevention and
propagation of HIV. Secondly, we welcome the
measures to intensify international cooperation among
national organs, in order to facilitate the adoption and
implementation of HIV/AIDS prevention, testing and
counselling policies and to promote the treatment of
staff participating in international peacekeeping
operations. Thirdly, we support the cooperation now
existing between UNAIDS, the World Health
Organization (WHO), the United Nations Population
Fund (UNFPA) and the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations to reduce the risk of HIV transmission
among refugees and host populations, as well as with
regard to United Nations staff and the staff of
humanitarian agencies in conflict and humanitarian
situations.

Beyond the "historic step" of the 10 January 2000
Security Council meeting, and beyond the
aforementioned measures, as President Konare
emphasized, there remains the ardent obligation to
come up with concrete measures that will prepare the
way for all humanity to take hope and have access to
equitable treatment.

Almost 20 years after the emergence of this
disease, the international community cannot accept a
situation in which the patients are in the South and the
treatments are in the North. In this respect, we
welcome the recommendation of the 105th session of
the Executive Council of the World Health
Organization (WHO) calling upon member States to

"improve access to prevention and treatment of
infection by HIV and associated illnesses by
ensuring reliable systems of distribution and
benefits and by providing access to affordable
medicine, in particular through the development
of a vigorous policy on the use of generic
products, bulk purchases, negotiations with
pharmaceutical companies and appropriate
financing."
We also support the recommendation on pursuing the
dialogue with the pharmaceutical industry so that
medicine to treat HIV/AIDS may become more
affordable to the populations of member States.

We are similarly gratified that the International
Therapeutic Solidarity Fund has been established.

As Dr. Piot, Executive Director of the Joint
United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS, has pointed
out, the priority objective today should be to reinforce
political will, resources, systems and social
commitment to turning back the course of the
epidemic. In that respect, the draft resolution to be
adopted today constitutes a further step forward,
building on the accomplishments of our meeting of 10
January 2000. That is why we fully support it.

In conclusion, I wish to assure you, Sir, of my
delegation's pleasure at seeing the Security Council
meet today under your presidency to consider this
important matter. We thank the Jamaican delegation for
having convened this important follow-up meeting
today and the United States delegation, under
Ambassador Richard Holbrooke, for having taken the
initiative of placing this topic on our agenda last
January.

