Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to begin by warmly thanking the Senegalese
presidency for organizing this essential debate on the
relationship between water, peace and security. I would
also like to thank Mr. Danilo Turk, Chair of the Global
High-Level Panel on Water and Peace; Ms. Christine
Beerli, Vice-President of the International Committee
of the Red Cross; and Mr. Sundeep Waslekar,
President of Strategic Foresight Group, for their very
edifying briefings.

Against the backdrop set out in the excellent

concept note (S/2016/969, annex) circulated by the
Senegalese presidency, I would like to make including
three messages. The first is that water should never be
a source of division, but rather a factor for cooperation
between States. That is an essential element. For that
purpose, we must use and promote the major conventions
on water use, namely, the Economic Commission
for Europe Convention on the Protection and Use of
Transboundary Watercourses and International Lakes,
agreed in Helsinki, and the Convention on the Law ofthe
Non-navigational Uses of International Watercourses,
agreed in New York. It is true that natural resources
are at stake in many conflicts. That has been the case
for at least 40 per cent of them over the past 60 years,
according to consistent estimates.

Climate change of course exacerbates the situation,
in particular because of its impact on land degradation
and desertification. But even in times ofwar, the sharing
of water resources can facilitate dialogue between the
warring parties - for example, the discussions between
Jordan and Israel and of the South African agreements
signed during the wars in the 1970s and 1980s.
In that context, in order to help States to make the
sharing of water resources a tool for cooperation, we
need an equitable multilateral framework endowed
with high-quality expertise. That is why France so
actively supports and promotes the two essential tools
of international law that we have at our disposal. The
first tool is the Economic Commission for Europe
Convention on the Protection and Use of Transboundary
Watercourses and International Lakes, known as
the Helsinki Convention, which has been open to all
States Members of the United Nations since 1 March.
The second tool is the Convention on the Law of the
Non-navigational Uses of International Watercourses,
known as the New York Convention.

The Helsinki Convention, we must underscore,
provides a dialogue and arbitration mechanism for cases
in which there are tensions between States situated
along the same river, lake or aquifer. It includes a
secretariat and a legal and technical support mechanism
for States parties, but also for non-State parties. Those
two Conventions are the primary instruments for the
implementation of Sustainable Development Goal 6, on
water and sanitation, and Sustainable Development Goal
16, on peace, justice and strong institutions, under the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. I therefore
welcome the involvement of the Global High-Level
Panel on Water and Peace in the promotion of the two
Conventions that I have mentioned. I also would like to
emphasize the fact that the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Disaster Risk Reduction has an
important role to play in encouraging States to become
parties to the two Conventions on the management of
transboundary watercourses.

My second message is that the Security Council
has a key role to play in the essential issue of water-
resource management. It must ensure that there is
protection of the infrastructure and other essential
services, in particular water, but also electricity,
during conflicts and post-crisis phases. Goods that are
indispensable to the survival of civilians are protected
under international humanitarian law. Human services
are part of that protection, as is the quality of many other
services, such as health services, as the representative
of the International Committee of the Red Cross
recalled a while ago.

The Security Council must therefore ensure
respect for humanitarian law. It must also ensure that
peacekeeping operations have a minimal environmental
impact. On the other hand, the Security Council has
to study and learn all of the lessons in the operational
recommendations on these issues that the High-Level
Panel on Water and Peace will formulate in 2017. We
look forward to those recommendations on the global
architecture for the prevention and resolution of water-
related conflicts and on water use as an instrument for
cooperation and peace.

That leads me to my third and final message,
which is of a more general nature. It is high time to
reflect on the global water architecture. The current
global water governance is not up to the challenges
of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. Its
fragmentation weakens it. That is why France thinks
that it is necessary to facilitate dialogue on the issue
of water-resource management among Member States
and United Nations agencies. Several United Nations
agencies are working on that issue: UNESCO on
surface and groundwater resources, the United Nations
Environment Programme on resource quality issues,
and UNICEF and the World Health Organization on the
links between water resources and people's access to
drinking water.

In that regard, France is in favour of establishing a
space for dialogue on water issues in their entirety to
cover access to water, but also water quality, pollution
and use, as well as the sustainable and integrated
management of resources, the protection and restoration
of aquatic environments, climate change and prevention
as a response to disasters.

In short, those are comments that I wanted to make
on this essential issue of water, peace and security.
The underlying thread of my statement and the central
message of France is that concerted management of
water resources, in particular access to drinking water,
is not only a technical subject, it is also a vital issue when
it comes to development, human rights and security. It
is therefore a top priority for our Organization. The
Security Council, naturally alongside the General
Assembly, has every legitimate right to be seized of the
matter. I am thoroughly convinced that our discussion
today, thanks to you, Mr. President, and the Senegalese
presidency, is both very enlightening for all of us and
very promising for the future.

