Mr. Duclos (France) (spoke in French): The
Special Representative has given the Security Council
a briefing in which he referred to the tragic events he
has witnessed since his appointment. I would like to
take this opportunity to reiterate that we are
unfortunately all too familiar with the language of
bombs and murder utilized by terrorists to
communicate. I would also like to say that the memory
of those who have died under such circumstances
compels us to be particularly resolved in combating
terrorism. I wish to reaffirm that resolve here. I would
like to thank Mr. Holkeri for his briefing, which
highlighted the priorities and prospects for Kosovo.

Mr. Holkeri noted in his briefing the importance
of the role played by the European Union. We support
that role and fully agree with the statement that will be
made shortly by Italy on behalf of the presidency of the
European Union. In addition to the comments to be
made by the representative of Italy, I would like to
emphasize the following points.

First, the international community remains
determined to move forward on this issue in
accordance with the "standards before status" formula.
In other words, the international community believes
that the issue of the Kosovo's future status cannot
begin to be calmly and effectively addressed until the
progress made to attain each of the eight standards is
deemed to be satisfactory. The goals are familiar. The
attainment of the eight standards endorsed by the
international community will make it possible to
proceed to building a modern, democratic and multi-
ethnic Kosovo. In addition, that phase will be essential
in the process of bringing Kosovo closer to the
European Union. The Secretary-General's very
comprehensive report (S/2003/996) makes it possible
to assess the scope of the efforts that must still be made
in each of the eight areas. I hope that the joint
implementation plan that is being finalized will enable
the Provisional Institutions of Self-Government to
make active progress in that regard.

My delegation would like to refer to three of
those standards today, without establishing any sort of
hierarchy among them. First, with regard to relations
with Belgrade, the direct dialogue between Pristina and
Belgrade was launched on 14 October 2003 thanks to
Mr. Holkeri's efforts. We welcome that development,
which is in keeping with a priority of the international
community as well as with the commitment entered
into by the parties at the Thessaloniki Summit.
Technical working groups must now work on four
subjects of common interest. We call upon Belgrade,
and in particular upon the provisional authorities in
Pristina, to engage constructively in that dialogue,
including by establishing representative delegations. It
is not just a matter of implementing one of the eight
standards; rather, it is a matter of concrete
improvement in the daily lives of the region's
inhabitants.

Secondly, I wish to refer to the return to Kosovo
of displaced persons. We condemn the violence that
took place this summer. That violence could have a
deterrent effect for some time on those wishing to
return. We were encouraged by the statements made by
the Provisional Institutions of Self-Government
condemning that violence. We welcome their public
commitment in favour of returns. We hope that the
Provisional Institutions will now take the concrete
measures necessary to prevent any repetition of such
violence and to ensure that persons returning to
Kosovo can do so in conditions of normal security and
dignity.

Finally, allow me to speak about the goal of
building functional and democratic institutions, which
also applies to the local level of administration. The
attainment of the goals of the international community
takes place largely at the municipal level. We therefore
attach great importance to the implementation of the
decentralization plan. We encourage all stakeholders to
implement as soon as possible the recommendations to
be made on decentralization.

In conclusion, I reiterate to Mr. Harri Holkeri
how much we appreciate the work he is carrying out in
difficult conditions in Kosovo. We know how much
investment that work will require, but we also know
how important it is for the future of Kosovo and for the
stability of the entire region. Mr. Holkeri can count on
our full and abiding support. We call upon all
stakeholders to cooperate constructively with him.

