Mr. Benmehidi (Algeria) (spoke in French):
First, I would like to congratulate you, Mr. President,
on Burkina Faso's accession to the presidency of the
Security Council for December, and to thank you for
taking the wise initiative of organizing this open debate
on the subject of drug trafficking as a threat to
international security, the importance of which is by
now beyond doubt.

I would be remiss if I did not pay tribute to the
Burkina Faso delegation for the excellent way it has
represented Africa on the Council for the last two
years.

At a time when the international community is
celebrating the centenary of international drug control,
whose foundations were laid by the International
Opium Commission, it is disturbing to note that drug
trafficking continues to be a serious threat to
international and regional peace and security, to States'
political and economic stability and to public health.

In a world characterized by an enormous
expansion of trade and advanced use of modern means
of communication, the production and illicit trafficking
of drugs are among the major activities of international
organized crime, with transactions involving colossal
sums of money. Traffickers have access to ever more
sophisticated ways of laundering income from drugs
and smuggling, which is why it is essential to grapple
with this problem as a whole, keeping in view the
interconnections and known links among the various
evils - of traffic in drugs, people and organs, of
money-laundering and corruption, cybercrime and,
especially, the devastating phenomenon of international
terrorism, for which drugs constitute the main source
of financing, along with ransoms coming from the
crime of hostage-taking.

The intersection of all those crimes and the
confluence of other factors such as the multifaceted
crisis that has rocked the world's economy are
imperiling international security and the rule of law,
especially in Africa, which has to deal with multiple
challenges. In that regard it is alarming to see that West
Africa is becoming a crossroads for global drug
trafficking, exacerbating political and security
instability in a number of countries of the region to the
point of causing the overthrow of constitutionally
elected Governments, with the potential risk of
spreading to the regional level.

Algeria supports the efforts of countries in the
subregion of West Africa carried out in the framework
of the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), and we were pleased with the adoption by
ECOWAS at Praia in October of a Political Declaration
and Regional Action Plan that will enable the
establishment of mechanisms and policies capable of
dealing with this scourge.

My delegation also believes that it is vitally
important to strengthen the international treaty
framework by calling on all States to ratify the
collection of conventions having to do with combating
drugs, organized transnational crime and corruption
and all relevant conventions regarding terrorism.
Beyond that, we must stick to the objectives set out
during the twentieth special session of the General
Assembly (see resolution S-20/4), as well as the
Declaration and Plan of Action adopted during the
fifty-second session of the Commission on Narcotic
Drugs (see E/2009/28 and E/CN.7/2009/12), aimed at
achieving an integrated and balanced strategy for
fighting the global drug problem. It is clear from those
documents that it is vital to work to reduce both the
supply of and the demand for drugs and to promote
international cooperation through an integrated
approach.

With respect to the African continent in
particular, the international community must work
more closely with States and regional and subregional
organizations to strengthen institutional capacities to
combat drug trafficking and all other forms of
organized crime. It is also essential to become actively
involved in economic efforts and the promotion of
alternative development policies in that region in order
to strengthen and broaden economic opportunities and
prospects, and thereby to reduce the possibilities and
temptations to resort to criminal activity.

For its part, at its twelfth Summit in February
2009, the African Union adopted a decision on the
growing threat of drug trafficking, in particular in West
Africa, which has become a source of concern with
respect to the security and good governance of the
region and the entire continent. In that regard, the
African Union called on the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime (UNODC) to step up and broaden its
cooperation with African regional communities in
order to strengthen its action against the scourge on the
continent. My delegation wishes here to pay a strong
tribute to UNODC, which can play a vital role in
assisting States in their efforts to combat drugs and
organized crime, in spite of being financed essentially
by voluntary contributions. We should also like to
welcome the in-depth analysis developed by
Mr. Antonio Maria Costa, Executive Director of
UNODC, in his briefing to the Council this morning.

In conclusion, the Council, which is responsible
for the maintenance of international peace and security,
must play a greater role in combating drug trafficking
and organized crime in conflict and post-conflict
environments. My delegation welcomes the
presidential statement (S/PRST/2009/32), which the
Council adopted this morning on Burkina Faso's
initiative.

