Mr. Akahori (Japan): I thank Prosecutor Bensouda
for her report and briefing, which I have read and listened
to carefully. On the occasion of the previous briefing in
June (see S/PV.7710), we stated that we regretted that
justice had not been achieved for the victims in Darfur,
despite the efforts of the International Criminal Court
(ICC). It is very regrettable that we must again repeat
that today.

As the Prosecutor stresses, the ICC cannot fulfil
its mandate without the cooperation of States. That is
precisely why resolution 1593 (2005) required the full
cooperation of the Government of the Sudan and all
other parties. Japan urges the full implementation of
the resolution to achieve justice in Darfur. A continued
failure to implement resolution 1593 (2005) would
undermine the credibility of the Security Council.
Follow-up on non-compliance is called for. In that
connection, this year, Japan, together with Australia,
the Czech Republic, Peru and Senegal, and in close
consultation with interested parties, prepared a
toolkit to assist the States parties of the Rome Statute,
explaining the various actions that can be taken in case
of non-compliance with ICC. We hope that the toolkit
will be a useful contribution in preventing and dealing
with non-cooperation.

On a positive note, we are encouraged by the
progress on the investigation and collection of evidence.
We look forward to further progress during the next
reporting period.

Progress in the political process is essential to
bringing stability to Darfur and justice to the Victims.
Japan welcomes the Sudan's signing of the Roadmap
Agreement in August, which the Council long called
for. It is regrettable, though, that an agreement on a
ceasefire has yet to be concluded. Japan hopes that both
the Government of the Sudan and the armed opposition
groups will engage constructively so that negotiations
for a ceasefire can be concluded without further delay
based on that framework.

We also welcome the extension of the unilateral
cessation of hostilities by the Government of the
Sudan and armed opposition groups. The cessation of
hostilities should be closely monitored, especially as
the dry season begins. While the report notes that the
level of violence seems to have decreased, the scale of
civilian attacks still requires the attention of ICC.
The Prosecutor's report referred to allegations of
the use of chemical weapons in Jebel Marra - that
needs continued attention and follow-up. Unhindered
fact-finding access should be provided.

