Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): First, let me
thank Under-Secretaries-General Lowcock and Feltman
for their briefings.

In my statement I will address three points:
implementation, implementation and implementation.

First, I will speak about the implementation of
the cessation of hostilities. Since the Council adopted
resolution 2401 (2018) on Saturday, civilians are still
dying in eastern Ghouta and elsewhere in Syria. The
humanitarian disaster continues worsen. We need a
full, nationwide cessation of hostilities and we need it
now. The Russian proposal for a humanitarian corridor
and pauses of five hours per day cannot be a substitute
for a humanitarian pause of 30 consecutive days, as
demanded in resolution 2401 (2018). Those five hours
do not meet the obligations under the resolution and
are not enough for the United Nations to be effective
in delivering aid to the entire area of Ghouta, as Under-
Secretary-General Lowcock just stated.

We call upon the parties to the conflict and on
those with influence on the parties to show decisive
action and stop the violence. As Under-Secretary-
General Feltman stated, three armed opposition
groups in eastern Ghouta have announced that they
are committed to fully implementing resolution 2401
(2018). We expect the regime to do the same. The air
strikes, the shelling and the shooting must stop. For
the credibility of the Council, it is crucial that its
resolutions be fully implemented. That is the obligation
of all States Members of the United Nations, under
the Charter.

The Kingdom of the Netherlands repeats the call
made by the High Representative of the European
Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy, Federica
Mogherini, to the Astana guarantors. She called on the
Foreign Ministers of Russia, Iran and Turkey to

"take all necessary steps to ensure that the fighting
stops, the Syrian people are protected and that
urgent humanitarian access and necessary medical
evacuations are taking place".

My second point is about the implementation of
humanitarian access. Resolution 2401 (2018) calls for
sieges of populated areas, including eastern Ghouta, to
be lifted immediately, and demands safe, unimpeded
and sustained access for humanitarian convoys. As
Under-Secretary-General Lowcock just explained, the
United Nations stands ready with 45 trucks to deliver
essential aid to eastern Ghouta. But the necessary
facilitation letters are still lacking, and the security
conditions do not permit those deliveries. At this point,
more than 1,000 people are in urgent need of medical
care, but they are still trapped in eastern Ghouta. If
they are not given the care they need in hospitals in
Damascus or elsewhere, they may die. The United
Nations and the Security Council have consistently
pleaded for these medical evacuations, and yet there
are still no developments with regard to them. We also
need to see access to aid for those fleeing the fighting
in Afrin. More generally, there should be delivery
of humanitarian aid to the areas that are not under
Government control. As Mr. Feltman just said, we
should reach all who are in need, wherever they are.

My third point is about implementing the protection
ofcivilians. The exception on the cessation ofhostilities
in paragraph 2 of the resolution allows targeted action
against terrorists who are designated as such by the
Council. However, that does not mean that absolutely
anything is allowed. International humanitarian law
applies to all military combat operations and counter-
terrorism actions. The principles of distinction,
proportionality and precaution must be respected in
all circumstances. The civilians in the conflict must
be protected. There is talk of humanitarian corridors
for civilians who want to leave eastern Ghouta, but
evacuations should always be voluntary. We are
concerned about the possibility that humanitarian
corridors will be used for forced population transfers.
Civilians cannot be forced to leave, and neither
should they be forced to stay. If voluntary evacuations
do take place, we will call on the United Nations to
monitor them.

Currently, the most urgent humanitarian situation
is in eastern Ghouta and Idlib, but needs remain high
elsewhere in Syria as well. We welcomed the January
delivery of aid to Rukban, but we want to stress the
importance of sustained access and a durable solution.
As others have said today, the demining activities
in Raqqa should be increased, and the Kingdom of
the Netherlands is doing its part in that regard. The
media coverage of the issue of the exploitation of
Syrian women in exchange for aid is very disturbing.
There should be no tolerance of such behaviour, as the
Secretary-General and the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs have already said. The probity
of any United Nations implementing parties should be
beyond any doubt.

In conclusion, we must ensure that resolution 2254
(2015) is fully implemented. There can be no military
solution to the conflict, and we call on all the parties
to engage seriously in the United Nations-led political
process as a matter of urgency. The suffering of the
people of Syria has lasted for more than seven years.
For the sake of the millions of women, children and
men trapped in this horrendous war, it is high time
that all parties started putting the protection, interests
and well-being of the Syrian people on the top of their
agenda. Yesterday, my Minister, Ms. Sigrid Kaag, said
that humanitarian access and the protection of civilians
are cornerstones of international humanitarian law.
They are part of our shared values and shared humanity.
The Security Council must do justice to those values
and to our shared humanity.

