Ms. Loj: I would like to thank you, Sir, for this
opportunity to present the twenty-first progress report
2

of the Secretary-General (S/2010/429) on the United
Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL). In doing so, I
extend my appreciation to the members of the Security
Council for their support to the work of the Mission.
As many of them know, I have been engaged with
Liberia for several years now, from when I served on
the Council and chaired the sanctions Committee in
2005 and 2006, through my present appointment as the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
coordinator of United Nations operations.

From this vantage point, I can attest to the
tremendous progress that Liberia has made in recent
years, much of which has been made possible by the
security umbrella that the United Nations peacekeeping
mission has provided. I must also praise President
Ellen Johnson-Sirleaf for her strong commitment to
peace consolidation and the advancement of Liberia's
development goals. As I have previously stated in this
Chamber, nowhere is it more clearly illustrated than in
Liberia that there cannot be sustainable security
without development, and there cannot be sustainable
development without security.

Council Members will already have had a chance
to read the Secretary-General's most recent progress
report detailing recent developments in the country. I
will thus focus my remarks on some recent events that
illustrate that a number of critical areas still need to be
addressed to achieve further progress and to enable
UNMIL to successfully hand over its responsibilities.

While the overall situation in Liberia has
remained stable, it continues to be fragile, and
additional progress is needed in a number of areas to
truly consolidate the peace. Liberia has asked to be
added to the agenda of the Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC) and hosted a visit from the Commission just a
few weeks ago. The Government has specified rule of
law, security sector reform and national reconciliation
as important priority areas to the Commission. If I may
add, Liberia being on the agenda of the PBC would
offer a unique opportunity for the Security Council and
the Commission to ensure that peacekeeping and
peacebuilding efforts become mutually supportive in
line with resolution 1645 (2005).

Security within the subregion is calm but fragile,
and the Mission continues to monitor developments
along the borders very closely, as well as recent events
in Guinea and Cote d'Ivoire. UNMIL's presence
represents a stabilizing influence in the subregion and
10-50803
serves as a deterrent to illegal cross-border activities,
including drug trafficking.

Internally, Liberia still faces potentially
destabilizing security challenges arising from mob
violence, ethnic and communal tensions, competition
for natural resources, land disputes, sexual and gender-
based violence, and armed robbery. Alarming rates of
unemployment, including among youth and
ex-combatants, raise further security concerns. UNMIL
has also noted the increasing availability of regionally
made guns, which are smuggled into Liberia. These are
quickly becoming the weapons of choice for many
criminals, illegal rubber-tappers and those engaged in
illegal mining. UNMIL has intensified its work with
the Government to address the legislative and
operational gaps in small arms control in Liberia.

Security incidents, like those described in the
progress report in Harper and Lofa raise serious
concerns. Many are originally sparked by minor
incidents that quickly develop into large-scale security
situations. These easily overwhelm local security
institutions and require UNMIL intervention to contain.
Numerous prison disturbances have also arisen in
reaction to poor conditions and outbreaks of disease,
and unfortunately, needs are addressed only when they
culminate in violence. Also, just last week, violence
erupted on the grounds of one of Liberia's larger
rubber plantations, the LAC plantation in Grand Bassa
county. The issue is all too familiar, as workers in large
concession areas continue to clash with company
management in the pursuit of improved labour
conditions, and local security actors are unable to
contain these alone.

Liberians' low confidence in the justice system
highlights the importance of strengthening the rule of
law and security institutions. One year ago, following
my briefing to the Council, representatives of the
Government of Liberia presented strategic plans for
key security institutions in a special partners' forum.
While I believe that those presentations were well
received, the plans still require substantial donor
support if they are to be effectively implemented.
Given the fact that Liberia's major security threats are
internal rather than external, it will be important to
ensure that security agencies, especially the police,
immigration and corrections services, are strengthened
to meet their future operational challenges.
10-50803

While we continue to encourage the Government
to progressively increase budgetary allocations to the
security sector, we are all fully aware of the financial
limitations. The reality is that much more external
support will be required, and I cannot appeal strongly
enough to Member States to come forward to support
the Government in these endeavours.

The Liberian political scene is fully seized with
preparations for the 2011 presidential and legislative
elections, and much activity has been ongoing to adopt
key legislation, mobilize resources and build capacity.
In late July, the legislature adopted a joint resolution
that will serve as the framework for the next elections,
commonly referred to as the Threshold Bill. This law is
a political compromise reached after months of debate,
and endorses the current 64 seats in the House of
Representatives while adding another nine seats to be
delineated by the National Elections Commission. This
compromise was a significant achievement since
earlier versions of the bill were highly controversial
and had even been vetoed twice by the President.

Both legislative houses recently enacted another
outstanding piece of legislation, a joint resolution
proposing amendments to election-related provisions
of the Constitution. These amendments include moving
election day from October to November in order to
move it out of the rainy season by a few weeks, and
allowing simple majorities to determine winners in all
electoral races, except for the two highest offices,
President and Vice-President. For these changes to the
Constitution to take effect, a referendum is needed, but
cannot be held less than 12 months after the
legislature's action. The National Elections
Commission has indicated that it will not be possible
for it to conduct a referendum before the next
elections.

As is mentioned in the Secretary-General's
progress report, the 2011 elections will be a critical test
for Liberia on its path to democratic stability. The
Government and its partners have been busy preparing
for this important event, and the electoral timetable
was announced on 27 August, with voter registration to
start in January. However, the National Elections
Commission will not be able to successfully organize
elections without the international community's
support. While considerable pledges have been made,
more is needed, particularly if the constitutional
amendments are not yet applicable and the
3
Commission is faced with having to conduct more than
80 runoffs across the country.

National reconciliation is crucial to durable peace
in Liberia. The President recently submitted her second
quarterly report on the implementation of the Truth and
Reconciliation Commission's recommendations. In it,
she reaffirmed her support for a nationwide Palava Hut
programme, a traditional reconciliation mechanism in
which perpetrators can publicly ask for forgiveness,
and named a range of actors to become involved in
addressing recommendations in a number of other
areas, including prosecution. The Truth and
Reconciliation Commission's report, especially the
implementation of its recommendations, remains a key
point of interest, but other measures to address root
causes of the conflict also deserve attention. The
President has presented a new set of nominees to the
Independent National Commission on Human Rights to
the Senate for consideration, and it is hoped that they
will soon be confirmed. This is crucial, as the
Commission will be necessary both to support
reconciliation efforts and to serve as a publicly
accessible human rights institution for all Liberians.

While deeper issues and cleavages in society
have yet to be addressed, the Government has also
announced an ambitious initiative, the Liberia National
Vision 2030, linked to achieving economic growth and
strengthening national identity and citizenship, which
should help make these issues more prominent in
public discourse. All of these programmes need to be
designed in an inclusive manner to ensure that Liberia
never again experiences the nightmare that its people
suffered in the recent decades of conflict and war.

A considerable milestone was achieved this
summer when Liberia reached the Heavily Indebted
Poor Countries (HIPC) Debt Initiative completion
point, qualifying for debt relief of $4.6 billion.
Reducing the country's debt burden frees up resources
to finance expenditures in areas critical to the success
of the poverty reduction strategy, now in its final year
of implementation. The Government's sustained
implementation of a strong macroeconomic programme
and ambitious reform agenda was instrumental in
Liberia's completion of the HIPC process.

However, it is important to note that the
Government still faces extreme financial constraints.
The proposed budget for the current fiscal year still
being debated in the legislature totals just $347 million

to cover all Government expenditures. The needs are
daunting, especially in a country building its
institutions, facing extremely poor infrastructure, and
struggling to provide basic social services to its
population. Furthermore, while significant progress has
been made in strengthening accountability and
transparency, more effort is needed to tackle
corruption, which has the potential to seriously hinder
Liberia's development objectives.

I am pleased to highlight the efforts undertaken
by the Government of Liberia and the Mission to
advance planning for the handover of security
responsibilities, including at the level of the
Government security pillar and the National Security
Council. As demonstrated in the June workshop on
security transition planning and in subsequent work,
the Government has taken ownership of the process
and recognizes the need for early planning to provide
the time and space for Liberia to stand up security
institutions, especially the police. We are jointly
working on a comprehensive situational assessment
and identifying gaps in individual security agencies
that will have to be filled to ensure a successful
transition. As part of this process, it is envisioned that
our current consolidation, drawdown and withdrawal
benchmarks, which covered the Mission's drawdown
phase, will be revised to incorporate specific
transition-related indicators and thus become transition
benchmarks.

The Mission will also continue its work with the
United Nations country team related to handing over
and phasing out its civilian activities, and at the same
time adjusting the work of the United Nations in
response to the Government's request that Liberia
become a self-starter delivering as one country. A high-
level summit on delivering as one is planned for
October to formally endorse the initiative and establish
a joint steering committee. With the final year of
implementation of the poverty reduction strategy now
under way and the Government looking ahead to its
next development strategy, continued coherence among
United Nations actors and other partners will be of
paramount importance to achieving desired results.

I would be remiss if I did not use this opportunity
to express our appreciation to the troop- and police-
contributing countries for their support to the Mission.
I would also appeal to them to ensure that awareness of
sexual exploitation and abuse is raised before police
and troops deploy to the Mission area and that timely
follow-up of investigations takes place. I would like to
reiterate my request to troop and police contributors to
inform the Mission of investigation outcomes and of
any measures taken against those found responsible for
any infraction. As Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Liberia, I spare no opportunity to
raise the issue of sexual exploitation and abuse with all
personnel, civilian and uniformed alike. By working
closely together with our troop and police contributors,
I trust that we can do better to encourage all members
of the Mission to refrain from these demeaning acts -
acts that in themselves defeat the whole purpose of our
work.

Let me conclude by stating that there have been
many positive developments in Liberia. Seven years of
unbroken peace - the longest in decades - have
allowed Liberians to begin to believe, to be optimistic
about the future and, day by day, to start taking charge
and shaping the direction of their country. However,
these positive developments are tempered by a fragile
peace that relies heavily on the presence of UNMIL
military and police.

Liberia will continue to require substantial
international support and assistance for the foreseeable
future. Recovering from a long civil war requires
leadership, resources and time. The Government of
Liberia is providing the leadership and readiness to
take ownership. Donors need to be generous and
expectations need to be realistic about how quickly
goals can be realized. I am confident that Liberians can
count on the continued support of the Council.

