Mr. Inderfurth (United States of America): We
believe that it is important that persons suspected of
leading last spring's genocide in Rwanda or in States
neighbouring Rwanda should be detained until the
International Tribunal for Rwanda can investigate and
make decisions about prosecution. Their detention, as

 

called for in this draft resolution, would be a tangible sign
of the international commitment to holding individuals
accountable for these atrocities and would thus improve
prospects for reconciliation in Rwanda. Having defendants
in custody would also enhance the credibility of the
International Tribunal, which will start investigations in the
next few weeks.

I should like to highlight especially two aspects of the
draft resolution - both dealing with the aftermath of the
tragic conflict in Rwanda. In the first place, the draft
resolution underscores the objective of the International
Tribunal, established pursuant to Security Council
resolution 955 (1994). If the Tribunal is to contribute to
terminating the impunity with which atrocities were
committed in Rwanda in the past, it is necessary that it be
able to take custody of those who committed such acts.
Such persons must not be allowed to slip away.

The final preambular paragraph, which reminds States
of their obligations under resolution 955 (1994), and
paragraph 1, which asks States to arrest and detain persons
who there is reason to believe committed acts within the
jurisdiction of the Tribunal, are steps to this end.

In the second place, the draft resolution seeks to
ameliorate the situation in the refugee camps and to
facilitate the return of the refugees. It condemns attacks
against persons in the camps and calls upon States to take
steps to prevent such attacks. It calls upon States to arrest
and detain persons when there is reason to believe that they
incited or participated in such attacks. Removing those who
threaten violence against refugees if they attempt to return
to Rwanda removes one of the major impediments to
voluntary return. Of course, the draft resolution makes it
clear that the arrest and detention of persons must take
place within the framework of law, including international
standards concerning human rights.

The draft resolution is a step in a process. It builds on
the resolutions that the Council has adopted, which are
recalled in the first preambular paragraph. It is not the end
of the process. There is much that remains to be done to
complete the establishment of a Tribunal so that it is in a
position to try and punish those guilty of serious violations
of international humanitarian law. There is much that
remains to be done to establish a justice system in Rwanda.
By adopting this draft resolution today we would move the
process along and provide further evidence of our
commitment to continue to do so.

Let me say in conclusion that we have been pleased
to work with the other members of the Council -
including in particular Rwanda - to achieve the adoption
of the draft resolution.

