Mr. Mayr-Harting (Austria): At the outset, I
would like to welcome Ambassador Augustine Mahiga
as the new Special Representative of the Secretary-
General. We thank him for his presentation and for the
commitment he has already shown under truly
challenging circumstances. I would also like to say that
we welcomed the presentation by Foreign Minister
Wetangula and would like to underline the key role that
Kenya is playing in bringing stability to Somalia by
accepting refugees as a basis for the activities of the
international community and, more specifically, on the
issue of piracy. We are also grateful to the Permanent
Representative of Somalia for his statement.

I would like to join others in condemning the
recent attacks of 9 September and the violence of
recent weeks. Austria expresses its condolences to the
victims and their families.

Let me underline that Austria fully aligns itself
with the statement of the European Union that will be
delivered later this morning. Let me now highlight a
few additional points.

Austria would once again like to confirm its
support for the Transitional Federal Government (TFG)
and for the continuation of the Djibouti peace process.
We hope that the TFG, with the support of the
international community, will be able to assume its
responsibilities - namely, to build security and rule of
law institutions and to embark on a reconciliation
process - in unity. As others have already said, the
transitional period comes to an end in August 2011,
and we need a clear strategy for the remainder of this
time.

10-5364]
We are deeply concerned about the devastating
effect the conflict has on the civilian population and
about the lack of respect for humanitarian principles.
We call on all parties to permit the delivery of
assistance and aid to those in need.

I would also like to reiterate our appreciation for
the dedication and engagement of the many
humanitarian workers who accept very high risks in
order to alleviate the plight of the civilian population in
Somalia. We call upon all parties to ensure the
protection of civilians, in particular that of children, in
compliance with human rights law and international
humanitarian law.

Austria would like to reiterate its condemnation
of the recruitment of children by all parties to the
conflict and request that they be released immediately.
In this regard, we encourage all parties to cooperate
with the Working Group of the Security Council on
Children and Armed Conflict, which is to begin its
consultations on the situation in Somalia in October.

Concerning the surge in piracy, it is, as others
have already said, not only important to consider
piracy as a threat to key international shipping lanes at
sea, but also necessary to consider its root causes and
to see it as a factor further aggravating the security and
humanitarian situation in Somalia. Austria therefore
stresses the importance of determined activities to curb
piracy in the region, as is also done through the
European Union naval operation, Operation Atalanta.

Let me also underline our commitment, support
and admiration for the important contribution of
AMISOM, its troop-contributing countries, Uganda
and Burundi, the United Nations support package for
AMISOM. and the substantial support by the European
Union to AMISOM. in bringing security and stability to
the country.

We welcome the progress in the integration of
United Nations operations, which will also ensure a
coherent United Nations approach in Somalia. It is
important to enhance the role of the United Nations in
Somalia, specifically in coordinating and leading the
efforts of the international community. We should also
aim at creating more synergies between the TFG and
the international community in Somalia and make more
efficient use of already established mechanisms for
coordination such as the High-level Committee and the
Joint Security Committee.

10-5364]
In conclusion, we are looking forward to the
summit on Somalia on 23 September that is to be
convened by the Secretary-General. It will provide an
opportunity to highlight the Security Council's firm
support and commitment to the remaining tasks during
the transitional period and to the stabilization of the
situation in Somalia.

