Mr. Olguin Cigarroa (Chile) (spoke in Spanish):
It is an honour to speak before the Council under
your presidency, Sir. This statement is being read out
on behalf of the Permanent Representative of Chile,
Ambassador Cristian Barros, the former Chair of the
Committees established pursuant to resolution 1572
(2004), concerning cote d'Ivoire, and resolution 2206
(2015), concerning South Sudan, who unfortunately
could not be with us today. We thank Venezuela for
allowing us to share some thoughts and proposals
about the working methods of the Security Council's
subsidiary organs, and particularly the sanctions
committees.

This debate reflects the shared interest in improving
the sanctions regimes, as seen in earlier initiatives, such
as the meeting held by the Council in November 2014
on general questions relating to sanctions (S/PV.7323)
and the high-level review of United Nations sanctions
and the resulting compendium, circulated in June 2015
(S/2015/432, annex). We welcome the presence and
participation today of representatives of the States
concerned and interested in the subject, since their
opinion will help to improve the way these mechanisms
work.

The universal character of the United Nations
makes it the appropriate body for establishing and
monitoring sanctions. We welcome the fact that these
are a non-military response to addressing threats to
international peace and security that is preventive
in nature and adaptable to new challenges. Although
progress has been made in recent years, problems
still exist that affect the effective implementation
of sanctions by Member States. On the basis of our
experience in presiding over the aforementioned
subsidiary organs, we have identified some issues and
situations of concern to us.

First, the sanctions committees cover a broad range
of topics, including non-proliferation, terrorism, gross
and systematic violations of human rights, peaceful
political transitions, illegal exploitation of and unlawful
trafficking in natural resources, and the recruitment and
use of children for military purposes. The committees
have so far been using a variety of tools, such as travel
bans, assets freezes amd arms embargoes, paying
attention to proportionality and functionality.

In order to help the various players to understand
the complexity of the sanctions regimes and their
tools, we believe that it would be reasonable to
establish some common denominators and to identify
best implementation practices. We therefore suggest
that consideration be given to the preparation of an
implementation assistance note for the application
of all Security Council sanctions to supplement the
consolidated sanctions list.

Secondly, criticisms about a lack of due process in
the establishment of sanctions regimes or the designation
process may undermine the legitimacy of the sanctions
and hamper their implementation. Due process is a
general principle of law that has a practical usefulness.
A lack of due process makes it difficult for some States
and regional political communities to implement the
sanctions. Therefore, the Council should strengthen the
mandate of the Office of the Ombudsperson and extend
that mandate - currently applicable to the Committee
established pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999),
1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015) - to other sanctions
committees. The establishment, by resolution 1730
(2006), ofa focal point for delisting from sanctions lists
was a significant development, although there is still
room for improvement.

Thirdly, with regard to transparency and outreach,
we should acknowledge that there has been progress in
that regard. However, the remaining shortcomings in
transparency and outreach are an obstacle to sanctions
implementation. We believe that the periodic reports
of the sanctions committees and other subsidiary
organs to the Security Council should, as a general
rule, be delivered in public. That would help to make
the committees' work more transparent, enhance
understanding of the sanctions regimes and help to
emphasize that all ofus should implement the sanctions.
Generally speaking, there is no reason to justify why
some sanctions committees, such as the one established
pursuant to resolution 1718 (2006), should continue to
report to the Council in closed consultations. Moreover,
such briefings should be accompanied by press releases
from the sanctions committees - a tool that we believe
is underutilized. In addition, visits to Member States
by spokespersons in order to explain the entire United
Nations sanctions architecture could be useful.

Fourthly, I should like to turn to the dialogue
between the committees and Member States, especially
those directly affected by sanctions, neighbouring
States and States of the region. A number of resolutions
and committee guidelines call for measures to enhance
transparency and increase dialogue with the Member
States. However, in practice those efforts are limited.
In our experience, the working visit made by the
Permanent Representative of Chile to Cote d'Ivoire
in November 2014, in his capacity as Chair of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1572
(2004), was important for his chairmanship, as it
improved channels for communication and cooperation,
provided a new perspective on the impact of sanctions
on the ground, narrowed perception gaps and relaunched
the relationship with the United Nations Operation in
C6te d'Ivoire. There is therefore a need for improved
dialogue with affected States and, as far as the security
situation allows, to promote on-site visits by sanctions
committees and their respective Chairs to verify and
evaluate in situ the implementation and impact of the
sanctions, as well as to promote better coordination
with other United Nations organs and missions.

Fifthly, with regard to unintended consequences,
there is a possibility that certain sanctions, such
as those involving specific natural resources, may
adversely impact legitimate trade and artisanal
communities that rely on those resources for survival.
Moreover, it is imperative to prevent sanctions from
having humanitarian consequences. That is a point on
which questions continue to be raised; it is essential to
address it because it could undermine the overarching
interest of the Charter of the United Nations, namely,
the dignity and rights of individuals. We believe that,
before establishing sanctions, the subsidiary organs
of the Council should evaluate the legal frameworks
in a country and the region and anticipate potential
unintended negative consequences of a humanitarian
or socioeconomic nature.

Assistance and cooperation should enhance
national capacities and national ownership by the
States concerned, at their request, in areas such as
the exploitation of natural resources, including plants
and wildlife, and the control of small arms and light
weapons, while at the same time providing the requested
support for the implementation of instruments such as
the Convention on International Trade in Endangered
Species of Wild Fauna and Flora and the Kinshasa
Convention for the Control of Small Arms and Light
Weapons.

Sanctions regimes are among the tools available to
the Security Council to deal with threats to international
peace and security. They are temporary tools and not
an end in themselves. The Council should therefore not
perpetuate sanctions committees indefinitely - some
have lasted for years and become anachronistic.
Against that backdrop, it is necessary to identify in
a more precise manner the goals to be achieved with
the establishment ofa committee, while also assessing
regularly whether the objectives are being achieved.

With regard to working methods, we suggest
that concrete measures be adopted to facilitate the
management of committees. For example, once new
members of the Security Council are elected, they
should quickly learn the committee chairmanships to
which they are going to be assigned, in order to allow
incoming teams to prepare for their new and important
tasks. We also suggest improving the processing time
for applications and queries that are formulated to the
committees.

I conclude by calling for a reflection on modalities
for improving the sanctions architecture. In that
context, we believe in the need to continue considering
ways and means of improving the work of the Security
Council's subsidiary organs. Sanctions are also related
to the effectiveness of the system. They have multiple
dimensions and effects, which makes it imperative to
follow up on the responsibility for implementing them
and on the duty to neutralize the negative unintended
consequences on the population. We therefore appreciate
the interest in promoting a process of reflection based
on realism and practicality.

