Mr. Haroon (Pakistan): Pakistan's delegation
warmly welcomes you, Madam President, to the
Security Council. As we wish you and your delegation
a productive visit, we warmly congratulate South
Africa and the African National Congress on its one-
hundredth anniversary. In that light, it is befitting that
President Zuma's statement compels attention as a
veritable tour de force in Africa. His role in the African
Union should be viewed as historically
groundbreaking. We also thank Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon for his rightfully vast report (8/2011/805) and
for his briefing on Africa. We also thank the Foreign
Ministers of Azerbaijan, Colombia, Guatemala and
Kenya, as well as the African Union Commissioner, for
their participation and for their important statements.
We also welcome the representatives who have come
from China, France, Germany, Portugal and Togo to
take part in today's debate.

Africa continuously defies its detractors, not only
by progressing but by committing itself to the
challenges of peace and security, including the building
of bridges with the international and regional comity of
nations. We commend the timely epoch-building
initiative of South Africa to hold a debate on the
African Union (AU)-United Nations relationship. The
high-level participation is a necessary reflection of the
close attention being paid to those linkages by the
leadership of Africa. After all, this is the nation that
gave the world the concept of transitional law, and that
then peacefully upheld the rule of law in a manner that
humankind can learn from.

This forum's venture today would not be
complete without invoking the great example of
President Nelson Mandela and Archbishop Desmond
Tutu. That is world-class leadership.

Asia and Africa are bound by strong interlinkages
of history and friendship. The early twentieth century
witnessed mutually inspiring independence movements
in the South Asian subcontinent and the freedom
struggle in Africa. Pakistan's strong support for
Africa's decolonization struggle is well known. Today
the two continents are partners in their respective peace
and development and in the prosperity of their people.
With 70 per cent of world trade binding our shores in
the future, the world shall have to take note.
I salute African wisdom and sagacity, because
while most regional organizations are based solely on
trade and economic considerations, Africa has made
significant strides to conceive the challenge of peace
and security as a collective responsibility. The African
Union is an embodiment of that pioneering spirit.

Within a decade of its foundation, the African
Union has created a solid edifice for peace in Africa, in
the form of African Peace and Security Architecture.
The Architecture stands on institutions like the AU
Peace and Security Council, the Panel of the Wise, the
African Standby Force and the Post-Conflict
Reconstruction and Development Framework. A set of
subregional organizations further strengthens the
Architecture.

The AU has evolved tangible remedial measures
for the entire spectrum of a conflict cycle. From
preventive diplomacy and mediation efforts to active
peacekeeping, peacebuilding and catalysing political
processes, the continent is using a wide range of
instruments in the international toolkit for peace and
security. The world can learn from that. The Africa of
today has sagaciously resorted to the vast spectrum of
modalities for peaceful settlement of disputes, as
envisaged in Chapter VI of the United Nations
Charter- a practice that merits emulation by the
Council.

The cooperation between the AU and the United
Nations in peace and security adds value to the work of
both organizations, particularly in matters of peace and
security. The AU Peace and Security Council and the
United Nations Security Council define the AU-United
Nations relationship at a strategic level. The AU
Commission and the United Nations Secretariat
provide the administrative foundation for that
partnership. It is worthwhile noting that Africa's
consensual and united position for enhanced
representation at the Security Council, which is a
legitimate demand, will also eventually strengthen the
cooperation between the two bodies.

Contacts between the AU and the United Nations,
particularly between their two Councils, are too slowly
evolving into a common strategic vision in areas of
prevention and management, and manifest themselves
in a lack of resolution of conflicts. That vision should
forge enhanced political coherence to address the
challenges of peace and security. While coordinating
the evolution of a common strategic vision will be
12-20579
incremental, we believe that an expressly targeted
focus on three key areas will further enhance
cooperation between the two bodies.

First, efforts should be made to ensure that the
annual consultative mechanism between the Security
Council and the AU Peace and Security Council
translates into formulating cohesive positions and
strategies. The two Councils can do so by holding more
frequent and informal exchanges, especially among
their respective presidencies. Such exchanges need to
be replicated between the AU Commission and the
Secretariat, as well as among other relevant bodies in
the AU and United Nations systems, namely, the
Peacebuilding Commission and its five country
configurations, which are all related to Africa.

Secondly, regular interaction with subregional
organizations in Africa will be critical to developing
commonalities in respective decisions relating to peace
and security, thereby ensuring their smooth
implementation. In this regard, the Security Council
has already expressed clear intentions in its
presidential statement of 13 January 2010
(S/PRST/2010/l). The challenge is to translate the
intent into action.

Finally, AU-United Nations cooperation - as
noted by President Zuma as well - can be optimized
by strict prioritization in areas of building local
capacities. Considering that most of the AU's work on
peace and security is based on Chapter VI provisions
related to the pacific settlement of disputes, the two
organizations can identify relevant areas for capacity-
building cooperation in mediation, arbitration and other
measures relating to preventive diplomacy.

Another avenue of cooperation could be security
sector reform (SSR). The AU has developed an
elaborate SSR policy framework for implementation,
which must be supported by the United Nations. It
would also be important to widen the discourse of
AU-United Nations cooperation beyond the work of
the Security Council to include issues such as fair trade
practices, food and environmental security, and
investment in governance institutions.

Let me conclude by stating that Pakistan, as an
observer State of the AU and a country in search of
peace and stability in its own neighbourhood, identifies
closely with the theme of today's debate. Out of nearly
10,000 Pakistani peacekeepers in the United Nations
missions around the world, 9,000 are performing duties
1220579

in Africa. In the peace and stability of Africa, we see
their safety and eventual safe return home. In the
economic progress of Africa, we see opportunities for
the whole global South, including Pakistan.

We hope that today's debate and high-level
participation, together with the draft resolution to be
adopted later (S/20l2/25) will further concretize the
modalities of AU-United Nations cooperation and pave
the way of constructive collaboration. Pakistan is today
a proud co-sponsor of the important draft resolution
before the Council.

