Mr. Radomski (Poland): Allow me to thank
Mr. Thomas Markram, Deputy to the High
Representative for Disarmament Affairs, for his
briefing and for conveying to us the fifty-fourth
monthly report of the Organization for the Prohibition
of Chemical Weapons (S/2018/283, annex).

Twoweeksago,wetookthe opportunityoer.Ahmet
Uziimcii, Director-General of the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW), being in
New York to thank him for the dedicated and tireless
efforts of the OPCW to strengthen and to maintain the
chemical non-proliferation and disarmament regime.
Allow me also to stress that Poland highly values the
efforts of the Fact-finding Mission with regard to all
its allegations of the use of chemical weapons in the
Syrian Arab Republic.

We note with the utmost concern that the OPCW
Technical Secretariat remains unable to confirm that
the declaration submitted by Syria could be considered
as accurate and complete in accordance with the
Chemcial Weapons Convention and the decisions of
the OPCW Executive Council. Once again, we join
the Secretary-General in calling on Syria to extend its
fullest cooperation to the Declaration Assessment Team
in order to clarify all existing gaps, inconsistencies
and discrepancies.

Today we observe the first anniversary of the deadly
chemical attack on Khan Shaykun, which left dozens
of victims dead or wounded. As the OPCW-United
Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism concluded in its
report of 26 October 2017 (see S/2017/904, annex), the
information gathered was sufficient to claim that the
Syrian Arab Republic was responsible for the release of
sarin at Khan Shaykhun on 4 April 2017.

However, the individuals and groups responsible
for that and other attacks have not been brought to
justice, and the use of chemical weapons has become
an almost regular practice in the war being waged
in Syria. That is why we must send a clear message
that the use of chemical weapons by anyone will not
be tolerated. It is yet another reason that we need to
ensure that the international community is empowered
to address each and every chemical attack and to hold
the perpetrators accountable. We call on our partners to
engage in a constructive discussion in order to establish
an independent, credible and professional investigative
mechanism to replace the former Joint Investigative
Mechanism. We believe that the draft resolution of the
United States is a good basis for further discussion in
that regard.

Putting an end to such impunity is a matter
not only of justice but also of the credibility of the
non-proliferation system and of the security of all of
us. Only a month ago, we witnessed another example of
the unprecedented use of a chemical agent in Salisbury
in the United Kingdom. We hope that the responsibility
for that attempt will be established quickly and that the
perpetrators ofthat reckless act will be held accountable
as soon as possible.

