Mr. Natalegawa (Indonesia): At the outset, I
would like to thank you, Mr. President, for convening
this deliberation on the critical issue of the protection
of civilians in armed conflict. We would also like to
thank Under-Secretary-General John Holmes for his
important briefing.

The issue before us is one that has certainly
received heightened attention. However, more needs to
be done to match decisions and declarations with
reality, as we are still witnessing a large number of
civilians falling victim to armed conflicts around the
world.

Indonesia is committed to addressing the impact
of armed conflict on civilians. We are both deeply
concerned and saddened that civilians continue to be
the victims of acts of violence committed by parties to
armed conflicts, including as the result of deliberate
targeting, the indiscriminate and excessive use of force,
and sexual and gender-based violence, as well as other
acts that are in violation of international law, including
international humanitarian law, human rights law and
refugee law.

We wish to underscore at least three basic
conditions as prerequisites to providing protection for
civilians in armed conflicts.

First, safe and unhindered access should be given
for humanitarian personnel to provide assistance to
civilians in armed conflict. The deliberate targeting of
humanitarian convoys and personnel is a deplorable
and unacceptable situation and one that is patently
illegal.

Secondly, humanitarian personnel need to
continue to uphold and respect the broad principles of
humanity, neutrality, impartiality and independence in
carrying out their role in a zone of conflict. The
implementation of those principles will remove any
justification for the sides in a conflict to hamper the
provision of aid and assistance to populations in need.

And thirdly, the parties to armed conflict should
take all precautions and measures necessary to spare
civilians and humanitarian workers and facilities from
the effects of hostilities.

While the Council's work in the protection of
civilians in armed conflict is critically important, it
cannot succeed on its own in the absence of
cooperation on the ground, and without other relevant
regional and international organizations taking part.
Building a culture of protection, through the
engagement of United Nations agencies, regional and
international humanitarian organizations and other
relevant actors, is essential in order to raise awareness
of civilian suffering and develop action plans to
prevent further loss of life.

The issue of the protection of civilians in armed
conflict has become even more prominent in view of
the deep suffering being inflicted by Israel in the Gaza
Strip. Israel continues to stubbornly defy the call by the
international community, principally through Security
Council resolution 1860 (2009), to end its military
operation. Far from heeding that call, Israel has
persisted in breaking international human rights and
humanitarian law. It is especially galling that Israel has
claimed that its actions are intended to protect
civilians. Far from it: Israel's policy of collective
punishment and its utter disregard of well-established
humanitarian principles are deeply repugnant.

In the past few days, Israel has not only
continued to intensify its air and ground operations, but
has also moved into densely populated Gaza City,
causing a spiralling death toll among Palestinian
civilians. With the escalation of military attacks, it is
even more difficult, if not impossible, for humanitarian
workers to operate and deliver aid to those civilians in
dire need. The consequences are absolutely clear: the
suffering of the Palestinians in Gaza Strip will only get
worse.

If we commit ourselves to protecting civilians in
armed conflict - a commitment that underpins our
deliberations today 4 this is clearly the moment to act
to protect civilians and to ensure that the fighting
comes to an immediate end.

Finally, we welcome and appreciate the efforts of
the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
in preparing the updated aide-memoire that will be
adopted by the Council.

In this context, we wish to reiterate our belief that
the protection of civilians should and must be based on
the three pillars of the United Nations: human rights,
security and development, which are closely
interlinked. Efforts to protect civilians in armed
conflict situations will be rendered futile should we
lose sight of that paramount perspective.

The tragic situation in the Gaza Strip clearly
shows not only that civilians need their rights and
security to be protected, but also that they require the
basic necessities for survival and for weathering the
conflict until a resolution is achieved. Clean water,
food and shelter are some of the basic needs that have
32
to be provided by all parties to all civilians in armed
conflict as a matter of necessity, not least in the Gaza
Strip.

