Mr. Listre (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I am
grateful to the League of Arab States and the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries for requesting
this open debate at a moment of such importance and
seriousness, and to you, Mr. President, for convening
the meeting without delay.

The position of my country has been clearly
stated in three previous debates. Argentina deeply
regrets that after 12 years it was not possible to achieve
the disarmament of Iraq by peaceful means and that the
Government of Iraq did not extend its full, immediate
and unconditional cooperation, as required by
resolution 1441 (2002), which was adopted
unanimously by the Security Council under Chapter
VII of the United Nations Charter on 8 November
2002. Argentina also deeply regrets that a divided
Security Council was not able to find within the
provisions of the Charter and its own resolutions a
peaceful solution to the crisis. It regrets even more the
armed conflict and the humanitarian catastrophe
looming over Iraq.

We have always said that the use of force is the
last resort, once all peaceful means have been
exhausted, and that within the United Nations system it
must be authorized by the Security Council.
Nevertheless, we believe that given the present
situation, legal and political debate on the legality of
the armed conflict will once again divide and paralyse
the Council and divert it from what we understand
should be the priority of the moment: the humanitarian
situation of the Iraqi people. With millions of potential
victims of catastrophe because of a lack of essential
elements, we believe that it would constitute a lack of
sensitivity and a failure of the multilateral system if the
Council were to look only to the past and failed to
assume its important responsibilities in the present.

The actions of the United Nations and, in
particular, of the Security Council must be directed at
enabling humanitarian organizations to provide
medicines, food and whatever else becomes necessary
and, if need be, to facilitate the opening of
humanitarian corridors. We urge all parties to cooperate
in this objective and, as far as possible, to prevent
military actions from impacting on the civilian
population and on civilian facilities. This position does
not in any way prejudge the legality or legitimacy of
the armed conflict. It is aimed only at giving the
necessary protection to the civilian population in
accordance with the principles of humanity, neutrality
and impartiality. In that context, Argentina especially
appreciates the work carried out with great dedication
by the International Red Cross and Red Crescent.

This is why, in these tragic circumstances, we
support the initiatives of the Secretary-General to adapt
the oil for food programme to the present exceptional
circumstances. This does not imply a value judgement
of the facts that make such changes to the programme
necessary. It neither legitimizes nor condemns the use
of force. We believe that the Security Council must
give the Secretary-General the necessary authority and
flexibility in this context to act to mitigate the needs of
the Iraqi people.

As was very appropriately expressed by the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Argentine Republic,
Mr. Carlos Ruckauf, to the Secretary-General, and as
stated in the letter I myself sent to the President of the
Security Council on 20 March 2003, Argentina
reiterates its willingness to participate in humanitarian
tasks to alleviate the suffering of the Iraqi people.

In the eyes of world public opinion, the Security
Council was not able to prevent the armed conflict. We
cannot allow the Council now to be perceived as the
obstacle to humanitarian assistance. If, in the face of
the daily tragedy of millions of innocent Iraqis, the
Council is paralysed or fails to act with the
determination required by the circumstances, that
public opinion might perhaps wonder what use the
Security Council is and what use the United Nations is.
That would surely be another heavy blow to this
already weakened Organization in the eyes of world
public opinion. Because Argentina believes that,
despite its weaknesses and shortcomings, the United
Nations is, and can be to an even greater extent, an
appropriate instrument for international peace and
security, economic and social development and the
protection of human rights, we urge the Council to rise
to the level of the responsibilities entrusted to it by
Member States and contribute to strengthening this
common enterprise.

