Mr. Henze (Germany): First of all, I wish to join
other delegations in congratulating you upon assuming the
presidency of the Council. Having the privilege of
working under your guidance as President of the
European Union, it is a double pleasure for me to benefit
from your great experience and diplomatic skills. I also
would like to thank Ambassador Kovanda for his work as
President of the Council during the past month. I refuse
to join another delegate who qualified you as an able
slave-holder. It is true we worked hard under your
presidency but we did it always with pleasure.

I also would like to welcome His Excellency Mr.
Chikraidze to the Security Council. We have listened very
carefully to his statement and we share his view that
progress in the efforts to reach a political settlement is
urgently needed.

As a member of the group of "Friends of Georgia",
Germany was actively involved in the drafting of the
resolution just adopted by the Council. My delegation is
pleased that the Council was able to reach agreement
without difficulty. Today's resolution reflects a unity of
purpose, which we hope will have a positive effect on the
parties.

On behalf of my Government, which was one of the
contributors of personnel to the United Nations Observer
Mission in Georgia (UNOMIG), I would like to express
our gratitude to the Chief Military Observer, General
Hvidegaard, and to the members of UNOMIG for the
excellent work that the mission has been doing.

In this context, I would like to emphasize that we
attach great importance to the increased presence and
visibility of UNOMIG in the Gali region. The more active
role of the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS)
peace-keeping force is equally welcome. We hope that
UNOMIG and the CIS troops will sustain this new modus
operandi.

At the same time, the security situation in the Gali
region remains a cause for concern. The parties need to
improve their cooperation with UNOMIG and the CIS
peace-keeping force. They must fully honour their
obligations under the cease-fire agreement, particularly as
regards restrictions on weapons in the security zone. They
must ensure the safety and security of all UNOMIG and
CIS personnel as well as their freedom of movement.

 

Once again, my delegation would like to express its
thanks for the briefings offered by our Russian colleagues
on the operation of the CIS peace-keeping force. We would
be grateful if this information could be made available
more frequently.

We share the great concern about the fate of the
refugees. This is a problem which has to be solved as soon
as possible. A secure environment is a prerequisite for a
large-scale return of refugees and displaced persons. In this
regard, there has been no improvement whatsoever since
the Council passed resolution 971 (1995) four months ago.
In fact, we have witnessed brutal attacks on the civilian
population. In addition to improving security, the Abkhaz
side must finally agree to a timetable for return. It must
also make good on its offer to regularize the status of those
returnees already in the Gali region, in accordance with the
Quadripartite Agreement.

Regarding the negotiations on a political settlement,
we fully support the efforts of the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General, Ambassador Brunner. We also
appreciate the increasing amount of work that is being done
by representatives of the Russian Federation. The resolution
stresses the need for substantial progress towards a political
settlement. It also makes clear that joint effort and close
coordination among all involved is needed in order to
achieve results that meet the requirements set out by this
Council.

In this context, I would like to repeat something my
delegation has said on previous occasions. We accept that
the Abkhaz side too has legitimate concerns. Abkhazia,
with its multi-ethnic population, must be granted an
appropriate degree of regional autonomy. However, any
settlement must be in keeping with the principles set out in
the Council's resolutions. In particular, it must respect the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Republic of
Georgia. We are encouraged that the Georgian Government
and parliament, for their part, are ready to move towards
federal structures.

Finally, I would like to underline that my Government
regards the extension of UNOMIG's mandate for eight
months as an exceptional measure in order to synchronize
the duration of UNOMIG's mandate with that of the CIS
peace-keeping force. In the future, we would prefer to
return to a standard six-month period.

