Mr. Morris: In response to the question from the
representative of the United States - and I thank the
United States; it should be said that in 2001 the United
States provided more than 60 per cent of the
humanitarian assistance for the World Food
Programme - the most recent message that we have
been trying to convey as it relates to Southern
Africa - and, by the way, I agree completely with the
representative of Germany's comment about leadership
and governance; they are pivotal and basic to
everything - we are overwhelmed with the issue of
children. There are 11 million AIDS orphans in sub-
Saharan Africa. Zimbabwe has 780,000 orphans;
Malawi and Zambia have somewhere between 400,000
and 500,000 orphans. Half the families are headed by
someone older than 65, and it is not uncommon to see a
family of five children headed by a little girl 14 years
of age who is the same size as my 7-year-old
granddaughter. The world's responsibility for these
children is enormous in terms of their education, their
food and their health.

That has also had the most devastating impact on
the human resource structure of Governments and
institutions. I mentioned the loss of teachers and the
depletion and loss of human resources. We are at
a point where we are talking about replenishing
systems. Essentially, the medical personnel in Southern
Africa - the doctors, nurses and pharmacists - are
gone. The talent that will be necessary to address these
issues is enormous. So we must focus on children and
on human resource talent. The HIV/AIDS issue is
enormous. More than half a million people died in
those six countries last year as a result of HIV/AIDS;
30 million people are infected in Africa, up 3.5 per cent
from last year; and 34 per cent of the adult population
in Zimbabwe is affected by HIV/AIDS, with
comparable numbers elsewhere in that part of the
world.

We have been focusing on the importance of
agricultural investment both in a micro sense and in a
macro sense, and on the importance of broadening the
donor base. Everyone in the world has the primary
responsibility to look after his or her own, but we all
have some responsibility for those elsewhere who are
worse off than we are. We are working very hard at
growing our donor base. We will need 3.8 million
metric tons of food to do our work in Africa this year;
we will need $1.8 billion, plus the $300 million that we
carried over from last year.

Eight of our 10 top donors increased their support
for the World Food Programme dramatically last year.
We need to keep that support growing. We need new
donors, and we need help from the private sector.

With regard to the question from Cameroon -
we have a regional office in Yaounde; Cameroon has
been a great friend - 10 years ago, 80 per cent of our
support was for development. Today, 80 per cent of our
support is for emergency relief. I do not know what has
happened in the world - I am not a scientist. But,
working with the Food and Agriculture Organization of
the United Nations, we are conducting three times as
many natural disaster assessments today as we did in
1965, and twice as many as in 1990.

There has been a change. There are presumably
limited resources, and the resources have gone to keep
people alive and to reduce human suffering in an
emergency context. In emergencies we try as much as
possible to ensure that our work has long-term
development implications. If we feed a child and
encourage that child to go to school, that is
development. If we feed a child and enhance the
nutritional content of the food with iodine, vitamin A
or iron, that is development in a human resource for
that country for a long period of time. Some of our
most important investments are in food-for-work
programmes, whereby we make resources available to
feed people if they participate in the rebuilding of a
community's infrastructure. In that way the community
wins and the family wins.

We are very troubled by the fact that today only
20 per cent of our resources are aimed at long-term
development - at prevention. That is a huge problem
in a place like Ethiopia; it is a huge problem around the
world.

Our colleague from Chile asked a question about
assistance required for Ethiopia and Eritrea. It has been
our plan to feed about 40 per cent of the hungry people
in Ethiopia, with the rest being handled by the
Government, by non-governmental organizations or
bilaterally. We have been raising something in the
neighbourhood of $205 million there. We are doing a
good job - we have raised about 70 per cent of what
we need. The issue in Eritrea is much more difficult.
We looked to raise more than $100 million, but the
response has been less than 20 per cent. We work very
well with the Government of Ethiopia.

With regard to the question raised by the
representative of Pakistan about the conflict, my sense
is that there are 900,000 soldiers still in the Eritrean
army who are being repatriated. Not having that
manpower available for agricultural work has been a
huge factor in the problem in Eritrea. So I think that
the conflict has exacerbated the problem - there is no
question about that.

Investments in early warning systems, in
assessment systems and in surveillance systems for
agriculture and health are incredibly important. That
gets to the issue of knowing what is likely to happen as
soon as possible and being prepared for it. We need to
make more investments in doing that better. The
technology is there. In analysing what the problems
are, historically we have looked only at food issues.
But as we do our assessments today and analyse the
severity of a problem, we need to look at other issues,
too.

I agree completely with my colleague from
Germany. The issue of governance and leadership is a
prime responsibility. Some countries, such as
Zimbabwe, are having very difficult problems right
now. I am a little more optimistic about the agricultural
situation of Malawi and Zambia this year - likewise
Mozambique, Lesotho and Swaziland. But the number
of people at risk in Zimbabwe has increased, and
agricultural production has not increased. Foreign
exchange, which would allow for imports, is not
available. The private sector does not function there.
The donor community does function there. Those are
issues that will require enormous leadership if the
situation is to be turned around.

The question from Pakistan about tying peace and
security to food issues was absolutely on target. There
is no question in my mind that hungry people behave
differently from people who are not hungry. When
people are fed and begin to learn they have hope and
opportunity in their lives, and lives with hope,
opportunity and a future are less likely to be violent.
Clearly, we have talked about the issue of refugees and
internally displaced persons. We have used food to
some degree in conflict resolution in Angola and Sierra
Leone. We have offered food as an incentive for people
to lay down their weapons, and that has worked pretty
well. Beyond that, this is an issue that I think we would
be interested in thinking a little more about. We try to
stay focused on the humanitarian agenda - the world
does not want people to starve. We are especially
concerned about the very vulnerable people at risk,
including women and children. We try to absent
ourselves from all of the other political debates going
on. But the representative of Pakistan raised a question
worth considering.

