Mr. Shcherbak (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are grateful to the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Iraq, Mr. Qazi, for his
briefing, and for having presented the report of the
Secretary-General on the activities of the United
Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI). He has
given us an objective picture of the extremely difficult
situation that the State of Iraq now finds itself in. Once
again, we express our profound gratitude to Mr. Qazi
and to the staff of UNAMI for their very important
work, which is being carried out in an extremely
difficult military and political context.

We welcome the presence in this Chamber of the
Vice-President of Iraq, Mr. Adil Abdal Mahdi, and we
express our solidarity with all of the Iraqi people, who
are now living through one of the most difficult periods
in their history.

We express our condolences to the families and
friends of those Iraqis who have died as a result of
terrorist acts or who have been victims of ethnic or
sectarian conflict.

The Secretary-General's report and Mr. Qazi's
briefing gave further details on the specific
characteristics of the crisis that is gripping Iraq today.
They include high levels of terrorist and insurgent
activity, the disastrous condition of the civilian
infrastructure, and the increasingly tragic situation of
refugees, internally displaced persons and professional
groups in the country.

The human rights situation in Iraq is also
unsatisfactory. The new Baghdad security plan,
intended to stabilize the situation in the capital, has not
yet yielded any significant results. Substantive talks
have not yet begun on a timetable for the withdrawal of
foreign troops from Iraq.

The Russian delegation supports the
recommendations of the Secretary-General with regard
to ways and means to settle the problem in Kirkuk.

We attach importance to the chapter dealing with
the work being carried out with respect to the
hydrocarbon law, and we share the view of the
Secretary-General that that document should ensure
equal access by all Iraqi communities to the country's
national resources and provide a mechanism that
guarantees its territorial integrity.

We earnestly hope that that law will include
provisions making it possible for many companies
throughout the world to work on an equal and non-
discriminatory basis - including Russian companies,
which have considerable experience in the oil and gas
sector in Iraq and in its hydrocarbon market.

At the same time, we would like to point out that
Russian companies are ready to take part in the
rebuilding of the Iraqi economy and the further
development of the country.

The Russian delegation notes the importance of
the international meeting held recently in Baghdad at
the initiative of the Iraqi Government, with the
participation of the five permanent members of the
Security Council, Iraq's neighbours and interested
regional organizations. The Russian Federation took
part in that important event and welcomed its outcome.
We have always stressed the need for the close
coordination of the international community's efforts
in Iraq and have advocated collective efforts to find a
way to overcome the crisis in that country. We have
supported, and will continue to support, all ideas and
proposals that are consistent with such an approach. It
is our hope that, following the Baghdad meeting, there
will be an international meeting with wider scope at the
level of ministers for foreign affairs.

The Russian Federation intends to continue to
take an active part in all significant multilateral
activities with regard to Iraq. We hope that such
activities will truly influence the future development of
events in that country and help the Iraqi people to
achieve national reconciliation through broad dialogue
involving all national patriotic forces and to put an end
to the violence and the bloodshed. Such an approach
should be taken by all responsible parties that wish to
see the lasting normalization of the situation in Iraq
and are able to assist in the settlement process. For its
part, Russia is ready to assist in any way that it can.

