Mr. Kolby (Norway): Norway remains deeply
alarmed at the present situation in the Middle East.
Norway remains convinced that only the resumption of
a political process can bring an end to the occupation
and bring a lasting solution and peace to Israelis and
Palestinians. The Security Council has indicated the
way forward through its recent resolutions, as well as
in resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973). Israel must
immediately stop its military actions against
Palestinian towns and villages and withdraw its forces.
Similarly, President Arafat must once again, in Arabic,
renounce suicide bombings.

The international community, and indeed this
Council, must stand united in their demand that these
Security Council resolutions be implemented. Norway
gives its full support to the recent United States
initiative and the mission of Secretary Powell.

President Arafat's ability to function as the leader
of the Palestinian Authority must be restored
immediately. There will be no way out of the present
dire situation unless this occurs.
Norway is extremely concerned with the
humanitarian situation in the Palestinian area. Norway,
in its capacity as Chairman of the Ad Hoc Liaison
Committee for the Coordination of International
Assistance to Palestinians and on behalf of the
international donor community, sent a letter yesterday
to Prime Minister Sharon expressing deep concern
about the latest developments and the humanitarian
situation in the region. Norway urged Israel to ensure
the safety of civilians and allow medical personnel
immediate, safe and unhindered access to the sick and
wounded in accordance with universally accepted
norms of international humanitarian law; to lift the
curfew within Palestinian cities and permit the entry of
food and medical supplies; to avoid damage to civilian
infrastructure and facilitate repairs to water and
electrical systems; and to ensure that the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East, the International Committee
of the Red Cross and the donor community have
immediate, safe and unhindered access to and
movement within the West Bank and Gaza.

Norway is also deeply concerned with the
developments in the border areas between Lebanon,
Syria and Israel. The present escalation in that area has
the potential to threaten regional peace and security.
The latest incursions into Israel must stop. Norway
urges all parties concerned to show restraint and to de-
escalate the situation immediately.

