Mr. Puente (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): I would
like to start by thanking Under-Secretary-General Alain
Le Roy for his presentation of the report of the
Secretary-General on the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (S/2009/352). I
also welcome the presence of Mr. Mikhail Margelov of
the Russian Federation at this meeting of the Security
Council.

Mexico supports the actions taken by the United
Nations in the Sudan and Darfur, and reiterates its
conviction regarding the fundamental and crucial role
that the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) and the United Nations
8
Mission in the Sudan are playing in providing peace
and stability in the country. It hopes that the work of
both missions will be reflected in the improvement of
the life of the Sudanese people as a whole.

We are pleased to note the improved functioning
of the cooperation mechanisms between the
Government of the Sudan and the missions deployed
on the ground, and we hope that that trend continues so
that the missions have better opportunities to discharge
their mandates.

We recognize the great importance of the
negotiations between the Government of the Sudan and
the Justice and Equality Movement, that were held in
Doha with the purpose of assessing the implementation
of the Agreement of Goodwill and Confidence-building
for the Settlement of the Problem in Darfur, signed by
both parties last February, under the auspices of Qatar,
the United Nations and the African Union. At the same
time, we urge the parties to pursue the path of dialogue
and hope that the negotiations will resume and result in
significant agreements that contribute to the stability of
the Sudan, in particular in the light of the 2010 election.

My delegation notes with concern the risks
pointed out by Mr. Le Roy concerning the
implementation of the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement. In that regard, we recognize the
importance of the parties complying with the decision
of the Permanent Court of Arbitration of The Hague on
the region ofAbyei.

We acknowledge the work of the Joint Chief
Mediator, Mr. Bassole, and of the African Union High-
Level Panel on Darfur headed by the former President
of South Africa, Thabo Mbeki, and we believe that the
international community should support their work so
as to maintain the current momentum of the mediation
work.

Those efforts are indispensable. Although four
years have passed since the Security Council decided
to refer the situation of Darfur to the International
Criminal Court, considering that the scope of the
conflict constituted a serious threat to international
peace and security, unfortunately the situation has not
significantly changed. Mexico reiterates its appeal to
the Government of the Sudan to take actions towards
the implementation of resolution 1593 (2005) and to
cooperate fully with the International Criminal Court,
which Mexico strongly supports, so as to end the
violence and impunity in Darfur.
09-42178
Furthermore, my delegation is following very
closely the tensions on the border between Chad and
the Sudan. We call on Chad and the Sudan to seek to
normalize their bilateral relations, take decisions that
foster a climate of trust, and abstain from supporting
the armed rebel groups operating on their territories.

My delegation acknowledges the joint efforts of
the Government of the Sudan, the United Nations and
the non-governmental organizations to address the
vacuum left by the expulsion and disbanding of 16
non-governmental organizations. However, it is
necessary to recognize that the quality and the levels of
humanitarian assistance are still inadequate.

Moreover, Mexico reiterates its strong
condemnation of the use of sexual violence in all its
forms, in particular against women and girls, who are
primarily internally displaced persons or refugees. We
urge all parties to end such acts, take concrete measures
to address those cases, and take all possible measures to
ensure that such crimes do not go unpunished.

At the same time, we support UNAMID's work in
helping to ensure the safe return and resettlement of
displaced persons, in particular the voluntary return of
about 1,500 people to their homes in the provinces of
Donki Dreisa and Muhagiriya in southern Darfur.

We are concerned over the death sentences and
arbitrary and illegal arrest and detention as well as
cruel treatment and torture during detention by
Government security forces. My delegation strongly
supports work towards a moratorium on executions and
abolition of the death penalty. We believe that the death
penalty is one of the most fundamental violations of
human rights. As we have often said, my country
strongly rejects capital punishment.

Lastly, my delegation thanks the delegation of the
United Kingdom for its draft resolution and supports
the extension of UNAMID's mandate for one year,
with special emphasis being placed on the importance
of the commitment of the parties directly involved in
the conflict, the international community as a whole
and the regional organizations, which should all
respect the peace agreements and the relevant
resolutions of the Security Council. We trust that
efforts in the region will have a positive impact on
achieving a lasting peace in the country.

