Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): This is the sixth
time that the Security Council has come together to
condemn a nuclear test by the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea; the sixth time that the world has
held its breath. The Democratic People's Republic of
Korea is the only country in the twenty-first century
to have conducted such tests, against all international
standards of behaviour. In addition, we have met many
times in recent months, following other provocations
from the Republic, most recently, just last week, in
response to its reckless missile test over Japan.

Yesterday's nuclear test explosion was by far the
largest yet. Combined with the increasing range of its
missiles, the Democratic People's Republic of Korea
poses a threat, not simply to its region, but truly to
global peace and security. The most recent test has
been quite rightly condemned already by most of the
Governments represented here today. We have adopted
eight sanctions resolutions on the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea. The country is subject to the most
stringent sanctions currently applied by the Council,
and yet the Republic continues to put its illegal missile
and nuclear programmes ahead of international law,
international security and the will of the Council.

It is a disturbing and unprecedented situation.
Rarely has a State remained so defiant in the face
of overwhelming international condemnation and
repeated powerful rounds of sanctions. It is clear that
existing sanctions applied by the Security Council on
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea are having
an effect, in particular the measures against commodity
exports and the financial sector that have been applied
since 2016. Those sanctions are making its harder and
harder for Pyongyang to acquire the hard currency
necessary to fund its programme. Each day, that gets
harder still, thanks to the efforts of many States around
the table.

Those who doubt that impact need only read the
statements coming from the regime. They rail against
the sanctions that we have placed upon them. But it
is also clear that the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea is uniquely willing to put its illicit programmes
ahead of the well-being of its people. Those people
suffer appalling repression and struggle even to feed
themselves. The leadership of the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea has chosen that path of defiance at
great cost.

Faced with this unique threat to international peace
and security, the Security Council must condemn the
test and the entire nuclear and missile programme of the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea. We continue to
wish for a peaceful way forward. Dialogue will always
be our end goal, but returning to dialogue without a
serious sign of intent from Pyongyang would be a set-up
for failure. The Democratic People's Republic of Korea
must change course to allow a return to dialogue. Were
it to do so, the opportunity exists to end the crisis. Until
that moment, we must stay the course on sanctions and,
as the Secretary-General has called for, continue to
present a united front.

When we met last week, I stated that the United
Kingdom believed that a new resolution was required
in response to the Republic's dangerous and illegal
test flight of the missile over Japan. In the light of
yesterday's nuclear test, our resolve to act has increased
further. We must increase the pace of implementation
of existing sanctions and work rapidly towards the
adoption of a new and effective resolution. While
continuing to enforce the measures that the Council has
already agreed, we should go further by taking steps
to sever the funds on which the regime relies in order
to pursue its illegal and destabilizing programmes.
Not least, we should further restrict the unethical
exploitation of overseas workers of the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea.

The Democratic People's Republic of Korea has
created a deeply dangerous and unstable situation. The
United Kingdom will work with our partners on the
Council and beyond to tackle the challenge. I urge all
States to join us.

