Mr. Wolff (United States of America): I am
pleased to report to the Security Council on behalf of
the Multinational Force in Iraq (MNF-I). I would like
to begin by thanking Under-Secretary-General Pascoe
for his briefing on the important work undertaken by
the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq
(UNAMI) and extend our appreciation through him to
all our United Nations colleagues on the ground in Iraq
for their ongoing dedication and hard work.

Today, on behalf of MNF-I, I would like to
discuss seven points on the progress achieved thus far.

First, allow me to address the sustained decrease
in security incidents and violence. For the past three
months, total security incidents have remained at their
lowest level in over four years. In just the past year,

since June 2007, the overall number of attacks has
decreased by 84 per cent; civilian deaths due to
violence have decreased by 65 per cent; Iraqi Security
Forces deaths have decreased by 67 per cent; United
States military deaths have decreased by 91 per cent;
coalition military deaths have decreased by 96 per
cent; explosions due to improvised explosive devices
have decreased by 75 per cent; suicide explosions have
decreased by 65 per cent; and ethno-sectarian deaths
have decreased by 94 per cent.

Coalition forces and Iraqi Security Forces have
achieved those security gains even as MNF-I has
drawn down forces from surge levels. The United
States has withdrawn, without replacement, the last of
its five surge brigade combat teams, as well as its
Marine expeditionary unit and two Marine battalions.
Also, the Australian battle group has departed from
Iraq and the Polish contingent will soon be withdrawn.

Ongoing security operations in Basra, Sadr City,
Mosul, Amarah and Diyala have produced encouraging
results, further degrading the capabilities of Al-Qaida
in Iraq and reducing the influence of illegal militias in
strategic Iraqi cities. Nonetheless, Al-Qaida in Iraq
remains a serious threat, particularly in the North. It
retains the intent and the capability of carrying out
sensational, lethal attacks, and its use of person-borne
improvised explosive devices and female suicide
bombers remains a particular challenge.

We also remain concerned by the flow of foreign
fighters and lethal aid into Iraq. Syria is the primary
gateway for foreign terrorists moving into Iraq, and the
Government of Syria must do more to halt the
operation of foreign fighter networks within its
territory.

During the recent operations in Basra, Sadr City
and Maysan, Iraqi troops uncovered convincing
evidence that Iranian lethal aid has continued to flow
into Iraq. In addition, during those operations,
numerous Mahdi Army militia fighters and leaders
from the Mahdi Army's associated, highly trained
special groups fled to Iran, where they received
sanctuary. The lethal activities of Iran's Islamic
Republican Guard corps, the Qods Force, contradict
Iran's publicly stated policy of supporting the Iraqi
Government and must cease.
Secondly, I would like describe the continuing
increase in the capability of the Iraqi Security Forces,
which has contributed substantially to the
improvements in the overall security environment.
More than 580,000 personnel now serve in the Iraqi
Security Forces, which represents an increase of over
21,000 personnel since our last report to the Council in
June.

There are now 161 Iraqi army combat battalions
conducting operations, which represents an increase of
14 battalions since our last report. Over 70 per cent or
113 of those Iraqi army combat battalions are assessed
to be in the lead for operations. Of those, 93 are rated
as able not only to take the lead in operations, but also
to fully plan, execute and sustain operations with
minimal or no assistance from coalition forces beyond
enablers and adviser teams. Another 10 battalions are
currently in force generation, and MNF-I plans an
additional 10 for force generation in 2008.

The Iraqi air force and navy have made
substantial progress as well. The Iraqi navy is now
conducting an average of 42 independent patrols per
week in Iraqi territorial waters, a 20 per cent increase
in the past two months. In addition, the Iraqi navy also
maintains security responsibility for the port of Umm
Qasr. The Iraqi air force is providing support to
counterinsurgency operations through intelligence,
surveillance and reconnaissance patrols of Iraqi
borders and critical electric and oil infrastructure.
Those efforts have resulted in the capture of insurgents
and the identification of damaged infrastructure,
allowing the Government of Iraq to expedite repairs
and re-establish essential services. Furthermore, the
Iraqi air force has proven itself very capable during
combat operations in Basra, Sadr City, Mosul, Amarah
and Diyala by successfully conducting transport
missions, reconnaissance and casualty evacuation.

The national police also continue to increase their
effectiveness and they are continuing their efforts to
achieve a better ethno-sectarian balance within the
force, through both recruiting and assignments, so that
force demographics better reflect the Iraqi population.
As of the end of July, 36 Iraqi national police
battalions were conducting operations alongside a
battalion-sized Iraqi emergency response unit. The
national police forces have conducted more than 15
operational deployments outside of Baghdad, most
recently in Basra, Mosul and Baqubah. That increased
effectiveness and deployability marks the beginning of
a transition from a static force centred on Baghdad to a
rapid response force for the Government of Iraq.

Thirdly, I would like to provide an update on the
role of the coalition. The support of the 30 countries
contributing to the coalition, NATO's training mission
and the operations of UNAMI is critical to the success
of Iraqi efforts to build a stable and secure country.
Coalition members other than the United States
contribute over 9,000 forces to the Multinational Force
and another 450 personnel to UNAMI. Every
contributor, large and small, plays a critical role -
from the Azeris, who have provided security at the
Haditha Dam since 2003, to the Romanians, who
provide route security in the Dhi Qar and Muthanna
provinces. We also welcome the assistance of countries
that continue to provide security for the United Nations
personnel and have contributed to the United Nations
trust fund. We remain committed to ensuring that the
United Nations receives the guarantees necessary for it
to sustain and expand its robust presence in Iraq.

Fourthly, I would like to emphasize that MNF-I is
continuing progressively to transfer responsibility for
security to the Government of Iraq. Ten out of
18 provinces are now under provincial Iraqi control,
with Qadisiyah province having transitioned on
16 July. Other provinces are expected to transition by
the end of this year.

In June, the Iraqi Government continued its
offensive against illegal armed groups and the special
groups, through Operation Promise of Peace in Missan,
which focused on securing the provincial capital,
Amarah, as well as the border and some smaller cities.
Several senior provincial officials were arrested, and
Iraqi security forces seized numerous caches of
weapons of Iranian origin. Such operations show the
willingness of Prime Minister al-Maliki and the Iraqi
Government to confront militants, regardless of their
sect or ethnicity, and to secure the country against the
threat of malign Iranian influence.

Iraqi security forces, working alongside local
groups, have also conducted operations in Mosul
against Al-Qaida elements. Operations Mother of Two
Springs and Lion's Roar denied Al-Qaida sanctuary in
the urban areas of Ninawa province and captured and
killed several leaders of Al-Qaida in Iraq.

Recently, Iraqi security forces and coalition units
have launched a major clearing operation in Diyala
province, north-east of Baghdad, to clear the remaining
safe havens of Al-Qaida in Iraq and stop the Jaish
al-Mahdi from smuggling and supplying lethal aid.

Iraqi security forces have significantly extended their
control, not only through the execution of military
operations, but also through the facilitation of
humanitarian assistance and the restoration of basic
services. Following the military operations in Missan
province, the Government of Iraq is beginning to
implement a $102-million programme to refurbish and
rebuild schools, develop municipalities, improve
electricity and health services, build up the police
forces and provide clean water and unemployment
assistance. That initiative follows similar
reconstruction efforts to reduce the appeal of militant
groups in Basra, Sadr City, Mosul and Amarah.

The fifth point I would like to discuss is political
reconciliation. The willingness of the Government of
Iraq to confront militias, regardless of sect, has
encouraged the Sunni coalition Tawafuq to reconcile its
internal differences and return its ministers to the
Government, thereby providing an additional avenue
for Sunni participation in the political process.

In late July, six ministers representing the Sunni
coalition were approved for the cabinet and four new
Shia ministers have filled vacant Sadrist seats. UNAMI
remains deeply engaged in assisting the Government of
Iraq in various political and diplomatic activities,
including addressing internal border issues, promoting
regional dialogue and assisting internally displaced
persons and refugees, as we just heard. Recently,
UNAMI has been instrumental in advising the Council
of Representatives committee members in the
preparation of the provincial elections law and the Iraq
High Elections Committee as they prepared for and
started voter registration on 15 July. We are encouraged
by UNAMI's plans to expand its footprint in Iraq and
believe that the assistance of the United Nations will
be critical to Iraq's long-term development and
stability. The proposed United Nations compound in
Baghdad will ensure that UNAMI is able to continue
its important role in Iraq, and we look forward to Iraqi
support to ensure those facilities are constructed.

Sixthly, I would like to stress the importance of
Iraq's neighbours in supporting Iraq's efforts to provide
security, achieve political progress and build its
economy. The Government of Iraq's security successes
have fostered international confidence. Bahrain,
Jordan, Kuwait and the United Arab Emirates have all
named ambassadors to Iraq, and other neighbours,
including Turkey, have recently sent high-level
delegations to Baghdad. We hope that others in the
region will follow their example.

Finally, I want to highlight that negotiations
continue between the United States and the Iraqi
Government on our transition relationship, including
with respect to security, which will recognize the
increasing ability of the Iraqi Security Forces to
assume greater responsibility for security and stability.

The report of the Secretary-General (S/2008/495),
which is before the Security Council today, highlights
the sustainable progress that has been achieved by the
Iraqi Government, with the assistance of the United
Nations and the support of the MNF-I and the Iraqi
Security Forces. The international community supports
a free, democratic, pluralistic, federal and unified Iraq,
and I call upon all parties to renew their commitment
to assist the Government of Iraq in continuing the hard
work to overcome the many challenges that remain.

