The President: I thank the representative of
China for his kind words.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
the representative of Norway.

But first, on behalf of the Security Council, I
would like to thank High Representative Wolfgang
Petritsch for having represented the international
community in Bosnia and Herzegovina in an exemplary
manner. Norway commends the High Representative's
balanced approach: on the one hand, taking charge of
the implementation of the Peace Agreements; on the
other, encouraging the Bosnian authorities to show
constructive leadership.

It is evident that local, entity and State officials in
Bosnia and Herzegovina must increasingly take upon
themselves the primary responsibility for progress in
the reform process. At the same time, the international
community must remain engaged. I agree with the High
Representative that more focus should be given to
strengthening institutional capacities and Bosnian
"ownership" of the implementation of the Dayton
Accords.

Bosnia and Herzegovina is on course for
membership in the Council of Europe in the coming
months. The elections scheduled for October will be
the first for which the Bosnian authorities have the sole
responsibility. These are important expressions of
confidence by the international community. However,
despite significant results thus far, extensive reforms
are still needed to put Bosnia and Herzegovina firmly
on the path to European integration. It rests with
Bosnian leaders to demonstrate the political will to
move forward. A case in point is the Constituent
Peoples Decision. We strongly support the High
Representative's call to the Bosnian leaders urgently to
find a compromise solution.
We welcome the decisions of the Steering Board
of the Peace Implementation Council on 28 February,
including the decision on streamlining the international
presence in Bosnia and Herzegovina. It is vital that the
international community act in a unified manner.

Norway commends Special Representative Klein
and the personnel of the United Nations Mission in
Bosnia and Herzegovina for their strong contribution to
the promotion of police reform and a self-sustaining
peace process in Bosnia and Herzegovina. We are
proud of the International Police Task Force, which
will leave behind it a legacy of professionalism and
dedication. We warmly welcome the readiness of the
European Union, as stated by Mr. Solana, to provide a
European Union Police Mission to follow up the good
work of the United Nations in this field. Norway
strongly supports the development of a European crisis
management capability. I am pleased to note that the
European Union will also invite non-member States to
participate in its Police Mission.

We support the efforts to strengthen the rule of
law, including the judiciary, in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. Much work remains to be done. Political
extremists and common criminals continue to hamper
the return process throughout Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Individuals indicted by the International Tribunal for
the former Yugoslavia have yet to be brought to justice.
Norway is pleased by the recent actions taken by the
NATO-led Stabilization Force in this regard. We expect
local, entity and State authorities and courts in Bosnia
and Herzegovina to act to fulfil their obligations to
cooperate fully with the Tribunal.

I support the High Representative's emphasis on a
regional approach to integration. Neighbouring
countries can make Vital contributions to political
stability and economic development in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. Ethnic tensions, organized crime, illegal
trafficking and political extremism must be dealt with
in a regional framework. In recent months, we have
seen progress in the normalization of political relations
among the countries of the region. These relations must
be based on mutual recognition of the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of each State. There are also signs
of cooperation among business communities and
societies. This is promising.

In conclusion, I welcome the designation of Lord
Ashdown as the future High Representative in Bosnia
and Herzegovina, as also expressed in the Council
resolution to be adopted in this meeting. I am
convinced that he will enjoy the Council's full support
in carrying on Mr. Petritsch's excellent work.

I now resume my function as President of the
Council.

