Mr. Akram (Pakistan): I should like to
commence my statement by expressing Pakistan's
complete condemnation of the horrible terrorist attack
that occurred earlier today in Moscow, killing 39
people. We express our deep condolences to the
bereaved families and to the Government and the
people of the Russian Federation.

Since this is the first opportunity I have had to
speak in a Council meeting during the current month,
let me take this opportunity to express the happiness of
Pakistan and my own happiness at seeing you, Sir,
preside over the Council during the month of January.
We are confident that, with your renowned diplomatic
skill, you will guide us to success on the many
important issues we will consider during your
presidency. I also wish to express the high appreciation
of the Pakistan delegation to Ambassador Munoz for
Chile's successful and busy presidency last month.

This morning, we should again like to welcome
Mr. Holkeri, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Kosovo, to the Security Council and to
thank him for briefing us once again. We share the
vision, which Mr. Holkeri expressed last December, of
a better Kosovo,
"a place where people are free to travel, use their
own languages and work anywhere in Kosovo, a
place where your ethnic identity - whether
Albanian, Serb, Turk, Bosniak, Roma, Gorani,
Ashkali, Egyptian or Croatian - has no effect on
the way you are treated at work, in the street or in
a court of law".

As a member of the Council and as a contributor of
troops to the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), Pakistan will continue to
support Mr. Holkeri in promoting the implementation
of the provisions of resolution 1244 (1999).

We look forward to studying the work plan that
UNMIK is drawing up for the implementation of the
eight standards identified in the standards document.
We take note, however, of the difficulties Mr. Holkeri
is encountering in drawing up the work plan. It is as
much in the interests of the Kosovo Serbs to participate
in the working groups as it is in the interests of the
Provisional Institutions to offer Mr. Holkeri its fullest
cooperation on all issues. It is, in fact, in the interests
of all sides to work towards the implementation of the
standards document. Nevertheless, we urge Mr. Holkeri
and UNMIK to find ways to expedite the drawing up of
the work plan. It is too important to become a hostage
to the intransigence of one side or the other. As
Mr. Holkeri has himself warned, inaction could leave
Kosovo a crippled society, perhaps for years to come.

While it is important to address all the eight
standards, in our opinion the three key areas deserving
urgent priority are the economy, the rule of law and
sustainable returns and its connected issues: freedom of
movement, the reintegration and return of refugees and
displaced persons, and property rights. Freedom of
movement for individuals and the right to return in
safety and dignity are basic rights of all refugees, and
not just in Kosovo; they are rights that need to be
addressed everywhere. Similarly, peace and
development are indivisible. Peace cannot be sustained
without sustained socio-economic development in
Kosovo, as in similar situations. Finally, the rule of law
is of particular importance for Kosovo, not only
because of the Violence associated with past ethnic
aggression, but also because of the endemic
transnational crime that continues to infect much of the
Balkan region.

The issue of dialogue between Belgrade and
Pristina remains central. We would strongly encourage
such a dialogue. We welcome the willingness of the
Provisional Institutions to move ahead in their area,
and we look forward to the establishment of a new
Government in Belgrade that will take up the offer.
That will be a first step in building confidence between
the two sides; it is, of course, an indispensable step to
enable them to effectively address the difficult but
important issue of status. The dismantling of parallel
institutions, which continue to undermine peace and
reconciliation in Kosovo, is also essential in the
confidence-building process.

We look forward to the Kosovo elections in
October, and we hope that all communities - in
particular the Kosovo Serbs - will participate fully in
that exercise.

Pakistan's reservations on the "standards before
status" issue are well known. We do not wish that
approach to become a precedent in similar situations in
other parts of the world. While we agree that the
United Nations Mission in Kosovo has a mandate to
implement the "standards before status" policy, that
should not preclude the Security Council's discussing
the status issue and constructively approaching it with
a View to finding a just and lasting solution. We should
at least begin to do so before the May 2005 target date
set by the standards document.

I should like to make one final observation. We
have noted recent remarks - including those by
Mr. Holkeri - to the effect that the future of Kosovo
lies in the European family. We have no doubt that it
does. But Kosovo does not belong to Europe alone; it
has a culture and a history that extend beyond Europe.
Therefore, the process of building peace and of
fostering reconciliation and prosperity in Kosovo
cannot become an exclusively European process. In
particular, we urge both Mr. Holkeri and the Contact
Group on Kosovo to work with the Organization of the
Islamic Conference to ensure that the solution for
Kosovo is a genuinely international solution, especially
since Kosovo remains under United Nations
transitional administration. The involvement of the
maximum number of partners cannot but help to ensure
that the process of peace, reconciliation and
reconstruction will be a success.

