Mr. Konuzin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): The work of the Security Council in 2002
was highly intensive, particularly in December. There
was a significant increase in the number of Council
meetings, both formal and informal consultations. This
year the Council adopted more than 100 resolutions
and official Presidential Statements. We dispatched
three Council Missions to Eritrea and Ethiopia, the
Great Lakes region and Kosovo. We believe that the
Security Council did an admirable job with an
increased workload. The meetings were topical and
thematic in nature and focused on achieving specific
outcomes. A result of our joint work was the adoption
of a whole range of important decisions on a number of
sore points on the international agenda. Still, at the
forefront of the Council's work in 2002 was the topic
of the fight against international terrorism. A
significant part of our work involved African issues as
well. The Council paid quite a bit of attention to a
Middle East settlement, to problems in Afghanistan and
the situations regarding Iraq and the Balkans.

Today we are bidding farewell to five delegations
who are concluding their work at the Council. We are
grateful to them for the concerns they have articulated
about the Council's work and for their wish to fine-
tune this work. We share many of these concerns. On a
number of them we do not have completely congruent
positions, which is natural, since in addition to the
goals and principles of the United Nations Charter that
bring us together, we also have national interests. The
important thing is that we are united in our wish to
increase the effectiveness of the Council's work as the
United Nations body that has the major responsibility
for international peace and security.

In speaking about the contribution to the work of
the Council of the departing delegations, I would like
to note the following contributions. The tireless and
painstaking work of our Irish colleagues in searching
for mutually acceptable solutions and consideration of
the most serious problems faced by the Council is
deeply appreciated by all Security Council members.
Ambassador Richard Ryan and the Irish delegation
overall merit the highest praise for successfully guiding
the Security Council Committee on sanctions against
UNITA.

We take note of the active and thorough work
done by the delegation of Mauritius, particularly on
African issues. The discussions in Ambassador Jagdish
Koonjul's Ad Hoc Working Group on Conflict
Prevention and Resolution in Africa, too, helped us
focus on many problems on the African continent and
helped us generate fresh, innovative ideas.

The effective and active work of the Norwegian
delegation, headed by Ambassador Ole Peter Kolby,
made a significant contribution to the successful work
of the Council over the past two years. Concise and
concrete Norwegian proposals on various problems
before us helped us reach prompt consensus among
members of the Security Council. The efforts of the
Norwegian delegation and of Ambassador Kolby in
heading the Council's sanctions Committee on Iraq
deserve high marks.
I would like to note the valuable contribution
made by the delegation of Singapore, and by
Ambassador Kishore Mahbubani personally, in fine-
tuning the working methods of the Security Council.
Singapore's approach was highly organized and
concrete. We will be able to make use of many of the
ideas of our Singaporean colleagues in our future work.

The current presidency is further confirmation of
the high degree of professionalism of our Colombian
colleagues. The Colombian delegation's work in the
Security Council was very professional and focused on
finding solutions acceptable to all members, even when
confronted with severe differences among Council
members. We note and commend the high level of
leadership provided by Ambassador Valdivieso and the
entire Colombian delegation in the Security Council
committee on sanctions against the Taliban.

I would like to take this opportunity to
congratulate all Security Council colleagues and to
wish them a happy new year for 2003. To all Member
States present here today and to our colleagues from
the Secretariat, we convey our sincere best wishes for
good health and success.

