Mr. Lucas (Angola): On behalf of the Angolan
delegation, I should like to thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this open meeting on the situation in
Kosovo. We express our thanks to Mr. Hedi Annabi for
his briefing, which provided an update on the situation
there.
We commend the work accomplished thus far by
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) and by the international community
at large in building a democratic State infrastructure
from the ground up in Kosovo - a task of the greatest
complexity, especially in such a deeply traumatized
and divided society. Those accomplishments, and the
commitment of the standing forces to the objectives set
for Kosovo by the international community, are signals
of hope for a better future in the region.

The most encouraging development in the
political process of Kosovo is the current transfer of
responsibilities from UNMIK to Kosovo's Provisional
Institutions of Self-Government. Notwithstanding the
imperfect functioning of those Institutions - and the
assertion by the Special Representative that Kosovo
still has some way to go in establishing representative
and functioning institutions accountable to the Kosovo
population - meaningful progress has been achieved.
We reaffirm our full support for the pursuit of that
process, as outlined in the Constitutional Framework.

It is widely recognized that the existence of a
political landscape with some degree of coherence is a
crucial element for the establishment of solid and
representative institutions, that the interparty struggle
should not undermine the stability of the institutions,
and that the public administration should not be built
along partisan lines. Kosovo's current political
situation presents realities that run counter to those
basic assertions, and we hope that they are part of the
learning process of democratic stabilization. That lends
more consistency to the "standards before status"
policy as the framework for achieving the goals set for
the transitional period and as an essential element in
the shaping of Kosovo's future.

At the same time, the other crucial elements of
this institution-building process are strengthening the
rule of law by enhancing the judicial system's
efficiency, impartiality and overall functioning, and
enhancing law enforcement institutions in order to curb
organized crime and ethnic violence and to bring all
criminals to justice. We encourage UNMIK and the
Special Representative to pursue a consistent policy
against destabilizing forces and criminal elements and
for establishing the rule of law as the social foundation
of Kosovo. In that regard, we are of the View that the
international community should lend its full support to
the Illicit Small Arms Control Project, to be
implemented by the United Nations Development
Programme in Kosovo and in Serbia and Montenegro,
aimed at controlling the spread and accumulation of
illicit small arms and light weapons, which are one of
the main sources of crime and violence in Kosovo.

To build a multi-ethnic and democratic society,
freedom of movement must be secured for all the
communities in Kosovo. We are very concerned by the
restrictions on movement still being imposed on
minorities; by the denial of their right to use their own
language and alphabet throughout the territory; and by
the continued violence, harassment and discrimination
faced by minorities, intended to discourage their return
to Kosovo as well as their participation in public life,
according to the assessment made by the Secretary-
General's Special Representative.

We are aware that much remains to be done and
that the leaders of Kosovo bear particular responsibility
for promoting the integration of minorities, which, in
the end, constitutes the core question of the Kosovo
issue. We see encouraging signals in this direction and
meaningful accomplishments in this very important
endeavour. Great difficulties still lie ahead on the road
towards the fulfilment of hopes for a multi-ethnic
society in Kosovo, but it is our conviction that with
perseverance and an imaginative approach it will be
possible to make important advances towards the
attainment of that goal.

There are reports on progress made by the
Provisional Institutions and some municipalities in
providing support for the return of minority
communities. There are encouraging developments that
should be supported and encouraged. We commend
UNMIK and the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees on their work for the
return of refugees and displaced persons.

A fundamental element for the normalization of
the situation and for ensuring the rights of minorities is
dialogue between the provisional authorities of Kosovo
and the authorities of Serbia and Montenegro. We
encourage such dialogue, and it is our hope that direct
talks on practical issues can soon begin, as a means to
overcome differences and misunderstandings and to
contribute to helping the political process to move in
the right direction. We commend the efforts by the
Special Representative to advance such dialogue.

Before concluding, we would like to express our
condemnation for the recent heinous and brutal
assassination of the Stolic family - a crime directed
against efforts to create a multi-ethnic society in
Kosovo, as described by the Assistant Secretary-
General.

Finally, we pay special tribute to Mr. Michael
Steiner, to UNMIK and to all those who have been
deploying immense efforts in the building of a
democratic and multi-ethnic nation in Kosovo.

