Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): Allow
me, first of all, Mr. President, to wish Eid Mubarak to
you and your team and all those celebrating today. I
would also like to congratulate you on your accession
to the presidency of the Security Council during the
month of June, throughout which you can count on
France's full support.

I would also like to thank Special Representative
Francois Lounceny Fall for his briefing and for his
work at the helm of the United Nations Regional
Office for Central Africa (UNOCA). The situation
in Central Africa continues to be marked by political
situations that are often volatile, fragile post-electoral
circumstances and persisting abuses by Boko Haram,
as well as violence related to transhumance and the
predatory activities of certain armed groups.

In this context, the action taken by the Special
Representative demonstrates the full added value
of a regional approach to better understanding the
dynamics of Central Africa and strengthening the
preventive approach taken by the United Nations
within the region. France therefore assures him of our
full support, both in his missions of good offices and
preventive diplomacy and in his missions to provide
support to regional initiatives, particularly those of
the Economic Community of Central African States
(ECCAS). We hope that the upcoming strategic review
will help to reinforce the work of UNOCA on all fronts.

I would like to underscore three situations that we
believe merit a particular mention today: the Central
African Republic, Cameroon and Boko Haram.

First, regarding the Central African Republic,
the signing of the Political Agreement for Peace and
Reconciliation in the Central African Republic on
6 February in Bangui laid the prospects for an end to
the crisis and for lasting peace in the Central African
Republic. It is therefore essential that the Central
African parties implement the agreement in good
faith and in a timely manner. The recent violence by
the Return, Reclamation and Rehabilitation group in
the Paoua region, leaving more than 50 civilians dead,
must be particularly condemned. This constitutes a
serious violation of the commitments made by that
armed group, especially given it is a signatory to the
peace agreement.

In this context, stopping the violence committed
by such groups, as well as disarming and demobilizing
them, in addition to the progressive restoration of State
authority throughout the country, must be a priority
in the implementation of the peace agreement. The
Government must also initiate the process of adopting
a law on decentralization and move to establish a truth,
justice, reconciliation and reparations commission.
The decentralization of transitional justice ensures that
local administration is brought closer to the population
and rendered more effective. This will also serve as a
response to the demand for justice expressed by the
people of the Central African Republic.

Ifthe implementation ofthe peace agreement is to be
successful, it is vital that the international community
be fully engaged in a coordinated manner in the political
and financial contexts. As such, the African Union,
ECCAS and the countries of the region, as guarantors
of the agreement, have a particularly important role to
play. We therefore encourage the African Union and
ECCAS to pursue their efforts, in close cooperation
with the United Nations, and encourage the countries
of the region to engage even further.

I now turn to the situation in Cameroon, on
which we align ourselves fully with the assessment
of the Special Representative. As we have stated on
previous occasions, France is incredibly concerned
about the deterioration of the situation in the North-
West and South-West regions of Cameroon. The human
casualties have been heavy, the humanitarian situation
is increasingly difficult and attacks on humanitarian
and medical personnel, health-care infrastructure and
schools are on the rise. The protection of civilians,
including humanitarian and medical personnel, respect
for international humanitarian law and human rights and
the guarantee of humanitarian access throughout the
country are, nevertheless, non-negotiable obligations
that must be prioritized above all else.

In this context, France is pursuing its efforts to
encourage the Cameroonian authorities to launch an
inclusive political dialogue, to implement measures
to reduce tensions and to entrench decentralization.
France also calls on all stakeholders to end the violence,
ensure the restoration of the rule of law and respect
the territorial integrity of Cameroon, which cannot
questioned. To echo the point the Special Representative
has just made, we believe that similar messages
conveyed by the African Union and the region would
be most useful in this regard. Moreover, we consider
the recent visit of the Prime Minister to the North-West
and South-West regions, his statements pertaining to
the launching of dialogue and information on initial
contacts with the parties concerned to be positive signs.
These announcements must now be implemented as
soon as possible.

Regarding my final point, concerning Boko Haram,
we remain concerned about the group's activities in the
Lake Chad basin region, despite the robust response
of the countries of the region. Only the restoration
of security will allow for the redeployment of basic
services, the resumption of economic activity and
longer-term development actions. France will therefore
continue to support the Multinational Joint Task Force
in its fight against terrorism. The reintegration of
former combatants, reconciliation and the protection
of women and youth are also vital to sustainably
stabilizing the region.

United Nations regional offices such as UNOCA,
are essential to enhancing the effectiveness and
efficiency ofUnited Nations conflict prevention efforts.
France will therefore continue to support the critical
development of United Nations activities, in a spirit
of strengthened partnership with African regional and
subregional organizations.

