We welcome you, Sir, as President of the Security Council. We thank Special Coordinator Nickolay Mladenov for his briefing, and we listened carefully to Mr. Daniel Levy and Mr. Khalil Shikaki. The situation in the Middle East remains in the spotlight owing to numerous conflicts and crises affecting peoples and countries of the region. Unfortunately, the underlying problems persist. Even more concerning is the fact that generally crises are either provoked from outside or complicated by external interference. That is compounded by the conviction of those who interfere that they know how to solve a particular issue while trying to promote one-sided approaches. The opinions of local populations and tribal, ethnic and religious groups are often ignored. The core principles of international assistance for overcoming crises are being twisted. The international community, and the United Nations in particular, should help countries to break deadlocks, prevent conflicts and render mediation efforts. Our starting point should be the principle of doing no harm. The Palestinian question is central to the entire Middle East. We have passed the date of | July, after which the Israeli Parliament threatened to begin discussing plans for the annexation of the West Bank of the Jordan River. No action has yet been taken, but it is important to understand that the implementation of those plans may close the door for the prospect of a two-State solution and only exacerbate the situation. We see no alternative to two States - Palestine and Israel - peacefully coexisting. In that regard, we reaffirm the call to abandon provocative actions and unilateral steps. International cooperation and joint steps must accompany the Middle East peace settlement. At the same time, we note again that the whole range of final-status issues should be resolved in direct negotiations between Palestinians and Israelis. Such negotiations should be launched as soon as possible. As a permanent member of the Security Council and of the Quartet of international mediators, Russia is ready to undertake efforts in the interest of reaching a settlement within the internationally recognized parameters - all the relevant United Nations resolutions, the Madrid principles and the Arab Peace Initiative - which provide for the creation of an independent, sovereign and territorially contiguous Palestinian State within the 1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital. We urge our partners in the Quartet - the United Nations, the European Union and the United States - to intensify their collaborative efforts. We are also ready for dialogue with key regional players, with the facilitation of the Quartet. Apart from those fundamental issues, it is important not to forget about daily challenges - the continuation of settlement activity, the demolition of Palestinian property and eviction of Palestinians, ongoing clashes and the threat of missile launches on Israeli territory. The coronavirus disease multiplied those problems, which can only be overcome collectively. We share the ongoing concern about the humanitarian situation in the Gaza Strip. The work of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East and the international community's support of the Agency is needed more than ever. In support of the efforts of our Egyptian friends, we call for Palestinian unity and are actively cooperating with various Palestinian representatives to help them overcome the internal split. In conclusion, I would like to stress once again that the only viable solution is one reached by both parties through negotiations and based on the internationally recognized principles. No recipe or plan disregarding - let alone clearly rejecting - that reality can be imposed or become a deal-breaker. We also reaffirm that any attempt to divert the attention of the international community and put the blame on other regional actors, no matter how big and influential they are, will not lead Palestinians and Israelis to a feasible solution to the current situation.
