Mr. Abdelaziz (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic):
Mr. President, allow me at the outset to convey to you
the greetings of Mr. Ahmed Aboul Gheit, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the Arab Republic of Egypt, who
was looking forward to participating in today's meeting
of the Security Council in order to reiterate Egypt's
great interest in the issue of piracy off the coast of
Somalia and the situation in Somalia in general, but
due to unforeseen circumstances was unable to
participate in the meeting. I therefore have the pleasure
to deliver this statement on his behalf:

"The past few months have seen a
noticeable and worrisome escalation in the
phenomenon of piracy and armed robbery off the
coast of Somalia. This phenomenon constitutes a
real threat to navigation in that important
strategic region, to the flow of trade and to the
movement of goods on the related maritime
routes.

"There is no doubt that this high-level
meeting of the Security Council to discuss the
phenomenon of piracy and the means of
combating is ample testimony to the fact that this
phenomenon has become a serious threat to
international peace and security. There is a real
need to widen the scope of the debate and to
continue to exchange views on the optimal means
to combat the phenomenon in the context of
implementing existing legal and political
frameworks and taking into account the
international, regional and security
circumstances, with a view to arriving at an
agreed approach for action.

"Egypt deeply deplores the escalation of
acts of piracy off the coast of Somalia. However,
it considers the phenomenon to be the direct and
clear result of the fragile political and security
situation in Somalia, which in turn is the result of
the continued disinterest of the international
community and of its disregard of the need to
consolidate peace and security in Somalia. From
this perspective, the Egyptian position is based on
the need for a comprehensive approach to the
situation in Somalia that addresses the root
causes and motives of the phenomenon of piracy
in the region and undertakes the rapid and
effective security actions needed to respond to all
forms of piracy and armed robbery.

"From that point of view, Egypt has
supported international and regional efforts and
initiatives undertaken to combat this
phenomenon. It has emphasized the need for
coherence among these efforts and respect for the
relevant rules of international law and for the
principle of a State's sovereignty over its
territorial waters. Egypt has also stressed that
these efforts should be made in conjunction with
the holding of a broad and detailed debate that
covers all the criteria and legal obligations with
the aim of agreeing on specified procedures to
regulate the response to this phenomenon in its
various stages, from military confrontation,
interrogation methods, criteria and controls, to
legal and judicial procedures applied to
perpetrators. Indeed, various options concerning
trials of the accused should be explored,
including the possible establishment by Security
Council resolution of an ad hoc international
court.

"It is important for us, in speaking about the
phenomenon of piracy off the coast of Somalia,
not to confuse issues relating to the geographical
scope of the phenomenon. From all indications,
the scope does not exceed the region of the
western Indian Ocean and the Gulf of Aden off
the coast of Somalia. Thus, the Arab Republic of
Egypt had been keen to convene a consultative
meeting of the Arab Red Sea riparian countries on
20 November 2008 in order to confirm two facts.
The first is that there are no acts of piracy in the
Red Sea and that the Red Sea has its own
specificities that distinguish it from other regions
facing a fragile security situation, due to the fact
that countries bordering the Red Sea have the
capacity to secure their shores and their territorial
waters. The second fact is that the Arab countries
bordering the Red Sea are concerned about the
escalation of the phenomenon near the southern
part of the Red Sea, and that they have the
capacity to secure navigation in the Red Sea and
to prevent the phenomenon of piracy from
emerging there.

"We thus remain eager to agree as soon as
possible on measures and procedures to end this
phenomenon off the coast of Somalia. We are all
therefore responsible for being accurate in our
pursuit of legal and political agreements in order
to ensure the cooperation of all parties and to
provide a legal and practical umbrella for all
efforts to combat piracy without violating the
established and agreed sovereign rights of States.

"In conclusion, allow me once again to
emphasize the organic linkage between the
phenomenon of piracy and the Somali issues in
general. This situation should prompt us to think
seriously about the optimal and most effective
way to support peace consolidation efforts and
stability in the country, particularly after the
Somali parties' success in signing the Djibouti
Agreement in August, as well as the subsequent
executory security and political agreements.
These agreements require the international
community to demonstrate sufficient support to
protect the progress already achieved towards
reaching peace and to prevent setbacks in efforts
at national reconciliation. Indeed, such setbacks
could have adverse and dangerous political and
security ramifications.

"Egypt looks forward to the Security
Council's substantive discussion of all proactive
options, including the deployment of a United
Nations peacekeeping force in Somalia that
would act as a safety valve for the joint Somali
force that the parties agreed to establish in
support of stabilization in Somalia following the
withdrawal of the Ethiopian forces. In addition,
options to strengthen a United Nations
peacekeeping force with maritime and land
components to address the piracy phenomenon
from all angles need to be explored."

