Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish):
My delegation wishes to thank the Presidents and the
Prosecutors of the International Criminal Tribunals
for the Former Yugoslavia and for Rwanda, and the
Residual Mechanism, for their comprehensive briefings
to the Council on the implementation of the completion
strategy of the two ad hoc Tribunals for the period from
May to November 2014. We are honoured to have them
present here today.

Their reports reveal that, despite the overall
difficulties created by the lack of personnel resulting
from the closure process, both Tribunals have made
significant progress. It is instructive to note that one
of the four outstanding cases before the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia, the Karadeie case,
one of the pending cases, is now at the sentencing
state, arguments having concluded in October, while
there remains only one appeal before the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda, in the Butare case.
In turn, the Residual Mechanism has clearly worked
intensively, with the appeal decision currently pending.
This will also mark a milestone in the judicial work of
the Mechanism.

As Chair of the Informal Working Group on
International Tribunals, I wish to reiterate my country's
commitment to supporting the work of the Tribunals
and the Mechanism. We believe that collaboration in
their completion strategies is one ofthe most direct ways
in which the Council can contribute to international
justice.

In that regard, in recent months we have conducted
a constructive dialogue with the Office for Human
Resources Management of the Secretariat in seeking
legal-administrative formulas to provide concrete
solutions to the challenges presented by the closure
process for the staffing of the Tribunals in The
Hague and Arusha, which has a direct impact on their
functioning.

We note the concerns regarding the situation of
those persons in Tanzania requiring relocation, and we
urge a dignified solution to be found for them swiftly,
with due consideration given to the humanitarian
implications of their situation.

We have also begun informal consultations on
extending the mandates of the judges and prosecutors
in both Tribunals following the requests from their
respective Presidents and from the Secretary-General
himself.

We are aware of the challenges that task implies. We
trust that the Council will be able to reach agreement on
the issues, thus meeting the responsibilities it assumed a
little over two decades ago and giving due consideration
to the international rule of law and justice.

My delegation hopes that this process of
accountability can be completed and serve as a clear
message from the international community that it will
not allow for crimes against humanity to go unpunished.
Finally, my delegation reiterates its congratulations
to the International Tribunal for Rwanda on the recently
celebrated twentieth anniversary of its establishment.

