We would like to thank the French Presidency for convening today's open debate. We welcome the valuable briefings by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict, Ms. Virginia Gamba de Potgieter, the Executive Director of UNICEF, Ms. Henrietta Fore, and the representative of civil society. Peru wishes to highlight its commitment to the children and armed conflict agenda. Children are one of the most vulnerable segments of the population because of their defencelessness and dependence, both of which greatly increase during armed conflicts. Accordingly, we condemn all forms of violence against children, including physical and psychological violence. We wish to highlight the anniversary of several important milestones in this agenda: the twentieth anniversary of the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the involvement of children in armed conflict; the fifteenth anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1612 (2005), which created the monitoring and reporting mechanism and established the Security Council Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict; and the fifth anniversary of the Safe Schools Declaration. These and all other instruments aimed at protecting children in armed conflict demonstrate the international community's interest in the problem. Notwithstanding the foregoing, we cannot but express great concern about the recurrence of new cases of grave violations of children's rights every year. We note with concern that the latest report of the Secretary-General (S/2020/525) once again describes an increase in the number of such violations, by both State and non-State actors. We also wish to express great concern about cases of sexual violence, sexual slavery and forced marriage, which continue to be used as a tactic of war and which disproportionately affects girls. As part of the general civilian population, children are subjects of international law and are entitled to minimum standards of protection under humanitarian law. Furthermore, they also enjoy rights pursuant to specific human rights instruments. In that context, we would like to highlight Common Article | of the four Geneva Conventions of 1949, on the obligation to respect and ensure respect for the Conventions' provisions. It is therefore incumbent on the Security Council, and on all States Members of the United Nations, to make a greater commitment to implementing urgent and effective measures to reverse the trend towards increased violations and ensure the due protection of all children during armed conflicts, in accordance with the obligations established under international law. Emphasis should be placed on preventive measures to stop the statistics from continuing to rise, on rehabilitation actions to help the recovery of victims of these grave violations and ensure their future, and on corrective measures involving exemplary sanctions against the perpetrators to prevent these situations from recurring. Peru agrees with the Secretary-General's call to all actors involved - listed and unlisted - to take all the necessary and effective measures to end and prevent the grave violations described in the report. The serious effects of the coronavirus disease pandemic throughout the world should lead us to reflect on the importance of complying with the obligations of international humanitarian law, which guarantees the immunity of civilian infrastructure, especially schools and hospitals. Our vulnerability to the impacts of disease and climate change should lead us to strengthen the protection of this infrastructure and ensure that the provision of services is not disrupted. If we do not ensure this, societies affected by armed conflict risk dangerously reversing their development and pushing their populations into conflict, thereby creating a threat to international peace and security. In this regard, Peru resolutely supports the Secretary-General's call for a global ceasefire to help contain the coronavirus. We welcome the efforts of the Special Representative of the Secretary- General for Children and Armed Conflict aimed at making progress on the children and armed conflict agenda. We also stress the priority that the Secretary-General attaches to this issue as a vital element in building sustainable peace. Finally, in the framework of its firm commitment to the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, Peru will continue to work constructively in favour of the children and armed conflict agenda, in order to ensure their well- being and guarantee the exercise of their fundamental rights.
