Mr. Kulyk (Ukraine): I would like to thank
Assistant Secretary-General Annabi for his lucid
briefing.

Allow me to take this opportunity to pay tribute
to the outstanding efforts of the men and women of the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK), who, together with other
representatives of the international community in the
province, helped make the news, reported by Mr.
Annabi, good and encouraging. My delegation
commends the important activities of the authorities of
the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe and KFOR,
which have ensured a peaceful and secure environment.

The situation in Kosovo and the results of the
parliamentary elections in the region were a matter of
close attention in my country. I wish to quote the
statement of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of
Ukraine, which conveys the essence of our reaction to
the Kosovo-wide elections.

"Ukraine welcomes the parliamentary
elections in Kosovo, Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia, held on 17 November 2001.

"Ukraine highly appreciates the calm and
businesslike atmosphere of the elections, as well
as the participation in the voting of
representatives of the national minorities of the
province, which was promoted by the
constructive approach of the leadership of the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia.

"The Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Ukraine
expresses hope that the development of
democratic institutions that will be established
upon the results of the elections will pave the way
for the normalization of the situation in Kosovo.

"We believe it will also promote a
constructive dialogue between the social and
political forces of the province on the basis of the
preservation of the territorial integrity of
Yugoslavia, in accordance with Security Council
resolution 1244 (1999), which should eventually
lead to the strengthening of a multi-ethnic and
democratic Kosovo within the Federal Republic
of Yugoslavia, as well as to peace and stability in
the Balkans".

In addition to this, I would like to make a few
points.

The Kosovo-wide elections of 17 November
demonstrated the growing political maturity of the
population, which, in the first place, seeks the way to a
normal life.

Now the Kosovo leaders should assume major
responsibility for the future political, economic and
social life of the province, while exercising their
authority in strict adherence to Security Council
resolution 1244 (1999) and the Constitutional
Framework for Provisional Self-Government.

Undoubtedly, these elections should be
considered the beginning of a difficult road that should
lead to a new, democratic and multi-ethnic Kosovo. On
this road, the new administration could be challenged
by the dangerous temptations of political euphoria,
geopolitical "creativity" and illusions, which could
provoke irrelevant statements and unconsidered
decisions.

The major problem for Kosovo is the challenge of
coexistence. My delegation believes that the political
wisdom of the elected political forces will help prevent
negative developments. What is really needed today is
to focus efforts on the urgent issues on the Kosovo
agenda. There is an urgent need to strengthen and
further develop close and cooperative ties with the
authorities of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. We
also call upon the elected Kosovo leaders to pay
special attention to the displaced persons and to ensure
their freedom of movement and return.

For centuries the history of the Kosovo and
Metohija region has been one of political, military and
cultural clashes, emotional turmoil and human despair.
Now it fully depends on Albanians and Serbs, Bosniacs
and Turks, Romas and Ashkalis, whether the lessons
learned will become the treasure of the future or the
burden of the past. We hope that the democratic
tendencies in Kosovo will give the necessary and
encouraging regional message. A stable and prosperous
Balkans as an integral part of the European orchestra
can be built only through the democratic means of
dialogue and inter-ethnic tolerance.

