Mr. Parham (United Kingdom): I thank
Ambassador Osorio and the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006) for their continued
work, and pay tribute to Ambassador Osorio and his
team in the Mission of Colombia and to the support that
they have received from the Panel of Experts during his
two years as Chair of that important Committee of the
Security Council.

The United Kingdom, along with the international
community at large, remains deeply concerned about
Iran's nuclear programme. The resolution adopted by
the Board of Governors of the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA) on 13 September called on Iran
to cooperate urgently with the IAEA. The overwhelming
support for that resolution demonstrated the depth of
international concern.

Iran must urgently address the international
community's serious concerns over its nuclear activity.
Assurance of Iran's peaceful intentions has not been
forthcoming. Iran continues to expand its enrichment
capacity, in direct contravention of resolutions of the
IAEA Board of Governors and the Security Council,
and has consistently failed to cooperate with the
Agency to address the possible military dimensions of
its nuclear programme.

Despite this, the United Kingdom remains fully
committed to finding a peaceful, negotiated solution to
this issue. The E3+3 has met with Iran at the political
and expert levels on four occasions since April, and it
remains active in pursuit of further dialogue. While
the E3+3 is entering into these talks in good faith,
negotiations cannot continue indefinitely. Iran must
engage seriously with this process. Until it does, the
international community will apply increasing pressure.

Here in New York, it is the work of the 1737
Committee that remains at the forefront of that
pressure - a symbol of international support for
efforts at peacefully preventing proliferation activity.
In this regard, I welcome the work of the Committee
in preparing implementation assistance notices. This
essential work will help to ensure that Member States
are fully equipped to implement Security Council
measures against Iran.

The role of the Panel of Experts remains crucial
in making sure that United Nations sanctions are
adhered to in full. We strongly welcome its work
with international organizations and experts, and we
champion its efforts to investigate alleged sanctions
violations. We look forward to hearing the results of
the two investigations currently under way.

We remain appalled by credible information that
Iran is providing technical advice, financial support,
equipment and weapons to aid Al-Assad's brutal and
Violent repression of the Syrian people. This is in stark
contravention of the will of the Syrian people and a
reminder of Iran's hypocrisy in claiming to support
freedom in the Arab world.

We also have serious concerns about Iranian
support for groups such as Hizbullah, Palestinian
Islamic Jihad and Hamas. Iranian Majlis Speaker Ali
Larijani described the Gaza resistance as "just a small
part of Iran's power". Such support is unacceptable
and only serves to undermine regional security. Arms
supplies to Hizbullah are contrary to the United
Nations embargo on the export of weapons by Iran,
and recent confirmation by a commander of the
Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps of the transfer of
Iranian military technology to Hamas would indicate
a further violation of the Council's resolutions and of
international law. We support the Committee and the
Panel of Experts in investigating these transgressions.

Iran's leaders, if they do the right thing, can bring
all sanctions to an end and, in doing so, help Iran to
realize the benefits of a civil nuclear programme.
They have a clear choice. They can either address
international concerns through negotiation and action,
or face further pressure and isolation.

