Mr. Soemirat (Indonesia): Let me begin by
thanking Special Envoy Griffiths and Under-Secretary-
General Lowcock for their briefings. We commend their
efforts and attempts to ease the conflict and deliver
humanitarian assistance on the ground.

In responding to the briefings, Indonesia would
like to underscore three points. First, improving the
security situation and promoting de-escalation must be
the priority at this time. We welcome the positive signals
by all sides indicating their interest in de-escalation
and call upon them to transform these signals into
further positive, concrete actions. In that regard, we are
encouraged by the releasing of detainees, as stated by
Special Envoy Griffiths. It is our fervent hope that the
reduction of Violence, particularly cross-border attacks,
will lead to the de-escalation of violence in other parts
of Yemen. In that regard, we are hopeful that we will be
able to reduce the number of casualties. Saving human
lives has always been Indonesia's biggest interest, and
it remains so.

We also welcome the positive developments in
Aden, as they extend the reduction of violence to the
southern part of Yemen. In that regard, we commend the
ongoing good offices being conducted by the Kingdom
of Saudi Arabia. We believe that such a de-escalation
would create space for the parties to enhance their
confidence and trust, which would be beneficial for the
prospects of resuming the second dialogue.

That brings me to my second point, which is that
the resumption of peace talks by the end of the year
should be made a priority. It is almost a year since the
first dialogue resulted in the Stockholm Agreement.
The Government of Yemen and the Houthis, as well as
other relevant parties, should resume dialogue with the
aim of committing to a wider ceasefire and to ending
the conflict. Inclusive intra-Yemeni dialogue with the
participation of all relevant stakeholders, including
representatives of civil society, non-governmental
organizations, women and youth, could chart the path
to a comprehensive political solution for the future
of Yemen. Key regional players should also support
the process.

Indonesia once again reiterates its support for the
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Yemen in
pursuing the resumption of the political process to end
the conflict in Yemen. We share the view expressed by
the briefers and some members of the Council who have
spoken before us that ending the conflict and improving
the country's economic conditions are the only means
of stopping the humanitarian catastrophe in Yemen.

Thirdly, the implementation of the Stockholm
Agreement should continue, in particular through the
full implementation of the Al-Hudaydah Agreement.
As has been repeated several times, Al-Hudaydah
is the centre of gravity of the crisis and progress in
Al-Hudaydah remains crucial to efforts to address the
conflict in Yemen. It is also the location of the corridor
for humanitarian assistance and, through its port, a
source of revenue for the Yemeni people. We call for
the implementation of both phases of the Agreement,
in accordance with the technical modalities of the
Agreement itself. We also welcome the activation of
the tripartite ceasefire enhancement and de-escalation
mechanism in order to prevent incidents in Al-Hudaydah
governorate and as a direct channel of communication
among the parties, under the auspices of the United
Nations Mission to Support the Hodeidah Agreement
(UNMHA). The works in progress in Al-Hudaydah
demonstrate the continued commitment of the parties to
the implementation of the Al-Hudaydah Agreement and
are a positive sign for extending the broader Agreement
beyond Al-Hudaydah.

Finally, we take note of the Secretary-General's
positive assessment of UNMHA. Indonesia remains
committed to supporting the work of the United Nations
in Yemen, including by being part of UNMHA.

