The President (spoke in Chinese): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received letters from
the representatives of Belgium, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Namibia, Rwanda and
Zimbabwe, in which they request to be invited to
participate in the discussion of the item on the
Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation ofthe President, Mr. Ileka
(Democratic Republic ofthe Congo) took a seat at
the Council table; Mr. De Ruyt (Belgium),

Mr. Theron (Namibia), Mr. Gasana (Rwanda) and
Mr. Jokonya (Zimbabwe) took the seats reserved
for them at the side ofthe Council Chamber.

The President (spoke in Chinese): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance with
the understanding reached in its prior consultations.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations and in the absence of
objection, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Kamel Morjane,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and head of the
United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
I invite Mr. Morjane to take a seat at the Council
table.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Mr. Morjane. It is my understanding that he
is also prepared to answer questions and provide
clarifications if need be.

I wish to point out that this is going to be the last
time that Mr. Morjane will participate in our meetings.
On this occasion, I wish, on behalf of the Council, to
pay special tribute to Mr. Morjane for his consistent
and tireless efforts in moving the peace process
forward in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Through his diplomatic skills, tenacity and effective
leadership of the United Nations Organization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Mr. Morjane
has forged good relations with the various parties and
has earned the full confidence of the Security Council.
We note with satisfaction that Mr. Morjane, while
relinquishing his present functions, will continue to
contribute his enormous talent to the United Nations
family by returning to the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees.

At the end of the briefing, I shall give the floor to
Council members who wish to make comments or ask
questions. I invite members to raise their hand if they
wish to take the floor.

I welcome the Secretary-General, who is with us
this morning, and give him the floor.


