Mr. Cardi (Italy): Italy aligns itself with the
statement delivered earlier by the observer of the
European Union.

I thank the Secretary-General for his briefing, and
China for organizing this timely debate on an issue that
cannot and should not be associated with any religion,
nationality, civilization or ethnic group.

Italy's contribution to this joint effort is
multidimensional. We believe that our response
should be be holistic - political, cultural and
diplomatic - and we focus on training local security
forces and countering financial flows to extremist
groups. I would like to share with the Council the main
features of our approach.

First and foremost is prevention. Italy appreciates

the Secretary-General's focus in his Plan of Action on
preventing violent extremism. Long-term solutions
should be based on an understanding of the forces that
alienate individuals, young people in particular, and
lead them to join extremist groups. To tackle the root
causes of the phenomenon, we also need to address
problems such as a lack of socioeconomic opportunities;
marginalization and discrimination; poor governance
and violations of human rights and the rule of law;
prolonged and unresolved conflicts; and radicalization
in prisons and marginalized communities. The
implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development (General Assembly resolution 70/1) will
play a pivotal role in those areas, as will women's
empowerment and engagement with youth.

The second feature is implementation of the
relevant United Nations resolutions. Over the years,
we have put together a toolbox for international efforts
aimed at cracking down on terrorist groups such as
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) and
Al-Qaida. We have adopted resolutions on cutting off
the financial sources of terrorism, stemming the flow
of foreign terrorist fighters, preventing terrorists from
using the Internet and social media to commit terrorist
acts, and preventing incitement. In that context, Italy
looks forward to the upcoming review of the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy.

The third revolves around the fact that the
responsibility for preventing violent extremist acts lies
with Member States, with the support of the United
Nations system. To be effective, national ownership
requires the involvement of religious and community
leaders, women's and youth associations, the private
sector and the media. At the same time, international
cooperation remains essential if we are to achieve
significant results.

My fourth point is that it is imperative to cut off the
financial sources of terrorism by fully implementing
resolutions 2199 (2015) and 2253 (2015). Together with
the United States and Saudi Arabia, Italy co-chairs
the Counter-ISIL Finance Group, which met in Rome
last week, with China participating for the first time.
The Group adopted an action plan aimed at preventing
ISIL's use of the international financial system;
countering its extortion and exploitation of economic
assets and resources; denying it funding from abroad;
and preventing it from providing financial or material
support to foreign affiliates. Our joint efforts are
seeing significant results. Within the framework of the
Group, Italy is also the coordinator of a project group
on cultural heritage whose purpose is to counter the
looting and illicit trafficking of cultural goods, one of
the main sources of terrorist group financing.

My final point is about culture and education,
which are at the core of our actions aimed at preventing
rather than countering violent extremism. Terrorists
seek to divide us by race, ethnicity, nationality and
values. Investing in education and protecting our
cultural heritage are key components of our effort. We
believe that no society can flourish without culture
or education, and no relationship can be established
without respect for a people's history and soul. On
16 February, Italy and UNESCO signed a landmark
agreement to establish a task force to protect ancient
cultural artifacts in crisis areas. The Blue Helmets of
culture, as we call them, are a tangible sign of Italy's
commitment to the Unite for Heritage campaign and to
the protection of our common cultural heritage from
terrorist and extremist groups.

