Mr. Barro (Senegal) (spoke in French): Allow me
to begin by thanking Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon
for his briefing andfor the relevant recommendations
appended to his letter dated 18Aagast 2016 (S/2016/722, annex). We would also like to thank Ms. Joanne Liu,
International President of Medecins Sans Frontieres,
and Mr. Peter Maurer, President of the International
Committee of the Red Cross, for their excellent
briefings and the tireless efforts ceaselessly made by
their respective organizations on the ground in order to
prevent and mitigate attacks committed against medical
personnel and facilities in armed conflict zones.

The information we have just received
demonstrates - if it was still necessary to do
so - the need for the Security Council to undertake
the protection of medical personnel, facilities
and transport. It is clear that this protection must be
respected in times of war. This is why we commend
the timeliness of the recommendations on measures to
be taken to strengthen the protection of the injured, the
sick, medical personnel and humanitarian players, as
well as their means of transport, as contained in the
aforementioned letter of the Secretary-General. We
also endorse the concrete recommendations aimed
at preventing acts of Violence, attacks and threats
against health care in times of armed conflict. In that
regard, my delegation backs the idea of that opening
investigations into allegations of Violations and a
commitment to prosecuting the perpetrators of these
crimes are essential to strengthening the protection of
health care in times of armed conflict.

Furthermore, we believe that the role of United
Nations peacekeeping operations needs to be
strengthened. This presupposes the need, during the
drafting of mandates or the establishment of missions,
for capacity-building measures and support for
security sector reform and sanctions procedures, and
especially to ensure that the resources of peacekeeping
operations are commensurate with their mandate.
This also presupposes the importance of ensuring
that individuals suspected of having committed grave
violations of international law relating to the protection
of medical care during armed conflicts be brought
to justice. It further requires the restoration of basic
services, including the reconstruction of medical
hospitals or other medical facilities destroyed or
damaged during attacks.

In addition to these recommendations of the
Secretary-General, we believe that it would be just as
relevant to take the following additional measures to
counter the attacks and obstructions to access to health
care in conflict zones.

First, we must identify all obstacles that prevent
access to health care and medical facilities, and to
ensure that these obstacles are lifted so as to enable
appropriate deployment on the ground.

Secondly, local health-care organizations must
be supported so as to ensure that they can provide
minimum services thanks to ad hoc solutions that could
be identified based on conditions on the ground.

Thirdly, military personnel must receive high-
quality training in order to reduce to a minimum
disruptions to health-care services, while safeguarding
the legitimate security considerations.

Finally, the Security Council must hold debriefing
meetings on attacks carried out frequently in
specific areas.

In conclusion, I reaffirm Senegal's dedication to
the protection of medical personnel and health facilities
during armed conflict, an issue that remains at the heart
of the Global Health and Foreign Policy initiative of the
Oslo Group on Global Health Policy, which our country
led in 2015, with the adoption by the General Assembly
of resolution 63/33 on strengthening the management of
international health crises.

