The President (spoke in Russian): I shall now make
a statement in my national capacity as representative of
the Russian Federation.

We thank the Secretary-General for his statement
on a subject that is so important to our region, and the
leaders of the Collective Security Treaty Organization
(CSTO), the Shanghai Cooperation Organization (SCO)
and the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) for
their detailed briefings.

Today's meeting is a central one for the Russian
Federation's presidency of the Security Council
for several reasons. First, the organizations under
discussion are truly Vital to the regions in which they
operate. There are pressing security and other issues
on their agendas, and one of Russia's foreign policy
priorities is cooperating with them. Secondly, we
believe that the considerable potential for cooperation
between the United Nations and CSTO, SCO and CIS
has not yet been fully exploited. Thirdly, we have
often encountered situations in which members of the
international community are not fully informed about
their activities. On the one hand, that is to some extent
a positive sign, since it speaks to their self-sufficiency
and effectiveness in resolving the challenges they
face. On the other, that lack of information can lead
to underestimating the role that CSTO, SCO and CIS
play in maintaining peace and security in their regions,
something to be avoided. In that regard, we hope
that today's briefings and discussion will enable the
international community to understand some of the
basic problems that our region has and how CSTO, SCO
and CIS are working to solve them.

Let me be frank. There is another problem. Under
various pretexts, some of our partners, including some
within the Security Council, have been attempting to
artificially marginalize those organizations, seeing
them as geopolitical competitors. For example, one of
the statements made environment arlier today referred
to certain criteria that such regional organizations
should meet. It is quite clear that if such criteria were
to be applied to the North Atlantic Treaty Organization,
for example, it would have to be rapidly disbanded. We
should put an end to this kind of ideological approach,
which damages our ability to cooperate in finding
answers to regional and global challenges.

I will begin with the use of so-called tough
security. The Collective Security Treaty Organization
was created in order to respond to our most urgent
military and political challenges, including the upsurge
in terrorist and extremist groups, and its potential for
destabilizing the situation on the borders of CSTO
member States. However, it is important to emphasize
that membership in CSTO is completely voluntary
and our joint efforts are not aimed at just anyone. We
are ready to engage in constructive cooperation with
every member of the international community, and that
approach is enshrined in the organization's documents.

Terrorist threats are one of CSTO's most difficult
problems. The overall situation in the Central Asian
republics remains calm, partly thanks to the major
efforts of the leaders of those countries. However,
both for us and for our CSTO partners, the threats to
regional security that result from external factors are
extremely immediate. We are dealing directly with
terrorist attacks and the ideological grooming of some
of our citizens, who then unfortunately end up in the
ranks of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL).
And, needless to say, we are also concerned about
their possible return to Russia or to our neighbours
and partners.

We are equally concerned about the chronic
instability in Afghanistan and the presence there of
terrorist hotbeds. The tracks of Afghans are clearly
visible in the subversive activities of organizations in
Central Asia such as the Uzbekistan Islamic Movement
and Hizb ut-Tahrir. The jihadists entering the region
establish contacts with criminal elements and drug
dealers and build cells for future terrorist activities.
The problem is exacerbated because the so-called
Islamic State has penetrated into Afghanistan and is
expanding its platform there. In that regard, we have
seen that ISIL has recently been increasingly involved
in northern Afghanistan, and there is a growing threat
from elements of the group entering neighbouring
States. Drugs in Afghanistan present a serious problem.
The United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime recently
revealed horrendous data on a 43 per cent increase in
opiate production there. Central Asia has every reason
to talk about Afghan heroin aggression. Afghan drug
trafficking is a significant source of funding for the
extremist underground network in Central Asia.

If we are to end such threats, we must act decisively
on the security front. The CSTO countries will continue
to strengthen and enhance their cooperation with
armed groups and security forces. The Kobalt-2016
joint rapid-response team training session held in May
demonstrated the excellent potential of the special
forces of Russia, Belarus, Kazakhstan, the Kyrgyz
Republic and Tajikistan for combating terrorism and
drug trafficking. The practical expertise of CSTO is in
demand, thanks to its more than 10 years of experience
in handling the Kanal anti-drug operation Canal, aimed
at cutting drug-smuggling routes. During that time,
seizures of drug indicators have gone up tenfold, to
20 tons.

The United Nations and CSTO have a major mutual
interest in enhancing their practical cooperation,
particularly in areas such as peacekeeping and
combating organized crime and terrorism. We believe
it is important to continue working on developing
CSTO peacekeeping capacity with the goal of sending
contingents to United Nations peacekeeping missions
in the near future.

The Shanghai Cooperation Organization has
increased its membership and its regional scope. Over
its 15-year history, it has strengthened its involvement
in regional processes. The process of making India and
Pakistan full-fledged members is in its final stages. We
hope that their soon-to-be participation in SCO will
enrich its cooperation efforts.

Since 2005, Iran has participated in the work of
the Organization as an observer. We hope that, once
the issue of Iran's nuclear programme has been fully
settled and the United Nations sanctions have been
lifted, no obstacles to considering its application for
full membership will remain.

Ensuring the security of the SCO area is the main
focus of its work, and there are many challenges similar
to those being faced by CSTO, such as terrorism,
extremism, organized crime, drugs trafficking and
threats from Afghanistan. We need to further enhance
the capacity of regional anti-terrorist structures,
improve coordination among military forces within the
United Nations and other international organizations,
update our anti-terrorist strategy and programme for
its implementation, and improve the legal basis for
cooperation in the area ofinformation security.

We give priority to implementing the SCO
cooperation programme on combating terrorism,
separatism and extremism for the period 2016-2018.
Work is under way on a draft SCO convention to combat
extremism. The joint counter-terrorism efforts of the
SCO Peace Mission military exercise has proven to be
very productive. However, our cooperation with SCO
is not limited just to that. In the Ufa SCO Development
Strategy, which was established under Russia's
presidency, we planned more than 70 events in the areas
of politics, economics and culture. One important area
of SCO work is fostering close economic cooperation.
We must further eliminate trade barriers and limits to
the movement of capital and labour, deepen production
and technological cooperation, and develop production
chains and joint transport infrastructure. The start of
negotiations on association of the Eurasian Economic
Union and the China Silk Road Economic Belt is a
promising prospect in that regard. We are convinced
that that involvement in this integration process
by all SCO and CIS members will be a prologue to
establishing a broad Eurasian area. We are pleased
with the cooperation dynamics in the areas of tourism,
education and youth.

In our relatively new geopolitical region, CIS is a
veteran organization that has helped us to forge friendly
relations between new sovereign States on the basis of
trust, equal rights and respect for each other's interests.
Despite well-known problems, the overall positive role
played by CIS is obvious. The CIS Heads of State met
for a summit in September in Bishkek, where they
adopted an anniversary statement announcing a joint
commitment to strengthening the Commonwealth,
using its integration capacity and developing greater
partnership among member States. We hope that this
will give a political impulse to the development oftrade
and investment cooperation and stimulate cooperation
in the areas of culture, education, science and sports.
We believe that CIS can effectively promote the
interests of the United Nations, including through the
interconnected nature of security and development.

In conclusion, I wish to note that developing a
collective approach in order to effectively overcome
current threats and challenges requires consistent
efforts to enhance the cooperation efforts of the United
Nations with regional and subregional organizations,
in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations,
and in particular Chapter VIII. The United Nations and
regional organizations have to complement one another
by exploiting their objective comparative advantages.
CSTO, SCO and CIS are making a considerable
contribution to combating terrorism, the drugs trade,
organized crime and other threats to international peace
and security. All three organizations are developing
practical cooperation with the United Nations, including
with the United Nations Regional Centre for Preventive
Diplomacy for Central Asia. We are convinced that
today's meeting has helped to demonstrate the potential
of and genuine interest in these regional organizations
in enhancing mutually beneficial cooperation with the
United Nations on a whole range of issues and different
avenues of work.

I now resume my function as President of the
Council.

I give the floor to the representative of Kazakhstan.

