Mr. Choi Young-jin (Republic of Korea): Timor-
Leste is one of the most remarkable United Nations
successes in nation-building. However, recent political
developments and the outbreak of fresh violence
remind us that the country's democracy is still fragile
and that the continued presence of the United Nations
is highly important for maintaining peace and stability.

Since gaining its independence in 2002, Timor-
Leste has moved forward on the road to peace,
democracy and development, making steady progress
in governance, institution-building and establishing the
rule of law. That has been achieved through the work
of the Government of Timor-Leste and the international
community. But we should recognize that the journey
has just begun. The situation remains fluid, and much
remains to be done to ensure security and stability for
Timor-Leste for the future.

We believe that Timor-Leste can and should stand
on its own. The goal of the international community in
Timor-Leste should be to help the people take full
control of their country's affairs. Before that can take
place, however, the international community will need
to provide much more help. The international
community should assist Timor-Leste in facing the
many challenges ahead. Our assistance should be
focused on helping the people of Timor-Leste to
develop sustainable institutions and policies that
support their new democracy, political stability and
economic growth.
It is with great anxiety that, in recent weeks, we
have watched the political tension in Timor-Leste erupt
into violence. In particular, my Government is deeply
concerned that approximately 100,000 people - or
10 per cent of the whole population of the country -
have been driven from their homes to shelter camps. In
that regard, my Government wishes to draw the
attention of Member States to the flash appeal for
humanitarian assistance for Timor-Leste made by
United Nations agencies and non-governmental
organizations stationed in the country.

We are heartened that the leaders of Timor-Leste
have been making determined efforts to stay united
during the current crisis and to take decisive measures
to address the challenges faced by the country. That
crisis has clearly revealed the underlying issues facing
Timor-Leste and the steps that its leaders should take
to bring about national unity.

The greatest challenge is the restoration of
stability and order. The United Nations should
strengthen its involvement in Timor-Leste to help
overcome that challenge. Another formidable challenge
ahead is the preparation for and conduct of its first
presidential and parliamentary elections, slated for
2007. International support for the election process will
be crucial, helping to consolidate the remarkable
achievements already made in reconstruction and
nation-building. We therefore believe that the
international community should respond favourably to
the needs of Timor-Leste for assistance and support in
meeting those challenges.

In that regard, I would like to reiterate my
Government's firm commitment to continue its strong
support for Timor-Leste. Some 700 Korean troops
participated for four years in the United Nations
peacekeeping operations there, and we provided
humanitarian and electoral assistance as well as
economic and technical cooperation to help the
Timorese people build their nation. Our collaboration
with Timorese authorities to enhance food production
by developing a new kind of corn - Timor Hybrid
Number 1 - is a source of particular satisfaction. My
Government stands ready to join the international
community in assisting the people of Timor-Leste.

One of the most important United Nations
successes is undergoing a crisis, and the international
community must help. The international community
has made a substantial investment in Timor-Leste's
progress as a nation, and we encourage its many
international supporters to continue their assistance to
ensure that the Timorese continue on their journey to a
stable and sustainable future.

