Mr. Ciss (Senegal) (spoke in French): My delegation
abstained in the voting on draft resolution S/2016/1085,
not because we favour inaction or we are questioning
the abuse that has been committed, but rather because,
while condemning the human rights violations and
other violations that are continuing to be perpetrated
by all the parties in the South Sudanese conflict, we
are convinced that in its quest for stability, that country
needs a sustainable peace. In our opinion, such an
approach requires an ongoing investment on the part of
the Security Council, which we have already witnessed
through the several actions that it has taken during the
year, including the visit by the Council in the month of
September, and the visit just made by the Chairman of
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 2206 (2015) concerning South Sudan. But
we need a united approach, above all, one that is in
close coordination with the organizations and countries
of the subregion. I am thinking, in particular, of IGAD
and its members, which have an important role to play.

In that regard, my delegation welcomes and strongly
encourages the efforts of IGAD and the countries of the
subregion. I am thinking in particular of the recent visit
that made by President Museveni of Uganda to Juba to
encourage the South Sudanese authorities to put an end
to their hostilities and to focus on the political process.
We also believe that, given the humanitarian urgency
and the importance of protecting civilians, we have to
act effectively. We are convinced that, as the Security
Council, we must begin a dynamic and constructive
dialogue with the Transitional Government of National
Unity. We encourage it to fulfil its commitments, as
soon as possible, to relaunch a national dialogue and to
deploy the Regional Protection Force. But that dialogue
must also be conducted with the other subregional
organizations, such as IGAD and the African Union,
and it should deal with the main aspects of stabilization
in South Sudan, namely, the implementation of the
peace agreement, security-sector reform, the protection
of civilians, human rights and the provision of
humanitarian assistance.

Once again, we believe that it is our responsibility
to support the people of South Sudan, who are, after
all, the ones who suffer most from the current situation.

