Mr. Serbini (Brunei Darussalam): We
congratulate you, Sir, on your excellent presidency, and
we welcome and congratulate the new members of the
Council. We also congratulate Sir Jeremy Greenstock
on his excellent chairmanship of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee.

I have the honour of speaking on behalf of the
members of the Association of South-East Asian
Nations (ASEAN), namely, Brunei Darussalam,
Cambodia, Indonesia, the Lao People's Democratic
Republic, Malaysia, Myanmar, the Philippines,
Singapore, Thailand and Viet Nam, on a matter which
we all consider very important. We would like to thank
the Security Council for this timely opportunity to have
a meaningful exchange of views on the implementation
of Council resolution 1373 (2001). This resolution
covers a wide range of issues including, among others,
measures to inhibit terrorist activities, the call for
cooperation through bilateral and multilateral
arrangements in various areas and the establishment of
the Counter-Terrorism Committee. It is our hope that
this open meeting, which complements the regular
briefings by the chair of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee, will help us better understand the wide
impact and repercussions of resolution 1373 (2001).

We in ASEAN believe that terrorism in all its
forms and manifestations presents a direct challenge to
international peace and security, development and
prosperity. We have been steadily strengthening our
cooperation in countering terrorism and other related
transnational crimes during the past few years. We
have noted the close link between international
terrorism and other transnational crimes, and we have
recognized the growing need for us to deal with its
many forms. We held our first ASEAN ministerial
Conference on Transnational Crime in Manila in
December 1997, where our Ministers resolved to
strengthen their commitment to cooperating at the
regional level in combating transnational crimes such
as terrorism, illicit drug trafficking, arms smuggling,
money-laundering, trafficking in persons and piracy.

Our Ministers have also met on two other
occasions, the most recent being the third ASEAN
Ministerial Meeting on Transnational Crime in
Singapore last year. Our cooperation has also crossed
over to the ASEAN Regional Forum, where our experts
had useful exchanges at the Experts Group Meetings on
Transnational Crime in Seoul, Republic of Korea, in
the year 2000 and last year in Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia.

Acts of terrorism require concerted and sustained
responses and actions at the international, regional and
national levels. With this in mind, our leaders adopted
the ASEAN Declaration on Joint Action to Counter
Terrorism on 5 November last year as our regional
response.

In the Declaration, our leaders expressed their
commitment

"to counter, prevent and suppress all forms of
terrorist acts in accordance with the Charter of
the United Nations and other international law,
especially taking into account the importance of
all relevant United Nations resolutions".

They underlined the importance of strengthening
regional and international cooperation in meeting these
challenges. ASEAN leaders rejected any attempt to link
terrorism with any religion or race. They also renewed
their commitment to pursuing effective policies and
strategies aimed at enhancing the well-being of the
people, which will be each member's national
contribution in the fight against terrorism. All
cooperative efforts to combat terrorism at the regional
level will consider joint practical counter-terrorism
measures in line with the specific circumstances in the
region and in each member country. Towards this end,
ASEAN Foreign Ministers will consider during their
retreat in Phuket, Thailand, to be held next month, an
agreement on exchange of information and the
establishment of communication procedures in this
context.

As a follow-up to the Declaration, ASEAN will
soon be convening an Ad Hoc Experts Group Meeting
and special sessions of the Senior Officials Meeting on
Transnational Crime. A special ASEAN ministerial
meeting on issues of terrorism is scheduled to be held
in Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia in April this year. The
meeting represents a significant step by ASEAN in
response to the United Nations call to enhance
coordination of national, subregional and international
efforts aimed at strengthening the global response to
terrorism. In addition, the relevant ASEAN Ministers
have been tasked with undertaking nine additional
practical measures in line with Security Council
resolution 1373 (2001). Individually, each ASEAN
member country has also undertaken steps aimed at
combating terrorism.

Countering terrorism presents an enormously
challenging task to us all, and it certainly requires
strong cooperation at all levels. ASEAN has acted in a
timely and responsible manner to address this
challenge. ASEAN remains steadfast in its commitment
and support of all efforts to promote international
cooperation in combating terrorism in accordance with
the United Nations Charter and the principles of
international law.

Finally, on behalf of my ASEAN colleagues, I
take this opportunity to commend Ambassador
Navarrete and wish him success in his future
endeavours.

