Mr. Chavez (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): I thank
you, Mr. President, for your initiative to convene this
open debate on a topic to which my country attaches
great importance: the participation of children in armed
conflicts. We particularly thank Ms. Radhika
Coomaraswamy, Mr. Le Roy and Ms. Veneman for
their briefings and for the valuable information
provided. We also thank Ms. Grace Akallo for her
brave testimony, which strengthens our conviction that
armed conflict is a circumstance in which children
require redoubled and concerted attention.

In that respect, my country believes, as the
Secretary-General indicates in his recommendations,
that the Security Council should accord equal attention
to all children affected by armed conflict, wherever it
may occur. Under no circumstances is the abduction,
recruitment for criminal purposes, sexual violation,
mutilation or death of children acceptable; neither are
attacks against schools or camps for refugees or
displaced persons.
Peru reiterates its condemnation of all acts of
violence, in particular the intentional and repeated
sexual violation and rape of minors, especially girls, as
weapons of war for parties to armed conflict. The
Security Council should consider the Secretary-
General's request that parties committing acts of sexual
violence against children in situations of armed
conflict be included in the annexes to his report.

Likewise, it is essential that resolutions 1612
(2005) and 1820 (2008) be mutually reinforcing in
order to prevent and combat sexual violence in conflict
situations. Mechanisms permitting United Nations
agencies to exchange reliable information on acts of
sexual violence in order to reduce and combat that
scourge should also be explored. For its part, the
Security Council should continue using or expanding
its use of the instruments and means at its disposal to
stop violations of children's rights in conflict
situations.

Resolution 1612 (2005), together with all
previous resolutions on this subject, has provided a
formal and detailed framework for promoting the
protection of children affected by armed conflict, as
well as key elements aimed at ensuring respect for
children's rights on the ground. Peru calls on the
parties to armed conflicts to commit themselves to
respecting children's rights.

At the same time, we must continue the
implementation of resolution 1612 (2005), particularly
when it comes to formulating specific action plans with
precise timetables to put an end to the recruitment and
use of children in armed conflicts. In that respect, we
should consider new modalities for cooperation among
the Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict,
sanctions committees and groups of experts in order to
take the measures necessary to ensure the safety of
children. In addition, the Security Council should
continue taking specific measures to protect children in
peacekeeping operations and political missions.

As rightly indicated in the Secretary-General's
report, given the regional dimension of many conflicts,
field-deployed operations can help establish
coordination mechanisms for information exchange
and cooperation on cross-border child protection.
Member States, especially those affected by armed
conflict, must also, within the framework of their legal
systems, continue to implement or adopt measures to
identify those responsible for the illegal recruitment
and use of children in armed conflict and other grave
violations of children's rights, and apply the necessary
sanctions. Neither amnesty nor impunity is acceptable.

The establishment of the Working Group on
Children and Armed Conflict is proof of the Security
Council's increasing commitment to protecting
children. I must highlight the successful work done by
France as chairman of the Working Group, and I can
assure Mexico of our support in its work as the new
Chairman.

It is also appropriate to highlight the work of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General. Since
field visits are an essential part of the implementation
of resolution 1612 (2005), it is only right for her Office
to have the necessary logistic and budgetary support to
fully perform its functions. The same can be said of the
important work carried out by UNICEF, the Committee
on the Rights of the Child and other relevant bodies in
this area. We call on States and all parties to conflicts
to cooperate with these bodies. We also call on the
donor community to support the efforts to reintegrate
and demobilize child soldiers being made in some
countries.

The progressive development of international
humanitarian law has provided us with the legal
instruments needed to fight against the use of children
in armed conflict, protect them and ensure their
security in times of violence. States and the
international community therefore have the great
responsibility of ensuring that this is done. Not only do
current peace and stability depend on compliance, but
so does the building of peaceful, stable societies in the
future.

