Mr. Wolfensohn: Let me say how grateful I am
to you, Sir, for this invitation, which is the second in
history to a President of the World Bank to attend a
meeting of the Security Council, the first having been
extended four years ago when we came together to
discuss the impact of AIDS as a security issue.
Important as that issue was and is, let me say
immediately that I am delighted that the Security
Council should be addressing this question at a time
when the words of the Iraq and Afghanistan conflict
interventions and resolutions in terms of the political
side are uppermost in the minds of people.

The reason that I am so pleased to be here is that
we feel, in our institution, that the issue of conflict
prevention, conflict resolution and rebuilding - which
is the subject of the discussion today - can best be
looked at from the point of view of the causes of
conflict and the methodologies of peace, some of
which the Secretary-General has referred to. Basically,
we have a fairly intuitive and not very complicated
notion that, if someone has a job and hope, he or she is
much less likely to go out and shoot people. This is not
a very complex concept, but I am happy to say that we
have done studies to prove that rather obvious point,
and I can quote the studies done by our colleagues in
the institution, which clearly state that

"our research suggests that the lack of economic
opportunity and resulting competition for scarce
resources, more than ethnic, political and
ideological issues, lie at the root of most conflicts
over the last 30 years".

Just in terms of my own experience since I have
been at the Bank - whether it be in Iraq, Afghanistan,
the West Bank, Gaza, Yemen, East Timor, Kosovo or
Bosnia and Herzegovina - I have found that, in all
these places where there has been tension, and in many
cases conflict, we have gone in, and the very first thing
that one needs to look at after some peace has been
restored and after one has addressed fundamental social
issues of education, health and infrastructure is the
question of how one establishes a framework in which
business can commence.

Let me say here that we give a lot of attention to
international investment. I am particularly proud that
Mr. Von Pierer is here at this meeting because of the
work that his company has done globally. However,
four times the amount of international investment is
done domestically and so, when one talks of business,
one really needs to think in terms of creating an
environment locally in which local investment can be
encouraged so that small and medium-size enterprise
and entrepreneurship can in fact flourish. A lot of this
was addressed in the recent study that was done by
Paul Martin and Ernesto Zedillo in response to a
request from the Secretary-General.

So the proposition which we basically believe is
that, in dealing with the first question of conflict
prevention, the first thing one needs is to have a
growing economy in which people share. Again, we
did a study of 60,000 poor people in 60 countries and
we came up, again, with an answer that one might have
concluded intuitively. The answer was that poor
people, like rich people, want to live in peace and to
have their community. They do not want charity -
they want an opportunity. They want for their women
not to be beaten up and, for their children, they want
hope.

In the world today, where 2.8 billion people out
of 6 billion are under the age of 25 and where 1.5
billion are under the age of 15 - and in the next 25
years 2 billion more will be entering our planet in the
developing world - the crucial challenge, as again has
been identified by the Secretary-General, is how we are
going to find opportunity for our youth to work. If they
do not have work, they are frustrated. Their immediate
instinct is not to go out and create a war, but they are
subject to influences from the outside, from people
who are malicious and who will either hide within their
number or use them for unlawful and offensive
purposes.

Thus, in our institution, we are devoting a
tremendous amount of time to trying to see how we can
meet the needs of those 60,000 people and people like
them. It is a very simple need: How do you give them
an opportunity to work in an equitable environment?
Here, one addresses a number of the questions that the
Secretary-General referred to in terms of the legal
framework which one can establish, the protection of
rights, the campaign against corruption and
establishing an opportunity for people to live in a
stable environment. This is what we are told they want
by people in developing countries, and it is not
surprising. In fact, the study was useful, but probably
not necessary in terms of intuitive thinking.

But we have done the work and proven in every
way that we can that giving people hope is the best way
to avoid conflict. Giving them an investment in their
lives and a chance to think of their children and to give
their children opportunity is the best way to stop them
going out and creating conflict. So when one talks in
the Security Council of the issue of the prevention of
conflict, central to that is the very simple notion of
giving people work and an opportunity. For that reason,
I think this subject is really important in this body,
because we are spending $900 billion on defence
annually and we are spending $50 billion a year, or a
little more, on development. I rather feel that if we
spent $900 billion on development and on getting
people to have jobs and to go into business, we
probably would not need more than $50 billion for
defence. This Council could then become an economic
and social council and it might be a lot more pleasant
and a lot less dramatic to be able to deal with hope,
rather than with crises. That is why, Sir, I think you
have chosen a very important subject today.

In relation to conflict resolution and the building
of peace, in all the cases I have mentioned there are
examples where we, often in conjunction with the
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) and
other agencies, have, as the primary function
concerning establishing peace, to get business going
again within a legal and appropriate framework which
protects human rights and is also environmentally
sound.

All of that is absolutely coherent and consistent
with the Millennium Development Goals established in
2000 - which we, the Secretary-General and others
are seeking to pursue - setting forth objectives of
what we need to do in order to have a peaceful and
appropriate world. All of the heads of Government
came together at the Millennium Summit and affirmed
the need to deal with the question of poverty. They did
not come to the Summit with goals relating to targets
for military expenditure. They said: The targets are
human. Let us get people to work, let us reduce
poverty, let us bring about growth and let us give
people an investment in hope and in their lives.

Not surprisingly, what we do, before and after
conflict, is to try and establish conditions in which
business - both international and local investment -
can flourish. For that reason, Sir, your choice of subject
today is admirable. The solution is not simple. One
does not just open the door for investment. It must be
done within the framework of a legal system,
governmental capacity, building transparent financial
systems and fighting corruption - issues which were
all mentioned at the International Conference on
Financing for Development in Monterrey, the
Johannesburg World Summit on Sustainable
Development and by the New Partnership for Africa's
Development (NEPAD).

I salute you, Sir, for putting the subject on the
Security Council agenda. We, at the Bank, are proud to
be working with United Nations agencies in terms of
this issue. It is a joy to consider the issues relating to
conflict by looking at the question of the causes of
conflict. The main cause of conflict is lack of hope, and
hope can be created by establishing businesses and by
creating jobs.

