Mr. Hunter (United States of America): I will lead off today by offering our condolences to the people of Kuwait for the death of their Amir, Sheikh Al-Sabah. The Amir was a peacemaker in every sense of the word, and we are grateful for his years of dedicated service to the people of Kuwait and to making the region a more stable, prosperous and peaceful place. His leadership during Kuwait's two years on the Security Council were particularly noteworthy and appreciated. Our thoughts and prayers today are with the people of Kuwait and his family. I thank Special Coordinator Mladenov for his briefing today. As always, we appreciate his hard work and that of his team in addressing this issue. Last month, the United States began by highlighting the most significant step towards peace in the Middle East in over 25 years - the agreement to normalize relations between Israel and the United Arab Emirates (see S/2020/837). For the second month in a row, we are pleased to draw the Council's attention to yet another momentous step on the path towards peace in the Middle East - on 11 September, Bahrain and Israel agreed to normalize relations. President Trump's bold diplomacy and rejection of the old conventional wisdom enabled him to broker these agreements - the Abraham accords - the first such agreements between Israel and Arab countries since 1994. I want to emphasize what President Trump highlighted about those agreements: in Israel's entire history, there had previously been only two such agreements. Now we have achieved two in a single month's time, and we are hopeful there will be more to follow. To commemorate those breakthroughs, President Trump hosted a historic signing ceremony on 15 September at the White House, where the Israeli Prime Minister and the Foreign Ministers of the United Arab Emirates and Bahrain signed the Abraham Accords Declaration. Israel, the United Arab Emirates and Bahrain have committed to the exchange of embassies and ambassadors, as well as cooperation in a broad range of fields including education, health care, trade, energy and security. President Trump's leadership, vision and expertise made this momentous event possible. He built trust with our regional allies and reoriented their strategic calculus by identifying shared interests and common opportunities, moving them away from a_ vested interest in perpetuating the same old conflicts. Instead of just talking about peace month after month, Security Council meeting after Security Council meeting, the United States led the way through action, and we achieved tangible results. We began this year by laying out the President's vision for peace - a comprehensive, fair and realistic plan for Israel and the Palestinians to live peacefully, side by side. The Abraham accords will allow further exploration of that vision. Both the vision for peace and the Abraham accords demonstrate the commitment of the United States and Israel to peace, prosperity and security throughout the Middle East. Despite those achievements, however, Palestinian terrorists fired a barrage of rockets on 15 and 16 September, just as Israel and its new Arab partners were commemorating their historic peace deals. We deplore and reject such violence, which has only brought misery and suffering for far too long. We now call on Palestinian leaders, who owe it to their people to reject violence, to embrace the opportunities for broader peace that the Abraham accords offer, and to work with Israel to resolve their long-standing issues. We hope that other Arab States can build on the accords while also encouraging the Palestinians to hold direct talks with Israel. Tomorrow, along with the United Arab Emirates, we will be co-hosting an informal briefing with Security Council members to discuss these peace agreements. That briefing will provide an opportunity for candid discussion about how these agreements could serve as a springboard to break the deadlock on the Israeli- Palestinian conflict. We encourage the members of the Security Council to embrace the opportunities presented by the Abraham accords, and we hope they will join us in publicly supporting these historic breakthroughs.
