Ms. Murmokaite (Lithuania): I thank the Chadian
presidency of the Security Council for organizing
this open debate on cooperation between regional and
subregional organizations on peace operations, with a
focus on the United Nations and African Union (AU)
partnership.

My delegation aligns itself with the statement to be
made later by the observer of the European Union (EU).

This is the third debate this year in which we discuss
in the Council the issue of cooperation between regional
and subregional organizations, which only confirms
the relevance and importance of this cooperation.

Some 70 per cent of the United Nations special
political missions and peacekeeping operations are
deployed in Africa. The continent's regional and
subregional organizations have been actively involved
in addressing the multilayered challenges facing
the continent, and their cooperation with the United
Nations and other regional partners, such as the EU,
has evolved significantly over the years. Many AU
operations have been rehatted into United Nations
peacekeeping missions.

African capacities are a critical resource for United
Nations peacekeeping, and United Nations support is
a critical enabler for AU operations. The effectiveness
of the United Nations and AU peacekeeping efforts
is therefore interdependent on many levels. The EU
also plays an important role by providing funding, as
in the case of the African Union Mission in Somalia,
bridging missions, as in the Central African Republic,
or contributing to capacity-building and training, as
in Mali, where Lithuanian trainers are part of the EU
training mission in Koulikoro. the EU's anti-piracy
mission off the coast of Somalia, where Lithuania
has participated since 2011, has been instrumental in
reducing the threat of piracy in the region.

At the fourth EU-Africa Summit, earlier this
year, EU leaders reaffirmed their commitment to
strengthening the operationalization of the African
Peace and Security Architecture and to supporting
training and capacity-building of African forces. The
EU is working, through its African Peace Facility
capacity-building component, to increase the capacity
of the AU and of regional economic communities in
the planning and conduct of peace operations. Such
synergies are critical for the overall success of peace
operations and need to be further developed. Enhancing
this collaboration, including and based on the lessons
learned from recent transitions of authorities from
AU peace support operations to United Nations
peacekeeping missions, is crucial.

As other representatives have noted, owing to their
knowledge of the region, regional and subregional
organizations are best positioned to understand the root
causes ofa conflict and to take early preventive action,
which is a key advantage in seeking to defuse a crisis
before it explodes. Effective and timely partnerships
can help prevent a conflict at its early stages, as
recently demonstrated in the Burkina Faso crisis, where
the joint mediation efforts of the United Nations, the
AU and Economic Community of West African States
proved to be useful to push the military back to the
path of constitutional legality. That only reinforces the
importance of strengthening AU and United Nations
capacities for early warning, conflict analysis, dialogue
and mediation, and the need for increased AU-United
Nations collaboration in the area of good offices
between the envoys of the two.

The strengths of regional bodies as first and rapid
responders to African crises must be acknowledged
and further developed. We welcome the AU's progress
in rapid deployment in response to emerging crises,
especially those that endanger civilians, and the
commitment made by African leaders to operationalize
the African Capacity for Immediate Response to Crises.
The development of policies and guidelines, as well as
training for the African Standby Force, as part of the
African Peace and Security Architecture, should be
further supported.

Getting the partnerships right at the political,
strategic, institutional and operational levels is
important in order to increase actual success in the
field. Better understanding of each other's working
methods and procedures and decision-making processes
would improve cooperation and increase transparency.
Deepening the strategic dialogue between the United
Nations and regional organizations, as well as
identifying concrete opportunities for joint planning at
both the strategic and operational levels, would greatly
benefit the collective action on the ground.

Further strengthening relations between the United
Nations Security Council and the AU Peace and Security
Council, including through truly interactive substantive
annual consultative meetings, timely consultations
and collaborative field missions, would enhance the
strategic partnership and help to formulate coherent
positions and strategies to address current crises. More
effective and frequent communication between the
Presidents of the Security Council and the AU Peace
and Security Council would also contribute to a timely
exchange ofinformation on decision-making processes.

A strong partnership with the African Union is
fundamental in mainstreaming protection-of-civilians
mechanisms in all peace and security activities,
including through the framework of cooperation
between the United Nations Office of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict and the African Union Commission
Concerning the Prevention and Response to Conflict-
related Sexual Violence in Africa, the designation by
the Chairperson of the African Union Commission
for a Special Envoy for Women, Peace and Security;
enhanced collaboration between the Peace and Security
Department of the AU Commission and the Office of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Children and Armed Conflicts.
Today we express our condolences to the people
of Pakistan after the savage attack on a school in
Peshawar. African States, too, have seen their share
of attacks against schools and children. The shocking
abduction of the Nigerian girls by Boko Haram earlier
this year is just one of the many cases of such attacks.
Closer United Nations cooperation with Africa's
regional and subregional organizations is essential for
tackling terrorism and other trans-boundary threats.
Enhanced intelligence information-sharing and
effective sanctions implementation are important tools
in countering terrorism. The role of the Committee of
Intelligence and Security Services of Africa and the
efforts of the African Centre for Studies and Research
on Terrorism should be commended in that regard. To
stern terrorist financing, strengthening joint efforts in
tackling human trafficking, illicit flows of arms, illegal
trade in natural resources and poaching, among others,
is required.

We look forward to the Secretary-General's
assessment report and recommendations on ways to
strengthen regional partnerships in peacekeeping
operations and further discussions on the issue. We
also look forward to the report by the High-level
Independent Panel to Review Peace Operations.

