Mr. Feltman: As we face a rapidly deteriorating
crisis in Ukraine that bears consequences far beyond
the country's borders, we deeply regret that the glimpse
of hope that followed the announcement of President
Poroshenko's peace plan, including the unilateral
ceasefire and peace talks with the armed groups, has
quickly dissipated.

In my briefing to the Council today, I will focus
on developments in eastern Ukraine, as well as on
international efforts towards a peaceful resolution.
First, with respect to the situation in eastern
Ukraine, while the United Nations has at this point
no independent verification of the circumstances
regarding the tragic crash yesterday of a Malaysia
Airlines passenger plane, the Secretary-General is
alarmed at what seem to be credible, numerous reports
that suggest that a sophisticated surface-to-air missile
was used. The Secretary-General strongly condemns
this apparently deliberate downing of a civilian aircraft.

This horrifying incident serves as the starkest
reminder of how dire the situation in eastern Ukraine
has become and how it affects countries and families
well beyond Ukraine's borders. Nearly 300 innocent
people from many countries, some of whom are
represented by members of the Council, were killed.
The casualties include a professional staff member of
the World Health Organization. I was shocked to learn
just now that nearly two-thirds of the victims come from
the Netherlands, and that there were 80 children on
board that flight. We convey our deepest condolences
to the families and friends of the victims.

The Secretary-General stated yesterday that there
is clearly a need for a full and transparent international
investigation. The United Nations is fully ready to
cooperate. We have been in touch yesterday and today
with the International Civil Aviation Organization
(ICAO), and ICAO has offered to Ukrainian officials
its investigative capacity in order to put together an
international team. ICAO and Ukrainian officials are
speaking today, and the Secretary-General is scheduled
to speak with Ukrainian President Poroshenko
tomorrow.

Following the 30 June announcement by President
Poroshenko of the end of the 10-day ceasefire and the
subsequent resumption of security and law enforcement
operations in the eastern parts of the country, the
fighting between Government forces and armed groups
has intensified dangerously, resulting in numerous
deaths. According to the Ukrainian authorities, a
number of towns, including notably the cities of
Slovyansk and Kramatorsk, as well as various smaller
villages in the Donetsk and Luhansk regions, have been
returned to their control.

However, relentless fighting has continued
particularly in and around the cities of Luhansk and
Donetsk, where the armed groups appear to have
consolidated their presence. Earlier this week, a fierce
battle was also fought over the international airport in
Luhansk, which now appears to be under the Ukrainian
Government's control. The situation on and around the
border between Ukraine and the Russian Federation
is of particular concern. While it is impossible for the
United Nations to independently verify these accounts,
in recent days a number of fatal incidents and intense
fighting have been reported.

On 13 July, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the
Russian Federation issued a statement noting that one
Russian national died and two were seriously injured
when a Ukrainian army shell hit a residential house.
Ukraine has rejected this claim. In the same statement,
the Ministry also warned that

"tensions in the area of the Russian-Ukrainian
border have dangerously escalated and may have
irreversible consequences, for which Ukraine will
be held responsible".

According to the Ukrainian authorities, the country's
border guard units have reportedly come under
continuous attack with rockets and mortars by armed
groups. There are also reports that several Ukrainian
military aircraft have been shot down over the past
weeks, most recently on 16 July.

As the Secretary-General has reiterated on countless
occasions, armed groups need to disarm immediately
and to stop engaging in unlawful and violent acts. At the
same time, we continue to strongly urge the Ukrainian
authorities to act with maximum restraint and to
make every effort possible to ensure the protection of
civilians caught in the fighting. Estimations of the total
number of civilian casualties vary, but according to the
Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights,
there have been approximately 500 casualties so far and
1,400 injured. Furthermore, the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees estimates
that the crisis had displaced some tens of thousands of
people as of 11 July. Grievances can and must never
justify endangering the lives of those one claims and
aims to represent and protect.

The Secretary-General welcomes the intensive
diplomatic efforts undertaken by many members of
the Council and others in recent weeks with a view to
de-escalatingthe crisis. The 2 JulyjointBerlin declaration
agreed upon by the Foreign Ministers of the Russian
Federation, Germany, France and Ukraine - similar
to the 17 April Geneva statement - provides a clear
and constructive way forward. As the declaration
underlines, there is an urgent need for a sustainable
ceasefire in eastern Ukraine to be agreed and fully
observed by all concerned, as well as to secure and
effectively control the Russian-Ukrainian border.

As the fighting continues, however, we are
disconcerted by the apparent lack of tangible progress
towards a political solution. A first, critical step would
be the immediate resumption of a ceasefire. The
Secretary- General calls on the international community
to come together in support of Ukraine, in accordance
with the principles of the United Nations Charter, and
to preserve peace and security for the broader region.
We will continue do our part. the Secretary-General is
in close contact with world leaders and has asked me to
return to Kyiv and Moscow in the coming days in the
spirit of his good offices.

Establishing a path to peace in Ukraine, as in
areas of conflict elsewhere in the world, will require
a concerted effort by national actors from across the
political spectrum, backed by the strong and unified
support of the international community. While the
security, political, economic, social, and human rights
issues in Ukraine that should be addressed are indeed
complicated, we hope that the shock of the downing
of the civilian passenger jet yesterday will prompt a
serious and sustained effort to end the fighting and
concentrate positively on Ukraine's future.

