Ms. Foo (Singapore): First, let me join others in
thanking Under-Secretary-General Oshima for his
extensive and comprehensive briefing and the
Norwegian presidency for its delegation's efforts to
keep the important issue of protection of civilians in
armed conflict high and firmly on the Council's
agenda. It is indeed important to revisit the issue from
time to time to ask ourselves whether what we have
been saying and doing so far is making a difference on
the ground.

In this regard, we would like to make three quick
points.

First, concerning the road map, the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) has
conducted several round-table discussions on this topic
so far. There has been significant feedback from the
relevant agencies involved in this exercise, but, while it
is easy for the agencies to highlight the problems and
the gaps, it has been a more difficult exercise to
recommend specific tools of implementation.
Therefore, in the report on the road-map exercise that
the Secretariat will be submitting, it might therefore be
useful to highlight specific tools of implementation that
could be used to implement the recommendations.
Secondly, we welcome the adoption of the draft
aide-memoire, to take place later today. We believe that
it could become a useful tool in the consideration of
current and future issues pertaining to protection of
civilians. In this regard, we would like to suggest that a
review be conducted of the current peacekeeping
operations using the aide-memoire as a checklist for
evaluation.

This serves two purposes: first, it allows us to
assess if current peacekeeping operations have been
effective in protecting civilians and whether there
could be further improvements to provide better
protection for them; and secondly, it helps to evaluate
the practical usefulness of the aide-memoire as a guide
and reference. This will help us to develop the aide-
memoire further, as Under-Secretary-General Oshima
noted, as a living document.

As we have consistently emphasized in all of our
discussions on this and other related subjects, the
Council will not be judged by the number of
documents we adopt on important but abstract
principles, but by how we apply those principles to the
actual conflict situations we deal with in a consistent
way. To help this review, the Secretariat may wish to
keep the Council informed about the usefulness of the
practical application of the aide-memoire which the
Secretariat is planning to carry out, including through
the November 2002 reports.

Thirdly, protection of civilians is best served if
we can act prior to an impending conflict. The Council
should not react only when large-scale violence has
taken place but should conduct itself proactively, and
act collectively, to prevent such conflict. The culture of
prevention has not yet fully taken hold. The Council
has been hearing ad hoc reports on disputes that could
pose a threat to international peace and security. What
is clearly lacking now is a structured mechanism that
could be implemented, when receiving such reports, to
contain a potential conflict. It may therefore be worth
the Council's while to reflect on this issue at a later
stage.

