Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
wishes to congratulate you, Mr. President, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month and will actively support your work.
China also expresses its appreciation to the United
States for the work it did as President during the month
of September.

I wish to thank Ambassadors Llorentty Soliz,
Umarov and Meza-Cuadra for their briefings. China
expresses its appreciation to the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1267
(1999), concerning Al-Qaida and the Taliban and
associated individuals and entities, the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1373 (2001), concerning counter-terrorism (CTC), and
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1540 (2004) for the work they have done
and the progress they have achieved under the able
leadership of the three Ambassadors.

Terrorism and the proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction and their means of delivery pose a
grave threat to international peace and security. The
international community should therefore strengthen
cooperation and adopt an integrated approach to
effectively respond to the threat. In connection with the
work of the three Committees, China wishes to make
the following points.

First, the 1267 Committee plays an important
role in evaluating terror threats and strengthening
sanctions. Recently, on the basis of the Council's
mandate, the Committee updated its rules of
procedure and conducted periodic review of the
sanctions list. The Committee has done something
positive in selecting a new Ombudsperson. It has also
strengthened cooperation with the Monitoring Team
and the Ombudsperson and has continued to improve
its working methods. China hopes that the Committee
will strengthen its communication with the countries
concerned and abide by the principles of objectivity,
neutrality and professionalism when it comes to listing,
exemptions and delisting. China also hopes that it will
make decisions on the basis of solid evidence and broad
consensus so as to preservejointly the authority and the
effectiveness of the sanctions regime.

Secondly, the CTC plays an important role in
facilitating the full implementation of the Council's
counter-terrorism resolutions by tracking new terror
threats and trends and by providing technical assistance
to the countries concerned. China is happy to see that
the CTC has strengthened its information-sharing and
coordination and cooperation with other United Nations
agencies throughjoint meetings and visits. China hopes
that the Committee will continue its dialogue with
Member States and engage in cooperation with regional
and subregional organizations, as well as assist Member
States with capacity-building on counter-terrorism so as
to jointly respond to new challenges posed by terrorist
organizations that incite, plan and execute terrorist
activities using the Internet and new technologies.

Thirdly, the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction and their means of delivery is a real threat
to international peace and security. It is also a challenge
to be taken up jointly by the international community.
In order to effectively respond to the threat of
proliferation by non-State actors, the 1540 Committee
should continue to work in a spirit of cooperation and
dialogue and carry out its activities under the purview
of the relevant Council resolutions and the Committee's
programme ofwork. It is necessary to stress the primary
responsibility of Member States in non-proliferation
and to support them in designing their non-proliferation
policies on their own terms. It is necessary also to
adopt a balanced approach in the implementation
of the provisions of Council resolutions and to build
the capacity of Member States to implement those
resolutions. We must also ensure that the assistance
provided by the Committee to Member States is more
targeted and effective and that special attention is given
to the needs of developing countries.

Fourthly, the Committees' Groups of Experts
should work within the framework of their respective
mandates and the Committees' rules of procedure. It
is essential that they strengthen coordination, leverage
their respective advantages, improve their work and
enhance their professionalism. At the same time, they
should be more open to the views of Member States.

China opposes terrorism of all kinds and is
firmly against the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction and their means of delivery. China has
adopted effective measures to implement Council
resolutions and supports the work of the Council's
subsidiary organs. China, together with the rest of the
international community, will continue its efforts to
promote international counter-terrorism cooperation,
strengthen the international non-proliferation regime
and work jointly to maintain world peace and stability.

