Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): France
welcomes the adoption today of resolution 2310 (2016),
which we co-sponsored, and thanks the United States
for having sponsored it as well.

The resolution urges all States that have not done so
to sign and ratify the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban
Treaty (CTBT) to ensure its entry into force as soon
as possible. It reaffirms the importance of nuclear-
testing moratoriums and urges all States to refrain from
conducting any type of nuclear explosion.

The CTBT is an essential step in the gradual
implementation of the nuclear-disarmament process,
and its entry into force is France's foremost priority
in this area. The CTBT and national moratoriums are
fundamental instruments for nuclear non-proliferation
and international security. Its importance is all the
clearer in the context of the serious and repeated acts
committed by North Korea, which carried out a fifth
nuclear test earlier this month. France and the Security
Council condemned these provocations, which are very
serious ones, with the utmost firmness.

It is crucial that all States live up to their
responsibilities today by heeding our call for the
universalization of the CTBT, as set forth in the
resolution we have just adopted. This is especially true
for those States whose signature and ratification are
necessary for the entry into force of the Treaty.

France was among the first States to sign the
CTBT, in September 1996, and to ratify it, in 1998.
As a responsible nuclear Power, we have taken strong
and exemplary steps, such as the dismantling of our
nuclear-testing site in the Pacific Ocean and putting
an end to our production of plutonium and uranium for
nuclear weapons.

We align ourselves all States members of the
Security Council in sending this message ofmobilization
for a comprehensive ban on nuclear testing. Such a
prohibition has become an example of responsible
behaviour at the international level. Only one State has
conducted nuclear testing in the twenty-first century,
and its behaviour is unanimously condemned at every
opportunity.

On the twentieth anniversary of the Treaty, France
wishes to reiterate its resolute commitment to the entry
into force of the CTBT as soon as possible. With this
resolution, the responsibility of every State is engaged
today more than ever.

