Mr. Esono Mbengono (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): We thank Ms. Hennis-Plasschaert, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Iraq
and Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission
for Iraq (UNAMI), for her very detailed, clear and
comprehensive briefing this morning.

Despite the progress observed since the successful
holding of last year's elections, Equatorial Guinea
continues to be concerned about the difficulties that
have delayed the formation of a new Iraqi Government
this year. However, in the most recent report of
the Secretary-General (S/2019/660), we note with
satisfaction the recent consultations among Iraqi
political leaders which helped to move the process
forward with new appointments in almost every
ministerial departments to be filled. We hope that, in
the same spirit of collaboration and cooperation, the
Minister of Education will be appointed as soon as
possible in order to fully conclude that process.

The completion of the formation of the Iraqi
Government is a necessary step for the new Executive
to restore the trust and support of the Iraqi people.
The Government will now be able to focus fully on
implementing its programme to improve basic services,
promoting reconstruction and economic development
and fostering a secure environment.

In order to firmly support the country's current
approach towards development and avoid the mistrust
of the Iraqi people, it is necessary to carefully manage
the country's revenues and resources. In that regard, we
welcome the continued focus of the Government of Iraq
on combating corruption and enhancing transparency,
as demonstrated, for example, by publicly reporting on
the implementation of the Government's programme.
However, the Supreme Council for Combating
Corruption, which has an important role to play in that
regard, should be further strengthened.

We highlight the appointment of three women
Ministers in the formation of the Kurdistan Regional
Government, which is a very significant development.
We therefore encourage the political leaders of the
Kurdistan region to take this opportunity to fill the
vacancies in the remaining Ministries and focus
on implementing the priorities of the Regional
Government, as well as further improving its relations
with Baghdad through dialogue.
With regard to the security situation, we condemn
in the strongest terms the asymmetric attacks that
the remaining elements of the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant (ISIL) continue to carry out on the
population and the security forces in various parts of
the country. We commend the Iraqi security forces that
have conducted large-scale clearance operations in the
liberated areas by arresting or neutralizing terrorist
fighters, defusing improvised explosive devices and
exposing ISIL hideouts, tunnels and weapons caches.

It is also important to take measures to stop
terrorists from returning to places already liberated
and to provide a secure environment so that all those
displaced by terrorist activities can return safely to
their homes. Those responsible for atrocities and
terrorist crimes must be held accountable and face
justice, without which genuine reconciliation will be
difficult. The reintegration of former combatants is
also a subject that requires careful analysis in order to
find a definitive solution to what is a very delicate and
complicated issue for the entire region.

The ongoing regional tensions remains a cause
for serious concern, in particular with regard to their
possible impact on Iraq. In that regard, we encourage
Iraq, its neighbours and international partners to take
concrete steps towards and continue addressing existing
problems and disputes in the region through dialogue in
a spirit of mutual respect and cooperation.

Regarding the funding shortfall of $335 million
of the $701 million needed to implement the 2019
humanitarian response plan and stabilization efforts,
we encourage the international community to continue
to support humanitarian work, which is extremely
important for those most in need.

With regard to the issue of missing Kuwaitis, third-
country nationals and Kuwaiti property, we await the
results of the DNA analysis of the human remains
exhumed in Samawah to determine whether or not they
are indeed those of missing Kuwaitis. The exhumation
of those remains is a significant step forward and
revives the hopes of finding answers for the families of
the missing. A satisfactory solution to that issue would
have a very positive effect on strengthening relations
between Iraq and Kuwait.

Lastly, I would like to pay tribute to UNAMI, and
particularly to its Head, for the considerable efforts to
support Iraqi authorities in completing their long list of
reconciliation projects in the country.

