Mr. Radomski (Poland): Allow me to start with
expressing my thanks to Special Envoy Said Djinnit
and Ambassador Serge Bale of the Congo for their very
informative briefings.

Let me first focus on the current political and
security situation in the Great Lakes region, since it has
a huge impact on the large population movements and
directly affects the humanitarian situation of the people
on the ground. The preconditions for stabilization in the

whole region are well known. They include conducting
reliable electoral processes that build the trust of
citizens in the authorities, re-establishing the rule of
law and respecting human rights and good governance,
since, despite all the efforts to date, the number of
serious violations in those areas has been increasing.

Tensions around the political processes in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Burundi, as
well as South Sudan and the Central African Republic,
still remain great obstacles to stability in the region.
The political situation in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo has strategic importance. Implementing the
confidence-building measures and ensuring a peaceful
electoral process by the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo are critical to the stability of
the Central Africa region. Moreover, cross-border
issues related to the eastern part of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo are of importance in order to
address the root causes of the conflict in the region.
Countering illegal cross-border activities is an essential
condition for the limitation of the destructive activity
of armed groups and for the successful submission of
combatants to the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programme.

We are concerned about the recent significant
increase in the number of refugees and internally
displaced persons, as there is a clear link between
forced displacement and instability in the region. We
also believe that greater attention must be paid to the
human rights situation in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Burundi, South Sudan and the Central
African Republic. An effective international response
is needed to put an end to violence and human rights
violations and abuses, especially in the case of attacks
that target women and children.

We appreciate the efforts made to implement of the
Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework. However,
more progress is still required in that regard. The full
implementation of the Framework is in the interests
of all its signatory States. They should increase their
commitment and ensure that the achievements in that
regard will not be lost. We should bear in mind that the
conflicts in different parts of the region have various
causes. More effort should be put into preventive
diplomacy and the promotion of good practices.
The international community must demonstrate its
continuing interest in the situation on the ground.

