Ms. Holguin Cuellar (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): On behalf of the Government of Colombia, I
would like to congratulate South Africa on its
presidency during this month, as well as to thank you,
Mr. President, for the timely initiative of convening
this debate of great pertinence and relevance for the
strengthening of cooperation between the United
Nations and regional organizations in maintaining
international peace and security. It is an honour to
participate in this meeting presided over by His
Excellency President Jacob Zuma. It is also a pleasure
to see high level representatives from the different
regions gathered here today. During its presidency,
South Africa will celebrate 100 years of the
establishment of the African National Congress. We
joint them in commemorating that event.

I would like to thank the Secretary-General for

his report (S/2011/805) detailing the progress and

remaining challenges in the area of cooperation

between the United Nations and the African Union on

issues of peace and security, as well as for his
participation in today's debate.

I also wish to thank Ambassador Ramtane
Lamamra, Commissioner for Peace and Security of the
African Union, for his briefing.

The report of the Secretary-General leaves us
wondering how to complement peacekeeping
operations, as they, in and of themselves, do not
produce the changes that countries need in the long-
term to consolidate their stability and development. In
that context, in the debates of recent months, Colombia
has emphasized recourse to peaceful conflict resolution
mechanisms. Today, we would like once again to
underscore the great contributions of the provisions of
Chapter VI of the Charter of the United Nations, which
allows the United Nations and the Council to support
the search for lasting solutions based on negotiation,
mediation and agreement.

For those practices to be effective, the role, vision
and leadership of regional organizations are crucial.
Without them, no action carried out focusing on the
interest of global balance will have the local effects
that improve the situation on the ground to provide
relief for populations affected by conflict. Concrete
actions have already been taken with regard to such
coordination, such as the common guidelines that
support a mediation framework in Africa based on the
cases of Kenya, Darfur, Somalia and Guinea-Bissau.
We hope those actions will be expanded and that
additional mechanisms will be found.

United Nations operations in Africa make up a
large portion of the Organization's agenda. Without a
doubt, the coordination with the African Union in
recent years has been essential to the success that has
been achieved. The 25 operations authorized by the
Security Council in Africa since 1990 highlight the
importance of the work carried out by this body with
the African Union and other subregional organizations
on that continent.

The presence of some of those peacekeeping
operations on the ground for extended periods serves to
draw attention to the issue of exit goals in evaluating
joint work, as the criteria of strengthening national
capacity and the creation of conditions for countries to
be able to take on their full independence and
sovereignty and generate development and welfare for
their people must have a central role.

The experience of the African Union highlights
the need for an integrated approach to address
conflicts. That regional organization is in a privileged
position to contribute and define elements and establish
strategies on how to strengthen conflict resolution in
its region. The fact that the Security Council and the
Peace and Security Council of the African Union meet
annually is an indication of the greater awareness that
exists with regard to the need to coordinate policies
and actions in the search for solutions.

Chapter VIII of the Charter envisions the
contribution of regional organizations as an integral
part of collective security and values their vision,
actions and initiatives to find solutions within their
range of competence. The fact that the application of
Chapter VII makes way more frequently for Chapter VI
can hinge on the support of the Security Council for
those efforts, thus strengthening peaceful agreement
and diplomatic channels in conflict resolution.

We cannot lose sight of the fact that the greatest
aspiration in the face of conflicts is to achieve peace.
In this regard, the preservation of cooperation efforts
must include their continuous adjustment to ensure that
they do not to become permanent, self-serving
structures, or whose purpose becomes solving
temporary problems.

