Mr. Maes (Luxembourg) (spoke in French):
Luxembourg fully aligns itself with the statement just
delivered by the observer of the European Union.

We warmly congratulate the Portuguese
presidency of the Council for organizing this bi-annual
debate on the protection of civilians, which has taken
on particular importance against the backdrop of the
developments in North Africa and the Middle East in
recent months.

The Security Council assumed its responsibilities
by authorizing, in resolution 1973 (2011), the operation
to protect civilians in Libya. The determined
intervention of the international community made it
possible to save the lives of countless Libyan men,
women and children. The international community had
to act. As the Deputy Prime Minister of Luxembourg
stated in the General Assembly in September,

"We did not want to reproach ourselves yet again
for having hesitated too long, for having
neglected our responsibility to protect those
unable to defend themselves against the cruelty of
their own authorities. We did not want once again

to be the powerless witnesses of large-scale
violence." (A/66/PV.24, p. 2)

We must now support the new Libya along the difficult
path towards democracy and the rule of law.

Enhancing the protection of civilians in armed
conflict lies at the heart of the Council's work to
maintain international peace and security, not only in
the Libyan context. The protection of civilians is the
noblest task of our peacekeepers, and possibly the most
difficult and the most delicate.

We therefore commend the Council for giving
peacekeeping operations increasingly explicit mandates
to protect civilians. The Council has an excellent tool,
the aide-memoire (S/PRST/2009/l, annex), to do so in
a systematic and coherent fashion. Is it essential to
translate the mandates set by the Council into rules of
engagement on the ground that enable Blue Helmets to
successfully discharge their protection-of-civilians
mandate. While the expectations of the populations in
areas where peacekeeping operations are deployed are
enormous, the resources available to our peacekeepers
are often too limited.

In that regard, we commend the initiatives taken
in recent years by the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations, in cooperation with the Special Committee
on Peacekeeping Operations and in consultation with
the Security Council, to better prepare the military,
police and civilian personnel deployed under the
auspices of the United Nations for their task of
protecting civilians. They do so in ever more complex
environments and conflicts, in which civilians continue
to be the first victims of the acts of violence committed
by parties to the conflict.

The efforts of the Council to better protect
children in armed conflict and to fight sexual violence
in conflicts are part and parcel of the agenda for the
protection of civilians. We encourage the Council to
continue to press ahead on all these fronts and to
continue to include violations of human rights and of
international humanitarian law as criteria for imposing
targeted sanctions.

United Nations peacekeeping operations,
however many and however big they may be, will
unfortunately never be enough to protect all civilians
who are victims of violation of their fundamental rights
during armed conflicts across the globe. Therefore, we
must spare no effort in fighting impunity of the

perpetrators of these crimes wherever they may be.
Important progress has been made through the
prosecution of the perpetrators of these crimes in
national, international and mixed criminal tribunals,
commissions of inquiry, and specialized chambers in
national tribunals.

The unanimous decision by the Security Council
to refer the situation in Libya since 15 February 2011
to the Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court
sent a clear signal to the Qadhafi regime and to all
combatants in Libya that they will be have to answer
for their acts. The international community will not
tolerate impunity for the most serious crimes. The
important preventative function of the activities of
these mechanisms and bodies deserves to be
highlighted as well.

Allow me to conclude by paying tribute to all the
men and women, at all levels of the hierarchy of
peacekeeping operations, who through their
courageous presence and their decisive action strive
day after day to give the civilian population during
armed conflict a sense of security, and thereby human
dignity.

