Mr. Khoshroo (Islamic Republic of Iran): I have
the honour to address the Security Council today on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement (NAM).

Let me start by congratulating you, Mr. President,
on Uruguay's accession to membership of the Council
and on its assumption of the presidency for this month,
as well as by thanking you for organizing this debate
and for preparing the concept note (S/2016/22, annex).
I would also like to thank the Secretary-General for his
June 2015 report (S/2015/453) on the issue at hand and
the Deputy Secretary-General for his briefing today.

Events around the world indicate that civilians
are still suffering in massive numbers. Despite all
the efforts at the international level, including those
undertaken by the relevant humanitarian institutions,
it is most unfortunate that civilians still account for
the vast majority of casualties in armed conflicts. As
the latest report of the Secretary-General indicates,
over the past decade the number of people in need of
international humanitarian assistance has tripled. The
overwhelming majority of those people are civilians
affected by armed conflict or complex emergencies,
which account for about 80 per cent of the crises
requiring an international humanitarian response.
Approximately 42 per cent of the world's poor now live
in conflict-affected and fragile States, and that figure is
expected to rise to 62 per cent by 2030. Direct attacks
on schools and hospitals have become common features
in many armed conflicts.

NAM. believes that due priority should continue to
be given to the promotion of the knowledge of, respect
for and observance by States of their obligations under
the Charter of the United Nations and international
law, including international human rights law and
international humanitarian law, in particular those of
the four Geneva Conventions of 1949 and their 1977
Protocols.

NAM. calls upon all parties to armed conflicts
to redouble their efforts to comply with their legal
obligations by, inter alia, prohibiting the targeting of
civilian populations and civilian property and attaching
priority to their responsibility to ensure general
protection against the dangers arising from military
operations to civilian installations, hospitals and relief
materials and the means to transport and distribute
such relief materials.

The Movement reiterates its condemnation of
the increasing attacks on the safety and security of
humanitarian personnel and urges the Governments
of States Members of the United Nations to ensure
respect for the protection of the personnel of United
Nations humanitarian organizations, in conformity
with the relevant provisions of international law. At the
same time, NAM. emphasizes that the principles of the
sovereign equality, political independence and territorial
integrity of all States and of non-intervention must be
upheld. The consent of a country is also imperative
for granting access to humanitarian assistance on its
territory and for its continued operations at all times.

United Nations missions constitute one of the most
significant means at the disposal of the United Nations
to protect civilians in situations of armed conflict. Since
1999, the Security Council has tasked United Nations

peacekeeping missions with protection mandates,
which include establishing effective early-warning
mechanisms, ensuring the provision of adequate
resources to monitor, prevent and respond to incidents
and supporting the efforts of host country authorities
to implement their responsibilities in protecting
civilians. Additionally, United Nations missions assist
in creating protective environments by supporting the
establishment of effective rule-of-law and security
institutions.
The Non-Aligned Movement stresses that United
Nations peacekeeping operations, in particular
those with protection-of-civilian mandates, should
be guided by the principles of the Charter of the
United Nations. The Movement underlines that the
protection of civilians is the primary responsibility
of the host country. Accordingly, NAM. emphasizes
that the relevant peacekeeping missions with a peace
mandate should conduct their tasks without prejudice
to the primary responsibility of the host Government to
protect civilians. We stress that the successful conduct
of tasks related to the protection of civilians requires
the integration of efforts at all levels and a holistic
approach that encompasses the timely provision of
adequate resources, logistical support and required
training, as well as clearly defined and achievable
mandates.

Let me conclude by expressing the hope that this
open debate will provide an opportunity to assess
the ways and means of providing better protection
to civilians in armed conflict. We need to identify
not only the positive developments made so far, but
the challenges ahead. Let me once more reiterate the
Non-Aligned Movement's firm beliefin the importance
of the protection of civilians in conflict situations,
in establishing accountability for violations of
international humanitarian law and in ending impunity.

