Mr. Haraguchi (Japan): The growing threat of
terrorism - as demonstrated by the bombings at a
hotel in Jakarta, Indonesia, and at the United Nations
headquarters in Baghdad in August; at the city centre
of Mumbai, India, last month; as well as the frequently
occurring terrorist attacks in Iraq in recent months -
poses an extremely grave challenge to our effort to
build a more decent world.

I would like to reiterate the importance of
resolute action on the part of the international
community in the fight against terrorism and to touch
upon the following three points in that connection.

First, I have repeatedly point out that it is
important to deny safe haven to terrorists. Despite the
repeated appeals of the international community, the
number of contracting parties to the counter-terrorism
conventions and protocols is still far from satisfactory.
In this connection, Japan has organized a seminar that
is being held today and tomorrow in Tokyo with a view
to encouraging accession to these counter-terrorism
conventions by countries in South-East Asia.

International and regional efforts are also
essential in order to deny safe haven to terrorists. We
welcome the strengthening of cooperation between the
CTC and other international and regional
organizations. One example of a regional effort in Asia
was the Asia-Europe Meeting seminar on anti-terrorism
held last month in Beijing, co-sponsored by China,
Denmark, Germany, Spain and Japan. My country is
determined to continue efforts to further strengthen
such international and regional cooperation.

Secondly, as regards the task of denying terrorists
access to the means of committing acts of terror, the
importance of promoting the conclusion of the
International Convention for the Suppression of the
Financing of Terrorism and of strictly implementing
the sanctions imposed on Al Qaeda and the Taliban by
Security Council resolution 1267 (1999) and
subsequent resolutions can hardly be overemphasized.
Efforts by Member States, however, should not stop
there. They need to go well beyond these measures.
Japan has frozen the assets of the military wing of
Hamas, in accordance with resolution 1373 (2001), but
in the light of the fact that Hamas has expressed its
tolerance of and support for terrorism, we have decided
to take measures to freeze the assets of Hamas as a
whole. We believe that these measures taken by my
country will encourage further efforts by the
Palestinian Authority to dismantle the terrorist
infrastructure, as required by the road map, and thus
contribute to achieving peaceful coexistence between
Israelis and Palestinians and to bringing about peace in
the Middle East.

With regard to the arms that can be used as a
direct means of committing terrorist acts, we welcome
the recent recommendation of the Group of
Governmental Experts on the United Nations Register
of Conventional Arms that man-portable air defence
systems be included among the categories of arms
subject to registration and reporting. We hope that the
inclusion of these weapons in the United Nations
Register, once agreed upon by Member States, will
make a significant contribution to preventing terrorists
from acquiring them.

We are also of the view that the CTC and the
Security Council as a whole should seriously address
the issue of the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction in the context of our fight against terrorism.

Thirdly, lack of capacity due to a variety of
constraints prevents many developing countries from
taking effective counter-terrorism measures, although
they recognize their importance and have the earnest
intention of implementing them. It is essential to
extend assistance for capacity-building to those
developing countries. Japan will continue to contribute
in this area through activities such as inviting
conference and seminar participants from developing
countries, in coordination with the CTC.

The necessity of addressing the root causes of
terrorism has been underscored on numerous
occasions. Identifying and addressing the root causes is
crucial, and all parties are called upon to make a
serious effort to eradicate them. However, while
acknowledging the need to address the underlying
causes of terrorism, we can never accept the existence
of root causes as justification for the use of terrorism or
as an excuse for delay in taking effective counter-
terrorism measures. We should be aware that only with
resolute will and determined action will we be able to
overcome the threat of terrorism.

