The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Cuba, Egypt, the Islamic Republic of
Iran, Israel, Japan, Jordan, Malaysia, the Netherlands,
South Africa, the Syrian Arab Republic, Tunisia and
Turkey, in which they request to be invited to
participate in the discussion of the item on the
Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Gillerman
(Israel) took a seat at the Council table; the
representatives of the other aforementioned
countries took the seats reserved for them at the
side of the Council Chamber.

The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I received a letter dated 4 October 2004
from the Permanent Observer of Palestine to the United
Nations, which will be issued as document S/2004/780,
and in which he requests to be invited to participate in
today's meeting.

I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite the Permanent Observer of Palestine to
participate in the meeting, in accordance with the
Council's provisional rules of procedure and the
previous practice in this regard.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Al-Kidwa

(Palestine) took a seat at the Council table.


The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter dated 4 October
2004 from the Permanent Representative of Algeria to
the United Nations, in which he requests that we
authorize His Excellency Mr. Yahya Mahmassani,
Ambassador, Permanent Observer of the League of
Arab States to the United Nations to address the
Council.

That letter will be published as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/2004/781.

If I hear no objection, I shall take it that the
Council agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 to
Mr. Yahya Mahmassani.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite Mr. Mahmassani to take the seat reserved
for him at the side of the Council Chamber.

I should like to inform the Council that I have
received a letter dated 4 October 2004 from the
Chairman of the Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People, requesting
that Mr. Ravan Farhadi, Vice-Chairman of the
Committee, be invited to participate in the debate.

In accordance with past practice in this matter, I
propose that the Council extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to the
Vice-Chairman of the Committee on the Exercise of
the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite Mr. Ravan Farhadi to take the seat
reserved for him at the side of the Council Chamber.

The Council will now begin its consideration of
the item on its agenda.

The Security Council is meeting in response to
the request contained in a letter dated 4 October 2004
from the Permanent Representative of Tunisia, which
will be issued as document S/2004/779.

I should like to draw attention to documents
S/2004/776, S/2004/76l and S/2004/729, containing
letters dated 30, 27 and 14 September 2004,
respectively, from the Permanent Observer of
Palestine; and S/2004/757 containing a letter dated 24
September from Israel.

I now give the floor to the Permanent Observer of
Palestine.


