Mr. Nduhungirehe (Rwanda) (spoke in French):
Allow me first of all to thank Mr. Jan Kubis, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, for his briefing
and leadership of the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA). At the same time, I thank
Ambassador Zahir Tanin, Permanent Representative of
Afghanistan to the United Nations, for his statement.

Rwanda appreciates the considerable progress made
by Afghanistan in the past few years, in particular in the
security, economic and political areas. That said, the
transition in Afghanistan still faces many challenges,
including the very worrying security and humanitarian
situation and the opium cultivation. Indeed, the security
of civilians and humanitarian workers, as noted by the
Secretary-General in his report (S/2013/721), is of great
concern.

Along those lines, my delegation firmly condemns
the attacks in Uruzgan province on 26 November and
in Faryab province on 27 November, which led to the
death of nine humanitarian workers. We call on the
Afghan Government to do its utmost to ensure that the
perpetrators of those crimes are held accountable.

The Afghan Government has made definite
progress in preparing for next year's presidential and
provincial council elections. Rwanda is pleased to
note the inclusion of women on the electoral lists as
candidates and election officers. We regret, however,
that there was no qualified female candidate for the
presidential election. The increased participation
of women will contribute to the legitimacy and
transparency of the electoral process. That is why we
call on the Afghan National Security Forces to take the
necessary security measures so as to allow women to
enjoy their political rights and to vote independently in
inclusive, transparent and credible elections.

Rwanda notes its deep concern about the rise in
the opium production in Afghanistan. a drug that has
serious consequences for the health of consumers as
well as the security, stability and development of the
country and the region. In that respect, we welcome
the commitment of the Afghan Government and the
initiatives of its international partners, in particular the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, to counter
that scourge. Eradicating the cultivation of that drug
requires a comprehensive and holistic approach as part
of a long-term security, development and institution
capacity-building strategy.

Improving relations and bolstering cooperation
between Afghanistan and its neighbours on a wide
range of issues, in particular those related to peace,
reconciliation, regional security, development and
humanitarian assistance, are crucial to lasting peace and
stability in the region. In that context, we are pleased
with the implementation of bilateral and multilateral
cooperation frameworks between Afghanistan and its
various regional partners.

We would like to take this opportunity to reiterate
our call to United Nations Member States and the other
development partners that made pledges at the various
donor conferences to meet those commitments. We also
encourage the international community to continue its
partnership with the Afghan Government, in particular
under the Tokyo Mutual Accountability Framework.

We would like to conclude by saying that Rwanda
will continue to support the Afghan Government
in completing the transition phase and over the
transformation decade that is beginning. We reiterate
our support for UNAMA and the United Nations
agencies working to support the Afghan authorities
in strengthening peace and stability and rebuilding
the country through robust regional commitment, in
particular with regard to border security and combating
drugs.

