Mr. Doutriaux (France) (spoke in French): We
thank Judge Pillay, Judge Jorda and Ms. Del Ponte for
their briefings. I wish to comment on both the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR).

With respect to the ICTY, we thank Judge Jorda
for reminding us of the reforms that are under way with
a view to enhancing the effectiveness of the Tribunal.
At present, the reforms are being fully implemented,
which is making it possible to expedite the cases
brought before the Tribunal. Twenty-seven ad litem
judges have been appointed; six of them have already
taken up their posts. There have been procedural and
evidentiary changes. A Coordination Council and a
Management Committee have been established. The
Office of the Prosecutor has reorganized its
investigative services. All of those are essential
reforms, but they alone are not enough.

Here, let me make two comments. All speakers
have noted that it is important for the States concerned
in the activities of the ICTY further to cooperate with
the Tribunal. Indeed, it is their obligation to do so.
There has been progress, especially in the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia, where we have seen the arrest
and the transfer to The Hague of Mr. Milosevic. There
has also been progress in Croatia. On the other hand,
the issue of cooperation is a concern with respect to
Bosnia and Herzegovina, and especially the Republika
Srpska, where persons accused by the Tribunal have
not been arrested; there is every reason to believe that
they are hiding in the Republika Srpska. In that
connection, Mr. Karadzic, Mr. Mladic and 29 other
fugitives were mentioned here today.

Another comment - one also made by many
other speakers - it would be best if the Tribunal, in
order to fulfil its function and mission in the shortest
possible time, concentrated more on the individuals
primarily responsible, the main organizers and planners
of crimes. This was also stressed by the Security
Council in resolution 1329 (2001). Those who simply
carried out orders should be judged by competent
national authorities, as was made possible by the rules
of procedure and evidence of the Tribunal for
Yugoslavia, which allows the Tribunal to suspend
charges in a given case in order to allow a national
tribunal to take up the case.

I have a question for the Prosecutor, if there is
enough time. How does she envisage the division of
respective responsibilities with the local tribunals?

I also have some comments on the Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda. We note encouraging signs of the
Tribunal's activities. However, from July 2000 to June
2001, a single judgement was rendered by the Tribunal,
which is not enough. Naturally, we expect progress
from recently implemented reforms, but there are still a
number of difficulties.

We are willing to examine the proposal of
President Pillay to create 18 ad litem judges. However,
tangible results of such a proposed reform should be
ensured. We would need to be able to better evaluate
the impact of the reforms already made by the
Registrar or the Prosecutor. It should also be seen to
what extent other reforms can be envisaged, in
particular by means of new modifications to procedure
to speed up the Tribunal's activities.

Above all, it is indispensable that the
Prosecutor's intentions on the subject of prosecutions
be more precise and better defined. Ms. Del Ponte and
other speakers have cited the figure of 136 new
inquiries. Bearing in mind the restricted competence of
the Tribunal for Rwanda, which is limited to 1994, we
consider this figure to be excessive. In the case of
Yugoslavia, we should limit ourselves, as stated in
resolution 1329 (2000), to those primarily responsible
for the genocide: to those who conceived and planned
it. The cases of those who simply carried out orders
should be deferred to the competent national
authorities. I am thinking in particular of the process
that the Minister for Justice of Rwanda has mentioned:
the gachacha tribunals, whose relevance should be
underlined in this regard.

