Mr. Schulz (Germany): First of all, we would like
to thank Mr. Mark Lowcock and Mr. Geir Pedersen
for their comprehensive briefings. Allow me to make
four remarks.

First of all, on the situation in northwest Syria,
we associate ourselves with the statement delivered
by the representative of Belgium on behalf of the
co-penholders on the humanitarian situation in Syria,
namely, Belgium, Kuwait and Germany.

We remain deeply concerned by the military
offensive in north-west Syria through indiscriminate
air strikes, shelling and the use of barrel bombs.
The ongoing escalation has severe consequences for
civilians, who were again indiscriminately targeted
in blatant violation of international humanitarian law.
We have repeatedly stated that there can be no excuse
for attacks against innocent civilians, the destruction
of hospitals and schools through targeted aerial attacks
and the displacement of 500,000 civilians.

We, too, are concerned by the presence and
attacks of Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham and other United
Nations-designated terrorist groups in Idlib. As the
Special Envoy reminded us in his briefing, there is
no easy solution or panacea, but their attacks must
stop. They must cease. However, the fight against
terrorism does not justify indiscriminate attacks on
civilians and civilian infrastructure. Therefore, we
remind the Russian Federation and the Syrian regime
once again that counter-terrorism operations do not
override the responsibility to protect civilians, or any
other obligations under international humanitarian
law. The Syrian regime and the Russian Federation
must immediately end their military offensive in and
around Idlib.

We urge all sides to recommit fully to the ceasefire
arrangements of the Russian-Turkish memorandum of
understanding and implement it in full, including by
withdrawing their forces from the agreed demilitarized
zone. We need to see a de-escalation zone without
escalation. The Council needs to do everything in its
power to urgently alleviate the humanitarian situation
in Idlib. Kuwait, Belgium and Germany have presented
a draft resolution to the members of the Council that
aims to do exactly that. We look forward to working
constructively with all Council members on the text.

Secondly, as there is no military solution to this
conflict, Germany remains convinced that only a
political solution on the basis of resolution 2254 (2015)
and the 2012 Geneva communique (S/2012/522, annex)
can achieve sustainable peace and stability in Syria.
We recognize the role that the Astana group and the
Russian Federation in particular can play with regard
to a political solution under the guidance of the United
Nations and Special Envoy Pedersen. But we need to
finally see tangible progress and concrete results.
Promises and optimistic statements are not sufficient.

The constitutional committee is a good case in
point. It is overdue and urgently needed as an entry point
into a political transition process. It could and should
have been established a long time ago. Today we heard
from Mr. Pedersen that the package is nearly finalized
and that he is hopeful that it can be finalized before the
beginning of the seventy-fourth session of the General
Assembly. That is good news. Unfortunately - and we
have to be honest about this - we have heard this too
many times. We hope that he is right, but we have been
told time and again about progress on the establishment
of the constitutional committee, and time and again we
have been left disappointed. We have to say that this
is largely due to the Syrian regime and its policies of
obstruction and procrastination.

Let me also say that we are particularly alarmed
by reports that the regime's intelligence services
threatened and intimidated prospective members of the
constitutional committee, as well as their families in
Syria, in order to sabotage the committee before its first
session. Damascus must stop harassing its prospective
members and allow their free movement in and out of
the country. It must seriously engage on the formation
of the constitutional committee under the auspices of

the United Nations.
Thirdly, there will be no solution to the tragic
conflict in Syria without a serious change in the
Syrian regime's behaviour. It remains essential to
create a safe, calm and neutral environment in which
a political transition can take place. First and foremost,
this requires an immediate end to the brutal actions of
the Syrian regime. However, arbitrary arrests, torture,
sexual violence and forced disappearances and killings
of detainees continue, even in so-called reconciled
areas. Those actions must finally stop. It is this Syrian
regime's policy that keeps Syrian internally displaced
persons and refugees from returning home. It is the
responsibility of the Syrian regime to provide credible
security guarantees that would enable the voluntary,
safe and dignified return of Syrians to their country.
As discussed during the Council's meeting at the
beginning of August (see S/PV.8593), we also need
to see meaningful progress on the issue of detainees
and missing persons. Again, the Special Envoy has
reported some progress in that area, but of course it is
not yet sufficient.

As long as the Syrian regime does not change its
brutal behaviour and end its continuous violations
of international human rights law and international
humanitarian law, there will be no lifting of sanctions.
As long as there is no credible, inclusive and genuine
political process firmly under way, there will be no
participation in reconstruction efforts from our side.
We therefore call on Syria to finally engage seriously in
bringing about a Syrian-led and Syrian-owned political
process, facilitated by the United Nations on the basis
of resolution 2254 (2015) in all its elements.

My final point refers to accountability, which is
most crucial from our point of View. The crimes and
atrocities committed on all sides during the Syrian
conflict, including horrific accounts of murder, torture,
sexual violence and crimes against children, must be
investigated and the perpetrators brought to justice.
National reconciliation and lasting peace in Syria will
not be possible without justice and accountability.

The International, Impartial and Independent
Mechanismto Assist inthe InvestigationandProsecution
of Those Responsible for the Most Serious Crimes
under International Law Committed in the Syrian
Arab Republic since March 2011 has become a central
repository of information and evidence of the crimes

committed in Syria, and therefore has a crucial role to
play in the prosecution of crimes committed during the
Syrian conflict. We will continue to support the work
of the Mechanism and the Commission of Inquiry.
We also welcome Secretary-General's establishment
of a board of inquiry regarding the incidents in Idlib.
We will continue to pursue accountability in order to
achieve justice for the Victims and eventually enable
national reconciliation and sustainable peace.

