The President: I will now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of the United States
of America.

I would like to begin by thanking the Secretary-
General for his important statement and for his
participation in today's open event. I wish to thank
Council colleagues as well for their thoughtful
contributions to today's event and the preparations for
it.

In our interconnected world, our system of
collective security is only as strong as the weakest
links in the chain. One of those weak links today is the
poorly secured borders that are exploited for the illicit
transfer of arms and drugs; of materiel for nuclear,
chemical and biological weapons; of terrorists and their
funds; of conflict minerals; and even of human beings,
a modern-day form of slavery. Such illicit transfers
across borders increasingly undermine the sovereignty
and internal stability of Member States and can
threaten international peace and security. The dangers
posed by these transfers are not limited to fragile or
particularly vulnerable States. They affect us all.

The Security Council has often addressed these
transfers individually, in specific regional contexts. For
example, we have examined how illicit arms transfers
have exacerbated instability in the Sahel and fuelled
long-standing conflict in Somalia and in the
Democratic Republic of Congo. We have seen how
arms smuggling from Iran, in violation of United
Nations sanctions, exacerbates conflict in the Middle
East and supports terrorist groups worldwide. We have
also discussed how drug trafficking has directly
contributed to internal disorder in Guinea-Bissau.
These are just a few examples.

The Security Council has been involved in the
question of illicit trafficking and movement for a long
time, but we have tended to look at each trafficked item
in isolation from the common feature they share - the
vulnerabilities at poorly secured borders that are too
easily exploited by nefarious networks.
States already understand very well how
important it is to control their borders and often ask for
international assistance in doing so. States recognize
their self-interest in protecting their territory and
people from these interrelated phenomena that threaten

their sovereignty, corrode governing institutions and
undermine internal security. States also have
international obligations, including those derived from
Chapter VII of the United Nations Charter and
including United Nations sanctions, that require them
to intercept or control contraband.

There are already significant bilateral,
multilateral and regional efforts under way to help
States defend their borders, and these efforts should be
supported and encouraged. Today, however, we focus
on the United Nations operational capacity. We believe
that the United Nations system could improve its help
to States to secure their borders and to put in place
related intelligence and law enforcement cooperation,
customs standards and administrative and legal
frameworks. That is why we have convened this debate
today.

Many elements of the United Nations system, as
well as national, regional and other multilateral
organizations, are already doing excellent work to
assist States in protecting their borders and in
implementing their relevant international obligations.
In response to requests from Member States,
organizations as diverse as INTERPOL, the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, the World
Customs Organization, United Nations peacekeeping
missions and the International Atomic Energy Agency
provide such assistance.

Also engaged in this work are a number of bodies
created by the Security Council, such as the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), the
Counter-Terrorism Executive Directorate and our
sanctions committees and their expert panels. The
United States fully supports all these efforts. We are
also committed to helping fund efforts by the United
Nations Counterterrorism Implementation Task Force
Working Group on Border Management to enhance
international, regional and national policy and practice
relating to border management in the context of
countering terrorism.

These bodies are all doing important work, but
because they are so narrowly focused on specific
threats, they may be unaware of overlapping efforts or
miss opportunities to pool knowledge and expertise.
After all, these different bodies are often evaluating the
same State institutions and legislative frameworks,
providing similar technical advice and appealing to the
same pool of donors for assistance. Put simply, they are
all working on different aspects of the same problem -
how to help States that want it and need it to better
secure and control the flow of illicit goods across their
borders. Surely there is scope to streamline and
strengthen the United Nations capacity to help States
secure their borders, while realizing efficiencies in the
process.

The Security Council can make an important
contribution to this effort, but it is vital that the
General Assembly, the Economic and Social Council
and others be fully engaged as well. This complex,
cross-cutting challenge cannot be tackled effectively
by any single body alone. Many United Nations actors
play a role in these capacity-building efforts, and it is
logical that they work better together as one United
Nations system to assist Member States. We therefore
welcome the Security Council's request to the
Secretary-General to provide a diagnostic assessment
of these efforts. The Security Council needs a birds-eye
view of them across the United Nations system. The
United States hopes that the Security-General's report
will also offer any proposals, as appropriate, for
improvements.

By helping Member States to secure their
borders, the Council can respond to and, we hope, help
prevent these evolving threats to international peace
and security. With this goal in mind, we look forward
to revisiting this issue in six months and to taking
effective action.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

After consultations among Council members, I
have been authorized to make the following statement
on their behalf:

"The Security Council reaffirms its primary
responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security, in accordance
with the Charter of the United Nations.

"The Security Council acknowledges the
evolving challenges and threats to international
peace and security, including armed conflicts,
terrorism, proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction and small arms and light weapons,
transnational organized crime, piracy, drugs and
human trafficking. The Council has addressed,
when appropriate, related to these challenges and
threats, illicit cross-border trafficking in arms,

drug trafficking, trafficking by non-State actors in
nuclear, chemical and biological weapons, their
means of delivery and related materials,
trafficking in conflict minerals and the movement
of terrorists and their funds in violation of United
Nations sanctions regimes imposed by the
Security Council in accordance with Chapter VII
of the United Nations Charter and other decisions
taken under Chapter VII, in particular resolutions
1373 (2001) and 1540 (2004) as well as its other
relevant decisions (hereinafter - illicit cross- border trafficking and movement). The Council is
concerned that such illicit cross-border trafficking
and movement contributes to these challenges and
threats. The Council recognizes that such illicit
cross-border trafficking and movement often
involves cross-cutting issues, many of which are
considered by the General Assembly and other
United Nations organs and bodies.

"The Council notes relevant international
conventions such as the Single Convention on
Narcotic Drugs of 1961 as amended by the 1972
Protocol, the Convention on Psychotropic
Substances of 1971, the United Nations
Convention against Illicit Traffic in Narcotic
Drugs and Psychotropic Substances of 1988, the
United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime of 2000 and the Protocols
thereto, the United Nations Convention against
Corruption of 2003 and the relevant international
conventions and protocols related to terrorism.
The Security Council recalls the United Nations
Programme of Action on Small Arms and Light
Weapons as well as the international tracing
instrument and the United Nations Global Plan of
Action to Combat Trafficking in Persons.

"The Security Council reaffirms the benefits
of transborder communication, international
exchange and international migration. The
Security Council notes, however, that the various
challenges and threats to international peace and
security posed by illicit cross-border trafficking
and movement have increased as the world has
become more interconnected. The Security
Council notes that, in a globalized society,
organized criminal groups and networks, better
equipped with new information and
communication technologies, are becoming more
diversified and connected in their illicit
operations, which in some cases may aggravate
threats to international security.

"The Security Council reaffirms that
securing their borders is the sovereign
prerogative of Member States and, in this context,
reaffirms its commitment to the purposes and
principles of the United Nations Charter,
including the principles of sovereign equality and
territorial integrity. The Security Council calls on
all Member States to improve border management
to effectively constrain the spread of
transnational threats. The Security Council
reaffirms that Member States shall refrain in their
international relations from the threat or use of
force against the territorial integrity or political
independence of any State, and shall also give the
United Nations every assistance in any action it
takes in accordance with the United Nations
Charter, and shall refrain from giving assistance
to any State against which the United Nations is
taking preventive or enforcement action.

"The Security Council acknowledges that
distinct strategies are required to address threats
posed by illicit cross-border trafficking and
movement. Nevertheless, the Council observes
that illicit cross-border trafficking and movement
are often facilitated by organized criminal groups
and networks. The Council further notes that such
illicit cross-border trafficking and movement,
which in some cases exploits similar
vulnerabilities experienced by Member States in
securing their borders, can be addressed by
improving Member States' abilities to secure their
borders. The Security Council further
acknowledges the importance of adopting a
comprehensive and balanced approach, as
necessary, to tackle the conditions conducive to
facilitating illicit cross-border trafficking and
movement, including demand and supply factors,
and underlines the importance of international
cooperation in this regard.

"The Security Council calls on Member
States to fully comply with relevant obligations
under applicable international law, including
human rights and international refugee and
humanitarian law, relating to securing their
borders against illicit cross-border trafficking and
movement, including obligations stemming from
relevant resolutions of the Security Council
adopted under Chapter VII of the United Nations
Charter. The Security Council calls on all
Member States to fully respect and implement all
of their relevant international obligations in this
regard.

"The Security Council encourages Member
States and relevant organizations to enhance
cooperation and strategies, as appropriate, to
combat such illicit cross-border trafficking and
movement.

"The Security Council encourages Member
States, as well as international organizations and
relevant regional and subregional organizations,
within existing mandates, as appropriate, to
enhance efforts to assist Member States to build
the capacity to secure their borders against illicit
cross-border trafficking and movement, upon
request and by mutual agreement, in accordance
with international law. The Security Council
commends the substantial efforts already under
way in this field.

"The Security Council observes that several
United Nations entities, including subsidiary
organs of the Security Council, already offer such
assistance. The Security Council acknowledges
the importance of coherent, system-wide United
Nations action in order to offer coordinated
responses to transnational threats, including
through the use of best practices and exchange of
positive experiences from relevant initiatives
elsewhere, such as the Paris Pact initiative.

"The Security Council invites the Secretary-
General to submit in six months a report
providing a comprehensive survey and
assessment of the United Nations relevant work
to help Member States counter illicit cross-border
trafficking and movement, as defined in the
second paragraph above."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2012/ 16.

I wish to remind all speakers to limit their
statements to no more than four minutes, in order to
enable the Council to carry out its work expeditiously.
Delegations with lengthy statements are kindly
requested to circulate their text in writing and to
deliver a condensed version when speaking in the
Chamber.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Israel.

