Mr. Nishida (Japan): I would like, first of all, to
congratulate His Excellency Mr. Baso Sangqu on his
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council,
as well as to extend my appreciation for South Africa's
strong initiative in convening today's open debate on
justice and the rule of law. I would also like to take this
opportunity to wish a successful year to the newly
elected members of the Council, namely, Azerbaijan,
Morocco, Togo, Pakistan and Guatemala.

Progress has been made in recent years within the
United Nations system in the field of the rule of law,
including an enhanced focus on women and children,
which has created greater awareness of the subject. The
plan to hold a high-level meeting on the rule of law at
the national and international levels during the high-
level segment of the General Assembly's sixty-seventh
session demonstrates that heightened awareness.
In that regard, we welcome the submission of the
Secretary-General's report (S/2011/634*) on the rule of
law and transitional justice in conflict and post-conflict
societies. We hope that today's debate will help to
advance our efforts to strengthen the rule of law, to
prevent conflicts and to build peace.

January marks the one-year anniversary of the
historic change that occurred in Tunisia and Egypt.
Since then, we have witnessed efforts to reform by
many countries. The events of 2011 reminded us that
the rule of law is one of the most critical norms in
realizing peaceful coexistence. In other words, this
year will be especially important in ensuring that the
rule of law, freedom and democracy take root in our
respective societies.

Different countries are at different phases of
change: some are progressing towards the
establishment of democratic Government through
constitutional and electoral processes and some are
seeking to create a blueprint for their countries, while
the actions of certain Governments give rise to serious
doubts as to their sincerity with regard to reform. It is
essential that the Security Council and the international
community continue to be seized of the developments
in each of those countries and provide the necessary
assistance.

Efforts to strengthen the rule of law have been
made in every part of the world, including Asia and
Africa. Japan has actively supported such endeavours.
In Afghanistan, for example, Japan has contributed a
total of $960 million to build capacity in the security
sector since 2001. In South-East Asia, we have
allocated $70 million to the Khmer Rouge trial in
Cambodia and have dispatched Mr. Motoo Noguchi to
serve as an international judge. I would like to take this
opportunity to reach out to the international community
for further assistance in order to support that very
important trial.

In the United Nations setting, Japan, as Chair of
the Working Group on Lessons Learned of the
Peacebuilding Commission, held a meeting on security
sector reform and the rule of law last October, leading
the discussion on linkages between security sector
reform and the rule of law and on the role of capacity-
building in rule of law efforts. The need for better
coordination at the policy level and among various
actors is quite evident. Japan, working through the
Peacebuilding Commission, stands ready to continue to
seek improvements in methods of assistance and to
explore a variety of means to mobilize funds.

The International Criminal Court is indispensable
in putting an end to impunity for perpetrators who
commit the most serious crimes. Japan will more
actively engage in the work of the Court and, together
with other States parties, strongly support the newly
elected President of the Assembly of States Parties to
the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court,
Her Excellency Ambassador Intelmann of Estonia. It is
our hope that those activities will lead to progress in
our fight against impunity and to the realization of
justice and the strengthening of the rule of law.

On 11 March, we will commemorate the first
anniversary of the Great East Japan Earthquake. The
fact that the people in the affected areas acted in such
an orderly manner, despite indescribable chaos and
sorrow, illustrates that in addition to institution-
building, nurturing a law-abiding spirit is also vital in
making the rule of law take root in a society. Needless
to say, the heartwarming support received from all over
the world also played a large role in giving the affected
people courage in the face of such adversity. We would
like to reiterate our deepest gratitude for that support.

Japan stands ready to support those countries
working to rebuild in the aftermath of conflicts and
disasters. We remain committed to providing assistance
in this very important area of the rule of law. Japan
also supports the presidential statement adopted today
(S/PRST/2012/11).

