Mr. Kamau (Kenya): Africa came to the Security
Council in the belief that the Council was in command
of its own reality and master of its mandate,that the
Rome Statute was fully operable, that article 16 of the
Statute was alive and an actionable piece of legislation
and that the Security Council was capable of executing
its singular mandate and responsibility under that
Article. Africa has learned that, despite the Security
Council's own recognition of the recent terror attacks
in Nairobi and the terror threats in neighbouring
capitals as threats to international peasce and security,
that recognition counts for little in the Council when
article 16 is under consideration.

Sadly, for some members of the Council, the
heartbreaking loss oflives and scores of shattered bodies
at the Westgate Mall do not meet the unspecified and
imaginary threshold of article 16. In fact, apparently,
the threat to the stability and political management of
a country that would result from a leadership removed
amid a regional war against terror do not meet that
imaginary threshold either.

Africa came to the Council to seek a deferral
by the International Criminal Court (ICC) for
12 months - nothing more and nothing less. We are

not here to discuss the cases or the Assembly of States
Parties. That is not the busines of the Council. Africa
is not putting political pressure, as some misguided and
purist activists have claimed. It is the law. Africa wanted
both the spirit and the letter of the law applied - not
a favour or a handout, just the application of the law.
Africa wanted that because we believe that the Rome
Statute belongs to us as much as anybody and that its
application would be without fear or favour. We were
under the impression that the good and global citizenry
of many African States in fighting terror and promoting
international peace and security would resonate and
have meaning in the Council.

We were wrong. The deferral has not been granted.
Africa's request, through the abstentions by certain
members of the Council, has been voted down. Reason
and the law have been discarded. Fear and distrust have
been allowed to prevail. Africa is disappointed. We
regret that very much.

We take note that some Security Council members
have chosen to tie the denial of the request by Africa to
the paranoid fear of an imaginary and possible future
abuse of article 16 by countries that has nothing to
do with the prevailing matter before the Council, the
pressing terror threats to East Africans and the need
for an adjunct, sustained and uninterrupted leadership.
Such a turn of events in the Chamber is simply sad,
absurd and confounding. It does nothing for building
confidence in or solidarity with the Council, especially
at a time when the usefulness of the Council is under
question.

It would seem that Africa should come to the
Security Council only after taking into account all
possible imaginary circumstances of abuse of the
Statute and other permutations of possible negative
applications that could potentially arise. Only then can
a Member State contemplate an affirmative decision by
the Council on the basis of article 16. Clearly, that is
impossible.

Yet, with anything less, we face accusations of
setting a bad precedent and of breaking seals. Such
accusations come thick and fast, accompanied by the
thinly veiled threat of facing the wrath ofthe ICC and its
cabal of European Assembly of States Parties members
and their friends. The singling out of some African
Council members for particular criticism and vitriol
has been unfortunate and uncalled for. The deferral
request came from the entire continent. Clearly, to
certain Council members, the supposed fear of setting
a precedent or of treading on legal niceties is much
more important than the need to promote international
solidarity, peace and security or helping to maintain
stability in a nation or region under the threat of terror.

Indeed, our understanding is now clear. The
Security Council is no institutional destination for
solving complex and fluid international security and
political problems. For Africa, the message is that
we need stay only within the African family to solve
unusual and complex political problems, working
within the African Union to seek solutions to the
challenges that we face. That is all right with us.

Be that as it may, despite appearances, the Security
Council is as much an institution of Africa as of any
region. For us, it would seem that many members of
the Council are stuck in a time warp. Some members, it
seems, perceive Africa as ifit were caught in the reality
of the 1990s and a few, I dare say, as if we were caught
in an even earlier era. One might ask why I say that.
It is because there seems to us little if any confidence
in either Africans or African solutions among some
Council members. There is little trust in our ability to
understand our reality, manage our affairs and act in
the best interest of our people and countries.

Our engagement here has been met by some with
derision, suspicion, impatience and even irritation. At
every turn, the bogeyman of impunity and dictatorship
has been dragged out to devastating effect. That is
wrong, and it is unfair, and it is sad and it is tragic. It is
an indictment on the state of international relations at
the dawn of the twenty-first century.

For Africa, the Rome Statute has failed its first
crucial test in the Council and has done so in spectacular
fashion, in the full glare of the African continent.
The Statute is clearly deeply flawed, inoperable and
inapplicable in the context of the Council. Nevertheless,
and without prejudice to the foregoing, Kenya is grateful
for the recognition given to it and its concerns by all the
members of the African continent and their respective
Heads of State and Government, as well as the African
Union Commission and its leadership. Africa's
solidarity around this issue has been a watershed; it has
been heartwarming and simply amazing.

Kenya, like the rest of Africa, is also most
appreciative of the support and direction that the deferral
draft resolution has received both from the African
member States of the Security Council - Rwanda,
Morocco and Togo - and from the other four members
of the Security Council: Russia, Pakistan, and in
particular Azerbaijan and China in their respective
facilitative roles as President.

There is little doubt that the victims of the 2007
post-election violence deserve justice. But no one
recognizes that more than Kenyans themselves and
no one here should doubt that, or imagine themselves
more concerned than Kenyans and, for that matter, than
Africans for the victims of our mishap in 2007.

In the name of Africa and in the name of Kenyans,
I would like to express my deepest gratitude for the
guidance, camaraderie, solidarity and support that
we have received and enjoyed as a Mission and as a
Government in this effort. And we also thank those
who saw it fit to give us support inside and outside the
Council. Kenya will not forget. Africa will not forget.
For many of us, our business here is done, but the
matter is not closed. Clearly, however, the Council has
removed itself from being part of an amicable solution
and with that it has done irreparable damage to the
Rome Statute and its furtherance in the future.

