Mr. McLay (New Zealand): New Zealand joins
those who have expressed outrage and sorrow at this
morning's attack on the United Nations compound in
Mogadishu, and offers its condolences to all who have
been affected. It seems yet again that we are faced with a
situation where, in determining their targets, Al-Qaida
and Al-Shabaab have no scruples and recognize no
boundaries.

In its April presidential statement adopted under
the Rwandan presidency (S/2013/PRST/4), the Council
identified the risk of natural resources becoming a root
cause of conflict in Africa. New Zealand considers this
to be a global issue. Even in our own Pacific region,
competition for resources has been a driver of conflict,
so we believe that the Council must consider this issue
in a wider context. We welcome the United Kingdom's
initiative to convene this meeting, and regret that it was
not possible for the Council to issue a formal statement
on the issue.

Extractive industries are often the last to cease
operations during hostilities and among the first to
return, and they are particularly tempting targets for
non-State actors. Natural resources can incentivize
peace spoilers. The natural resource dimension is a
major challenge for international policymakers, but also
presents opportunities to develop better Council tools
for conflict prevention, and to improve its mandates to
assist States emerging from conflict.

We agree others who have stressed that the Council
should not assume exclusive competence to deal with
these issues. In our view, the combined effort of the whole
United Nations system is required, so it is especially
important that the Council adapt its methods to enable
engagement with other appropriate organs. Similarly,
interaction between the Council and relevant regional
and subregional organizations must be improved to
ensure better management of resource-driven conflicts.
Supply chains and intraregional trade are often a key
element of resource-fuelled conflicts, which makes
meaningful interaction with the relevant regional and
subregional organizations of crucial importance.

But the fact remains that only the Security
Council has the competence and the essential and
effective tools to deal with resource dimensions
of conflict - specifically, targeted sanctions and
peacekeeping missions. Well-targeted sanctions are very
effective instruments for restricting the exploitation of
natural resources, which are often used to fund armed
conflict, and can be a useful tool to restrict funding
for resource-related conflicts. Asset freezes and travel
bans can deter spoilers. Sanctions can also support
efforts to seek the post-conflict recovery of funds from
illegal asset exploitation. And we support the call to
improve information-sharing between sanctions panels
and groups of experts, which, whenever applicable,
should include cooperation with relevant peacekeeping
missions.

Peacekeeping missions and special political
missions in conflict situations with a resource
dimension should be specifically mandated to assist
national efforts and boost institutions that can reduce
the risk of future resource-driven conflict, which
means that particular attention to resource regulation
and the rule of law.

New Zealand also draws attention to the potential
for civil society and resource firms to play a positive
role. In recent times, civil society has successfully
highlighted the link between resource exploitation and
conflict, and we are encouraged by voluntary, industry
efforts to self-regulate through mechanisms such as the
Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative.

We also believe that the Council must pay more
attention to the need for national ownership. The work
of panels of experts and other United Nations activities
in affected states must support and enhance national
capacities. In short, New Zealand supports effective
action by the Council, in partnership with others,
and the use of its undoubted powers to address this
important issue.

