Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): This
morning's meeting coincides with the commemoration
of the terrorist attacks that took place on 11 September
2001, claiming thousands of innocent victims among
the friendly American people. We would like to convey
once again our condolences to the American people
and the families of the victims, and to express our
solidarity with them on this day. We also reiterate our
commitment to working with our partners and allies
to eliminate the scourge of terrorism, which threatens
international peace and security. We too pledge to
pursue our efforts as a member of the Global Coalition
to Defeat the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham.

I thank the representative of the Russian Federation
for his briefing to the Security Council on the outcome
of the summit held in Tehran on Friday among the
Astana guarantors. The summit addressed the situation
in Syria generally and in Idlib specifically. In that
regard, we call on the parties concerned to pursue
the dialogue process at all levels in order to reach a
peaceful resolution to the situation in Idlib.

The State of Kuwait reiterates what we have
noted in previous meetings, namely, that any
military escalation in Idlib would have catastrophic
humanitarian consequences. It is the most vulnerable
of the society - women, children, the elderly and the
sick - who would pay the heaviest price. We have seen
what happened in other parts of Syria, some of which
were designated de-escalation zones.
We have closely followed the recent reports of some
international organizations on the situation in Idlib and
the surrounding areas. We would like to voice our deep
concern in the light of the information that the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA)
has reported on the displacement of more than 30,000
persons from Idlib during the past few days as a result
of the recent escalation there.

We also followed the press conference that the
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs,
Mr. Mark Lowcock, held yesterday in Geneva, during
which he called upon the international community to
address the crisis in a way that would prevent Idlib in the
months ahead from becoming the worst humanitarian
catastrophe, with the heaviest loss of lives, in the
twenty-first century. I reiterate that warning by saying
that if a comprehensive military operation were to
take place in Idlib, which must draw the attention of
the Security Council, then we would indeed face the
worst humanitarian catastrophe, with the heaviest loss
of lives, in the twenty-first century.

We remind all parties of the need to honour their

commitments under international humanitarian law
and international human rights law, and to uphold
the principles of distinction, proportionality and
precaution, as well as of the protection of civilians
and civilian sites. Military attacks targeting groups
categorized as terrorist groups by the Security Council
absolutely do not give any party to the conflict cause
to violate its obligations under international law. Let us
remember that wars have rules, and that in Idlib there is
one terrorist for every 100 civilians, most of whom are
women and children.

We reiterate our support to for Secretary-General
Antonio Guterres, who in a statement of 29 August,
urgently appealed to the Syrian Government and all
parties concerned to exercise restraint. He also called
on the Astana guarantors to step up efforts to find
a peaceful solution to the situation in Idlib and to
devote more time and attention to diplomatic efforts
in order to avoid further bloodshed. In this context,
we hope that the meetings held today and yesterday in
Geneva by the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Staffan de Mistura, will find ways to save the lives
of innocent civilians.

This is the fourth meeting that we have held
on Syria in less than one week. We hope that these
meetings will draw attention to Idlib and contribute
to sustaining the diplomatic efforts of us all in order
to avoid a humanitarian catastrophe and maintain
the commitment to implementing Security Council
resolutions, including resolution 2401 (2018), which
calls for a ceasefire, for humanitarian aid to reach those
who are in need, and for the protection of civilians
and health-care and civilian facilities. We hope that
the messages that come out of our meetings will reach
the parties concerned and make them aware that the
Security Council will closely follow the situation in
Idlib and is ready to take the measures necessary to
shoulder its humanitarian and legal responsibilities
towards the inhabitants of Idlib.

In conclusion, we underscore once again that the
best and most sustainale solution to the Syrian crisis
is a political solution under the auspices of the United
Nations and in line with resolution 2254 (2015) and the
2012 Geneva communique (S/2012/522, annex).

