Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I should
like to begin by thanking Mr. Stephen O'Brien for
his very illuminating briefing and his exemplary
commitment, and for his pressing appeal to all actors
involved in the face of a situation in which millions of
people are threatened with famine in Yemen, Somalia
and Nigeria and are already experiencing famine,
unfortunately, in South Sudan. I should like also to pay
tribute to the admirable work done by humanitarian
workers in the field, who are very often working in the
most difficult of circumstances.

I should like to convey three main messages today.

The first is that the action of the United
Nations, is essential as it is, cannot substitute for the
responsibilities that the Governments of these four
countries have vis-a-vis their populations. It is these
Governments that have the primary responsibility to
protect their populations.

In South Sudan, the recent declaration of famine
in certain parts of the country is an illustration of the
tragic situation that has prevailed in the country for
more than three years now due to the political conflict.
Because of the fighting and the violence of which they
are the deliberate targets, entire populations have had
to leave their land and their villages and can no longer
provide for themselves. The fear of violence has also
meant that some of that land, despite being fertile, has
not been planted. Let us not be mistaken here: this
famine is largely man-made.

We call upon the Government of South Sudan to take
into account the needs ofits population. In South Sudan
and in Yemen, only a political solution to the conflicts
there will make it possible to address the root causes
of those conflicts and to put an end to the suffering
of the people. In this regard, we support the mediation
efforts led by the United Nations, in particular the work
of the Special Envoy on Yemen, Ismail Ould Cheikh
Ahmed, in enabling the resumption and continuation
of negotiations, and an early and lasting cessation
of hostilities.
In South Sudan, we call for the rapid implementation
of the peace agreement; the national dialogue should not
be an obstacle in this respect. The rule of law and good
governance are also essential to prevent such scourges.
We hope that the commitments undertaken by the new
Somali President, Mr. Farmajo, will be followed up by
concrete action, particularly with regard to the reform
of the security sector.

In South Sudan, constraints on public freedoms is of
concern. The second message that I would like to send
today is that the United Nations and humanitarian actors
must be able to access all people who need their help,
without bureaucratic red tape or threats to their security.
Mounting tensions - even hostility - with regard to
humanitarian actors hamper the delivery of supplies
and the provision of basic needs. That is often
compounded by the refusal of access by armed groups
on the ground, as well as administrative blockages and
lengthy bureaucratic procedures. As Mr. O'Brien has
just mentioned, there is an ever-growing number of
obstacles to humanitarian assistance.

The Governments of the States concerned have
a special responsibility. They must ensure safe
and unhindered access to the United Nations and
humanitarian actors, wherever populations need
emergency assistance. The various bureaucratic
obstacles imposed by the authorities, in particular
the South Sudanese authorities, are helping to slow
down the provision of the necessary aid to the most
vulnerable populations.

We are particularly concerned about the situation
in South Sudan, where humanitarian actors and the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan are all too
often the target of attacks, harassment or access
restrictions. These hindrances are committed by all
the parties to the conflict, be it the Sudan People's
Liberation Army (SPLA), the SPLA in Opposition,
or the various armed groups that are multiplying in
the country. These access restrictions must cease
immediately. We must collectively and unambiguously
express our condemnation of such barriers, which are
contrary to international humanitarian law. I recall
that all parties to conflicts are obligated to facilitate
the delivery of food supplies. Without that, the
mobilization of the international community would be
absolutely ineffective.

These problems are also quite acute in Yemen, where
the ongoing fighting threatens to further exacerbate
the humanitarian situation. The parties to the conflict
must immediately cease indiscriminate attacks on
civilians and civilian infrastructure. Such actions could
be classified as war crimes. It is also imperative that
humanitarian actors have unhindered access in order to
bring the basic necessities to the population.

The third message I want to deliver today is that in
order to cope with the magnitude of the financial need,
it is important to foster a comprehensive approach in
order to create synergies and to improve coordination
with other donors, and to mobilize goodwill,
including - as Stephen O'Brien said - private donors
and businesses, as well as "non-traditional" donors, in
particular emerging economies. It is through general
mobilization and the use of all means at our disposal
that we can help people in need and respond to the call
of Stephen O'Brien. In that context, we welcome the
holding of the Yemen donors' conference, to be held
25 April in Geneva.

