The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the United States of
America.

Today's resolution 2252 (2015) affirms the
Council's support for the peace agreement signed by
South Sudanese parties in August and mandates certain
additional tasks so that the United Nations Mission
in South Sudan (UNMISS) can better support the
implementation of the agreement. We thank Council
members for their support for the resolution. It retains
UNMISS'S core mandate to protect civilians, monitor
and investigate human rights abuses and violations,
and create conditions in which humanitarian assistance
can reach people in need. It also answers the Secretary-
General's call for increasing the number of troops and
police assigned to UNMISS, and thereby strengthens
the Mission's ability to protect civilians. That increase
will further enable UNMISS to support ceasefire
monitoring and provide technical assistance to the
joint integrated police, which will be important for
maintaining security in cities throughout the country.

The resolution also anticipates the return of nearly
3,000 members of the opposition to Juba. A return
of such large numbers of opposition figures could
change the dynamics in Juba, which is why we have
asked the Secretary-General to undertake planning for
UNMISS to ensure that it has a dedicated capacity to
deter and respond to incidents in Juba so as to avoid
any deterioration in security there. While the Council
agreed on the necessary troop and police increases,
we regret, as others have, that we could not reach full
consensus on all elements of the resolution. Many of
the main concerns raised remain the same as those at
our last adoption, and I would like to briefly respond
to them.

First, today's resolution expresses our continued
commitment to using sanctions as a tool for peace. They
are essential, as a tool in the toolbox, to marginalizing
those who wish to derail an important agreement.
The African Union (AU) has spoken forcefully about
this issue on multiple occasions. In a 26 September
communique of its Peace and Security Council, the
AU expressed its determination "to impose measures
against all those who would impede this agreement".
Today's resolution takes the same position.

Secondly, like its predecessor, today's resolution
recognizes the Council's responsibility to ensure
that UNMISS peacekeepers have the tools and
technological capabilities they need to safely and fully
fulfill their mission. We heard an extensive briefing
from the Secretariat during our meeting with troop-
and police-contributing countries (see S/PV.7569) on
the important role that unarmed and unmanned aerial
systems and helicopters can play in helping missions
fulfil their difficult mandates. We owe it to the troops
and police on the ground to provide them with those
lifesaving tools. They are asking for unmanned aerial
vehicles (UAVs) so they can know what is going on
around them, so that they are less at risk and so they
can better fulfil their mandates. We are listening to the
troop contributors. This issue should not and need not
be politicized. As a matter of fact, we wonder if the
countries that abstained in the voting on this resolution,
citing UAVs, would do so if they had battalions of
peacekeepers on the ground.

Finally, today's resolution reflects the fact that
ensuring accountability for crimes and abuses, and
providing access to justice for victims, represents
a central part of building peace, not an obstacle to
maintaining it. The hybrid court proposed in the peace
agreement could play an important role in that effort,
and the resolution reaffirms the Security Council's
commitment to staying involved in the development of
that institution. This is really important. It is important
because impunity must end if peace and security are
to take hold and to endure. There cannot be collective
guilt, andjustice is a critical means for ending collective
guilt.

South Sudan has an opportunity to close the door on
conflict and reclaim the promise we all saw at its birth
as a nation four years ago. Today's resolution will help
them to do so, and I thank the Council for its work. If
holding partners to their commitments to implementing
the agreement, providing access to justice for victims
and supplying troop contributors with the tools they
need to do their jobs safely leads to abstentions, that
is very unfortunate for a Council that has agreed on
such issues in many other contexts in the past. We seek
unity, for sure, but today's strong vote reinforces our
determination to ensure that UNMISS can respond to a
very real crisis, which persists, and the very real needs
in South Sudan.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

The meeting rose at 10.35 am.
