Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset, I wish to thank you, Madam President, and your
delegation for taking the initiative to hold this meeting.
I also wish to thank the Secretary-General for his

briefing today. Our delegation stands ready to join and
support him in his efforts to reform the Organization.

Freedom is the foundation essential to the full
exercise of human rights. Freedom, understood in the
broadest possible way, presupposes the ability of a
person to choose their destiny. Choose their way of life.
Choose their form of Government. Choose their leaders.
Choose the person with whom they wish to share their
life. Choose their religion. Choose to have a religion or
not. Choose their education. Choose to procreate, and
how to do so or not. Choose where to live. In short,
choose their life. It is in that ability to choose that the
rights of the person - human rights - as set out in
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights of 1948, the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights,
and the International Covenant on Economic, Social
and Cultural Rights of 1966, are developed.

Even where there is complete freedom, it is still
necessary to safely ensure the movement from mere
statements to the full exercise of those rights. However,
we can categorically assert that where there is no
freedom, human rights are violated entirely. Where
there is no freedom, there will always be tensions
that can lead to violent changes and the outbreak of
conflict. In that regard, we reiterate once again that
it is the responsibility of Governments to guarantee
and to promote the enjoyment of human rights by the
inhabitants of their countries, whether they be residents
or persons in transit.

Uruguay is committed to the promotion and
protection of, and respect for human rights, as
a fundamental basis for sustaining fundamental
freedoms and democratic life in all nations. Therefore,
it does not recognize limits or exclusivity with regard
to the forums in which human rights may be discussed.
Moreover, it therefore does not accept the excuse
of sovereignty or domestic jurisdiction in efforts to
prevent the examination of the human rights situation
in Member States.

To borrow the words of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights, Mr. Zeid Ra'ad Al
Hussein, "sovereignty is threatened when leaders
responsible for crimes against humanity go unpunished,
and a culture of impunity feeds future cycles of Violent
instability across whole regions."

Uruguay is of the view that ensuring the protection
of all human rights and peace is a precondition for the
sustainable development of countries. As expressed in
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,

"Sustainable development cannot be realized
without peace and security; and peace and security
will be at risk without sustainable development.
The new Agenda recognizes the need to build
peaceful, just and inclusive societies that provide
equal access to justice and that are based on respect
for human rights... on effective rule of law and
good governance at all levels and on transparent,
effective and accountable institutions" (General Assembly resolution 70/], para. 35).

The occurrence of violations and abuses of human
rights certainly set the foundation for the emergence of
conflicts. If we look for the root causes of the conflicts
of today, in most cases we will find serious human
rights violations. The systematic violation of human
rights is inherent to conflicts, which, in turn, can
threaten international peace and security.

Until now, the Council has generally reacted to
such situations after the fact, once the events have
already taken place. We therefore echo the words of the
Secretary-General on the importance of emphasizing
the prevention of conflicts, since we put so much
energy and resources into dealing with those that arise
rather than preventing their occurrence in the first
place. In that context, we would like to mention the
13 June 2016 appeal in which a group of 69 countries,
including Uruguay, demanded, through their missions
in Geneva, that human rights be put at the heart of
conflict prevention.

Today, the protection of human rights is part of
the mandates of nine peacekeeping operations and
five special political missions. In that regard, Uruguay
believes that the human rights components in peace
operations contribute to their effectiveness in achieving
the purposes for which they were deployed. It is therefore
appropriate that the Security Council should receive
periodic reports on every situation, without exception,
where there are serious human rights violations. The
Council should give greater attention to signs, such as
serious violations of human rights, that foreshadow the
start or escalation ofa conflict, because that is the only
way it can take measures in time to prevent conflicts.
The fact is that the sooner those signs are identified,
the more time the Council will have to act in order to
mitigate their possible consequences.

Lastly, we would like to emphasize the importance
of the nexus in the cooperation and flow of information
between the Security Council and the Human
Rights Council through information procedures and
mechanismsthat enable them to coordinate their actions
within their respective mandates and develop the
system's preventive capability. While they are clearly
two independent organs with different functions, that
should not be an obstacle to the importance of ensuring
the complementarity of their work.

