I thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for her briefing. The Special Representative has the full support of France. I would like to commend the outstanding work of the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) under her leadership, as well as that of the entire United Nations family in Iraq. Today I would like to address three points. First of all, I would like to express France's support for the Government of Iraq, led by Mr. Al-Kadhimi, as the President of the French Republic did during his visit to Iraq in September and again during the Iraqi Prime Minister's visit to Paris in October. Together with the Iraqi Government, we will continue our efforts to mobilize the country's regional and international partners in support of an initiative to strengthen its stability and security. The Iraqi authorities conduct very ambitious reforms in a context made even more difficult by the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. As the Special Representative said, these reforms are essential to meeting the legitimate aspirations of Iraqis by modernizing the economy, reforming the Administration, strengthening the protection of human rights and remaining steadfast in the fight against corruption. We welcome the announcement of early elections in June 2021. UNAMI's support to the Iraqi authorities and the Independent High Electoral Commission in the organization of these elections is extremely valuable in ensuring free and transparent elections. The participation of all groups in society, in particular young people and women, will be crucial in building the democratic future of the country. France will contribute €1 million to fund UNAM activities in this area. We encourage the entire international community to work to ensure smooth elections and full confidence in the electoral process. We also welcome progress in the dialogue between Baghdad and Erbil. The Sinjar agreement is very promising in this regard. The health projects we endorse in the region will also foster support for this movement to the benefit of the population. Despite the promising announcements and progress on the ground, we remain concerned about the attacks targeting demonstrators, members of civil society, human rights defenders and journalists. It is imperative that the perpetrators be prosecuted, as trust cannot be built without justice. My second point concerns security challenges in Iraq. Terrorism ranks first and is our common challenge. The fight against Da'esh is not over. The international coalition's military contribution in support of the Iraqi authorities remains crucial, and its operational modalities can be adapted to the changing threat. The work of the United Nations Investigative Team to Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed by Da'esh/Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant is essential in combating impunity. It is also crucial that the Iraqi State maintains its monopoly on use of force in the country. The action of certain armed groups is very worrisome, in particular the unacceptable attacks on diplomatic missions. We welcome the efforts of the Iraqi Government to stop them. In that context, it is all the more crucial to ensure that Iraq remain unaffected by regional tensions and that its sovereignty and territorial integrity be respected. We therefore welcome the Iraqi Government's strong commitment to balanced and good-neighbourly diplomacy. The recent progress in the return of remains of Kuwaiti and third-country nationals is a testament to that. It is important that those actions continue. Lastly, and this is my third point, I would like to say a word about the humanitarian situation. Every effort must be made to ensure safe and unhindered humanitarian access to all those in need of assistance in Iraq. I refer in particular of the hundreds of thousands of internally displaced persons, who must be able to continue receiving assistance when they leave the camps. Camp closures must be implemented in a coordinated manner and accompanied by a concrete plan to support the return of people. This is all the more crucial as the COVID-19 pandemic continues to spread in the country at an extremely worrisome rate. Vaccination campaigns must scale up, given that the pandemic has led to a 20 per cent to 30 per cent decrease in vaccination rates in the country. We have a collective responsibility in this regard to prevent avoidable outbreaks of polio or measles. As mentioned by the Special Representative, there are many challenges. But France is determined to stand with Iraq at this important time in its history.
