Mr. Percaya (Indonesia): The tragedy of Malaysia
Airlines Flight MH-l7 has left us all shocked and in
deep sadness. We are all in mourning. However, the
grief is even greater for the families and friends who
are dealing with the loss of their loved ones. As the
struggle to understand the loss of so many innocent
lives in the crash ofFlight MH-l7 continues, witnessing
the current situation, especially for the families of the
victims, is deeply painful. We share their pain and their
sorrow.

Since the incident, we have seen various initiatives
and efforts undertaken by many countries to investigate
the incident, which we greatly welcome. Indonesia
wishes to emphasize that, even when it comes to
humanitarian tragedies, all parties must cooperate.
In that regard, they should collaborate and assist the
peoples and Governments of the victims' countries of
origin. We therefore welcome the adoption of resolution
2166 (2014), which Indonesia co-sponsored, on this
particular issue. In that regard, we also commend
Australia for taking the initiative.

Our delegation is pleased that the Council, through
the resolution, demands full and unrestricted access to
the crash site and surrounding area for the appropriate
parties and supports a full, thorough and independent
international investigation into the incident. For
Indonesia, as well as the rest of the international
community, it is also important for the evacuation
of the victims' bodies to be treated in a dignified,
respectful and professional manner and to ensure that
the process begins immediately. We also underscore
that the victims' bodies must be returned home without
any further delay.

Indonesia reiterates its strong support and assistance
for the investigation process, including by joining the
mission to help identify the victims of Flight MH-l7.
As the tragic and wanton loss of life is felt around the
world, we also demand that those responsible for that
inhuman incident be held accountable for their heinous
crime. We are aware that such a process will not bring
back the daughters, sons, mothers, fathers, sisters,
brothers or friends of the families who are struggling
to cope with their immeasurable loss. However, justice
must be served and we urge all concerned countries and
entities to fully play their role to ensure that that, along
with the other requirements stated in the resolution,
happens.

