Mr. Mawe (Ireland): Adapting to meet radically
new and different environments and challenges, United
Nations peacekeeping is in the process of undergoing
significant change. We warmly welcome Russia's
scheduling of today's debate, which provides a timely
opportunity to consider the new trends in United
Nations peacekeeping operations.

Ireland aligns itself with the statement made on
behalf of the European Union and its member States.

Ireland has a strong and distinguished record in
peacekeeping, with unbroken service in United Nations
missions since our first deployment in 1958, including
the appointment of an Irish national as head ofa United
Nations mission on 12 occasions. We see peacekeeping
as a crucial instrument in maintaining and ensuring
peace, preventing conflict and giving the necessary
space and support to countries emerging from conflict
to enable them to develop and grow. We therefore
dearly wish to see a United Nations peacekeeping that
is smart, fit for purpose and well-resourced to meet the
high demands we place on it.

Those demands only continue to grow. The reality
is that, in recent years, peacekeeping has evolved to
such an extent that the term itself scarcely describes the
range and nature of activities undertaken in its name.
Today's debate is well informed by the concept note
(S/2014/384, annex), which, above all else, calls for a
more systematic and joined-up approach to justifying
and elaborating the new trends in peacekeeping. Two
of those developments stand out: more robust peace
enforcement, undertaken in certain circumstances,
and a more comprehensive and ambitious approach to
institution- and State-building.

In 2000, Lakhdar Brahimi wrote that there can
be no peacekeeping unless there is a peace to keep.
Changes in the nature of conflict, however, mean that
United Nations forces increasingly operate in less
secure environments. In a small number of specific
situations - for example, in eastern Democratic
Republic ofthe Congo - the United Nations has sought
to be more proactive in how it protects the civilian
population by supporting targeted offensive operations
against armed groups.

Such robust operations do not, in our View, have
any impact on the impartiality of United Nations
peacekeeping. Impartiality does not mean having
to adopt a neutral equidistance between two or
more parties - in this case, Government forces and
non-Government armed groups. Rather, impartiality
is about implementing a mandate in a fair-minded
and unbiased manner. It is a fundamental misreading
of the nature of United Nations peacekeeping to see
more proactive and robust targeting of armed groups
aimed at protecting vulnerable civilians as in any way
incompatible with the United Nations mission.

However, there is no doubt that more robust peace
operations can work only if undertaken so as to deliver
clear political goals and as part ofa broader stabilization
strategy. Higher-intensity peace enforcement also
brings sharply into focus the imperative of having
United Nations command-and-control arrangements
that are fit for purpose, with decisive leadership, well-
resourced planning and the reduction and elimination
of national caveats and restrictions. Ireland is pleased
to be organizing a panel discussion on 3 July at United
Nations Headquarters to continue this important
conversation and to consider the significant progress
made to date and the challenges outstanding on
command and control.

A second point resulting from operating in less secure
environments concerns the safety of peacekeepers. We
owe it to our service personnel, who are deploying into
increasingly dangerous environments, to have them as
well equipped as possible. It is sobering to remember
that, to date this year, 37 persons serving in United
Nations peacekeeping missions have been killed. We
are convinced of the clear benefits offered by modern
technology and high-tech equipment, notably the
sharply increased situational awareness offered by
unarmed unmanned aerial vehicles. Such tools and
other technologies act simultaneously to strengthen the
mission in delivering its mandate and to increase force
protection.

Nationally, with over 130 members of our
defence forces currently serving on the Golan with
the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force
(UNDOF), Ireland is acutely aware of the imperative of
strengthening force protection. An Irish and UNDOF
force fully equipped with equipment to counter
improvised explosive devices would be better able to
protect itself and the civilian Syrian population from
the threat posed by such devices.

The second, most striking change in United Nations
peacekeeping is the dramatically increasing range of
responsibilities and tasks with which United Nations
missions are charged. Mission mandates have grown
longer and more complex, particularly in terms of
institution- and State-building. Meanwhile, resources
have not increased in line with the increasing demand.
There are a variety of ways to try to square that circle,
including by increasing flexibility and innovation in
relation to resources for missions, improving common
standards and building strategic partnerships. Ireland
is pleased to support the development of common
standards relating to military police and special forces,
but, realistically, some hard choices need to be made on
just what can be expected of United Nations missions.

The Security Council should replace vague,
aspirational mission mandates with mandates with a
clear purpose tempered by achievable and realistic
ambition. The recent work to refocus the mandate of
the United Nations Mission in South Sudan and to
reallocate to it resources from other United Nations
missions in the region is a welcome step in the right
direction. Given the scarcity of resources, there is also
a clear case for moving to downsize or close some long-
standing missions. It is important that that conversation
on adjusting multidimensional mission mandates
involve representatives of development agencies from
the broader United Nations family.

We look forward to contributing further to this
important reflection on the nature of United Nations
peacekeeping and to seeing how these policy areas can
be strengthened and developed.

