Mr. Lacroix: I thank you, Madam President, for
the opportunity to brief the Security Council today,
in line with resolution 2479 (2019), of 27 June, which
extended the mandate of the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) until
31 October 2019.

Important developments have taken place in the
Sudan Since I last briefed the Security Council, on
14 June (see S/PV.8549). Most notably, on 17 August,
the Transitional Military Council and the Forces
of Freedom and Change signed the agreements on
transitional arrangements for the forthcoming 39-month
period. The signing ceremony was attended by Heads of
State and ministers from neighbouring countries, other
ministerial representatives from the Gulf region and the
European Union, and the Chairperson of the African
Union. The United Nations was also witness, with the
Special Envoy for the Horn of Africa representing the
Secretary-General.

Following the signing ceremony, the Sovereign
Council, consisting of five military personnel and
six civilians, including two women, was sworn in
on 21 August. Abdel-Fattah Al-Burhan assumed
the presidency of the Sovereign Council, and the
Transitional Military Council was formally dissolved.
Later that day, a renowned economist and United
Nations veteran, Mr. Abdalla Hamdok, was sworn in
as new Prime Minister. The new Cabinet is expected to
be sworn in by 1 September. Of note, the transitional
agreements entail a pledge to end all outstanding
conflicts in the Sudan, which could bring long-term
stability to Darfur and other marginalized areas. Talks
between the new Government and various armed groups
in the Sudan are expected to take place, including with
the Sudan Revolutionary Front, which includes some of
the Darfur movements.

In Darfur, the security situation remains largely
unchanged. Intermittent clashes between the Sudanese
Armed Forces/Rapid Support Forces and the Sudan
Liberation Army/Abdul Wahid faction continue in J ebel
Marra. Intercommunal tensions, particularly between
farmers and herders, escalate during the harvest
season. UNAMID has observed herders adopting a
more aggressive posture during the current season
and continues to work with State authorities to reduce
those tensions. Peaceful demonstrations continue,
particularly in the Kalma camp for internally displaced
persons, where elements sympathetic to Abdul Wahid
are opposed to the agreements made in Khartoum.
Other Darfur armed groups are not yet part of the
national political process, although there have not been
signs of renewed military activities involving them.
On 27 June, the Justice and Equality Movement and
the Sudan Liberation Army/Minni Minnawi faction
signed a ceasefire with the Transitional Military
Council, facilitated by President Deby Itno of Chad.
That illustrates that the strategic environment in Darfur
has not shifted since the publication ofthe latest special
report in June (S/2019/445). The remaining conflict
drivers and armed groups outside the peace process
still pose potential risks to sustainable peacebuilding.

With the establishment of the Sovereign Council,
the timeline for resuming the drawdown of UNAMID
may be revisited after the end ofthe pause on 31 October.
Decree 102, which demanded the transfer of UNAMID
camps to the Rapid Support Forces has been rescinded,
and the Transitional Military Council has confirmed
that the end-use of UNAMID camps handed over to the
Sudanese authorities will be civilian. UNAMID is in the
process of developing a road map to articulate site-by-
site handover arrangements. To that end, UNAMID held
a technical-level meeting with the Sudanese authorities

in Khartoum on 5 August. During the discussion, the
Sudanese authorities reiterated their pledge to dedicate
UNAMID camps to civilian purposes, while asking
for the donation of other mission assets. UNAMID
and Sudanese officials agreed that those resources
should be earmarked for the organizations supporting
peacebuilding and community stabilization, in line
with the overall transition concept.

UNAMID and the United Nations country team
continue working together to provide transition support
to the State-liaison functions in four key areas: the rule
of law, livelihoods, immediate service delivery and
human rights. For the period from 1 July to 31 December
of 2019, UNAMID allocated $17.2 million for State
liaison functions activities out, of its total programmatic
funding of $19.6 million. As of August, seven out of
10 memorandums of understanding had been signed
with United Nations agencies, funds and programmes.
While most of the projects for the second half of 2019
built on activities already implemented during the first
phase of State liaison functions implementation, from
January to June of this year, livelihood support for
return areas has received an additional $3.3 million to
foster confidence between internally displaced persons
and host communities.

The military takeover of power in April posed
some challenges to the implementation of State liaison
function activities. For example, in relation to human
rights and rule-of-law support, UNAMID and the
United Nations country team shifted their focus from
national institutions to a community-based approach to
strengthen the capacity of local actors, including the
National Human Rights Commission in Darfur, civil
society and community-based organizations, to address
protection concerns. Adjustments have also been made
to enhance information sharing, coordination, and duty
of care for personnel embedded in the State liaison
functions structures, based on lessons learned from the
first phase of the process.

To coordinate transition planning, UNAMID
and the United Nations country team established an
interim transition team in Khartoum earlier this year.
The team relocated to Darfur after the change of
Government in April and is continuing consultations
with relevant mission sections and the Office of the
Resident Coordinator. The team is expected to become
a fully fledged and functional joint transition cell by
early September, with a finalized staffing structure
and associated terms of reference. The transition cell
will be further supported by a liquidation team from
Headquarters to provide a dedicated surge capacity,
if the exit of UNAMID were to be completed by
December 2020.
As reported during our previous briefing,
the Department of Peace Operations has initiated
discussions with the African Union to develop a joint
political strategy for post-UNAMID engagement.
Commissioner Chergui will also address this subject.
Once the new Cabinet is formed, we will engage
relevant interlocutors on a range of issues, including
the drawdown of UNAMID, planning for a transition
from peacekeeping to peacebuilding, next steps for the
Darfur peace process, and post-UNAMID engagement.
In line with the vision ofthe new Government to resolve
all internal conflicts, and in close consultation with the
Government, we would like to explore various options
to support Sudanese interlocutors in addressing the
remaining conflict drivers in Darfur.

In that context, both the African Union (AU) and
the Sudanese interlocutors have proposed a meeting
of the Tripartite Coordination Mechanism to further
discuss future AU-United Nations engagement in and
on Darfur on the side lines ofthe General Assembly. As
discussions with the AU and Sudanese authorities on the
joint political strategy and post-UNAMID engagement
in Darfur are likely to solidify through those initiatives
in late September, the deadline for a special report on
the subject, due to the Security Council by the end of
September, might need to be extended by a few weeks.

We congratulate Sudanese parties for having
navigated the unprecedented task of relinquishing a
highly centralized rule that lasted for more than 30
years and enduring protracted negotiations that led
to a civilian-military coalition Government. With the
support of the African Union, Ethiopia, on behalf of
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development, and
other key partners, including members of the Security
Council, the people of the Sudan demonstrated that
they have chosen the path of inclusive decision-making,
equality, equity, freedom and human rights for all.

This is an opportunity to put a definitive end to
the conflict in Darfur. Doing so will require both
an irreversible transition from peacekeeping to
peacebuilding and the engagement of those groups that
have not been part of the Doha Document for Peace in
Darfur in the peace process. Donor support will be more
critical than ever to assist the simultaneous transitions
in Darfur and elsewhere in the Sudan, particularly
considering the economic crisis that triggered the
political change. Commissioner Chergui and I plan to
travel to the Sudan together in early October and look
forward to briefing the Council again on the visit,
which would also involve discussions with the new
Government on post-UNAMID engagement.
