Ms. King (Australia): I would like to thank
Prosecutor Fatou Bensouda for her briefing, as well as
for the continuing efforts ofthe Office ofthe Prosecutor
in relation to Darfur. These briefings are an important
opportunity for us to reaffirm that both the International
Criminal Court (ICC) and the Council have vital
roles to play in ensuring that peace and justice are
delivered to the people of the region. We cannot avoid
Ms. Bensouda's central message to us that a dramatic
shift is needed in the Council's approach to the level
of support it provides to the International Criminal
Court's effort to provide justice and accountability for
the people of Darfur.

The Prosecutor's nineteenth report presents an
extremely disturbing picture of the situation in Darfur,
and the impact of the ongoing climate of impunity. It
draws together what we in the Council have been trying
to respond to this year alone in adopting resolutions
2138 (2014) and 2148 (2014), namely, the serious impact
of the deteriorating security situation on the civilian
population. We agree with the Prosecutor that there is
every reason to be concerned about the trends in violence
and the extent ofits impact, including widespread sexual
violence, which is causing great danger to civilians and
to the peacekeepers and humanitarian workers seeking
to help them.

This year alone, several hundred thousand
people from Darfur - many of them women and
children - have been displaced. That significant
displacement reflects the fact that air strikes targeting
civilians have reportedly continued despite clear
demands from the Council that they cease. The air
strikes have been coupled with the rise of the Rapid
Support Forces paramilitary group, which the Prosecutor
reports has been involved in attacks against civilians,
including attacking and burning villages, and which
the Government of the Sudan has admitted is affiliated
with the Sudanese Armed Forces. Humanitarian access
continues to be deliberately restricted.

We are therefore grateful for the Office of
the Prosecutor's efforts to continue to monitor the
situation in Darfur, despite the significant challenges
it faces in conducting meaningful investigations.
Accurate information is obviously essential to future
accountability processes and to ensure informed
Council deliberations. That includes information from
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID), of course, so we therefore support
the Prosecutor's call for a thorough, independent and
transparent inquiry into allegations that information
about crimes committed against civilians and
peacekeepers have been withheld.

We welcome the ICC's ongoing preparations for
the trial of Abdallah Banda, and look forward to the
Trial Chamber's decision on a revised start date. We
call on the Sudanese authorities to cooperate with the
Court so that the Office of the Prosecutor can make
progress in other investigations and prosecutions. In
particular, the Sudanese authorities must arrest and
surrender President Al-Bashir, Abdelrahim Mohamed
Hussein, Ahmad Harun and Ali Kushayb, in line with
the Sudan's obligations under resolution 1593 (2005).

It goes without saying that ICC States parties
must also meet their obligations to cooperate with
the Court. We are very disappointed that some States
parties continue to invite President Al-Bashir to visit
their countries and fail to meet their obligation to
arrest and surrender him when he does. We welcome
the Prosecutor's call for relevant States parties to be
provided with the necessary support and assistance
to ensure that effective arrests and surrenders can be
made. And the Council should at least do the ICC the
courtesy of responding to the Court's eight letters about
the failure of some States to cooperate with the Court in
relation to the Darfur referral.

The crimes reported by the Prosecutor are
indicative of a pervasive culture of impunity in Darfur
and a systemic failure by the Government of the Sudan
to pursue accountability for attacks against its own
civilians, against humanitarian workers and against
UNAMID peacekeepers. The Prosecutor is right to
remind us that the Council's repeated demands to
the Government of the Sudan to end impunity and
bring justice and accountability to victims have gone
deliberately unfulfilled. As Ms. Bensouda has told us
this morning, the Government of the Sudan has failed
to provide any meaningful measure of justice at the
national level.

Those committing the crimes alleged in the
Prosecutor's report must be held to account, and we
know that the latest report presents only a fraction of
what is actually taking place in Darfur. Where there
is an allegation of an attack, such as that referenced in
paragraph 44 of the Prosecutor's report - "in which
militia forces, specifically from the Rapid Support
Forces, reportedly gang-raped a 10-year-old girl" - it
is unconscionable that the Government of the Sudan
should fail to hold such perpetrators to account.

Despite the international community's efforts
to date, the violence in Darfur is only getting worse.
Perpetrators of Rome Statute crimes continue to avoid
justice, emboldening others to commit similar crimes.
Given the failure of the Sudanese authorities to take
appropriate action on accountability, the ICC's efforts
to ensure such accountability are critical. It was the
Council that referred the situation to the ICC, and it
is the Council that must shoulder its responsibility to
support the Court's efforts to fulfil its mandate. There
is nojustification for further delay in the Council taking
meaningful steps, therefore, to support the ICC's work
in Darfur.

