Mr. Lukabu Khabouji N'Zaji (Zaire) (interpretation from French): The delegation of Zaire is very pleased to
see you, Sir, presiding over the work of the Security
Council for the month of April. We are confident that your
exceptional qualities as a seasoned diplomat, your acute
sense of consensus-building and your knowledge of the
affairs of the United Nations will serve to make you an
excellent President.

We would also like to address our congratulations to
a brother, the Ambassador and Permanent Representative of
Botswana, who presided with such tact, firmness and
humour over the work of the Council during the month of
March.

I would like, finally, to thank the Secretary-General
for having made possible the publication of the final report
of the International Commission of Inquiry.

In my delegation's view, the interim report and the
final report drafted by the Commission of Inquiry cannot
be considered separately from each other. This is why my
delegation takes the liberty of recalling before the Council
certain facts from the interim report it considers essential.

The Commission notes in its report that during its
stay in Rwanda it went to Iwawa Island, in Rwandan
territory. There the Commission inspected arms,
explosives and other materiel, most of which was found
to be obsolete and unusable, while the new materiel, still
wrapped in plastic, consisted mostly of disassembled
machine-guns. Thus, the Commission has provided us
with important information, but that information is
incomplete, because it gives the Council no way of
knowing where those weapons came from.

The Commission adds in its report that the most
senior officer present of the Rwandan Patriotic Army
(RPA) informed the Commission that some of the
working arms had been taken and distributed to RPA
members, but that none of the weapons were new.

Still on Iwawa Island, the President and some of the
Commission members then interrogated some young
people and a junior officer of the former Rwandan
government forces who, as they were told by the RPA
officer present, had been captured on the island. The
members of the Commission had to request that officer to
serve as an interpreter during their conversations, but had
no reason to doubt the accuracy of his interpretation. It
emerged from the replies given by the young people
interrogated by the Commission that they were Rwandans
and that they had lived in the Mugunga camp, close to
Goma, in Zaire. They had been trained in the handling of
weapons on the island under the supervision of a
commander of the former Rwandan government forces
and of a civilian. No foreigner was apparently involved in
this operation. I am citing paragraphs 18, 19 and 20 of
the interim report of the Commission of Inquiry.

Zaire wonders how it can be implicated in an affair
that is occurring entirely on the territory of another
sovereign State, where the actors are nationals of that
country, albeit former refugees of a Zairian camp. And to
crown that, this is the only training case that the
Commission inquired into during the investigation.

The Commission indicates in paragraph 24 of its
report that it had intended to visit Zaire on 22 November
1995 and that it had drawn up its itinerary with the
assistance of the liaison officer of the United Nations
 

Assistance Mission for Rwanda (UNAMIR) in Kinshasa.
The Commission was given to understand that the planned
duration of its stay in Zaire - initially, 20 days or so -
was too long and had to be shortened, and that its plan to
stay in Gisenyi, in Rwanda, while carrying out its inquiries
in Goma, on the other side of the border, would be rejected.

The Security Council can imagine what the state of
mind of the Commission would be when it arrived in Zaire.
It wished to be housed in Rwanda and to carry out its
inquiries in Zaire. It indicates in its letter addressed to the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Zaire that

"the Commission has no objection to permanently
remaining in Zaire throughout its inquiries on the
territory of Zaire, provided that the Zairian
Government is prepared to provide the members of the
Commission and its support personnel with suitable
lodging and to ensure them an adequate level of
safety, and provided that the steps taken by the Zairian
authorities are acceptable to the Commission."

Just imagine that I have just given you the main factor
that affected the working relations between Zaire and the
Commission of Inquiry.

As my Government was unable to make available to
the Commission suitable housing, pointing out that it had
the resources to arrange for its own lodgings, this had the
effect of subjecting Zaire to discriminatory treatment. This
is the truth.

In paragraph 35, finally, the report says that the
Zairian side seemed to wish to renegotiate the mandate of
the Commission and insisted that it be present at its talks
with potential witnesses - further untruths served up to the
Council. So, where is the truth, one might ask. The truth is
as follows.

In note verbale number 130 of 27 November 1995,
which the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Zaire addressed
to the Representative of the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Rwanda (UNAMIR) Liaison Office in Zaire,
the following was expressed:

"T 0 this effect and in accordance with the terms
of the letter from the Prime Minister to the Secretary-
General of the Organization of the United Nations,
dated 23 June 1995, the Minister invites the Director
of the Liaison Office to convey to him, at his earliest
convenience, the terms of reference of the
Commission's mission, so that the Government can
make all the necessary arrangements for the proper
functioning of the international inquiry and to
establish the date of their arrival in Zaire as quickly
as possible."

The note verbale goes on to say:

"The Ministry would point out to the
representative of UNAMIR that the Government
attaches the highest importance to the calmness and
the objectivity that should characterize the work of
said Commission, and strongly suggests that it
refrain from making any statement or holding any
interview or press conference at the outset, during or
at the end of its mission, and that it reserve its
conclusions for the Secretary-General and the
Security Council. Likewise, the Government
earnestly hopes that throughout their work in the
north and south of Kivu, the members of the
Commission will reside on the territory of Zaire,
where every arrangement will be made to welcome
them and ensure their safety, as was the case in the
other countries they visited".

In what I have just recalled on behalf of the
delegation of Zaire, there was no intention whatever on
the part of Zaire to renegotiate the terms of reference, but
rather simply a concern to provide the Commission with
the conditions that would make it possible for it to
properly pursue its inquiries on the soil of Zaire.

Is there a single person who can tell us why the
Commission demanded that press conferences be held
immediately upon its arrival in Zaire, during its inquiries
and after its inquiries? But what, in that case, can be the
content of the report after all these productions, if in fact
they took place? And why did it demand to stay in
Gisenyi, in the territory of Rwanda, while carrying out
inquiries in Zaire? Only the members of the Commission
know the answer to that question.

Council members may undoubtedly wonder what
point we want to make with all these quotations and
tiresome recollections. Zaire desires to demonstrate to the
Council through these quotes the unequal treatment given
to Zaire by the Commission, as well as its discriminatory
methods.

The Commission stayed in Rwanda for two days
only, and it proposed to stay in Zaire for 20 days,
forgetting that the area in which they were to operate was
a highly unsafe area and that Security Council resolution

 

1013 (1995), in paragraph 5 (a) and (b), imposes on the
States visited by the Commission, within the context of its
inquiry, the responsibility to ensure the safety of the
members of this Commission.

Furthermore, during its inspection mission on Iwawa
Island, in Rwanda, the Commission was assisted by officers
of the Rwandan Patriotic Army, who even provided
interpretation services, whereas the same favourable
treatment was refused to Zaire. The Commission even gave
a testimonial to its providential interpreter by saying in its
report that there was no reason to doubt the accuracy of his
interpretation, although none of the members of the
Commission understood Kinyarawanda and therefore were
unable to assess the accuracy of this fortunate
interpretation.

These are the key facts that claim the attention of the
Commission.

And what about the final report? The Commission, in
its search for truth, was curiously content, after certain
inquiries, with laconic replies and often with a simple letter
from the party approached indicating simply that, in his
case, there had been no violation of the embargo.

One must understand that most of the final report
deals with a single case, which is pompously entitled "Case
study: arms purchase in Seychelles", as if Seychelles had
suddenly become an arms-producing country. But I would
like to dwell on this transaction, in which my country's
name is mentioned more than once.

Let us consider the period during which this
transaction took place.

I should like to remind the Council of an observation
made by my Minister for Foreign Affairs to the
Commission of Inquiry. He pointed out that during the
period when the so-called arms deliveries were supposed to
have been made in violation of the embargo - in the
middle of 1994 - the situation around Goma was marked
by considerable upheaval and confusion. Some 2 million
refugees had crossed the border and had completely flooded
the relief organizations, which led the authorities to suspend
the implementation of the immigration and customs
regulations in order to speed up the delivery of assistance.

The Council should bear in mind that during that same
period, the Government of the regime that had been
expelled from Rwanda was still fighting on the soil of
Rwanda, and that Rwanda was represented in the Security
Council by an envoy from the regime that today is
decried. It must be recalled that Kigali did not fall until
4 July 1994. Therefore, all the authorities in Kigali at that
time still represented legality in Rwanda - a fact borne
out by the adoption of resolution 918 (1994) at a meeting
in which a Rwandan representative from the Hutu fringe
participated unchallenged. I would invite the Council to
reread the statement he made at that time.

In its report, the Commission does not indicate to the
Council exactly when the Seychelles authorities decided
to sell to Mr. Bagosora and Mr. Ehlers the cargo from the
ship Malo, which had been seized. It tells the Council that
the two individuals entered Seychelles on 4 June 1994.
They even provide the immigration slip of Mr. Bagosora,
but fail to provide that of Mr. Ehlers, even though he
seems to have played a key part in the negotiations with
the Seychelles authorities.

I should like to draw the attention of the members of
the Council to a slew of questions which arise from this
report and to which it does not provide the expected
replies. These are detailed in the letter which we sent to
the President of the Council.

Throughout its investigation, the Commission
remained the prisoner of its own reference materials,
which it had taken with it when it left New York. It never
tried to seek the truth beyond the writings of certain non-
governmental organizations that hoped for some
international attention. Completely benighted by its desire
to prove that the allegations that its mission was to
investigate were well founded, the Commission forfeited
its objectivity and was swayed by prejudices.

In paragraph 29 the Commission illustrates the
extent of its prejudice when it says that:

"The Government of Seychelles and Mr.
Michel cooperated fully with the Commission and
provided it with information that amply corroborated
the statements made in the Human Rights Watch
report." (S/1996/195, para. 29)

In other words, any reply that does not corroborate
what is contained in the Commission's reference
documents is regarded as a sign of lack of cooperation.

While reaffirming the content of our letter addressed
to the President, contained in document S/1996/241, we
would like to add the following.

 

In an attempt to explain the influx of arms into the
region, the Commission states in paragraph 12 of its report
that:

"General Lafourcade" - the Commander of
Operation Turquoise - "told the Commission that
French forces had brought with them no arms except
those they required for their own use. No weapons
were left behind, and all had been fully accounted for
on their departure. The General also informed the
Commission that French forces had confiscated
approximately a thousand weapons from the retreating
Rwandan government forces ((RGF) - also known as
Forces Armees Rwandaises (FAR))" - an acronym
easily confused with that of my own country's army,
FAZ. "At the conclusion of Operation Turquoise, they
said they had inventoried those weapons and handed
them over to the United Nations Assistance Mission
for Rwanda (UNAMIR). The Commission had already
heard of this matter and had written to UNAMIR
asking about the disposition of the arms. No reply has
been received." (ibid., para. 12)

I think the Council will agree that this is a strange
example of the kind of cooperation that the Commission
received and of which it boasts in paragraph 58 and
appendix I of its report. It is a strange kind of cooperation,
because these are two bodies created by the Security
Council. And it is Zaire which is criticized for lack of
cooperation.

Despite these accusations of lack of cooperation, Zaire
delivered to the President of the Council a letter dated 23
February 1996 (S/1996/132) stating that:

"I am also authorized to tell you that, since the
International Commission of Inquiry left Zaire of its
own accord, it is for it to decide, and to inform the
Zairian authorities accordingly, what it considers to be
an appropriate moment for it to return to Zaire to
complete its work there. It will receive the same
cooperation and the same facilities from the
Government of Zaire as it did on its first visit to the
country."

Imagine Zaire's astonishment that no reference is
made to that letter in the report, whereas communications
received at almost the same time, or even later, are inserted
in the report. Paragraph 44, in fact refers to a letter dated
20 February, and paragraph 51 speaks of a note received on
8 March 1996.

With respect to the case mentioned in the report
dealing with the purchase of arms in Seychelles, my
delegation confirms for the Council its concerns,
expressed in the letter dated 3 April 1996, issued as
document S/1996/241.

The Government of the Republic of Zaire, on the
basis of information, albeit incomplete, drawn from the
two reports of the Commission, undertook to carry out its
own inquiry on the transaction with Seychelles and will
supply the Council with its conclusions.
Consequently, we would urge that all countries
whose nationals, be they individuals or legal entities, that
took any part in the Seychelles transaction should
undertake to carry out their own inquiries and
communicate the results of those inquiries to the Security
Council.

The draft resolution before the Council calls for the
following comments. In the third preambular paragraph,
reference is made to the Tunis Declaration, and operative
paragraph 6 also refers to that Declaration.

I should like to raise a prejudicial question. Is the
Security Council entitled to take hold of any document
that is produced in the world and involve it in its
decisions? As far as I know, this Declaration has never
been published as a document of the Security Council.

Zaire believes that a simple statement by the
President of the Council would have been sufficient to
take note of this report, which is extremely contradictory
in many respects. No one acknowledges that it has any
particular merit, not even the Council, as can be seen
from preambular paragraph 11 of the draft resolution. But
despite that, it describes the report as excellent.

Preambular paragraph 10 of the draft resolution
refers to aircraft that are continuing to land at Goma and
Bukavu with arms. This is simply an invention on the
part of those who still wish to discredit Zaire despite the
sacrifices it made in the Rwandan crisis.

Since, in the eyes of the Council, these planes are
known and identified, perhaps we can be told where they
came from, and also the origin of the arms they were
carrying?

The airports of Goma and Bukavu are transportation
routes from the east of Zaire. They are open and serve the
purposes for which they were constructed.

 

It is high time for the Council to stop basing its
decisions on indications or unproven allegations because
there are many other allegations published by serious
sources that have not received the same attention from the
Council. Why do we have these double standards for some
and no standards at all for others?

The twelfth preambular paragraph, which reflects a
biased view of the central threat to security in the region,
should have been firmer in its assessment of the danger
represented by the refugee element in the region. Indeed,
we offered a more realistic draft, which read:
"Recognizing that the massive presence of
refugees in the Great Lakes region is a major factor
for destabilization in the region and an ongoing threat
to international peace and security, and that every
effort must be made to allow these refugees to return
to their country of origin as soon as possible in order
to make the region more secure".

Zaire firmly believes that, so long as the question of
refugees has not been successfully resolved by their return
to their respective countries, the region will long continue
to be in a state of upheaval. Moreover, among its
contradictory statements, the Commission recognizes this
danger in paragraph 61 of its final report. The Council must
take the refugee dimension into account in all its
undertakings in the region and exert pressure on Kigali to
bring its population home.

Here, I must digress, because I have heard it claimed
that the Government of Kigali received 8,000 Zairian
refugees. That is not so; here is the truth.

In 1927 and 1959, following famines, there were two
mass migrations from Rwanda to the Masisi plains in Zaire.
The transplanted population living on these plains consisted
mainly of Tutsis, but it must be understood that the Great
Lakes region has one feature specific to itself: the peasants
who live there are greatly attached to their land. There is no
free land in the Great Lakes region. The land belongs to the
tribes.

Claims of ownership were made by this refugee
population over the local inhabitants of the Masisi, and the
situation was further aggravated because the transplanted
population was not integrated into the local population.
They even refused to marry the locals and married only
among themselves. One result of this is the degeneracy
visible among them.

The Younde population in the Masisi continues to
contest the presence of the transplanted population on its
lands. When that population learned that their brothers
had seized power in Kigali by military action, they joined
the war in Rwanda, participating physically and providing
material and financial contributions. They decided to
return to Rwanda, their native land. But I have seen none
of the Zairian refugees who are supposed to have returned
to Rwanda.

Rwanda has simply to assume its responsibilities and
welcome its returning people. It is as if one were to
suggest that the young people on Iwawa Island were not
entitled to be there. They are Rwandans trained in
Rwanda. They came from a Zairian camp, but we cannot
be responsible for actions committed in Rwanda by
refugees who then return to Zaire.

I therefore wish to inform the Council, on behalf of
the Government of Zaire, that there are no Zairian
refugees in Rwanda. There is a movement of Rwandese
located in Zaire. I might add that the Ambassador of
Rwanda returned to his country and assumed his
responsibilities, but he too was a refugee in my country.
I wish to take this opportunity to ask the Secretary-
General through you, Sir, to use his influence to persuade
the Ambassador of Rwanda to the United Nations to
return the Zairian passport he continues to hold. Who
knows: He may make use of it, and I would find myself
with another Bagasora on my hands.

In connection with the draft resolution, operative
paragraph 7 singles my country out for attention. This
paragraph reveals the Council's ignorance of the realities
of the region.

The tragedy of Rwanda was predictable and the
respective foreign offices of the members of the Council
must have informed them correctly. But no one was
willing to raise their voice, so let us shed no crocodile
tears today.

The arms traffic in the region is being blown out of
all proportion, while it has been forgotten that the
weapons that killed hundreds of thousands of people in
Rwanda were not cannons or mortars but mere machetes,
weapons available to the simplest peasant. It was the
machete that did the killing in Rwanda.

Lastly, on a more positive note, let me point to a
provision that could be useful in moving the inquiry
ahead. Paragraph 9 calls upon States, particularly those

 

whose nationals - native or naturalized - have been
implicated by the report, to carry out their own
investigations, the results of which paragraph 10 calls upon
them to make available. Indeed, the Council must require
respect for paragraph 1 (c) of resolution 1013 (1995). The
embargo having been decreed under Chapter VII, no
banking institution can hide behind the screen of financial
secrecy. All those who gave orders in the Seychelles
operation must be clearly identified so as to allow all these
international swindlers to be brought down.

Believing that the draft resolution that is about to be
adopted authorizes the Commission to resume its work, as
we had wished, Zaire asks the Commission to provide
answers to the many questions it asked in its letter of 3
March 1996 (document S/1996/241). This will allow us to
conclude fruitfully the investigation we are currently
pursuing.

The Government of the Republic of Zaire eagerly
awaits the return to the region of the Commission of
Inquiry and hopes that it will leave its prejudices in the
dustbin of history and get down to its investigation. It will
enjoy the open cooperation of the Government of the
Republic of Zaire, aimed at seeking out all evidence of the
truth in the interests of the international community.

