Mr. Danforth (United States of America): I am
sure I join with all members in thanking Ambassador
Konuzin for his report to us this morning and also in
congratulating him and his staff on their work since
assuming the chairmanship of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC) in May.

I would also like to welcome Javier Ruperez, the
Executive Director of the newly established Counter-
Terrorism Executive Directorate (CTED), to his first
Council meeting. The establishment of that body marks
a watershed moment in the Council's effort to deal with
the menacing threat to international peace and security
that is terrorism.

The global campaign against terrorism remains
the highest of priorities for my Government. The
United States is committed to seeing that the United
Nations continues to play an important role in this area,
and my Government is working to find ways to
enhance the United Nations effectiveness. It will
require a team effort to defeat the scourge of terrorism.
The Counter-Terrorism Committee has been a valuable
member of that team. Through its capacity-building
work and its global coordination initiatives, the
Committee has helped to energize member States and
organizations around the world to make the fight
against terrorism more of a priority, be it through the
adoption of new or the improvement of existing
counter-terrorism laws or enforcement mechanisms.

As a result of its work, more organizations and
countries have joined the counter-terrorism team.
Nevertheless, much work remains to be done. For
example, while we have seen a significant increase in
the number of States that have become parties to the 12
international counter-terrorism conventions and
protocols, there are still too many that have failed to
take action in this area. Some 40 States are parties to
fewer than half of those instruments. This suggests a
lack of urgency in fighting terrorism and weakens
international solidarity.

Although the CTC has received more than 500
reports from member States, compliance with
resolution 1373 (2001) requires much more than the
submission of reports. Compliance requires action on
various fronts - the legislative, the regulatory and the
operational. The CTC needs to do a better job of
reinforcing that point, both in New York and in
capitals. Perhaps the clearest indication of just how
much more needs to be done is the number of major
terrorist attacks since the CTC opened its doors for
business in October 2001. Simply put, the terrorists and
their supporters have continued to strike, be it in Bali,
Moscow, Casablanca, Riyadh, Baghdad, Mombassa,
Istanbul, Haifa, Tel Aviv, Jerusalem or Madrid.
Terrorism has not been defeated, raising the spectre of
further deadly attacks on innocent victims and
continuing threats to international peace and security.

The Council established the CTED to strengthen
the CTC and provide it with additional tools and
resources. Now we must work to ensure that the CTED
becomes operational as quickly as possible. The CTED
will enable the CTC to be more proactive, to reach out
in different ways to States and organizations and to
encourage more of them to become full partners on the
counter-terrorism team. Through field visits to
different States, it will be able to help the CTC assess
on-the-ground efforts to implement the provisions of
resolution 1373 (2001), thus moving beyond the
current focus on written reports. This is essential if the
CTC eventually hopes to gather enough information to
determine which States are in compliance with the
resolution.

In addition, we encourage those States that have
asked for technical assistance to consider requesting a
visit from the CTC and the CTED. Even with the work
of those bodies and that of the Council's other counter-
terrorism body, the Al Qaeda-Taliban sanctions
Committee, the Council itself must remain at the
forefront of the global campaign to rid the world of the
scourge of terrorism. It must act with a sense of
urgency, as though the events of 11 March 2004 and
11 September 2001 had taken place yesterday, not
months or years ago. It must never forget that, so long
as a few States are not acting quickly enough to raise
their capacity to fight terrorism or are not meeting their
international counter-terrorism obligations, all of us
remain vulnerable.

The Council must be prepared to live up to its
responsibility under the United Nations Charter to
maintain international peace and security.

