The President (spoke in French): I shall now

make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of the Republic of the Congo.

I thank Mr. Williams, the Special Coordinator for
the Middle East Process and the Secretary-General's
Personal Representative to the Palestine Liberation
Organization and the Palestinian Authority, for his very
informative statement, the content of which has been
duly noted by the Congolese delegation.

In a precarious and volatile environment, we note
positive signs that are important milestones along the
path to the relaunching of the peace process in the
region. As we all know, a solution to the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict cannot be found through arms.
Thus there is a need for the international community to
firmly support the initiatives and efforts being
undertaken at various levels in order to achieve the
two-State solution, Israel and Palestine living side-by-
side in peace and security in accordance with the Road
Map and the relevant resolutions of the United Nations.
Certainly, the security situation on the ground
continues to be a source of concern, and my delegation
strongly condemns all acts of violence and
provocation, whatever their source.

We also remain extremely concerned by the
continuing deterioration in the living conditions of the
Palestinian people, particularly in Gaza. The organized
shortages and restrictions on movement of the
population of the occupied territories and of
humanitarian personnel are intolerable, because they
aggravate a situation that is already disastrous and are
making this territory a veritable open-air prison. The
international community, in particular the principle
donors, must contribute effectively to easing the
difficulties of the daily life of the Palestinian people -
all of the Palestinian people.

My delegation deplores once again the violent
nature of inter-Palestinian clashes, which unfortunately
have led to a de facto split between Gaza and the West
Bank, thus compromising the idea of a democratic and
viable Palestinian State. We urge the Palestinian people
to draw on their patriotic resources and regain their
unity with the assistance of the States of the region, in
particular in the spirit of the agreement reached in
Mecca, Saudi Arabia on 8 February 2007.

The Middle East Quartet, for its part, must
redouble its efforts in accordance with its mission,
which is to restore peace in the region by putting an

end to the Arab-Israeli conflict and by creating the
conditions necessary for the establishment of the
Palestinian State. My delegation notes and welcomes
the latest initiatives of the Quartet, particularly the
declaration made at Lisbon on 19 July 2007 regarding
the convening of an international meeting on the
initiative of the President of the United States of
America, mentioned in his statement of 16 July 2007.

We also welcome the recent arrangements by the
Secretary-General to implement the conclusions of the
Quartet, measures that were in fact endorsed by our
Council on 24 August with regard to the mandate of
Mr. Tony Blair, the Quartet representative, and the
establishment and the functioning of his office in
Jerusalem.

The Congo expects the international meeting on
the Middle East to be able to help protagonists in the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict to achieve substantial
progress in the forthcoming negotiations. In the
meantime, we call on both parties to avoid any
unilateral actions or measures which might undermine
confidence. In this respect, we welcome the release by
Israel of 250 Palestinian prisoners and the restoration
to the Palestinian Authority of previously frozen
financial assets. We also welcome the resumption of
bilateral talks between the Prime Minister of Israel,
Ehud Olmert, and the President of the Palestinian
Authority, Mahmoud Abbas, talks that we feel should
go beyond security and humanitarian arrangements in
order to focus on substantive issues and move on to
new stages.

As regards Lebanon, my delegation welcomes
efforts being made at various levels to prevent that
country, which we cherish, from sinking once again
into violence. We note the tireless efforts of certain
countries that are friends of Lebanon. These efforts
should be supported by the entire international
community.

We would like to reaffirm the position expressed
by the Council on 3 August 2007 through the
presidential statement issued following the discussion
on the implementation of resolution 1701 (2006)
(S/PRST/2007/29). We also welcome the adoption by
the Council on 24 August 2007 of resolution 1773
(2007), which renews the mandate of the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon for another year.

One year after the war of summer 2006, Lebanon
is still faced with major challenges as regards its
political independence, its sovereignty, its unity and its
territorial integrity. We remain convinced that only a
responsible national dialogue will make it possible to
find solutions to the many questions that remain
unresolved relating to constitutional issues, electoral
perspectives and legal disputes.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I now give the floor to the Permanent Observer of
Palestine.

