Mr. Pleuger (Germany): As I did not take the
floor yesterday, I would like to wish you well, Sir, in
your presidency this month and also to thank
Ambassador Lavrov and his whole team for the way he
conducted the business of our Council last month.

I also want to associate myself with the statement
that will later be made by the Italian Presidency of the
European Union.

First of all, I would like to thank Michael Steiner
for his last briefing on Kosovo to the Security Council
in his capacity as Special Representative of the
Secretary-General. His departure is, I feel, the occasion
to take stock of the developments and achievements in
Kosovo. Indeed, looking back over the past year and a
half, we note that Kosovo has made remarkable
progress, which sometimes we tend to lose sight of in
dealing with day-to-day problems.

When Michael Steiner arrived in Pristina, he was
confronted with a situation in which, three months after
the parliamentary elections, politicians were haggling
over setting up a coalition Government. Michael
Steiner, with his known determination and resolve,
plunged ahead, facilitated the formation of a
Government, kick-started the institutions, brought back
home the last political prisoners from Serbia, set up the
benchmark catalogue and created the policy of
"standards before status" that is still the guiding
political principle for the time being.

Today, the full set of institutions required for
substantial autonomy and self-government, including
the justice and police systems, is in place. However, a
lot of issues still evade resolution. Many of today's
problems are due to a serious and worrying lack of
political maturity, democratic behaviour, compromise
and respect for minorities on the part of local society
and political representatives. One may hold the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
accountable for failures, but never for a lack of good
faith in the course of creating a multi-ethnic and
democratic Kosovo. Kosovo could be much more
advanced if it were not for a political class that pursues
its own interest, widely ignoring the wishes and the
common interests of the ordinary people.

It is essential that the Provisional Institutions of
Self-Government in Kosovo meet the benchmarks set
out by the Special Representative and that they
advance legislation and develop policies for all
Kosovars in order to promote the economy and the
development of social policies, with particular focus on
the situation of Kosovo's minorities.

This week, as mentioned by Michael Steiner, has
seen a hopeful political sign - the unprecedented
appeal by Kosovo's non-Serb leaders to the internally
displaced persons in an open letter to the displaced
residents of Kosovo in Serbia, Montenegro and
Macedonia. We consider this appeal to be an
expression of political responsibility and maturity. We
consider the confirmation of Kosovo as a rightful home
for the displaced to be a binding commitment and we
hope that this appeal will become a milestone in the
matter of returns and integration.

What are the immediate next steps? We call on
Belgrade and Pristina to start a direct dialogue on
practical issues, possibly before the summer break. The
beginning of dialogue should lead to a process of
various parallel discussions at the expert level, and this
dialogue should not be delayed.

There is no easy and effortless way to achieve the
benchmarks of a modern society for European
integration. Kosovo will face a difficult process of
further reforms and transformation. Michael Steiner
dodged no efforts to bring the process forward; neither
will his successor, whom we hope will be appointed
soon.

In conclusion, I would like to thank Mr. Steiner
again for his tenure and for the outstanding service he
has done.

