Mr. Haniff (Malaysia): I join my colleagues in
welcoming Ms. Federica Mogherini and congratulating
her on her assumption of the position of High
Representative for Foreign Affairs and Security
Policy of the European Union (EU). I also thank the
Secretary-General and the High Representative for
their respective statements.

Malaysia fully supports the call of the Secretary-
General to further expand cooperation between
the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations so that they may work closely together
in preventing, managing and resolving crisis under
Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations.
Regional organizations such as the EU have the
resources, expertise and international standing to play
multiple roles, including those of mediator, observer,
donor and peacebuilder, in various conflict areas all
over the world.

As part of the Middle East Quartet, the EU plays a
vital role in contributing to the Middle Eastpeace process
towards finding a sustainable solution to the decades-
long Palestinian-Israeli conflict. We are encouraged by
the commitment shown by Ms. Mogherini, as reflected
in her visit to Gaza last November and her increasing
engagement with the leaders of the Palestinian
Authority. Malaysia welcomes the statement made by
the High Representative last November, which stressed
the need for a Palestinian State as the ultimate goal and
position of the EU, based on a two-State solution with
an independent, democratic, viable State of Palestine
living side by side with Israel and its other neighbours
in peace and security.

Malaysia lauds the continuing financial support
by the EU in building institutions and infrastructure
in the occupied Palestinian territories with the aim of
creating a viable Palestinian State. We also welcome
the recognition of the State of Palestine by Sweden last
year, and we hope to see more EU members moving
towards a similar direction in the near future.

As a regional organization that prides itself on its
core values of protection of human rights and the rule
of law, we urge the EU to be at the forefront of ending
impunity in the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, especially
in view of the massive atrocities committed against the
Palestinian civilians during the Gaza conflict last year,
the continuing expansion of illegal Israeli settlements
in the occupied Palestinian territories, the continuing
construction of the separation wall by Israel, contrary
to the 2004 advisory opinion of the International Court
of Justice, and, recently, the withholding oftax revenues
by Israel in violation of its obligations under the Paris
Protocol of the Oslo accords.

We have heard repeated warnings from the United
Nations, including from the Secretary-General,
regarding the unsustainability of the situation in
occupied Palestinian territories due to continuing
Israeli occupation. We have also noted the widespread
disillusionment with the Middle East Quartet, especially
on the part of the region. We sincerely hope that the
international community will heed the warnings and
start to tackle the root causes of the conflict, rather than
continue with its piecemeal response of addressing the
symptoms of the crisis. In that regard, we look forward
to the early resumption of negotiations on the Middle
East peace process and we call on the EU, as a Quartet
member, to intensify its efforts towards that end.

Meanwhile, on Iran's nuclear programme, Malaysia
recognizes the pivotal role played by the EU in
resolving the issue, within the context of the ongoing
E3+3 negotiations with Iran. Following the landmark
Joint Plan of Action of 24 November 2013, we are now
witnessing the potential culmination of a truly historic
agreement, which my delegation hopes will bring about
a final and peaceful resolution to the Iranian nuclear
issue. Malaysia encourages all parties to continue their
efforts towards dialogue and understanding, with a
View to bridging the gaps that remain.

On Africa, we commend the role and contribution of

the EU in the African region, from conflict prevention
to conflict management and post-conflict transition
and sustainable development. We also acknowledge
the support of the EU in sharing its technical expertise
to ensure the success of electoral processes in African
countries, including in Burundi.

With regard to the situation in Mali, Malaysia wishes
to take this opportunity to extend our condolences to
the families of victims of the recent terrorist attacks
in Bamako and Kidal, on 7 and 8 March, that killed
civilians and United Nations personnel, including
a staff member of the EU delegation. We strongly
condemn that atrocious act.

We commend the significant role of the EU in
supporting the Algiers process. As a co-mediator, the
EU continues to play its constructive role in assisting
the Malian parties with a view to achieving national
reconciliation and a long-lasting, peaceful solution. We
view that continued commitment of the EU, in close
cooperation with the United Nations and the African
Union, as essential at this particularly crucial juncture.

On Libya, Malaysia notes the ongoing efforts ofthe
EU in providing humanitarian assistance to asylum-
seekers in the Mediterranean region. We also welcome
the possibility of the EU's playing a greater role in
monitoring and preventing the illicit flow of arms and
oil in the Mediterranean Sea, as well as the security
threats posed by terrorism in the region.

The volatile security situation and dire humanitarian
predicament in the Central African Republic require
our sustained attention. The multifaceted involvement
of the EU in the Central African Republic, including
its military operation in the Central Africa Republic
(EUFOR RCA) exemplifies the vital role that the
international community can play alongside the United
Nations in restoring peace and security to the Central
African Republic. We commend EUFOR RCA for
its important contribution to stabilizing the security
situation in Bangui and note the end of its mandate
on 15 March. We welcome the decision of the EU to
deploy the EU military advisory mission to the Central
African Republic, which we hope will continue the
momentum in strengthening the security sector in the
Central African Republic and building the foundations
for long-lasting stability.

Within Europe itself, the Ukrainian crisis is
threatening the security and stability of the region.
We applaud the initiative taken by key EU members,
particularly France and Germany, in engaging with
the conflicting parties to de-escalate the crisis. We
welcome the resulting agreement on the package
of measures for the implementation of the Minsk
agreements, which was subsequently endorsed by the
Council. We call on all parties to fully comply with
the provisions of the agreement to facilitate a final
political solution to the crisis and for the EU to play a
constructive role towards that end. We also follow with
great interest the EU's recent launching of a review of
European neighbourhood policy in order to build strong
partnerships and to better tackle the challenges faced
by the EU in its relations with its neighbours.

In the western Balkans, we commend the stabilizing
role played by the EU in the post-conflict countries in the
region, such as in Bosnia and Herzegovina and Kosovo.
We welcome the breakthrough in normalizing relations
between Kosovo and Serbia, as well as the continuing
commitment by Ms. Mogherini in facilitating the high-
level talks between Pristina and Belgrade on 9 February
2015 in Brussels.

We also fully support the continuing role played by
the EU in further strengthening democratic institutions,
the rule of law and the process of reconciliation; in
capacity-building; and in creating a functioning market
economy in the western Balkans.

By way of conclusion, Malaysia welcomes the
reaffirmation by the High Representative of the EU
that the EU will continue its close cooperation with
the United Nations in upholding the purposes and
principles of the United Nations Charter. As a Council
member, Malaysia reiterates its commitment to play
a constructive role in further engaging with regional
organizations, especially one as successful and
established as the EU, in maintaining international
peace and security.

