Mr. Trujillo Garcia (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
I commend the high-level authorities for their presence
here today and express my gratitude for the briefing
by Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-General
for Political and Peacebuilding Affairs. I also thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this meeting on the
situation in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.

Let me begin by welcoming the transition process
and the re-establishment of the constitutional order
that, under the leadership of Interim President Juan
Guaido and the National Assembly, propelled by the
exhilarating democratic political forces and the broad
and eloquent citizen mobilization, is taking place in
our brotherly country in this new phase that began on
23 January. Colombia asked to take the floor in this
meeting to join the just call of the Venezuelan people
and express its firm and determined support for the
interim President of Venezuela, Juan Guaido, and
the legislative competency of the National Assembly,
elected to power on 6 December 2015. Our actions
therefore reflect the fulfilment of our duties as a
State Member of the United Nations, a member of the
Organization of American States and a signatory of the
Inter-American Democratic Charter.

It bears recalling that such duties compel us to
act within the mentioned legal frameworks when
irregularities impede the democratic process, as was
the case in Venezuela as a result of the May 2018
electoral process, which lacked legitimacy. For the
same reason, together with other democracies in the
hemisphere and acting in the framework of the Lima
Group, Colombia has taken the political decision to
firmly commit its Government, under President Ivan
Duque Marquez, to supporting fostering conditions
that will enable the brotherly people of Venezuela to
live again in democracy and freedom.

The dictatorship in Venezuela has posed a threat
to peace, security and stability in the region, while
running contrary to international law, in particular
inter-American law. As a country neighbouring
Venezuela, Colombia has experienced and suffered its
consequences. This same dictatorship has appropriated
properties in which Colombian businessmen had
legitimate interests, has all but destroyed commercial
exchange that was profitable for and mutually beneficial
to both countries, and has harboured terrorist groups
that violate the right to and threaten, the life, property,
security and well-being of citizens in Colombia.
The destructive consequences of the dictatorship's
actions in the economic, political and social realms have
been such in scope that they have led to the exodus of
more than 3.5 million people, who have abandoned their
land in desperation and despair in search of peace and
opportunities. In the spirit of responsibility, solidarity
and sense of humanitarian obligation, Colombia
has welcomed more than 1 million migrants from
Venezuela, despite its limited capacities and resources.
We will therefore continue to participate actively in
building a regional and global response to adequately
manage the migration crisis.

What moves us in humanitarian terms in the current
situation is ensuring that, upon reopening the doors
closed off by the dictatorship - thanks to the first steps
taken by Interim President Juan Guaido - aid reaches
those in need. The international democratic community
has the moral and political duty to diplomatically and
politically mobilize without hesitation or delay support
for the efforts ofa people who are reclaiming their right
to freedom and prosperity.

President Ivan Duque Marquez once said that what
destroys Venezuela destroys us and what strengthens
Venezuela strengthens us. What Colombia has therefore
come to ask of the international community at this
historic Security Council meeting - very respectfully,
yet eagerly - is to support ending the usurpation
and starting the transition process with the holding of
free and transparent elections, with every guarantee,
under the leadership of Interim President Guaido.
Colombia has come to ask for support for rejecting
insincere dialogues that the dictatorship has used to
stall processes, buy time and prolong the suffering of
the Venezuelan people. Colombia has come to ask for
support for the entry of humanitarian aid into Venezuela.
Colombia has come to ask that the international
community demand respect for the life and integrity of
Juan Guaido, the members of the National Assembly,
those fighting for democracy and all Venezuelans who
are dedicating their efforts to building a better future.
Colombia has come to ask that more members of the
international community join in the referral of various
States to the International Criminal Court so that the
serious events that have taken place in Venezuela can
be investigated. Colombia has come to ask for support
for measures for the protection of assets confiscated
by the dictatorship and corruption. Colombia has come
to ask for political support from every corner of the
world for the developments that have restored hope to a
people who see the gleaming promise ofa better future.
Colombia has come to ask for support for the decision
to move towards a transparent and secure electoral
contest in which the brotherly Venezuelans can choose
the Government that they want.

