Mr. Fernandez-Taranco: Since last month's
briefing (see S/PV.6488), there has been an increase in
violent incidents and tensions on the ground, while
efforts to restart the Israeli-Palestinian negotiations
have not produced visible results. We must not let the
recent surge in violence further undermine the
possibility of finding a way towards an agreement on
final status issues or undermine the State-building
achievements thus far. The wider region has continued
to witness dramatic developments, which add to the
importance of redoubling efforts to break the deadlock
as progress towards peace and meeting the legitimate
aspirations of the Palestinian people to statehood could
be an important stabilizing force in the Middle East.

During the reporting period, the Quartet
continued its efforts to help the parties to find a way
back to direct negotiations. As agreed in Munich on
5 February, Quartet envoys have met separately with
Palestinian and Israeli negotiators, and are giving
serious consideration to the views of the parties on how
to bring about resumed negotiations on all core issues,
including borders and security. Quartet envoys will
further engage with both sides, and the Quartet is
planning to meet at the principals level in April. It is
hoped that this meeting can help set the stage for
renewed negotiations, and the United Nations is
working actively towards this goal.

On 11 March, a shocking murder of five
members, including three young children, of an Israeli
family of seven took place at the settlement of Itamar
in the occupied West Bank. The Secretary-General and
the Quartet unequivocally condemned the murders,
offered condolences and called for those responsible to
be brought to justice and for all to act with restraint.
2
The Quartet stated that attacks on any civilians are
completely unacceptable in any circumstance.
President Abbas condemned the murders and offered
the help of Palestinian security forces in bringing the
perpetrators to justice. We expect strong action against
incitement or glorification of any violent acts.

Israeli forces were deployed in several areas
throughout the West Bank with the goal of detaining
the perpetrators and containing attempts by Israeli
settlers to attack Palestinians and their property in
reprisal for the killings. Despite those efforts, during
the three days following the murders, the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs recorded eight
incidents that resulted in injuries to Palestinians, and
23 that caused damage to property throughout the West
Bank, as a result of settler violence. As well, the Israeli
security forces reinstated the Hawwara check point
near Nablus, which had been removed on 11 February.

Overall, settler violence considerably increased
during the reporting period, with 60 incidents resulting
in damage to property and 24 Palestinians injured by
settlers in 18 incidents in the West Bank. In one of
those incidents, on Monday, a Palestinian was stabbed
and injured by settlers close to Hebron. In another
incident yesterday two Palestinians were shot and
wounded by settlers. We recall that the Israeli
Government must fulfil its obligation to protect the
Palestinian population in the occupied West Bank.

Citing security concerns, Israeli security forces
conducted 320 search operations in the West Bank.
One hundred and eleven Palestinians were injured by
Israeli security forces and 217 were arrested. About
half of those injuries occurred in the East Jerusalem
neighbourhood of Silwan during clashes between local
residents and the Israeli police in the context of
protests against settler activities in the neighbourhood.

We are also concerned by the increased violence
and tensions in and around Gaza during the reporting
period. Twelve missiles, one of which was a Grad
rocket, and 55 mortars were shot indiscriminately
towards Israeli civilian areas, including some 50
mortar shells, in an alarming escalation during the
night between 19 and 20 March. We condemn those
attacks, which are a violation of resolution 1860 (2009)
and which must cease immediately. More than 20 air
strikes and 15 incursions took place, resulting in the
deaths of three Palestinian civilians and 28 injured, as
well as two militants killed and five injured. All parties
11-27288
must exercise restraint and respect international
humanitarian law.

On 15 March, Israeli forces intercepted the ship
Victoria 200 nautical miles from the Israeli coast. The
ship carried some 25 tones of weapons and
ammunition. The Israeli authorities believe that the
arms were destined for militant groups in Gaza. If that
destination were to be confirmed, it would constitute a
Violation of resolution 1860 (2009), which provides for
the prevention of illicit trafficking of arms and
ammunition.

We are deeply concerned about the decision of
12 March by the Israeli Government to approve the
construction of approximately 400 housing units in the
West Bank in reaction to the heinous murder in Itamar.
On 1 March, the Jerusalem municipality issued a
permit for the construction of 14 apartments for Israeli
settlers in the Ras al-Amud neighbourhood of East
Jerusalem. Those are provocative actions that only
serve to exacerbate tensions. Once again, I would like
to express the United Nations position that any
settlement activity by Israel in occupied territory is
illegal under international law and detrimental to
efforts to resume negotiations and achieve the two-
State solution.

Israeli authorities demolished 59 Palestinian
structures throughout the West Bank during the
reporting period. As a result, 119 people were forcibly
displaced. Israel, as the occupying Power, is prohibited
from destroying property belonging to individuals or
communities, except when absolutely required by
military necessity.

On 7 March, the Israeli Government announced
its intention to demolish all illegal West Bank outposts
built on private Palestinian land by the end of 2011. We
welcome that announcement. However, we note that it
fails to address the issue of the existence of more than
100 other West Bank outposts constructed not only in
defiance of international law but also in violation of
the Israeli Government's own regulations. On
28 February, the Israeli authorities demolished a
number of structures in an outpost in the northern West
Bank, prompting violent clashes with settlers that led
to 17 arrests. Following the confrontation, militant
settlers attacked a nearby Palestinian village, fire-
bombing a house and injuring two children and
damaging property. Prime Minister Netanyahu
condemned their actions.
11-27288

We stress the importance of further enabling steps
by Israel to ensure greater progress on the ground in
support of Palestinian State-building efforts. Measures
agreed by Prime Minister Netanyahu and Quartet
Representative Blair have started to be implemented in
some areas. For example, on 3 March, the Israeli
Ministry of Communications released the remaining
bandwidth to the Wataniya mobile operator. Such
facilitation is critical to further the development of the
Palestinian private sector, which is the engine of
sustainable economic growth.

However, State-building efforts by the Palestinian
Authority will be at risk if the political process does
not overcome the current impasse in the negotiations. It
will be further undermined if tensions and violence on
the ground continue. They also continue to be impeded
in area C and East Jerusalem by Israeli measures that
challenge movement and access, hinder the provision
of basic services and undermine the development of
resources.

As the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee is about to
meet on 13 April, I wish to emphasize that continued
support from donors is important to meet recurrent
budget expenses of the Palestinian Authority. To date,
commitments are far below what is needed.

The Secretary-General noted with much interest
the readiness of President Abbas to visit Gaza in an
effort to end Palestinian disunity. He also discussed the
importance of Palestinian unity with the Egyptian
Foreign Minister in Cairo and noted Egyptian
intentions to focus anew on that important issue. It is
important that the leaders respond to the clear wish of
the people for unity. We welcome serious efforts by all
factions to advance Palestinian unity and continue to
hope for real progress within the framework of the
Palestinian Authority and the commitments of the
Palestine Liberation Organization.

On 15 March, demonstrations involving several
thousand participants were held in most major West
Bank cities. On the same day, much larger
demonstrations were held in Gaza, with participation
estimated at 100,000. Protestors called for an end to
the Israeli occupation and the Palestinian division. I
report with concern that Hamas security forces
clamped down on protesters in Gaza, reportedly
injuring seven Palestinians. The following day they
suppressed a gathering of students, resulting in tens of
students injured. Also on 15 March, Hamas security
3
forces attacked local members of the press; on
19 March, they stormed the bureaus of Reuters, CNN
and the NHK news channel, attacking journalists,
confiscating tapes and destroying equipment. We
condemn those attacks and urge full respect for the
freedom of the press in Gaza as elsewhere.

Notwithstanding the difficulties, preparations for
municipal elections are ongoing. The Palestinian
Central Elections Committee organized voter
registration in the West Bank from 9 to 15 March. It
was unable to open its offices in Gaza due to the
refusal of Hamas. On 8 March, President Abbas
confirmed that the local elections scheduled for 9 July
would be held on time. However, he reiterated that
there would be no presidential and legislative elections
unless they were held in the West Bank and Gaza
simultaneously.

The situation of the civilian population in Gaza
remains a concern. The weekly average number of
truckloads entering the Strip during the reporting
period was 882, compared to 566 in June 2010, before
the announcement of the revised Israeli policy.
However, the current imports represent approximately
only one third of the June 2007 pre-blockade weekly
average.

United Nations projects with a total value of
$155.5 million have been approved thus far by the
Government of Israel. It is now important to ensure the
timely implementation of those projects and a steady
flow of approvals. The recent movement of 23,650 tons
of aggregate from Sufa crossing is a welcome step.
However, a fundamental upgrade in the entry of
materials through Israeli crossings is necessary for the
United Nations to continue its work and, more
importantly, for the rehabilitation of the private sector,
which is critical to the revival of the economy in Gaza.
Based on our estimates, the amount of construction
materials that is now entering through the tunnels is
substantially more than the amount passing through the
Israeli crossings for approved international projects.

I regret to continue to report that Staff Sergeant
Gilad Shalit remains in Hamas captivity and has had no
humanitarian access for nearly five years. We reiterate
our call for his release and for humanitarian access to
be provided to him without delay. We are concerned by
the continued detention of several thousand
Palestinians in Israel, and we call for their rights to be
respected.
As far as the regional aspects of the peace
process are concerned, there has been no progress in
efforts to promote Israeli-Syrian peace negotiations.
Settlement activities in the occupied Syrian Golan have
also continued. We encourage the parties to pursue the
resolution of the conflict in the context of the Arab
Peace Initiative.

In Lebanon, Mr. Mikati, whom President Sleiman
mandated on 25 January to form a new Government,
has pursued his consultations with all political parties
in a climate of increased political polarization. On
27 February, the 14 March coalition announced that it
would not take part in the future Government.
Mr. Mikati has placed great emphasis on forming a
non-partisan Government. The Secretary-General
renews his hope that the new Government will meet the
aspirations of all Lebanese and calls on it to respect
Lebanon's international obligations.

On 13 March, the 14 March coalition held a
major political rally to commemorate the sixth
anniversary of its formation. All speakers at the rally
expressed strong support for the Special Tribunal for
Lebanon and denounced the continued existence of
arms outside the control of the State and their use as
political instruments in the domestic arena.

I am concerned by the increase in verbal attacks
and even some acts of violence in Lebanon against
staff members of the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA), following the death of a young boy on
8 March in Ein el-Hilweh camp. I call on Palestinian
factions to de-escalate the situation. UNRWA continues
to strive for the delivery of improved services to the
Palestinian refugees it serves. I call upon the
international community to step up support to UNRWA
in order to urgently meet its funding requirements.

The overall situation in the area of operations of
the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon has
remained generally quiet and stable. Israeli air
violations continued at high levels, in violation of
resolution 1701 (2006). Further details will be
discussed by the Special Coordinator of the Secretary-
General for Lebanon and the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations when they brief the Council
on the implementation of the resolution on 29 March.

Let me conclude by reiterating a sense of urgency
to break the current impasse in the Israeli-Palestinian
negotiations. The important achievements, especially
11-27288
those related to the State-building agenda of the
Palestinian Authority, will be at risk if the impasse in
the political process is not overcome. A decisive effort
must now be made by the international community and
the Quartet to bring the parties back to negotiating the
final status issues towards implementing the two-State
solution. We urge the parties to demonstrate leadership
and to rise to the challenge of making an historic
peace.
11-27288
