Mr. Isata: I would like, first of all, to
congratulate you, Mr. President, on your assumption of
the presidency of the Council and to express, on behalf
of the African Union (AU), my sincere gratitude for the
opportunity given us to join this important meeting on
Guinea-Bissau. Personally, I am honoured to address
the Council for the first time in my present capacity.
We attach great significance to this engagement within
the context of the growing partnership between the
African Union and the Security Council, and with the
United Nations as a whole.

Once again, the Security Council is called on to
assume the responsibility for which it was established:
the maintenance of international peace and security.
Today, we gather to continue our efforts on the
situation in Guinea-Bissau, a country that has been
living in a cycle of political instability for decades, a
result of the weakness of the State institutions and
legal system, particularly the administration of
criminal justice.

We are grateful for the comprehensive briefing
provided by the colleagues who preceded me. I will be
very brief in discussing just a few points, from our
point of view, concerning the situation on the ground.

As a result of the absence of the effective rule of
law and the spread of drug trafficking, corruption and
poverty - which have been pervasive there for many
years - Guinea-Bissau has experienced decades of
instability. The African Union, to strengthen its efforts
to help bring an end to that chronic problem and
restore constitutional normality, decided to open a
permanent office in Guinea-Bissau, as a first step in the
development of a joint stabilization mission of the AU
and the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), pursuant to the decision of the Assembly
of the African Union at its special session held in
August 2009 in Tripoli, Libya.
10-62182
We are pleased to note at this juncture that,
despite all the difficulties it faces, Guinea-Bissau has
shown encouraging signs regarding the implementation
of the decisions and recommendations of the African
Union and the international community. Those signs
can be summarized as follows.

President Malam Bacai Sanha and Prime Minister
Carlos Gomes Junior made a commitment to end their
differences, expressed on 14 October before the
diplomatic corps following AU-United Nations efforts
on the ground. On that same occasion, an official
announcement was made of their decision to accept
deployment of a joint AU-ECOWAS stabilization
mission, with a mandate for further peacebuilding and
stability, as well as post-conflict reconstruction and
development, in conformity with the Tripoli Plan of
Action adopted by the African Union Assembly on
21 August 2009. Guinea-Bissau's Parliament accepted
the African Union proposal aimed at passing legislation
criminalizing the trafficking, possession, transfer and
processing of drugs. The judicial branch showed its
determination to continue and effectively conclude the
criminal investigation into the murders perpetrated in
March and June 2009. The Guinea-Bissau authorities
accepted the African Union proposal for the creation of
a truth and national reconciliation commission as the
last stage of the forthcoming National Reconciliation
Conference. And Guinea-Bissau's Government
obtained positive results in its implementation of the
recommendations of the Bretton Woods institutions.

On the issue of drug trafficking, despite the legal
measures to be adopted, the creation and training of a
special rapid-deployment police force with modern
equipment is imperative. The Truth and National
Reconciliation Commission is intended to bring moral
reparation for the injury done to the relatives of Victims
of the various crimes that occurred in recent years in
Guinea-Bissau, and to launch genuine national
reconciliation among the people of Guinea-Bissau.
However, it is important to point out that the
Commission must not be seen as a substitute for the
legal measures already in progress.

Considering the positive signs that the authorities
of Guinea-Bissau have shown, the African Union
believes that holding a donors conference for the
country will constitute an incentive for efforts to
reform the defence and security sectors - a
cornerstone in promoting democracy, the rule of law
and good governance. The conference will also

contribute to alleviating the pervasive poverty that
Guinea Bissau-faces, another cause and source of
instability.

In the interdependent world of today, prosperity
and stability are indivisible concepts. Today, we are
confronted with the choice of continuing our
commitment to supporting the Government and people
of Guinea-Bissau, a nation in despair, or abandoning it
to an unknown fate. However, it is important to note
that the path we choose to follow will constitute the
standard by which the future will assess our efforts. We
are confident that the Security Council's more than
60-year experience, coupled with increasing
mobilization of other actors for international peace and
security around the world, will provide a rich and solid
base from which we can draw innovative ideas for
supporting the efforts of the people and Government of
Guinea-Bissau to restore lasting peace and security in
their country.

