Mr. Syihab (Indonesia): We thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary- General for Afghanistan
and Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA), Ambassador Tadamichi
Yamamoto, as well as Ms. Sima Samar, Chairperson of
the Afghan Independent Human Rights Commission,
for their briefings. Let me also welcome the Permanent
Representative of Afghanistan and thank her for
her statement.

We also commend the entire UNAMA team for its
indispensable work in supporting the Government and
the people of Afghanistan in their pursuit of progress
with regard to development, the rule of law, human
rights and the political, security and humanitarian
fronts. As UNAMA has shown, it is crucial that the
support of the United Nations and other partners be in
line with the aspirations of Afghan people. Indonesia
wishes to emphasize three main points in response to
the very important matters raised by the briefers.

First, a free and fair presidential election should be
held without further delay. The presidential election in
September will renew the hopes of the people, who must
determine their future freely and fairly in a moment of
unity. We are happy to note that the preparations for
the presidential electoral process are at the centre of
the priorities of the Government of Afghanistan and
UNAMA's activities. Although there have been delays,
we are pleased that, for the first time since 2011, a new
Parliament was inaugurated. The Secretary-General's
report (S/2019/493) contains numerous encouraging
milestones, one of which is that both the Independent
Election Commission and the Electoral Complaints
Commission elected women as Heads. Indonesia
applauds the greater and more meaningful participation
of women in various nation-building processes
in Afghanistan.

Secondly, improving security and stability in
Afghanistan is imperative. Even though there was a
decrease in security-related incidents as compared with
the same period in 2018, the security situation remains
volatile. It is regrettable that the Taliban announced
their annual spring offensive in the midst of an ongoing
peace process. Indonesia has always believed that a
military solution is never an option for ending conflict,
as it only further victimizes innocent civilians and
disrupts sorely needed stabilization efforts from taking
root. It is therefore essential to hold safe elections and
ensure that all Afghans are involved in taking their
country forward. That would be in the interests of the
Taliban as well. We underline that Afghanistan must
not be used by violent extremist groups to jeopardize
regional stability.

Thirdly, everyone must work hard for the success of
the peace process. There has been a robust international
effort to support peace in Afghanistan, but in the end
peace will be possible only if all Afghans own those
efforts and exercise their political will for a democratic

and united Afghanistan. That will require an Afghan-led
and -owned peace process with intra-Afghan dialogue.

Indonesia stresses the need for the meaningful
involvement of all Afghans, including women and
youth. The more the different segments of Afghan
society can come together in nation-building, the
stronger their prospects for a united, prosperous and
peaceful future. In that connection, Indonesia will
continue to offer its concrete support to Afghanistan,
including through multifaceted capacity-building and
training programmes, as well as meetings of religious
scholars that disseminate how terrorism has no place
in religion. Indonesia has also reiterated its readiness
to host direct talks between the different Afghan
parties. We will continue to make efforts to spawn an
intra-Afghan peace dialogue.

Let me conclude by underlining the responsibility
of everyone to play their role responsibly and fully to
help Afghans carve out the promising future that they
so deserve.

