Mr. Valle (Brazil): At the outset, let me congratulate
you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Council for the month of August. We are confident that
under your wise and skilled leadership the work of the
Security Council will be conducted in a highly effective
way. I take this opportunity also to thank your
predecessor, Ambassador Martinez Blanco, for the able
way in which he conducted the business of the Council
during the month of July.

Let me express our gratitude and appreciation for the
Secretary-General's latest report on the situation with
regard to the peace process in Angola. As the report itself
states,

"the Angolan peace process has made steady
progress since the adoption of Security Council
resolution 976 (l995)." (S/1995/588, para. 2)

We can now identify an atmosphere of increasing
confidence between the Government of Angola and
UNITA.

The meeting in Lusaka on 6 May 1995 between the
President of Angola and Mr. Jonas Savimbi was a very
welcome development in this context. The United
Nations, especially through the Security Council, has been
instrumental in paving the way for an effective peace
process in Angola.

The Secretary-General and his Special
Representative, Mr. Alioune Blondin Beye, have been key
players in bridging differences and in facilitating the
consolidation of the peace process. I should like to stress
the indefatigable efforts of Maitre Blondin Beye in the
negotiations that preceded the Lusaka meeting. His role
has since continued to be a fundamental one. The recent
visit of the Secretary-General to Angola was another very
important step aimed at preserving the momentum of the
peace process.

Brazil has always had a strong commitment to the
cause of peace in Angola and has consistently supported
United Nations efforts with this objective.

 

The Security Council has before it today a draft
resolution that would extend the mandate of the United
Nations Angola Verification Mission (UNAVEM. III) until
8 February 1996. As a whole, we consider it a balanced
text. Its most important element is the confirmation of the
commitment of the United Nations to the consolidation of
the peace process in Angola. The United Nations is
allocating personnel and resources to Angola which will
help to direct the country towards peace and development.
As the peace process is consolidated, greater attention will
have to be given to the tasks of development and
reconstruction. It is our hope that the international
community will not fail to assist the Government and the
people of Angola in these fundamental tasks.

I should like, finally, to stress the political priority that
Brazil attaches to its participation in UNAVEM. III, as
publicly reiterated by President Henrique Fernando Cardoso
on the occasion of a ceremony to decorate a Brazilian
peace-keeper taken hostage in Bosnia.

