Ms. Mtengeti-Migiro (United Republic of Tanzania): Let me at the outset, Sir, congratulate you
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of May. During our presidency,
in January, we benefited a great deal from your support
and that of the other members of the Council. We have
no doubt that under your able leadership the Council
will be able to conduct its work smoothly. In that
regard, I want to assure you of the support and
cooperation of the delegation of the United Republic of
Tanzania.

I should also like to take this opportunity to
express my appreciation for the United States initiative
to convene this timely meeting on Darfur.

We are meeting at a very critical moment as far as
the conflict in Darfur is concerned. The two-year
intensive peace negotiations under African Union
leadership and with the unwavering support of the
Security Council were crowned with the signing of a
peace agreement last Friday in Abuja. The signing of
the peace agreement marks a major breakthrough in the
efforts to end the Darfur conflict. We congratulate the
Government of the Sudan and the leadership of the
largest faction of the Sudanese Liberation Movement
on signing the peace agreement.

We wish to thank Mr. Salim Ahmed Salim and his
mediating team for successfully guiding the parties to
this historic stage. We, equally, recognize and
appreciate the positive role played by the African
leaders - particularly President Olusegun Obasanjo,
President Denis Sassou Nguesso and President Alpha
Omar Konare - the League of Arab States, the
European Union, the United States and the United
Kingdom in winning the support of the parties that
signed the draft peace agreement.

The arduously negotiated Abuja peace agreement
offers a balanced and forward-looking framework for
peace in Darfur. We recognize that the peace agreement
is not totally inclusive, as not all the parties are
signatory to it. Nonetheless, we strongly believe that
the agreement is an important step on the path towards
lasting peace in the Sudan in general and in Darfur in
particular. We therefore strongly urge the remaining
two groups to join ranks with the other parties in
accepting the peace agreement.

As far as we are concerned, the peace agreement
has all the significant ingredients that can help restore
peace in Darfur. These include the call for a ceasefire,
disarmament of the militias, the integration of the rebel
fighters into the national armed forces and a protection
force for civilians in the Darfur-Darfur dialogue.

The Security Council and the international
community at large must give full support to the parties
and the African Union with a view to ensuring that the
signed peace agreement is fully implemented. At the
same time, we call upon all parties not to do anything
that will undermine the implementation of the peace
agreement.

It is unfortunate that while we are celebrating
some positive developments in Abuja, the humanitarian
situation in Darfur continues to deteriorate. We are
particularly disturbed about the continued attacks
against civilians and humanitarian operations. We need
to adopt a comprehensive approach that prevents
further atrocities and suffering in Darfur and increases
humanitarian efforts.

We are pleased with the ongoing visit by Mr. Jan
Egeland, Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs, to the Sudan, in particular Darfur. We consider
the visit to be one of the first tangible outcomes of the
Abuja peace agreement on Darfur. At the same time,
we believe that the visit will help in assessing the
humanitarian situation on the ground, including with
regard to access, the security situation in the camps and
the level of assistance.

It is unfortunate that that there has been a
significant decrease in funding for humanitarian
assistance in Darfur. The prospect of daily food rations
being cut in half is indeed worrying. We hope that the
decrease was due to logistical, rather than resource,
constraints. Nonetheless, we appeal to the donor
community to provide additional assistance to the
refugees and displaced persons while they wait for
repatriation following the peace agreement.

Let me conclude by recognizing the
commendable job done by the African peace
mission - the African Union Mission in Sudan
(AMIS) - in Darfur. We hope that the Abuja peace
agreement for Darfur will pave the way for the transfer
of AMIS to a United Nations operation. What seems to
be critical at this juncture is the strengthening of
AMIS. The positive developments in Abuja and the
deterioration of the humanitarian situation on the
ground demand the strengthening of AMIS in the
shortest possible time. We welcome the decision of the
Government of the Sudan to allow the United Nations
assessment mission to proceed to Darfur.

Finally, we thank the delegation of the United
States for having prepared the draft resolution. We
fully support it.

