The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Portugal.
Portugal fully subscribes to the statement made
earlier by the Presidency of the European Union.

The Graca Machel report on the impact of armed
conflicts on children, submitted to the General Assembly
in 1996, revealed to the international community the
extent of the suffering of child victims of armed conflicts
throughout the world. The painful awareness of this
scourge led the Members of the United Nations to request
the Secretary-General to name a Special Representative
for Children and Armed Conflict, Ambassador Olara
Otunnu. I thank him and welcome his presence among us
here today.

The need for collective action to overcome this
scourge led Portugal to propose that members of the
Security Council hear the Special Representative, which
occurred in informal consultations last 11 June; and it was
the impact of what he reported to the members of the
Council that gave birth to the idea to hold this debate
here today, open to all Members of the United Nations.
My delegation listened carefully to Ambassador Otunnu's
forceful statement today and will spare no effort to
translate his specific proposals into action.

The Security Council is called upon on a daily basis
to deliberate on situations and conflicts that illustrate the

 

perverse development in the conduct of war in recent years,
namely, that civilian populations - above all women and
children - are increasingly affected by armed conflicts and
transformed into the targets and tools of war. It is
disheartening to compare, as Ambassador Otunnu did, the
numbers of victims of current conflicts with those of the
world wars of this century.

On the one hand, technological advances explain that
abhorrent development by permitting, for example, the
production of small arms, which are easily manipulated by
child soldiers, and stimulates the recruitment of children
into armies and armed groups. Those same technological
advances permit the manufacture of mines and chemical
and biological weapons, which blindly victimize the non-
combatant population.

On the other hand, despite the existence of normative
international instruments - the Geneva Conventions, their
respective Additional Protocols and the Convention on the
Rights of the Child drawn up by the United Nations - and
the extremely important role played by the Committee on
the Rights of the Child, the minimum standards of respect
for human rights in situations of war are systematically
ignored and violated both by governmental forces and by
non-State actors. Ambassador Otunnu has also called our
attention to the failure of the local systems of traditional
values that have always prevailed in any society, culture or
region in defence of the innocent and the most vulnerable,
especially children.

We have, however, made some significant progress.
The convergence of the efforts of all allowed us to take a
major step in this struggle by adopting the Convention on
the indiscriminate use of landmines, to which my country
has the honour to have subscribed. Alongside other
countries, and in a similar partnership with various non-
governmental organizations, Portugal is now committed to
bringing about the adoption of a convention to control the
use of small arms.

It is, however, paradoxical that practically every
Member State of the United Nations has subscribed to the
Convention on the Rights of the Child, the most inclusive
of all instruments of international law, ratified by 191
countries; and yet, every day, we see a rapid increase in the
number of children killed, injured, violated, exploited,
uprooted and without support, in great part due to the
effects of armed violence. At the threshold of the new
millennium, despite the achievements of our species in
many fields, that which distinguishes us from other
creatures is at risk: the very essence of humanity, respect
for the dignity of the human being - and in this case,
the most vulnerable of all human beings.

We in the United Nations have to act to stop or to
minimize the suffering of children in armed conflict. We
cannot continue to overestimate certain principles of
relations between States and Governments at the expense
of the rights of citizens whom those very States and
Governments are supposed to protect - and, indeed, exist
to protect. Peace and security, stability and prosperity,
even national sovereignty: these goals are attainable only
if human security is also assured, including that of
children - especially that of children.

The effect of armed conflict on children is one of
those problems that, because of its seriousness, scope and
nature, is relevant to the entire United Nations system
and, directly or indirectly, falls into the area of
competence of various departments, organs, programmes,
funds and agencies. Taking the lead is the United Nations
Children's Fund (UNICEF), which has carried out notable
efforts to alert us to the dimensions of the problem and to
promote actions designed to counter it. But we also have
the Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights,
the Office of the High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR), the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs and other Secretariat departments,
such as the Department of Political Affairs and the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations; as well as
programmes, funds and agencies such as the United
Nations Development Programme (UNDP), the United
Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization
(UNESCO), the World Health Organization (WHO), the
International Labour Organization (ILO), the World Food
Programme (WFP); and, finally, the international financial
institutions, namely, the World Bank and the International
Monetary Fund (IMF).

The Security Council, in the exercise of its functions
and responsibilities, and when deliberating what action it
will take in any conflict, cannot fail to participate in this
collective effort by the United Nations system. It must
participate through reaction against the abuse and
violations of the rights of children committed by the
parties. Through the adoption of measures appropriate to
each case, the parties should be led to respect effectively
their obligations under international law, particularly
under the Geneva Conventions and the Convention on the
Rights of the Child. The Council should condemn the
involvement of children in armed conflict, particularly
their mobilization by regular forces or armed groups. It
should watch over the protection of and respect for the

 

rights of children, specifically through the mandates it gives
to peacekeeping and peace-building operations. Within
United Nations missions, priority should be given to
programmes for national reconstruction and the social
rehabilitation of children and youth. The Council should
seek to assess in advance the impact of any sanctions
regime on the situation of children and vulnerable groups,
such as pregnant and nursing mothers, thus ensuring the
necessary humanitarian exemptions to minimize their
negative effects. Above all, however, the Council should
combat, through its action, the sense of impunity in those
belligerents responsible for the atrocities and abuses
committed against children, whether they happen to be
acting on behalf of Governments or not. The Council can
concede neither credibility nor legitimacy to such criminals,
regardless of the part they might play in the resolution of
the conflict.

Here I am referring to concrete situations under
consideration by the Council: the monstrous child
mutilations committed by the leaders of the FARC/RUF in
Sierra Leone; the cruel abduction of Ugandan children to
reinforce the ranks of the Lord's Resistance Army; or the
decisions taken in Afghanistan to prevent girls from
attending school or having access to hospitals.

The Security Council clearly has a political and ethical
role to play in putting a stop to this impunity - a role
complementary to the action of tribunals which must be
assured at the national and international levels. In this
context, I recall a joint statement issued on 17 June 1998
by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Ambassador Otunnu, the Executive Director of UNICEF,
the High Commissioners for Refugees and for Human
Rights and the Emergency Relief Coordinator:

"The perpetrators of these atrocities are deaf to
appeals from the international community We
believe that much of the criminal violence in
armed conflicts and rebellions is the result of
impunity."

To that end, the creation of an international criminal
court, which Portugal wishes to see come to fruition in
Rome, will be of decisive importance - an independent
and well-equipped court to try and punish war criminals
and those responsible for crimes against humanity, a court
that will have the protection of the rights of children as an
integral part of its statute and mandate, one that will take
into account as a mitigating factor the young age of the
accused while considering it an aggravating factor in the
behaviour of adults when children have been involved in
committing the crime.

The exposure of children to the consequences of
armed conflicts is made banal by the recruitment of
individuals under 18 years of age into their regular
armies. These are young men and women who are not
allowed to vote but are considered fit to enter combat.
This is what Ambassador Otunnu told the Council on 11
June, defending his belief that it is necessary to establish
internationally a minimum age of 18 years for military
recruitment, through the optional protocol to the
Convention on the Rights of the Child. Portugal hopes
that the working group of the Commission on Human
Rights established for that purpose will soon complete its
work successfully.

It is a fortunate coincidence that this debate among
Members of the United Nations promoted by the Security
Council precedes by one day the launching by a coalition
of non-governmental organizations of a global campaign
entitled "Stop Using Child Soldiers". This coalition
includes Amnesty International, Human Rights Watch, the
Jesuit Refugees Service, the Quaker United Nations
Office, the Radda Barnen Save the Children and the Terre
des Hommes. The general mobilization required to
combat the use of children in armed conflict will
obviously need to awaken public opinion - from those
sitting in front of their television sets to those who are
grass-roots combatants. The partnership of the United
Nations and its Member States with civil society -
namely, the non-governmental organizations and the
media - is vital to eradicate this scourge.
As the Nobel Prize-winner Archbishop Desmond
Tutu said,
"It is immoral that adults should want children to
fight their wars for them There is simply no
excuse, no acceptable argument for arming
children."

I conclude by reaffirming the strong support of
Portugal for the mandate of and the action being developed
by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General. I
hope that this open debate and the presidential statement to
he delivered later on will represent useful tools to assist his
endeavours to protect children in situations of armed
conflict all over the world.

I new resume my functions as President of the
Council.

There are no further speakers inscribed on my list. The
Council will continue its consideration of this item at its
next meeting, to be converted immediately after the
adjournment of this meeting.

The meeting rose at 6 p.m.
