Mr. Hahn (Republic of Korea): I thank you,
Madam, for convening this year's first quarterly open
debate on the situation in the Middle East.

The situation in the Middle East has tremendous
impact beyond the region. Millions of refugees from
Syria, Yemen and Iraq are moving towards Europe
and other areas. Violent extremism is expanding
globally. The international community must make a
more concerted effort than ever to prevent conflicts in
the region. In that vein, we strongly support the plan
of action to prevent violent extremism, initiated by
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, as a useful global
framework to prevent that dangerous parasite from
taking root and destroying the region and beyond. We
also hope that the beginning of the implementation
of the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action in Iran on
16 January will serve as a catalyst for a more peaceful
and prosperous Middle East, based on denuclearization.

This year, the vicious cycle of attacks and retaliation
between the Palestinians and Israelis has again
continued to be a serious concern for the international
community. Furthermore, there have been no signs of
any serious effort to work for peace among the opposing
parties. We once again urge the leaders of both Israel
and Palestine to keep in mind that hostilities and
violence not only mar the present, they also undermine
the future, by driving young people deeper into
desperation and hopelessness. We urge all the parties to
put an end to violence and return to the negotiating table
in order to work out a viable framework for achieving
a two-State solution. Confidence-building measures,
including ending the expansion of settlements in the
occupied territories, are urgently needed if we are to
create an environment more conducive to dialogue for
sustainable peace between the parties.

Turning to Syria, we welcome the announcement
of the start of an intra-Syrian dialogue on 29 January,
and appreciate the efforts of the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for Syria, Mr. Staffan de Mistura,
to get this moving with unwavering commitment
to resolution 2254 (2015). As the resolution makes
clear, the dialogue must be an inclusive and Syrian-
led political process. At the same time, all the parties
must prepare for a nationwide ceasefire so that it can
go into effect as soon as the political process begins.
We must never again allow religious and national
antagonisms and tensions in the region to paralyse
international efforts to end the Syrian conflict. The
already indescribable suffering of the Syrian people
worsens every minute. Unhindered and unconditional
humanitarian access must be ensured and international
humanitarian law observed by all parties. The Republic
of Korea will continue to join in the international efforts
to end the suffering. In that regard, we will announce
our 2016 humanitarian assistance plan for Syria and its
neighbours at the conference to be held in London on
4 February.

In Yemen, it is urgent that we convene another
round of peace talks as soon as possible. We urge the
key players in the region to refrain from any activities
that could fuel the conflict, and to cooperate with the
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Yemen,
Mr. Ismail Ould Cheikh Ahmed, in working to bring
the warring parties back to the negotiating table.

The Middle East must remain an epicentre of
instability no longer. We must spare no effort this year to
open a new chapter of sustainable peace and collective
prosperity in the region's history. The Republic of Korea
will continue to support the efforts of the international
community and the Security Council to create peace
and stability in the region and to play a constructive
role to that end.

