Mr. Hasmy (Malaysia): My delegation is pleased to
see you, Sir, presiding over this meeting of the Council. I
would also like to commend the delegation of Bangladesh
for convening this meeting of the Council to discuss the
important subject of humanitarian aspects of issues before
the Security Council.

The Council has, in the past, addressed aspects of the
issue, but would certainly benefit from a further, more
comprehensive and integrated discussion of the subject. The
issue is important and relevant in the context of the conflict
situations in our time, be they in Africa, Asia or the
Balkans. In many of these conflicts, many non-combatants,
particularly women, children and other vulnerable groups,
find themselves helpless victims in situations beyond their
control. They become uprooted and displaced in their own
country or are forced to flee across borders for safety and
are compelled to stay as refugees for months and
sometimes years before they can return to their villages and
homes. Indeed, in a number of conflict situations, innocent
civilians are sometimes used as human shields or as pawns
among the combatants. In other situations, such as in Sierra
Leone, the most vulnerable of the civilian population,
namely children, have been manipulated and used by the
rebel forces as direct instruments of war, with traumatic
consequences for these child soldiers and their families.
The defencelessness and vulnerability of these
unarmed civilians in many conflict situations demand the
serious attention of this Council. In such situations it is
imperative for the international community, and this
Council in particular, to take immediate and appropriate
actions to ameliorate their tragic situations. It is incumbent
upon the Council, in its consideration of specific conflict
situations, also to deal with the humanitarian dimension of
the conflicts and to consider appropriate measures. The
Council, acting on behalf of the international community,
in fulfilling its role as the United Nations organ charged
with primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security, should make every effort
to ensure their protection, the quick delivery of
humanitarian assistance and their safe return to their
villages and homes at the end of the conflict. My delegation
believes that prompt and appropriate responses to such
humanitarian situations by the Council would avert
humanitarian tragedies of enormous proportions, such as
the world has witnessed in recent times, much to the
discredit of the United Nations and this Council in
particular.

Clearly, the humanitarian dimension in armed
conflict is an important element in the maintenance of
international peace and security in view of their
cause-and-effect relationship, which the Council can ill
afford to ignore. The Council has an important role to
play in addressing this issue. There should be close
monitoring of conflict situations and early recognition of
manifestations of humanitarian tragedies. Unfolding
humanitarian tragedies should be highlighted in the early
stages of conflict and efforts made in galvanizing
coordinated international actions. Perpetrators of
violations of human rights, who are the cause of so many
of these humanitarian tragedies, should be identified and
appropriately chastised and punished whenever possible.
They must not be allowed to carry on their inhumane
activities with impunity. The setting up of appropriate
national or international tribunals to look into these cases
would be a concrete deterrent measure to curb this culture
of impunity, which is so prevalent in many conflict
situations. Would-be violators of human rights should be
forewarned that they cannot hope to escape from the long
arm of the law, domestic or international, even after the
end of the conflict.

It is equally important for the Council to ensure the
safe and unimpeded access of humanitarian assistance to
war-affected civilians and the safety, security and freedom
of movement of United Nations and associated
humanitarian personnel. The work of these humanitarian
workers is as indispensable as that performed by
peacekeepers, and in many ways more dangerous, because
they are unarmed and vulnerable to armed attacks or
harassment. Their selfless dedication and commitment to
their humanitarian calling deserves not only our
unqualified admiration but, more importantly, our
sustained, strong support, which can be best demonstrated
by ensuring their personal security while they are on their
often risky humanitarian missions. Peacekeepers can also
assist in the humanitarian field if they are made more
aware of the humanitarian dimension of their oftentimes
complex peacekeeping duties. This can be done through
integrating humanitarian components into peacekeeping
operations and providing appropriate training in dealing
with such situations, as well as familiarizing them with
international humanitarian law and human rights. At the
same time, the question of adequate funding for

 

humanitarian programmes should also be given serious
attention in any meaningful discussion of conflict situations
in the Council, because without it, many of the programmes
and activities in the humanitarian field cannot be effectively
implemented.

The draft statement which the Council intends to adopt
at the end of this debate reaffirms the Charter
responsibilities of the Security Council and delineates the
various measures which could be taken by the Council in
the fulfilment of these responsibilities as they relate to
humanitarian crises in armed conflict. While not exhaustive,
the draft statement contains a comprehensive list of
procedural and practical actions which the Council could
take, either acting alone or in coordination with other
international humanitarian agencies and non-governmental
organizations. It is hoped that the highlighting of this issue
through this formal meeting of the Council will serve to
further sensitize both Council members and the international
community as a whole to the seriousness of the
humanitarian problems affecting civilians caught in armed
conflicts. It is further hoped that this debate will galvanize
international action for their amelioration, wherever they
occur.

Of course, the measures that are being proposed will
only ameliorate the dire situations of civilians in armed
conflict; they will not solve the humanitarian problems
entirely, which can only happen when the conflict is ended.
This must be addressed separately in comprehensive fashion
by the parties to the conflict. We should incorporate, as an
indispensable element, humanitarian support. Until the
conflicts are resolved, there is a need for the international
community to highlight and ease the plight of the unarmed
civilians and to ensure their protection, as well as the
protection of humanitarian workers, under international law.
Hence, the importance of this debate in the Council on
this issue today. In addressing this issue, it is imperative for
the Council to be well informed, well coordinated and, most
important of all, fully responsive.

