Ms. Hollis: I echo the comments made by President
Fisher and thank the Council for its decision to convene
this briefing on the Special Court for Sierra Leone. As
the Prosecutor of the Special Court, I am honoured to
be given this opportunity to brief the Council. I will
focus my remarks on the achievements of the Special
Court and on those of the Office of the Prosecutor in
particular. I will also discuss some of the challenges
faced by the Office of the Prosecutor, our responses to
those challenges and certain challenges the Residual
Special Court for Sierra Leone may face.

I turn first to the achievements of the Special
Court. President Fisher has mentioned some of its
many successes. In my view, the principal achievement
of the Court, and its most important legacy, will be
the fulfilment of our mandate to prosecute those who
bear the greatest responsibility for the horrific crimes
committed against the people of Sierra Leone. All
the members of the Office of the Prosecutor, past and
present, can be proud of their significant contribution to
that accomplishment. The achievements of the Special
Court are the product of the hard work and dedication
of all the organs and members of the Special Court, who
are to be commended for their untiring efforts. With the
Council's permission, I will limit my comments to the
achievements of the Office of the Prosecutor.

The Office of the Prosecutor has acted expeditiously.
We commenced operations in mid-2002 and presented
the first indictments in March 2003. Guided by the
Special Court's statute, we focused our efforts on
prosecuting those who bear the greatest responsibility.
Consequently, we presented 13 indictments, charging
senior leaders of the three main factions in the Sierra
Leone conflict and Charles Taylor, the then President of
Liberia. The first trials began in 2004. With the exception
of the case against Mr. Taylor, all cases were completed
through appeal by October 2009. Unfortunately, it was
not until 2006 that Mr. Taylor was surrendered to the
Special Court, three years after he was indicted.

The Office of the Prosecutor expeditiously and
effectively prosecuted Mr. Taylor. We amended the
indictment against him, reducing the charges in order to
present the case more speedily. We presented evidence
that resulted in Mr. Taylor's conviction on all charges, a
result noted by the Security Council in resolution 2065
(2012). This is the first conviction of a former Head
of State by an international criminal tribunal since the
Nuremberg trials in 1946. On the basis of that verdict,
Mr. Taylor was sentenced to 50 years' imprisonment.

Mr. Taylor was convicted of the charges for
two reasons. First, he was convicted of planning the
attacks that culminated in the January 1999 invasion
of Freetown and the mass crimes that resulted from
those attacks. Secondly, he was convicted of aiding
and abetting members of the Revolutionary United
Front and the Armed Forces Revolutionary Council in
the commission of the charged crimes. Both the Office
of the Prosecutor and Mr. Taylor have appealed the
judgement and the sentence.

We are proud of our other achievements as well. The
Office of the Prosecutor has been an active participant
in the Special Court's excellent outreach programme,
which has been widely commended for its effectiveness.
Through the programme we have succeeded in engaging
the people of Sierra Leone in a judicial process carried
out in their name, and have fostered a two-way
conversation between the Prosecutor and the affected
communities.

The Office of the Prosecutor has also contributed
significantly to international jurisprudence. We were the
first to charge and prosecute the crimes of enlistment,
recruitment and use of child soldiers, attacks on
peacekeepers and forced marriage as a crime against
humanity. The resulting jurisprudence can be relied on
by other international as well as national courts.

Many deserve credit for the Special Court's
achievements, and I would like to express my gratitude
to them. They include, in particular, the people of
Sierra Leone, whose demand for justice - the Council
will recall - resulted in the creation of the Court; the
Security Council, which, through resolution 1315 (2000)
and subsequent others, responded to that demand; the
Secretary-General, whose work advanced the creation
of the Special Court and whose continued support
strengthened it; very importantly, the victims, survivors
and those members of the perpetrator groups who
showed the courage and commitment needed to give
information and to testify, both for the prosecution and
the defence; the Government and the people of Sierra
Leone, for their continuing commitment to the Court and
the support they have provided; the Member States that
have faithfully served on the Special Court Management
Committee; the 51 States, the United Nations, the
European Commission and other organizations that
have provided funding and other support for the Special
Court; and civil society organizations in Sierra Leone,
Liberia and worldwide, for their commitment to justice
and support for the Court.

Particular mention must be made of the United
Nations and the Government of Sierra Leone as partners
in establishing the Special Court. Together they created
a statute that achieved two important goals. First, as
I have already discussed, the statute, appropriately,
focused our efforts on those who bear the greatest
responsibility. Secondly, the statute ensured that the
Special Court would build on the strong foundation
put in place by the International Criminal Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia and the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda, both as to substantive and
procedural law. The Special Court has indeed built on
that foundation in carrying out its mandate. I encourage
all tribunals and courts that have followed to build on
that expanded foundation.

As President Fisher has stated, the Special Court
has faced numerous challenges during its decade of
operation. I will now highlight some of those challenges
relating to the Office of the Prosecutor. The record will
show that we have responded positively to them in ways
that may be relevant for other courts and tribunals. Of
the most demanding challenges before us, I would like
to address three: indictment, staffing and witness issues.

I will first address indictments. Charges are
determined, first and foremost, by the evidence
before a prosecutor. As with other prosecutors faced
with a multitude of crimes committed across a wide
chronological period and geographic area, we had the
task of developing indictments that balanced two goals:
first, arriving at a true reflection of the nature and scale
of the crimes to which an accused could be linked and
the full extent of his criminal conduct, and, secondly,
bringing charges that could be expeditiously proved.
To achieve that balance, we focused our indictments on
representative crimes and on the scope of the criminal
conduct of each accused person.

I now turn to staffing challenges. The Office of
the Prosecutor had the task of recruiting a sufficient
number of staff to fulfil our exacting mandate and
with retaining enough experienced staff to maintain
the continuity of our work. Those challenges were
amplified by the uncertain nature of voluntary funding.
We responded by using short-term contracts whenever
possible, giving us flexibility in meeting our needs; by
reducing permanent posts in an orderly manner as we
reached prosecution milestones; and by relying heavily
on experienced, talented professionals seconded to us
by States. Those secondments proved to be an effective
and financially desirable option. For example, we could
not have conducted our investigations without the local
knowledge and expertise of Sierra Leonean investigators
loaned to us by the host Government.

I will now address witness issues. Of course,
without witnesses, no trials would be possible. Our
main challenges were to communicate and meet with
some 800 potential witnesses in a safe environment and,
in cooperation with the Registry's Witness and Victims
Section, to ensure the security before, during and after
the trial, of the more than 300 prosecution witnesses who
testified. We have relied extensively on investigators
seconded from the Sierra Leone police to enable us
to contact our witnesses in a manner that protected
their security. We have also had regular contact with
our witnesses before and after trial, ensuring that we
receive timely alerts of any security risk or harassment.
Allow me to emphasize that the security of witnesses
and the enforcement of witness protection orders were
and remain significant challenges. For example, in their
testimony, many witnesses named individuals who had
committed horrific crimes; those witnesses continue to
live among the individuals named and their supporters.

I now turn to the Residual Special Court for Sierra
Leone. Some of the challenges it may face can be
anticipated today. The Residual Special Court plans to have
a relatively small footprint. That is a positive response to
the challenge of balancing the requirements of its mandate
with efficiency and financial stability. Such efficiency may
be enhanced by sharing an administrative platform with
other courts. As already emphasized, ensuring the security
of witnesses and the enforcement of witness protection
orders will be a continuing and significant challenge.
Indicative of that challenge, this year, the Special Court
has convicted five individuals of contempt for interfering
with witnesses; those convictions are, of course, subject
to appeal. As made clear by article 18 of its statute, the
Residual Special Court shall be responsible for ensuring
the security of witnesses and those put at risk by witness
testimony. It shall also be responsible for the enforcement
of the protection orders of the Special Court and any put
in place by the Residual Special Court.

In order to fulfil that mandate, it is critical that
the Residual Court will have the resources necessary
to protect witnesses and ensure that people who came
forward, often at the risk of their well-being, will
continue to receive the protection of the Court they have
so well served.

I wish again to thank the Security Council for this
opportunity to brief its members about the Special Court.
In preparing my briefing, I was reminded of resolution
1315 (2000). The prudence of that resolution has been
made clear to me every time I engage the people of Sierra
Leone. I thank the Council for its wisdom, including
in adopting that resolution, and for its support for the
Special Court.

