Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We would like to thank Deputy Secretary-
General Eliasson, the Chairperson of the Peacebuilding
Commission, Ambassador Patriota, and the
Administrator of the United Nations Development
Programme, Ms. Clark, for their informative briefings,
in which they highlighted the peacebuilding efforts
of the United Nations, the difficulties facing the
Organization and the outlook in this area.

The Russian Federation considers assistance to
peacebuilding as one of the key factors for the effective
resolution of conflicts and ensuring that they do not
recur. In most cases, countries torn apart by war or
crises are not capable of coping on their own with the
broad array of problems related to restoring security
and law and order, protecting human rights and fighting
poverty. International assistance in this regard is
particularly crucial.

At the same time, we are convinced that the key
to successful and sustainable results from this kind
of cooperation lies in national ownership on the part
of States. They have to determine their priorities for
themselves, whose practical implementation should
be overseen by national Government institutions that
represent the interests of society as a whole.

Considerable work in the area of peacebuilding
is carried out in the framework of the United Nations
through peacekeeping missions and the Peacebuilding
Commission and its country-specific configurations.
That endeavour entails considerable difficulties and
challenges that require coordinated efforts on the
part of Member States, United Nations funds and
programmes, regional organizations, the Secretariat and
international financial institutions. Peacebuilding tasks
are increasingly included in the multifaceted mandates
of peacekeeping operations. First and foremost, that
means assisting in the sectors of security, disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration, supporting the
re-establishment of law enforcement and the rule of
law. In general, such efforts are required to address
the causes of a conflict and prevent its recurrence.
Peacekeepers should not replace national bodies.
International assistance in the area of peacekeeping
remains fragmentary. There is a lack of coordination
in the division of labour that leads to a duplication of
peacebuilding efforts, non-optimal use of resources and
the squandering of available resources. In that regard,
it is important that all those involved in peacebuilding
work clearly within their mandates and the established
regulations. The examples of Guinea-Bissau and the
Central African Republic require a thorough analysis
of peacebuilding activity, with a focus on the reasons
for the lack of expected results and the failure to ensure
that such situations do not relapse into crisis.

It is clear that, to achieve practical results, there
is a need to continue fine-tuning the peacebuilding
architecture at the global and country levels alike.
The Russian Federation supports the work of the
Peacebuilding Commission as one of the central
intergovernmental bodies for coordinating such
cooperation. In our view, its added value is to provide
quality advisory assistance to the Security Council at
its request on countries on the agendas of both bodies.
In our view, the Commission, in the framework of
its mandate, should contribute to dealing with major
crosscutting issues related to peacebuilding and to the
United Nations system as a whole, and that require
multidimensional discussion with Member States
within the framework of specialized United Nations
bodies.

The events planned for this year, including
holding the first annual session of the Commission
and the beginning of the scheduled 2015 review, will
make a significant contribution to consolidating the
Commission as an intergovernmental body that plays a
key role in the peacebuilding architecture of the United
Nations.

Today the Peacebuilding Commission has acquired
significant experience in direct dialogue with national
Governments, based on mutual control in fulfilling
obligations as well as through coordinating the
efforts of international players in implementing the
priorities determined by post-conflict countries. A
positive example of that could be the stabilization of
the situations in Sierra Leone, Liberia and Burundi. It
is essential to consolidate those successes, including
through continual security sector reform, forward-
looking socioeconomic development and combating
poverty and unemployment. United Nations funds
should play a key role.

The Peacebuilding Fund is one of the most important
components of the peacebuilding architecture. That
mechanism, a term-loan facility that contributes to
attracting long-term resources for rebuilding and
development, has confirmed its effectiveness. On
that basis, Russia has continued to provide an annual
contribution of $2 million to the Fund. Providing
assistance to the Fund on the basis of programmes
and projects developed by the United Nations and the
Government in question should take into account the
priorities of the host country and ensure its responsible
approach in using that kind of assistance. At the same
time, it is important to ensure that countries do not
become addicted to donor infusions.

We continue to consider that the country principle
is key in distributing resources. We do not think that
artificial priorities should be imposed on countries. It
is the Governments themselves that should determine
their priorities.

