Ms. Malcorra: I thank you, Sir, for inviting me
to this meeting and giving me the opportunity to hear
members' views and discuss the follow-up of the report
of the Senior Advisory Group on civilian capacity (see S/2001/85). I am happy to see Jean-Marie Guehenno
11-33213
and Ambassador Gasana, representing the
Peacebuilding Commission today.

Civilian capacity is a vital component of almost
all the missions that the Council authorizes. From
large, multidimensional peacekeeping operations to
smaller, more specialized political missions, all need
extensive civilian expertise to fulfil their mandates.
When the Secretary-General produced his first report
on peacebuilding (S/2009/304) in the immediate
aftermath of conflict in 2009, the Council stressed the
importance of rapidly deployable civilian expertise to
help develop national capacities as early as possible. It
was in that regard that the Council welcomed the
Secretary-General's proposal for a review to analyse
how to broaden and deepen the pool of civilian
experts - a review that has now produced the report
we have before us today.

The Secretary-General has welcomed the
direction articulated by the report. The
recommendations are congruent with his broader
efforts to create a more open and responsive United
Nations working in close partnership with Member
States. The Secretary-General has stressed that the
report's emphasis on the need to do more within
existing resources and to make better use of the
systems already in place is also in line with his
continuing drive to build a more accountable, efficient
and effective United Nations. I see a great deal of
congruence between the report's recommendations and
the priorities the Council has long identified for
improving our collective performance in supporting
conflict-affected countries.

First, with respect to national ownership, the
entire report is based on the premise that unless
national Governments, peoples and institutions truly
own their peacebuilding processes, peace will not last.
Identifying and developing latent national capacity is
always difficult, but it has to be built into our
objectives and our work plans from the very start.

The Council has emphasized the need for early
and predictable support in priority areas of
peacebuilding, including security sector reform and the
rule of law, respect for human rights and refugee
return, core Government functions and economic
revitalization. The report recognizes those that
currently lack the capacity to respond to demand. But
there is also the question of the national capacity to
manage and direct such assistance. The Council has

rightly stressed the vital role of the United Nations in
supporting national authorities to develop an early
strategy to address their peacebuilding priorities. The
report, too, says that we must do better at supporting
Governments in building the core structures needed for
policy management and prioritization, aid coordination
and public financial management. This is congruent
with key findings and messages in the newly released
World Development Report.

With regard to partnerships, delivering more
effective civilian capacity needs to be a collective
effort. It is neither practicable nor wise for the United
Nations to try to recruit as staff members individuals
with all the myriad skills and experience that are
necessary to meet post-conflict needs, either now or in
an unknown future. What the report recommends,
instead, is for the United Nations to supplement its
core staff by investing in long-term partnerships with
external providers who can furnish the necessary niche
capacity on a more flexible, on-demand basis. Building
such partnerships will be of mutual benefit. Not only
will the United Nations gain access to new sources of
capacity that are currently underused, but Member
States and other partners will have increased
opportunities for deploying their civilian capacities in
partnership with the United Nations. This is the point
of the report's recommendations for greater South-
South cooperation and triangular partnerships, and for
associated modalities like experts on mission or
civilian support packages, to enable them to work
smoothly.

Lastly, with regard to the importance of
translating proposed changes into improved
effectiveness of operations on the ground, many of the
recommendations in the report concern United Nations
rules or management practices at Headquarters. But
there is little point in changes at Headquarters if they
do not ultimately improve our performance in the field,
that is, the value of our assistance to conflict-affected
countries. As we move ahead and consider which of the
report's ideas we can usefully apply, and how, I am
determined that we should maintain a clear focus on
the field and on how our work is going to make an
impact there. I therefore intend to involve
representatives from the field in meetings of our
Steering Committee whenever possible.

Next, let me turn to the way ahead. As Chair of
the Steering Committee appointed by the Secretary-
General to take the report forward, we are working on
the basis of certain key principles. First, we shall be
open and consultative. The entire United Nations
system, Member States and other external partners all
need to be involved if we are to crystallize a set of
actionable recommendations from the report.
Consultations will also help us understand what
capacities are available beyond the United Nations but
not being fully used. The debate that took place in the
General Assembly yesterday has already given us
indications that will inform the process moving
forward.

We have to align our work with other initiatives
and reforms across the United Nations system that fit
with what we are trying to do. Some of the report's
human resources recommendations, for example, may
be more productively pursued within other work
streams. By putting these things under a civilian
capacity chapeau, we may be able to lend them a
sharper focus, sense of urgency and added value.

We are adopting a holistic, system-wide
approach. The Steering Committee established by the
Secretary-General includes our development and
humanitarian colleagues. The World Bank has shown
interest in joining, and we are working on a way to
make that happen. Our meetings so far have shown that
there is much constructive interest across the system in
how the report can be acted upon, even though there
may be differences of opinion about exactly how to do
it. There is, moreover, broad agreement on the key
goals, namely, to better enable national capacity
development, to develop mechanisms for effective
partnerships with external capacities and to design
more seamless arrangements within the United Nations
to enable a rapid response to crises. That is an
encouraging basis on which to move ahead.

Lastly, we need to be selective. The report
contains more than 70 recommendations. Some
changes that appear simple may in practice be difficult.
Others, though, can be done within the Secretary-
General's or his executive heads' own purview. We
need to identify those that offer the greatest return on
investment and prioritize them. We also need to test
some of these ideas, especially in the field. South
Sudan, for example, should the Security Council
authorize a United Nations mission there, may present
opportunities. But we must also be realistic. Some
recommendations need systemic change, and they will
take some time.
Where do we go from here? I look forward to
hearing Council members" views on the report and
what they consider to be opportunities for early action.
The Secretary-General will wish to reflect on these as
he considers how to take the report forward. He will
then indicate which recommendations he intends to
implement, and how - probably in the form of a
report to the membership after the summer. This will
be a long journey, and we are just beginning here.

