Mr. Vitrenko (Ukraine): I want to welcome
Special Representative Shearer to the Security Council
today and to assure him of Ukraine's full support to
his and his team. I also thank Ambassador Ciss for
his briefing. We appreciate Senegal's leadership of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 2206
(2015) concerning South Sudan.

My delegation is extremely concerned about the
continuing deterioration of the security situation in
Wau and the other areas of South Sudan where fighting
is taking place between the Sudan People's Liberation
Army (SPLA) and the SPLA in Opposition and their
allied militias. It is alarming that these armed clashes
continue to result in civilian casualties, significant
displacement and food shortages. Ukraine firmly
condemns the fighting and calls on the parties to
conduct a comprehensive investigation designed to
ensure that those responsible for killings, violating
international humanitarian law and undermining peace
are held accountable.

We continue to believe that if we are to change the
logic of the deplorable developments in South Sudan,
it is crucial to put more pressure on the parties to end
their hostilities and to create conditions conducive
to the delivery of humanitarian aid. That brings
me to my second point, which is about the obstacles
that have been put in the way of the freedom of
movement of the United Nations Mission in South
Sudan (UNMISS). We are particularly disappointed
that despite the Government's numerous promises, its
forces have continued their restrictions - which are
in fact systematic - on UNMISS's movements and
their interference with UNMISS's implementation of
its mandate. The Mission's ability to implement its
mandated tasks therefore remains extremely limited.

It should be recalled that the Transitional
Government of National Unity is required to fulfil
its commitments both under the joint communique of
4 September 2016, signed last year during the Security
Council's visit to Juba, and under the status-of-forces
agreement. UNMISS and the humanitarian actors must
have unhindered access to the affected areas if they are
to help those in need, especially in Wau. We cannot
stress enough that freedom of movement for UNMISS
and humanitarian organizations is not a privilege to be
granted or taken away on a whim but rather a right,
on which their ability to carry out their mandated
tasks depends.

Given the deteriorating security situation in South
Sudan, including where it has been the result of the
rise of militias, UNMISS should be ready to respond
to any scenario. In that regard, Ukraine, as one of the
countries contributing troops and police to the Mission,
welcomes the significant efforts that have been made
to enhance its ability to protect civilians, improve its
planning ofits response to crisis situations and increase
the safety and security of its staff. We also look forward
to the start of the regional protection force's operations
in South Sudan, as envisaged in resolution 2304 (2016).
We call on the Government to provide all the necessary
assistance, including by accelerating customs clearances
and granting visas for participating units.

Lastly, I want to stress that an inclusive political
dialogue is the only way to settle the conflict in South
Sudan. It is important that external actors, in particular
those in the region, exercise leverage to encourage the
parties to sit around the negotiating table. It is also
crucial to ensure that the region and the United Nations
speak with one voice and send coordinated messages.

