Mr. Ibrahim (Malaysia): 1, too, would like to
welcome the Judges and Prosecutor representing the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
(ICTY) and the International Residual Mechanism for
Criminal Tribunals back to New York. I thank them for
their very comprehensive briefings.

My delegation welcomes the notable progress made
by the ICTY and the Residual Mechanism during the
reporting period. In particular, we wish to congratulate
the Residual Mechanism on the official launching of
its new premises in Arusha last month. We commend
the Government of Tanzania for its crucial role and
valuable contribution in that regard.

Malaysia is encouraged by the smooth functioning
of the Residual Mechanism in assuming responsibility
for a number of functions of the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) and the ICTY. We
reiterate our call on Member States to fully support
the Mechanism, especially in tracking the remaining
fugitives indicted by the ICTR, to enforce sentences
and to relocate those who have served their sentences
or who have been acquitted by the Tribunal.

Turning to the ICTY, Malaysia is reassured by
the commitment expressed by its President that the
judicial work of the Tribunal remains on track and
is to be completed by November 2017. We welcome
the progress made in the cases of Prosecutor v. Mic'o
Stanisic and Stojan Zupljanin, Prosecutor v. Prlie
et al. and Prosecutor v. Ratko Mlaa'ic' during the
reporting period.

Malaysia takes note of the evaluation by the Office
of Internal Oversight Services (OIOS) on the methods
and work of the ICTY and the Tribunal's response to
the OIOS report (S/2016/441). We welcome the adoption
of a code of professional conduct by the judges of the
Tribunal, in line with the OIOS recommendations. While
other recommendations of the OIOS may have some
merit, we believe that at this point the Tribunal should
focus its time and resources on completing its judicial
work within the stipulated deadline, instead of being
distracted by administrative and management issues.

At today's briefing, we have again heard from Judge
Agius on how staff attrition continues to seriously
impact the work of the Tribunal and could potentially
affect its completion strategy. We believe that, on
this last leg of the Tribunal's work, Member States
should redouble their efforts to support the Tribunal in
addressing that critical challenge.

Malaysia Views the reversing trend in cooperation
with the ICTY as deeply disturbing, especially in the
context of revisionist movements in the region and the
glorification of war criminals. These are warning signs
that must not be ignored by the international community,
as they could undermine the great strides that we have
made in recent decades towards ending impunity for war
crimes, genocide and crimes against humanity. In that
regard, we urge Serbia to uphold its legal obligations
to resume cooperation with the Tribunal, including by
executing the Tribunal's arrest warrants. We also call
on the relevant Member States in the former Yugoslavia
to intensify the pace and effectiveness of war crimes
prosecutions by their national authorities for cases
being referred to their national jurisdictions.

More than 20 years ago, the Security Council
decided to create the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia and the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda to try those responsible for serious
violations of international humanitarian law, including
genocide, mass rape and ethnic cleansing. The painful
truth is that if the Security Council had the political
will to prevent or stop the mass atrocities committed
in Rwanda and in the Balkans region and to uphold
its responsibility to maintain international peace and
security under the Charter of the United Nations,
there would have been no need for either Tribunal to
be created.

However, in the bloody aftermath of the conflicts
in Rwanda and in Bosnia and Herzegovina, the Security
Council owes it to the Victims to bring the perpetrators
to justice for their heinous crimes. We also owe it to the
Victims to remain firm in our commitment to justice
and accountability, many years later, and to fully
support the Tribunals in fulfilling their mandates until
the end of operations. We simply do not have the moral
standing to disown the Tribunals.

Malaysia is therefore incredulous that the priorities
of ensuring justice and due process seem to be buried
in overwhelming concerns about budget and deadlines.
There is no doubt that the historic legacy of the ICTY
and the ICTR in ending impunity and in laying the
foundation for international criminal justice will
remain long after the Tribunals' closure. What is less
obvious is whether the Security Council will also be on
the right side of history in supporting the Tribunals and
the Residual Mechanism all the way in ending impunity.

