Mr. Dabbashi (Libya) (spoke in Arabic): I am
pleased to be able to congratulate you, Mr. President,
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for this month. I thank Mr. Martin Kobler,
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
for his important briefing. I commend him for his
determination to bring the positions of the various
Libyan parties closer with the aim of speeding up
implementation of the Libyan Political Agreement,
signed on 17 December. I would also like to thank
Ambassador Ramlan Bin Ibrahim for his presentation
of the report of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1970 (2011).

Libyans have welcomed the signing of the Political
Agreement, which they see as auguring well, and which
has been endorsed by the House of Representatives.
While we have been hoping to see the establishment ofa
Government of National Accord, there are spoilers who
have continued to use tactics designed to derail every
attempt to form such a Government, both within and
outside the House of Representatives. No one can deny
the fact that Libyans and the House of Representatives
are positive that there is a clear majority in the House in
support of the formation of a Government of National
Accord under the Prime Minister-designate, Fayiz
Al-Sarraj. If the House had been permitted to vote
on it, the Government would now be able to carry out
its functions. I hope those members of the House will
reconsider their position and that the Security Council
will not fail to sanction those who have stood in the way
of implementation of the Political Agreement.

Unfortunately, there are Libyans who believe it is in
their interest to prevent the formation of a Government
of National Accord and to foment problems and discord
among the country's institutions. Some think they
can control and lead Libyans through the use of force.
Others are trying to use the Libyan army's successes to
prevent the formation of a Government, with no thought
for the suffering of Libyans both inside and outside the
country or the threats that surround it.

Libyans have once again shown that nothing can
divide them when they know that their country is under
siege. We have recently seen young patriots coming
from every city to surround the city of Sabratha in
western Libya in order to fight Da'esh together and to
try to drive its soldiers out. They have forgotten all their
previous political differences and some of them have
died as martyrs alongside the residents of Sabratha in a
decisive battle aimed at purging the area of terrorism.
They have achieved a great deal despite the obstacles
placed in their way by the local leaders, who are under
the thumb of the Libyan Islamic Fighting Group. I
commend all the patriotic residents of the towns of
Zawiyah, Serman, Ojailat, Jamil and other areas who
have responded to their country's call in the absence
of any support from the Government of the extremist
militias in Tripoli, which instead of fighting terrorism
has been aiding Da'esh and its wounded by using
members of the Libyan Islamic Fighting Group, and
has hastened to declare the city liberated from Da'esh
in order to cover for Da'esh leaders who are still trying
to escape, and some of whom are hiding in the capital
of Tripoli.

The clashes with Da'esh in the western region of
the country have shown that the militia authorities in
Tripoli, which claim to constitute a Government of
security, do not possess an army, and that they actually
provide the basis for terrorism, since they cannot
combat it. We have seen that the only regular army in
Libya is made up of those units fighting terrorism in
Benghazi, who have been able to liberate Ajdabiya, are
working to liberate Derna and are in the J abal Al-Gharbi
region preparing to carry out orders if the vote in the
body politic is blocked or if the militias prevent the
Government of national accord from working in Tripoli.

I would like to take this opportunity to commend
the Libyan army and the forces supporting it on its
success in Benghazi, which for the first time in two
years has enabled families that had to flee to return
to their homes. It is time that the Government, with
the help of the international community, put together a
comprehensive plan for the reconstruction of Benghazi.

Some Libyans are opposed to the army's leadership,
while others insist that they should not be interfered
with, which shows clearly that all Libyans recognize
that the army exists. It is therefore incumbent upon the
international community to help the army to develop
on a professional basis that aligns with international
standards, as well as to furnish it with the equipment it
needs to fight terrorism and protect the State's borders.
There can be no question that establishing a programme
aimed at reintegrating into the army all soldiers who
have committed no crimes or human-rights violations
and those fighters who wish to join the army should
be the Government of National Accord's top priority
and the main goal for international assistance. In that
regard, I should warn against any efforts to strengthen
the capacity of the militias on the pretext of helping to
prepare them to fight Da'esh in Sirte. That can only
have the effect of complicating the Libyan crisis even
more, particularly in view of the fact that since the fight
began we have seen the militias retreat from Sirte and
put it back in the hands of Da'esh.

It will be difficult to unite Libyans in the effort
to fight and eliminate terrorism in the country if we
continue to ignore the fact that elements of the Libyan
Islamic Fighting Group and the Muslim Brotherhood in
Libya are supporting and protecting Da'esh. They are
allies of the Islamic State and have provided them with
weapons and financing. They have made it possible
for them to control Sirte and Derna and some areas of
Benghazi. They have also made it possible to establish
pockets of control in other Libyan cities.

Therefore, the time has come to ask those who use
religion as a slogan to say something we have never
heard from them before, namely, the condemnation
of Da'esh and Ansar Al-Sharia. They must declare
that they are not linked to the ideology of Al-Qaida
or Da'esh, or at least that they have rejected it. They
must accept what Libyans agree upon with regard to
the sponsorship of the United Nations and accept the
national State and respect the institutions and symbols
of democracy, the rule of law and equality among all
Libyans. They must demonstrate this in fact so that
Libyans can believe them, trust them, vote for them and
integrate them in the conduct of the affairs of the State.
Otherwise, Libyans will remain suspicious of those
two organizations.

No force will be able to impose its authority on
the Libyan people. Over the past four years, terrorist
organizations have controlled the levers of the State.
Unfortunately, they are sowing division among
Libyans and encouraging them to kill each other. They
do so by using two television channels - A1 Nabaa
and Tanasoh - to disseminate propaganda. If the
international community is serious about resolving the
Libyan crisis, it must prevent the broadcasting of those
two television channels and punish those responsible. It
is worth noting that the Tanasoh channel is broadcasted
from the United Kingdom and that its owner holds
British nationality, while one of its main officials is a
Canadian mufti of Libyan origin.

During the 11 February meeting on sanctions (see S/PV.7620), I referred to the losses suffered by Libya
because the Board of the Libyan Investment Authority
was unable to manage the country's investments. We
have been in consultations with members of the Board
to determine what measures need to be adopted to
prevent losses without lifting the assets freeze. We feel
that Council members understand this problem and we
hope that itwill lead to a draft resolution to be adopted
soon by the Security Council.

Libyans aspire to a Government that unites them,
manages their affairs, provides them with security
and basic services and makes it possible for them to
return to their homes. Their hopes are based on the
establishment of the Government of National Accord,
which is working out of Tripoli. We hope that Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Kobler will
be able to help Lybians achieve their goals with the
Council's assistance. But it is up to Libyans to set aside
their political alliances andjoin together to confront the

greatest danger, namely, terrorism and the possibility
ofa break~up ofthe State and a division ofthe territory.

