I thank all the briefers for their presentations. Saint Vincent and the Grenadines has invited us to examine the contemporary drivers of conflict and insecurity. This is an important debate because while the causes of conflicts evolve, the Charter of the United Nations and the responsibilities of the Council are immutable. It is imperative that the Security Council continuously adapt its actions and tools in order to fulfil its principal responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and security. I would like to emphasize three points. First, climate change threatens international peace and security. The Council has on many occasions recognized the nefarious effects of climate change in different regions, from the Lake Chad basin to Somalia or Mali, and has called for a better assessment and management of the related risks. It is time to make our action part of a preventive approach by anticipating in particular the humanitarian consequences of environmental disasters. That is why France would like the Secretary-General to be able to present, every two years, an assessment of the threats to international peace and security posed by climate change. My second point concerns pandemics. The Security Council must anticipate their destabilizing effect more systematically. The role of the Security Council in mitigating the consequences of the coronavirus disease is essential. That is why we firmly support the call of the Secretary-General for an immediate and global ceasefire to facilitate the fight against the pandemic. No effort must be spared to accelerate the implementation of resolution 2532 (2020), which the Council adopted unanimously on | July. Countries in conflict or post-conflict situations are particularly vulnerable. It is therefore indispensable to preserve humanitarian space and to ensure the protection of humanitarian and health workers. Furthermore, pandemics aggravate the deep causes of conflict, in particular by reinforcing inequalities and disproportionately affecting the most vulnerable. Measures taken to stem them can also generate information manipulation and a restriction of public freedoms, thereby undermining confidence in institutions. That is why, as per my third and final point, we must remain vigilant with regard to human rights. Human rights violations, the breakdown of the constitutional order and the exclusion of women and youth can lead to violence, population displacement and the destabilization of States and entire regions. That is nothing new. The situations on the Council's agenda serve as a daily reminder. That is why the Council demands respect for international humanitarian law, mandates peacekeeping operations to protect civilians and assists national authorities in strengthening the rule of law, security and justice. We have specific mechanisms for the protection of children, the full participation of women and their protection, the consideration of young people and the fights against poverty and impunity. We must go further to address situations of massive human rights violations. We are in favour of regular briefings by the High Commissioner for Human Rights, just as we are briefed regularly by the High Commissioner for Refugees, for example. We can reinforce synergies with the Human Rights Council while respecting the mandate of each forum. Finally, the Security Council must continue to interact with human rights defenders, particularly during its visits on the ground, and call for their protection when they are threatened. Conflicts are also rooted in issues of development and governance, which are at the heart of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. The United Nations must adopt an integrated approach, combining security, humanitarian and political actions, that also promotes human rights, sustainable development and the fight against climate change. The Security Council must play its part fully. Let us collectively rise to the challenge.
