Mr. De Soto: Today in the Middle East, crisis
and opportunity exist side by side in a daily struggle
for dominance over the fate of Israelis, Palestinians,
Lebanese, Syrians and the region as a whole.

At the heart of the conflict is the problem of
Israel and Palestine. In that theatre, a deadly crisis
continues in Gaza. For many months, Israel has
conducted military operations, featuring tank,
commando and infantry incursions, targeted killings
from the air and firing from the sea, with the stated
purpose of preventing the daily Palestinian militant
rocket fire into population centres in southern Israel.
These operations intensified after the capture of an
Israeli soldier on 25 June and the killing of two others
by Palestinian militants who had crossed from Gaza
into Israel.

Since that time, Israeli operations have killed 295
Palestinians, including 66 children, and have injured
1,113 others. However, neither these intensive
operations nor continuing diplomatic efforts have led
either to the release of the captured soldier or to the
cessation of the indiscriminate rocket attacks, which
have injured 20 Israelis since 25 June.

A number of Israeli sources in the Israel Defense
Forces (IDF) and intelligence services claim that
weapons-smuggling into Gaza has increased in recent
months, including through tunnels under the
06-57842
Philadelphi corridor and elsewhere. IDF forces
launched a ground operation along the corridor in
recent days, and there are reports that the IDF is
preparing for a further intensification of its military
operations in Gaza.

Egyptian officials are leading diplomatic efforts
to resolve the crisis and report that a package is on the
table designed to address both parties' concerns, but
the captors say they seek additional guarantees. In
Cairo last week, I conveyed the full support of the
United Nations for the Egyptian efforts and expressed
our readiness to assist in any way we can.

The other crisis that must be overcome is the
political crisis of the Palestinian Authority, which has
for several months been governed by a President and a
Prime Minister with divergent programmes and has
been polarized by deadly clashes between rival security
forces. Palestinian society is teetering between national
unity one day and civil conflict the next.

On 11 September, President Abbas announced
that he had agreed with Prime Minister Haniyeh on the
political platform of a national unity government. On
20 September, the Quartet encouraged those efforts in
the hope that a national unity government programme
would reflect Quartet principles and allow for early
international engagement.

Regrettably, following statements from Prime
Minister Haniyeh calling basic points into question,
these efforts did not succeed. Recent efforts by
regional mediators to help the Palestinians unite have
also not borne fruit. In our contacts with both the
presidency and the Government, we continue to urge
them and the movements of which they are members to
make a new effort to overcome their differences.

We saw how important it is for these efforts to
succeed two and a half weeks ago, when at least eight
Palestinians were killed and more than 70 were injured
in armed clashes in Gaza between the striking
Palestinian security forces, largely loyal to Fatah, and
the executive force deployed by the Hamas Minister of
the Interior. United Nations workers on the ground also
report an increased reliance on traditional law
enforcement as family groupings resort to self-
protection and take justice into their own hands. The
members of the civil police - the only civilian service
with the potential to provide public order and
protection within the occupied Palestinian territories'
increasingly insecure communities - have received
06-57842

less than 40 per cent of their salaries since March, and
only half of them now show up for work. A rolling
strike has, in fact, been widespread throughout the
public sector since 13 August. As many as three
quarters of medical workers are not turning up at work,
and WHO reports that most hospital wards are, in fact,
closed. In response, the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
has had to open its medical facilities to non-refuges.
Ninety per cent of teachers employed by the
Palestinian Authority in the West Bank are on strike,
imperilling this year's academic cycle. Here again,
UNRWA has been obliged to step in. There are growing
indications that ministries are being transformed by the
continued replacement of mid- to high-level officials
with new appointees loyal to the current
Government - a process that may also be accelerated
by the departure of former officials in the absence of
regular salary payments.

We welcome the efforts of the European
Commission to mitigate the worse effects of the crisis
by renewing and expanding the Temporary
International Mechanism (TIM), as agreed by the
Quartet last month. However, the TIM. can neither
substitute for the Palestinian Authority, nor can it be
sustained financially over time. The continued
withholding by Israel of over half a billion dollars of
Palestinian money, collected via value-added tax and
customs receipts, is the biggest single direct cause of
the Palestinian financial crisis. Its importance has led
the Quartet to invite the parties to consider channelling
these funds through the TIM, at least for the present.

Another ingredient for restoring hope to the
Palestinians would be implementation of the
Agreement on Movement and Access, which was
concluded a year ago next month. The Quartet believes
that Rafah and other crossings must remain open in
accordance with the Agreement. Despite discussions by
Quartet members with the Israeli authorities on
concrete steps to move forward - including proposals
put forward by the United Nations - Israel's policy of
near-complete closure of Gaza continues. Israel has
legitimate security concerns relating to human and
commercial movements in and out of the Gaza Strip,
and we continue to press the Palestinian Authority to
meet its obligations under the Agreement on Movement
and Access relating to the protection and
administration of passages. For its part, Israel has
undertaken in the Agreement to ensure the continuous
3
operation of passages and to facilitate the export of
agricultural goods from Gaza. While specific security
threats may require specific actions, analysis of
Agreement implementation patterns shows that the
significant tightening of closures at Rafah, Karni and
Erez crossings have been heavily shaped by two events
in 2006: the formation of the Hamas-led Palestinian
Authority Government and the abduction of the Israeli
soldier. It would appear that only by decoupling
economic access for civilians from the broader political
impasse will the Agreement on Movement and Access
be implemented. Only then will Palestinian economic
life be given a chance to recover.

Meanwhile, obstacles to movement in the West
Bank have risen by 40 per cent in a year. Settlement
activity continues, with the recent announcement of the
construction of a further 950 settlement units in the
West Bank. The construction of the main structure of
the police station on the El block between Jerusalem
and Ma'aleh Adumim has largely been completed. The
construction of the barrier on occupied territory,
including around Jerusalem, has continued, in defiance
of the International Court of Justice Advisory Opinion.

Access to the occupied Palestinian territory by
Palestinians of the diaspora has also been tightened in
recent months. Palestinians holding foreign passports,
including businessmen, students and professionals,
have, in ever-larger numbers, been denied Visas that
would permit them to visit spouses or families or tend
to businesses. I should also report that Prime Minister
Olmert announced in the aftermath of the Lebanon war
that the plans on which he had been elected, namely, to
withdraw Israeli settlements from parts of the West
Bank, are on hold. The Prime Minister has, however,
stated his willingness to meet President Abbas, and
aides to the two leaders are exploring this possibility.
Foreign Minister Livni and President Abbas also met
during last month's opening of the general debate of
the General Assembly.

The fragile balance between crisis and
opportunity is also apparent in Lebanon, where
momentum has been generated in the implementation
of Security Council resolution 1701 (2006), but also
where the country's heavy political tensions remain a
constant source of concern. The United Nations is
continuing to work closely with all sides to encourage
political leaders to commit themselves to dialogue in
order to bridge their differences. The Council will
receive the report on implementation of resolution
1559 (2004) shortly. The Secretariat will also continue
to report to the Council directly on the status of
implementation of resolution 1701 (2006), and I will,
therefore, not address this further in this briefing.

I should report also that Israeli Prime Minister
Olmert has called for direct talks between Israel and
Lebanon, but Lebanese Prime Minister Siniora has
reiterated his position that his country will the last to
sign a peace treaty with Israel. Meanwhile, Syrian
President Assad has expressed publicly on more than
one occasion a desire to negotiate with Israel in order
to secure the return of the occupied Golan Heights and
establish a lasting peace between Syria and Israel.
While this has generated some debate in Israel, the
Israeli Prime Minister has dismissed these statements
and has stated that Syria must cease alleged support for
terrorism. Mr. Olmert has also stated that, as long as he
is Prime Minister, the Golan Heights will remain a
permanent part of the State of Israel.

The continuing violence in Gaza and southern
Israel continues to kill, injure and endanger civilians.
Palestinian militant rocket fire should cease, as should
Israeli military operations. Both sides should comply
with their obligations to respect civilians under
international humanitarian law. The virtual siege of
Gaza is having a devastating effect on the lives of
ordinary Palestinians, stifling hope and fomenting
despair, while the continued dangerous launching of
rockets at Israeli population centres, such as Sderot, is
a source of deep distress for ordinary Israelis.
Palestinian institutions continue to be degraded, and
the suffering of civilians widens and increases,
particularly in Gaza. The combination of near total
closure of the Gaza Strip, non-payment of public-sector
salaries, absence of basic law and order, declining
service delivery, continued military strikes by air and
land and the lack of any apparent political horizon is a
truly explosive one - as potentially dangerous for
Israel as it is currently dangerous for Palestinians. As
my colleague Jan Egeland puts it, Gaza is a ticking
time bomb, and only a political way out can defuse it.
The United Nations fully recognizes the challenges
facing both Prime Minister Olmert and President Abbas
in this regard. At the same time, we believe that they
and their citizens have a shared interest in meaningful
dialogue, and we offer them our full support in trying
to develop it.

The difficulties that continue to bedevil efforts to
form a Palestinian national unity government should
06-57842
not lead us to think that there is another simple, magic
formula or quick fix that is likely to solve the current
Palestinian political crisis. The route of national unity
offers the most credible opportunity - indeed, perhaps
the only one - to stem the slide into anarchy and for
the security forces controlled by the presidency and
those under the jurisdiction of the Ministry of the
Interior to work together to provide basic law and order
for Palestinians and prevent attacks against Israel,
rather than continue to face off on the streets. Such a
government will need international support if it is to
respond to the aspirations of the Palestinian people for
law and order and progress towards a two-State
solution. That is why its platform should reflect
Quartet principles and why donors, in turn, should
signal their readiness to re-engage if there is genuine
movement, in full awareness that such movement is
more likely to be a process than an event.

The international community should also expect
all members of the Israeli Government, and its acts of
legislation, to reflect their commitment to the
principles of the peace process, including the goal of a
two-State solution which ends the occupation that
began in 1967, and to meeting their obligation not to
advocate or pursue policies that create irreversible
facts on the ground or prejudge final status issues.
Israel clearly has more to do in this regard, in the light
of the continued building of the barrier, the
entrenchment of settlements and the rarely impeded
mushrooming outposts considered illegal by Israel
itself, despite its statements of intent regarding
commitment to Road Map obligations.

Last month, at its meeting in New York, the
Quartet reaffirmed its commitment to the Road Map as
the means to realize the goal of two democratic States,
Israel and Palestine, living side by side in peace and
security. The Quartet also stressed the need for a
credible political process in order to make progress
towards a two-State solution to the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict. The United Nations continues to work closely
with Quartet partners to identify ways to restart such a
political process between Israelis and Palestinians.

The international community's long-term goal is,
of course, not only peace between Israel and Palestine,
but also peace between Israel and Syria, and Israel and
Lebanon. Security Council resolution 1701 (2006)
stresses the need for a just, lasting and comprehensive
peace in the region. My regional terms of reference
reflect the United Nations commitment to this goal.
06-57842

The Arab Peace Initiative, which was endorsed by the
Council of the League of Arab States in Beirut in 2002,
also represents a crucial piece of the regional puzzle. A
serious and systematic search for peace in the region
requires dialogue with all the parties in the conflict,
pari passu, to ensure that crises are managed and
opportunities explored, and that developments on one
track are not undermined by developments on another.

Recent developments have also driven home the
interconnectedness of the region's problems and the
shortcomings of piecemeal or compartmentalized
approaches as opposed to an approach that is
coordinated and comprehensive. Signs of willingness
by Israel to open discussions with the Government of
Lebanon, and by the Syrian President to talk to
Israel - tentative as these are - should be considered
in this light, and we hope that opportunities for
adversaries talking to resolve differences will not
remain unexplored.

Together with our Quartet colleagues and
working with the parties and our regional partners, the
United Nations will do its part in trying to rebuild this
bridge in the form of a carefully monitored and
credible political process based on parallel
implementation of obligations leading towards a
clearly defined comprehensive peace. The objectives of
the United Nations remain security and full recognition
to the State of Israel within internationally recognized
borders, an end to the occupation for the Palestinian
people in an independent, sovereign State, recovery of
lost land by Syria, and a fully sovereign and secure
Lebanon, through the implementation of all relevant
resolutions of the Security Council.

