Mr. Pham (Viet Nam): First of all, I would like
to thank the German presidency for convening this
important open debate. I also thank Ms. Rosemary
DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-General for Political and
Peacebuilding Affairs, for her valuable briefing, as
well as Ms. Nada Majdalani and Mr. Gideon Bromberg
for their interventions. Viet Nam aligns itself with
the statement delivered by the representative of the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela on behalf of the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.

Viet Nam is deeply concerned over the continued
negative trends on the ground, particularly deadly
clashes, incitement to violence, provocations, illegal
settlement expansion, displacement of people and the
dire humanitarian situation in Gaza and the West Bank.
It is ultimately the people who suffer the most. The
situation is a denial of the fundamental rights for the
people on the ground and undermines all efforts towards
a peaceful solution for the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.

Viet Nam condemns all acts of violence against
civilians and excessive use of lethal weapons. We urge
all concerned parties to exercise restraint and to refrain
from all acts that would escalate tensions. We share the
concern that Special Coordinator Mladenov expressed
in his briefing to the Council last month that no step
had been taken by Israel to cease settlement activities
in the occupied Palestinian territories and the recent
announcement of the construction of 840 new housing
units in Ariel (see S/PV.8489). We are also concerned
over the launching of rockets from the Gaza Strip into
Israeli civilian areas.

Regarding the ongoing situation in Gaza, we call
on Israel and the Palestinian Authority to act seriously
to prevent any further deterioration of the humanitarian
situation. There can be no lasting solution for Gaza
without a lifting of the blockade and the restoration
of the power of the Palestinian Authority in Gaza. My
delegation highly appreciates the tireless efforts of the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East to ease the suffering
of Palestinians.

A just, comprehensive and lasting solution to the
conflict can be achieved only through earnest and
constructive dialogue and negotiations, in accordance
with international law, including all relevant United
Nations resolutions, particularly Security Council
resolutions 478 (1980), 2254 (2015) and 2334 (2016).

Viet Nam time and again has reaffirmed its support
for the legitimate struggle of the Palestinian people
for their inalienable rights, including the right to self-
determination and the establishment of an independent
and sovereign State. We strongly believe that the two-
State solution is the optimal way to end the conflict and
to fulfil the aspirations ofboth Israelis and Palestinians.
We wish to see two States, Israel and Palestine, living
side by side in peace and security along the pre-
1967 borders.

We call for unity at both the national level, with
a genuine intra-Palestinian reconciliation, and the
international level, with continued and consistent
support in words and in deeds. We highly appreciate
the efforts made by Egypt to promote Palestinian
reconciliation and call upon all concerned to abide by
international law and United Nations resolutions on
this issue.

Regardless of the enormous efforts made by the
international community, prospects of a sustainable
political solution to the conflict seem to be on a
dangerous trajectory, as the Secretary-General has
warned. Viet Nam urgently appeals to all parties
concerned to make greater concerted efforts to put
an end to the pain and suffering of the people on the
ground and to bring the peace process back on track.
