Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
would like to welcome you to the Security Council,
Mr. President, and to thank you for presiding over
today's open debate. We also thank Secretary-General
Guterres and Special Representative Gamba for their
briefings. We listened attentively to the representative
of civil society.

Children are both the future and the hope of the
world, and also its most vulnerable group. With the
increasing escalation and spread of armed conflicts
and terrorist activities, problems of the abduction of
children and their exploitation in terrorist attacks are
worsening. The displacement of children in areas in
turmoil is also an increasingly serious problem, while
their circumstances in relation to security, health
care, education and other humanitarian problems are
a continuing source of concern. The international
community must take such new realities and trends into
consideration and take concrete measures to protect
children in armed conflicts.

We should first continue to fight terrorism in all
its forms in order to keep children from harm. The
international community should have zero tolerance
towards terrorism, whatever the situation, and should
resolutely combat crimes in which terrorist groups kill,
abuse or kidnap children. The international community
should take effective measures and work together to
combat terrorist groups' use of the Internet and social
media to spread violent or terrorism-related audiovisual
content with the aim of finding recruits and inciting
violent or extreme activities. Efforts should be made to
ensure that children's minds are not poisoned through
the dissemination of terrorist and extremist ideologies.
We should pay great attention to the role of families,
schools and communities in helping children fight the
influence of extremist or terrorist thinking.
Secondly, we should respect the leadership of
the countries concerned and create a solid basis for
child protection. It is the Governments of countries in
conflict that have the primary responsibility to protect
their children, and therefore the key to implementing
resolutions, programmes and plans aimed at protecting
children lies in promoting the efforts and coordination
of the countries involved. The international community
should encourage those countries to take on their
full leadership role and provide them with support
and assistance in building their capacity for child
protection while respecting their sovereignty. Through
its monitoring and reporting mechanism for children in
armed conflict, the Security Council should strengthen
its dialogue and communication with Governments,
listen to their voices and coordinate actively with them.

Thirdly, we should increase our international
humanitarian assistance and provide concrete help to
children affected by armed conflict. While taking an
approach that respects the sovereignty of countries
in conflict, the international community should
uphold the principles of humaneness, impartiality and
justice in ensuring that children affected by armed
conflicts have access to food, health care, education
and other humanitarian assistance. The United
Nations Development Programme, the World Health
Organization and the World Food Programme should
strengthen their mutual coordination, while the United
Nations as a whole should also improve its coordination
with regional and subregional organizations.

Fourthly, we should have an integrated strategy and
work to establish international synergy in the area of
child protection. In post-conflict construction, attention
should be given to help children suffering from the
effects of armed conflicts to reintegrate successfully
and to create a security and social environment
conducive to their healthy development. UNICEF,
UNESCO and the World Bank should make use of their
positions to enhance coordination and cooperation
and to support countries in conflict in their efforts to
eradicate poverty and promote universal education and
sustainable development.

China stands ready to work with the rest of the
international community, and will continue to support
the active efforts ofthe Security Council, the Secretary-
General and his Special Representative, as well as to
make every effort to maintain international peace and
security, improve the situation of children in armed
conflicts, protect children from the scourge of war and
create a harmonious and stable environment for their
healthy development.

