Mr. Kumalo (South Africa): Allow me at the
outset, Sir, to congratulate you on your assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council for the month of
June 2006.

Any credible debate on the role of the Security
Council in strengthening international law, the rule of
law and the maintenance of international peace and
security ought to begin with an assessment of the
performance of the Security Council itself. The
Security Council bears the primary responsibility for
the maintenance of international peace and security and
for saving succeeding generations from the scourge of
war. The question that therefore arises is whether the
Security Council, in its current form, is representative
of the United Nations membership and is willing and
able to carry out its Charter responsibilities.

When one considers the Security Council's
performance in places like Rwanda and Darfur, the
results are clearly less than satisfactory. On the other
hand, the Council has helped to bring some of those
accused of war crimes and crimes against humanity in
Sierra Leone, Liberia, Rwanda, the former Yugoslavia
and elsewhere to trial. The Council has also helped to
strengthen State institutions in a number of conflict-
afflicted societies and has played a constructive role in
promoting national reconciliation, judicial and

06-4010]

security-sector reform and political inclusiveness in
those societies. However, the Security Council's
partisan performance in the Middle East and the
perception that some are above the law in the so-called
war on terrorism is a serious indictment of this body.

The Security Council's mixed track record and
the erosion of its credibility suggest that there is clear
room for improvement. Indeed, if the Council is to
realize its full potential to strengthen international law
and to help instil the rule of law, comprehensive reform
would be required, reform that addresses both its
composition and its working methods. In particular,
developing countries would have to be brought into the
Council's decision-making process through inclusion
in the permanent membership category. A closer
working relationship between the Security Council and
the African Union's Peace and Security Council would
also be required.

The replacement of the Commission on Human
Rights by the Human Rights Council is a significant
reform that has placed the United Nations on a firm
footing to protect all human rights. It is significant that
the Human Rights Council was created as an organ of
the General Assembly, which is the only truly
representative body within this Organization. Member
States should now participate actively and
constructively in the new body to mould it into an
institution that will become the prime defender and
promoter of human rights worldwide. That is best
achieved by reducing the politicization of human rights
issues and the selectivity with which they are currently
addressed.

The world is placing its faith in the new
Peacebuilding Commission, which is tasked with
helping promote social progress and better standards of
life in post-conflict societies. That institution may help
to foster the conditions in which the rule of law might
be re-established and thereby prevent future conflicts.
However, the suggestion that the Peacebuilding
Commission can assist only countries that are not on
the agenda of the Security Council would gravely limit
its ability to help those that require its assistance
before it has even become fully operational.

During the 2005 world summit, Member States
recognized the inherent responsibility that exists to
protect populations from genocide, war crimes, ethnic
cleansing and crimes against humanity. This
fundamental reaffirmation of the dignity and worth of
the human person and the equality of races, cultures
and genders must now be followed by action.

The people of Darfur and the people of Palestine
are among those who look to the Security Council to
protect them from the crimes that are currently being
inflicted upon them with impunity. They, like all
others, deserve justice and have an inalienable right to
live in freedom from attacks.

For this reason, it is important that the success of
the reform of the United Nations be measured
according to how far we go towards meeting the
objectives of the Organization as set out in the Charter,
rather than against extraneous factors such as the
money that major contributors may save by abolishing
mandates.

