Mr. Yel'Chenko (Ukraine): One could hardly
overestimate the importance and practical usefulness o f
the discussion that took place in this room 10 days ago.
We would like to thank the delegation of Canada for
initiating and organizing this open briefing that gave us
an excellent opportunity to see live debate in the Security
Council and to listen to a broad exchange of views and
proposals aimed at finding effective ways and means to
protect civilians in armed conflicts. We are also grateful
to the Canadian delegation for inviting non-members of
the Council to respond to the briefing and to provide
guidance on the content of the Secretary-General's report
requested in the Presidential Statement of 12 February
1999.

It is indeed not easy to add something new to the
examination carried out and ideas expressed during the
meeting. In my statement I would like to emphasize a few
important points that, in our opinion, the report of the
Secretary-General should address specifically.

We believe that, before formulating the
recommendations to the Security Council, the report of
the Secretary-General should in the first place contain an
analysis of the causes of contemporary conflicts. As has
already been pointed out by a number of speakers,
present-day conflicts are in most cases civil or inter-ethnic
warfare of non-international character in which the main
purpose of the warring sides is not to subdue the rival
group but rather to eliminate or banish it. In such
conflicts, civilians are not simply collateral victims of
atrocities committed by one or both sides but a direct
target thereof. For the same reason, the efforts of
humanitarian organizations bringing desperately needed
help to those suffering from horrors of war - and even
their presence - are most unwelcome to the perpetrators
of mass killings and ethnic cleansing.

The growing number of armed conflicts, as well as
their brutal character, is to a large extent the result of
poverty and decreasing resources that bring about
extensive migrations of population, unemployment and
growth of crime. Sometimes a mere spark can kindle the
flame of long and bloody warfare, especially in the areas
with a population of mixed ethnic or religious

 

composition. In this connection, it is important not to
overlook the role of sustainable economic development,
preservation and strengthening of the fabric of societies'
and education in eliminating the causes of conflicts and in
their prevention.

During the discussion, several speakers touched upon
the issue of sanctions. Economic sanctions are a powerful
instrument which should be resorted to with great caution.
We strongly support the idea that they must be used
appropriately to target those responsible and not to increase
suffering of women, elderly and children who are the prime
victims in times of war. They also should not contribute to
the deepening of poverty which in many cases is the main
source of conflict. For this purpose, the Security Council
should, in our opinion, give careful consideration to the
potential social, economic and humanitarian impact of
sanctions on the population of the target State and in third
countries prior to the imposition of sanctions. Following the
imposition of sanctions, the Secretariat should be entrusted
with the task of monitoring their effects with a view to
providing the Council with possible options so that
appropriate adjustments and changes could be introduced to
the regime of sanctions in order to mitigate their adverse
collateral effects.

Another important aspect which should be addressed
in the report of the Secretary-General is the measures to
prevent illicit arms flows into the areas of armed conflict
and the role of the Security Council in enforcing such
measures. This study could also include proposals on the
reduction of legal arms trade in the areas where internal
instability and tension may easily turn into war if no
measures of restraint are exercised by the international
community.

My country supports the efforts of the international
community aimed at ensuring respect for the rules of
international humanitarian law. Ukraine is a party to the
two Protocols Additional to the Geneva Conventions and
recognized the competence of the International Fact-Finding
Commission. The Commission deserves a wider recognition
by States, for its primary task is not only that of fact-
finding but also to facilitate the restoration of respect for
the humanitarian law in general, as well as protection of the
legitimate rights and interests of the victims of armed
conflicts.

My country supported the initiative to establish an
international criminal court and was actively involved in
this process through participation in the work of the
Preparatory Committee and the Rome Diplomatic
Conference. In Rome, we witnessed a historic moment
when the idea of establishing an international criminal
court was finally accomplished, thus successfully fulfilling
the work that had been in progress over the past fifty
years. The establishment of the International Criminal
Court (ICC) will provide an indispensable element in
protection of victims of armed conflicts and in
strengthening international humanitarian law through an
effective judicial institution of universal character. We are
confident that it will receive a worldwide support through
the process of subsequent ICC Statute acceptance.

Of no less importance is the universal acceptance of
the Anti-personnel Mines Convention, which is about to
enter into force. Bearing in mind the significance of this
instrument for the protection of civilian populations in
armed conflicts, the Government of Ukraine decided to
sign the Convention before 1 March 1999.

