Mr. Kama] (Pakistan): As this is the first time that
I am addressing the Council under your presidency, Sir,
allow me to congratulate you and to express our

 

admiration for the many initiatives that you are taking to
inject greater transparency into its work.

We also salute your predecessor, Ambassador
Amorim, for his own presidency and for the onerous duties
that he continues to perform.

Allow me to express our gratitude to you for arranging
today's debate on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict. The open briefing on the same subject on 12
February 1999 by International Committee of the Red Cross
(ICRC) President Cornelio Sommaruga; the Executive
Director of the United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF),
Ms. Carol Bellamy; and the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Olara Otunnu, was informative,
useful and thought-provoking.

It is a matter of grave concern for all of us that the
violence in situations of armed conflict has reached
dangerous proportions, directed in most cases against
civilians, especially women, children and other vulnerable
groups, including refugees and internally displaced persons.
The growing number of casualties of humanitarian workers
also remains a matter of serious concern. Civilian casualties
account for almost 80 per cent of the total number of
victims in armed conflict. Over a million people die each
year in armed conflicts around the world.

The figure for children's casualties is particularly
agonizing. Special Representative Olara Otunnu shook us
all with a dismal piece of information that, during the past
decade, over 2 million children have lost their lives in
various armed conflicts, while 12 million have been made
homeless and 300,000 are serving as child soldiers in 30
conflict situations. Though most of these conflict situations
are in Africa, conflicts also persist in other parts of the
world, including in our own region, resulting in similar
problems of civilian victims and gross human rights
violations. Indian-occupied Kashmir is a case in point. The
international community cannot and must not remain
indifferent to such long-lasting situations.

What is more frustrating is the fact that civilians are
subjected to such cruel treatment despite the existence of a
substantial body of international law and principles evolved
over a long period of time to protect civilians, refugees and
humanitarian personnel. The 1949 Geneva Conventions and
the Additional Protocols of 1977 are well-established norms
of international humanitarian law for the protection of
civilians and other persons who are not party to any
hostilities. Similarly, the 1951 Convention and 1967
Protocol relating to the Status of Refugees are the principal
international instruments concerning the protection of
refugees. We have a collective responsibility to ensure
effective adherence to these legal codes by the Members
of the United Nations.

In his report of 22 September 1998, the Secretary-
General indicated that the relevant norms, principles and
provisions of international law are particularly violated in
situations of internal conflicts where whole societies are
mobilized for war. There should be concerted efforts to
create awareness of the responsibility of State authorities
in protecting the civilians in armed conflicts. In this
connection, we welcome the establishment of the
International Criminal Court, having jurisdiction over
genocide, crimes against humanity, war crimes and the
crime of aggression. Pakistan actively participated in the
deliberations of the United Nations Diplomatic
Conference at Rome. We hope the establishment of the
Court will usher in a new era of dispensing justice to
people, which would, in turn, help to establish a just
global society.

We support the idea, contained in the Security
Council presidential statement of 12 February 1999, that
there should be a comprehensive and coordinated
approach by the Member States and international
organizations and agencies to address the problem of the
protection of civilians in armed conflict. It is our hope
that the Secretary-General, in his report to the Security
Council in September this year, will submit practicable
recommendations, particularly on measures to address the
root causes of conflict. The need to improve the
socio-economic conditions of conflict-prone societies must
also be accorded due emphasis in order to ensure
effective results. We support the views expressed by some
delegations that the Secretary-General's report should not
only focus on the role of the Security Council in
improving the physical and legal protection of civilians in
armed conflict, but that it should also be comprehensive
in nature, identifying the role of all the concerned bodies
and agencies.

 

