Mr. Al-Kidwa (Palestine) (spoke in Arabic):
Allow me first of all to congratulate you, Mr.
President, on presiding over the Council this month and
to express to you our gratitude for understanding the
very difficult time the Palestinian people are
experiencing. I should also like to take this opportunity
to particularly thank the President of the Council of last
month, Ambassador Andjaba, for the valuable efforts
he made to ensure that the Council assume its
responsibilities vis-a-vis the explosive situation
affecting the Palestinian occupied territories, Jerusalem
and the Middle East in general. These and other efforts
of the Council led to the adoption of resolution 1322
(2000) - a resolution of great value and significance
that has, like others, still not been implemented by the
occupying Power, Israel.

I should also like to thank you, Mr. President, for
responding so rapidly to the request of the Arab Group
to convene this emergency meeting of the Security
Council, despite the fact that we are on the eve of a
holiday. We commend you for your initiative. That
request by the Arab Group was made in the light of the
serious escalation of the violence by Israel in the past
few hours. In fact, at 6 pm. Palestine time, Israeli
military helicopters, with the assistance of Israeli naval
gunships, undertook intensive attacks against numerous
targets in Gaza and other locations in the Gaza Strip.

The occupying Israeli forces launched over 50
rocket attacks against Palestinian Authority facilities
and buildings, including a police station, a preventive
security installation and Fatah movement buildings. In
the wake of these attacks and raids, at least one
Palestinian was killed, over 70 were injured and
considerable material damage was done. But after these
attacks - and this is of paramount importance - a
state of general panic swept through Gaza's entire
population of over 1 million people. There is a threat
that this serious escalation in the situation will spread
to the entire Middle East region, leading to a situation
of unprecedented gravity that might have unknown
disastrous consequences.

Since 29 September - one day after the
unfortunate visit of Ariel Sharon to Al-Haram Al-
Sharif on 28 September - we have sent 14 official

letters to the Security Council. In that official
correspondence we transmitted, inter alia, the names of
the Palestinian martyrs; today their number exceeds
225. We also detailed examples of Israeli conduct, how
they have been using their enormous war machine in an
excessive, disproportionate and indiscriminate use of
force, often without justification. We communicated to
the Council numerous instances of deliberate murder,
either by sniper fire or as a result of the use of other
weapons, including heavy weapons such as tanks and
other military equipment. We indicated how seriously
such deliberate actions have affected so many people.
More than 10,000 people have been injured, including
2,000 injuries caused by live ammunitions. Many of
those injured will be disabled for life, and one third of
the casualties are children under the age of 18.

We also communicated details of the massive
destruction that occurred in the bloody attack by the
occupying Israeli Power - the destruction of houses,
factories and plants - intended to make the land arid
and render it unproductive. The movement of people
and goods has been prohibited, which has had a
deleterious effect on the already weak Palestinian
economy.

All of these actions constitute a series of grave
violations and breaches of the Fourth Geneva
Convention of 1949. Many actions, such as those that I
have cited, constitute war crimes under the terms of
that Convention. They also represent a grave breach of
United Nations resolutions, including the resolutions of
this Council.

All of these events have been accompanied by a
stalemate in the peace process - a stalemate imposed

by Israel when its leaders proudly announced that they
have called a time-out in the peace process, as though
it were a basketball game.

All of this action has been accompanied by
reproaches directed against the Palestinian Authority.
The reality is that Israeli policies and practices stem
from the presence of Israeli occupiers and the policy of
settlement - a policy that has continued even after the
beginning of the peace process. The Israelis reproaches
demonstrate that their position is clearly racist. How
can they accuse the Palestinian people of putting their
children in front of murderous Israeli forces? Such an
accusation actually carries a clearly racist message. At
the same time, Israel has tried to back out of the Sharm
el-Sheikh agreement and has engaged in obstructionist
actions with regard to the fact-finding committee. That
committee was set up with great expectations, but it
has been unable to achieve anything. The reason, as the
Council has learned and as the press reported this
morning, are the obstructionist tactics of Israel. At least
one press agency has reported that the Israeli Ministry
of Foreign Affairs had sent a letter to the United States
Department of State indicating that the time was not
yet right for this committee to undertake its work. Yet
the committee was announced by President Clinton in
accordance with the terms of the Sharm el-Sheikh
agreement. However, in the View of the occupying
Power, the committee is now undesirable.

What, then, is the bottom line? What has been the
consequence of this Israeli campaign that was
unleashed on 28 September, and the attack on the first
Kiblah - the third-holiest site - in occupied East
Jerusalem? The consequence was a vast number of
victims and martyrs, and massive destruction. Another
consequence was the considerable harm done to the
Middle East peace process. The third consequence was
the creation of great tensions in the region. The fourth
consequence was that the region today, in its entirety,
may experience further clashes and confrontations.

Now the question that should be asked in the face
of this very serious reality is "How can we put an end
to this situation?" The responsibility of the Security
Council is consistent and clear in this regard, in
accordance with the Charter of the United Nations.
First, specific, concrete measures need to be taken to
put an end to this deadly, bloody Israeli campaign
being waged against the Palestinian people and
Palestinian civilians. Secondly, the Security Council
must provide the necessary international protection for
Palestinian civilians under Israeli occupation.

Let us be frank with one another. The parties,
after all that has happened, cannot themselves alone
put an end to this situation. They need the assistance of
a third party. We absolutely fail to understand why
anyone is objecting to this, and why there is
procrastination. Is it emanating from the permanent
members or other members of the Security Council, or
is it coming from outside the Council?

Since 25 October, almost a month ago, we have
been requesting that a United Nations observer force be
established. President Yasser Arafat personally
participated in a meeting with the Council, and we
would like to thank the Council for giving us the
opportunity of that special meeting with our President.
He explained to the Council all the details of the
Palestinian point of View. He requested 2,000 military
observers, who would be equipped with light weapons.
Why 2,000? Because our estimates regarding the
practical requirements on the ground indicate that such
a number would be appropriate. This observer force
would have to act under the United Nations emblem
and auspices and under its supervision. The observers
would not be deployed to fixed locations or constant
lines, so it is clear that the only objective is to ensure
the safety and security of Palestinian civilians.

We took the necessary time to deal with all the
constructive proposals, particularly the ideas of France,
that were presented on this subject. We tried to take
these proposals and ideas into consideration when we
finalized our specific proposals.

As for the approval of Israel, we would stress
once again that approval by Israel, as an occupying
Power, cannot be a prerequisite for the Security
Council's enacting the necessary measures. The
Council is not dealing here with a domestic situation of
one of its Member States; it is dealing with the only
United Nations Member State - I repeat, the only
United Nations Member State - that the Security
Council, in the 25 resolutions it has adopted regarding
the region, recognizes as an occupying Power. I repeat:
25 resolutions. This is the only case of its kind.

So we have said that Israel's approval is not a
prerequisite for the Security Council measures to be
enacted. We think that practical cooperation with Israel
is a must for implementation of any resolution the
Council may adopt. This conclusion stems from the
legal obligation of Member States. This is one of the
obligations incumbent on Israel, as a United Nations
Member State, under the Charter of the United Nations.
We have also said that we are all duty-bound - all
of us, members or non-members of the Security
Council - to ensure this practical and pragmatic
cooperation.

Last Friday this Council agreed to entrust the
Secretary-General with conducting the necessary
consultations on this issue. We commended this
initiative; we responded favourably to the Secretary-
General's efforts; and we have every intention of
continuing to respond favourably to his efforts.

Further, we would say that time is short; indeed it
is running out. The toll of casualties is increasing. The
destruction is becoming more serious. Things are
growing more complicated. All this warrants urgent
action in adopting the necessary resolution.

In full frankness and candour we urge the Council
to take the necessary measures at the beginning of next
week, so that only one month will have elapsed since
our first initiative, and so that this action will have
legitimacy in the eyes of the people who are enduring
the occupation. It seem legitimate and just for the
Council to act in its official capacity by adopting or not
adopting the draft resolution before it.

For some time we and the whole world were
awaiting the triumph of the peace process. We were
awaiting the admission of Palestine as a United Nations
Member State. Personally, I was expecting to be able to
work in a different environment and situation than the
one I now find myself in. But, unfortunately, the
occupying Power does not even wish to accept
anything as fundamental, elementary and self-evident
as the fact that the problem resides in occupation itself.
If the occupying force were prepared to put an end to
this occupation then all the disasters would disappear,
all the ills that our people are experiencing would come
to an end and the region would be rid of these
problems.

Why the clashes? Why all the warfare? Why the
accusations? The end of the occupation would lead to
an immediate end to all these problems. There is the
main reason for our misfortune, and therein lies the
remedy to it. One does not need to be a genius to come
up with this remedy. This has been the fate of all
peoples struggling for self-determination, freedom and
independence. Any situation in which there is suffering
can be remedied in this manner, and thus we can avoid
additional problems and bloodshed.

Let me once again thank you, Sir, for having
convened this meeting and for having paid such close
attention to what I have been saying.

