Mr. Delattre (France) (Spoke in French): Allow
me to start by thanking Egypt for having undertaken
this initiative of organizing this very important
debate. I would also like to thank all the briefers for
their extremely enlightening presentations. Inviting
the Secretary-General of Al Azhar Islamic Research
Academy and the Vice-President and Deputy General
Counsel of the Microsoft Corporation is an eloquent
illustration of the United Nations desire to strengthen
its partnership with civil society - some will say to
embrace a world that is increasingly post-Westphalian,
with its risks but also with the opportunities that flow
from it.

I assure the Foreign Minister of Egypt of France's
sympathy and solidarity following the attack that
plunged Cairo into mourning last Sunday.

France associates itself with the statement to be
delivered later by the observer of the European Union.

While significant successes has been achieved in
recent months in the fight against Da'esh in Iraq and
Syria, that group's propaganda unfortunately continues
to exert an important pull on our people. In France
more than 2,000 citizens or residents are involved in the
Iraqi- Syrian terrorist networks, and nearly 9,300 people
have been reported to the authorities for radicalization.
Globally, it is estimated that nearly 30,000 foreign
terrorist fighters from close to 100 countries have
joined the Iraqi-Syrian theatre.

The propaganda of terrorist groups, particularly
Da'esh, seeks to convince by painting an ideal, but
false, world. As French Prime Minister Manuel Valls
has stated,

"An ideology of chaos is afoot. It glorifies death
and corrupts the ideals at the very heart of our
societies."

Its recruiters deceive young people by promising them
a future, an ideal or a cause to defend. But in fact they
end up experiencing only manipulation, cruelty and
death. Terrorist groups use mind control techniques to
get young people to reject their schools, their work and
even their families.

Despite the recent decline in the number of
messages and videos posted by Da'esh, the Internet
remains the recruitment channel favoured by terrorists.
They have refined their indoctrination techniques and
exploit its full potential: sites defending terrorism,
discussion forums, direct messaging services, videos
and social networks. For them, the Internet is the way to
massively spread their propaganda and present young
people with a message tailored to those they wish to
capture in their nets.

Faced with a threat of this magnitude, the
international community must take action to break this
large-scale recruitment and indoctrination exercise.
We must fight terrorism and resolutely counter its
propaganda of hatred with the greatest determination
and with the necessary means and always with the
weapons of the law and with respect for human rights
and fundamental freedoms. For it is precisely those
rights that terrorists want to destroy because they lie at
the heart of our democracies.

The French approach is based on two axes. The
first dimension is preventive and dissuasive. It is based
on countering influences and taking actions aimed at
delegitimizing Da'esh in the eyes of potential recruits
and the public. As an example, in January France
created the www.stop-djihadism.gouv.fr website,
aimed at the families and friends of those on the path of
radicalization, which was then supplemented by a Twitter
account and a Facebook page. It is not simply aimed at
the propaganda Da'esh, but also at that of Al-Qaida and
Boko Haram. Similarly, France has set up a free hot line,
which is accessible 24 hours a day, to enable families
and friends to report their concerns to the authorities.
France's plan of action against radicalization and
terrorism, which was just updated on 9 May, provides
50 new concrete measures to improve its understanding
of the phenomenon and further strengthen its prevention
policies. For example, the cutting off of any source of
financing for those who join the ranks of terrorists.
We will intensify our strategic communications efforts
within the framework of the new action plan. At the
international level, France actively supports the work
of the Global Coalition to Counter the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant, which has produced some highly
effective communications campaigns, particularly
through the Sawab Centre. But beyond Governments'
necessary stance and commitment, the effectiveness
of our action also depends on mobilizing civil society.
We must expose the contradictions of terrorist groups
on the ground, and that requires boldness, innovation
and the ability to mobilize society as whole - public
authorities, associations and the private sector.

The second aspect of France's approach is punitive,
involving blocking websites and removing content
while respecting fundamental human rights and
freedoms. A law enacted on 13 November 2014 enables
the administrative authority to require Internet service
providers to block access to sites hosted in France that
advocate terrorism, and 60 have been blocked so far.
The PHAROS reporting platform enables Internet users
to report findings of illegal content, which are then
transmitted to police, gendarmerie or customs special
services.

Finally, since early 2015 France has had a
close and constant dialogue with the major Internet
players - Microsoft, whose presence here today I
welcome, but also Facebook, Twitter and Google. That
dialogue has been further strengthened in the wake of
the attacks of 13 November in order to urge all Internet
businesses to take responsibility. Those tragic events
have in fact enabled us to see where social networks can
play a catalytic role in mobilizing society.

Today's debate enables us to send two main
messages. The first is that the United Nations has a
major part to play in combating terrorism in general and
Da'esh in particular. That is the message of resolution
2249 (2015), which the Council adopted unanimously,
at France's initiative, on 20 November, exactly a week
after the Paris attacks, and which outlines the framework
for our shared fight against Da'esh in particular. The
second is that the United Nations has a unique role to
play in mobilizing the international community and
civil society against terrorist ideologies and narratives.
In that fight, our great diversity is our best asset for
bringing to bear the values that we hold in common and
that lie at the heart of the United Nations.

In urging the international community to redouble
its efforts to counter terrorist propaganda with the help
of the private sector, civil society and stakeholders
on the ground, the presidental statement we have just
adopted (S/PRST/2016/6) will enable us to further
deepen that mobilization and to usefully supplement
the Secretary-General's call for developing a United
Nations communications strategy for preventing violent
extremism, as described in his January Plan of Action
(A/70/674). France will continue to play its full part in
those efforts.

