Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): The situation around the Palestinian
territories continues to deteriorate and is threatening to
get out of control. The large-scale terrorist acts in
Israel were followed by harsh action by the Israeli
army against the residence of the head of the
Palestinian National Authority, Yasser Arafat, in
Ramallah. Now, in response to that, currently there are
mass protest demonstrations under way in the
Palestinian territories. In clashes with the Israeli troops
in Ramallah, Tulkarem and Nablus, there are dead and
wounded.

All of this happened at the very moment when a
drop in the level of violence in the Palestinian-Israeli
conflict was being noted. It happened when there were
prospects for emerging from the crisis on the basis of
the proposals agreed by the Quartet of international
mediators in New York on 17 September. Their
proposals had been supported by the Security Council.

The extremist forces are not interested in a
settlement of the conflict in the Middle East. They
want to undermine the situation again and thrust the
Palestinians and the Israelis into another spiral of
bloodshed and confrontation. It is extremely important
not to let the opponents of the peace process achieve
their goals. We would strongly urge both sides not to
yield to the emotions and provocations of the
extremists, not to allow the unfolding of this scenario
of Violence.

Last weekend the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
the Russian Federation, Igor Ivanov, had telephone
conversations with the head of the Palestinian National
Authority, Yasser Arafat; Shimon Peres, the Deputy
Prime Minister of Israel; Amre Moussa, the Secretary-
General of the League of Arab States; the United States
Secretary of State; the Foreign Ministers of Saudi
Arabia, Egypt and Denmark; the United Nations
Secretary-General; and Mr. Javier Solana, the High
Representative of the European Union. They
exchanged views about what steps should be taken to
resolve this crisis.

Russia is convinced that it is now extremely
important to do everything possible to achieve an
immediate halt to the violence. It is important to end
the blockade and the destruction of the headquarters of
the head of the Palestinian National Authority, and to
give the Palestinian Authority some real possibility of
introducing order into the territory, first of all by
halting extremist attacks and arresting persons guilty of
terrorist acts.

At this critical moment, it is important to make
use of all existing mechanisms to swiftly stabilize the
situation. It is necessary to make use of the potential of
the Security Council, of international mediators and of
key Middle Eastern countries in order to halt this
escalation of the conflict and clear the way for
negotiations on the basis of what the Quartet has
agreed upon, which opens the way to a comprehensive
settlement based on the resolutions of the Security
Council. Today, those resolutions are not being
implemented.

The Security Council must respond to this
challenge to its authority. We must actively and firmly
seek to achieve an immediate halt to this absolutely
unacceptable development of the situation in the
Palestinian territories, which is a real threat to peace
and security.

Russia, as a permanent member of the Security
Council, will be guided by those principles in
considering the draft resolution that will be introduced
in the Council.

