Mr. Salam (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to thank Ambassador Osorio for his 90-day report
on the work of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1737 (2006). Allow me to make the
following observations.

Lebanon was one of the first countries to adhere
to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons (NPT), is party to all international
non-proliferation instruments and is fully committed to
its responsibilities. We warmly welcome the
international interest in disarmament. We believe that
weapons of mass destruction, and nuclear weapons in
particular, can never be a source of peace, security or
stability; quite to the contrary, they can compel other
States to seek to acquire these weapons and lead to an
unbridled arms race.

Resolution 1929 (2010) and other relevant
resolutions reaffirmed the rights of the parties to the
NPT to undertake nuclear research and use nuclear
energy for peaceful purposes. The resolution also
affirms the importance of political and diplomatic
efforts for seeking negotiated solutions. We call for the
relaunching of negotiations and a return to dialogue,
which is the best way to find a comprehensive and
final solution that will increase international
confidence in the peaceful nature of the Iranian nuclear
programme and open the way to the development of
fruitful development agreements with the Islamic
Republic of Iran.

We fully subscribe to the statement made by the
representative of Brazil to the effect that the Tehran
declaration represented an opportunity that ought to
have been seized.

Lebanon also hopes to see the dream of a nuclear-
weapon-free zone in the Middle East. We affirm that
the Final Document of the 2010 Review Conference of
the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons (NPT/CONF.2010/50 (Vol. I)) calls
on Israel to adhere to the Treaty, as it is the only
country of the Middle East that has not done so. It
should place its installations under the comprehensive
safeguards regime of the International Atomic Energy
Agency.

We reaffirm Lebanon's commitment to continuing
to cooperate with the Committee and to assist in its
efforts to fulfil its mandate.

