Mr. Traore (Guinea) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I should like to express to you, Mr. President,
and to the delegation of Pakistan my delegation's
gratitude for the organization of this meeting on the
role of the Security Council in the pacific settlement of
disputes. Despite your busy calendar, you have found
the time to preside. That confirms, if that were
necessary, the importance of the topic that we are
considering today. My gratitude goes also to the
Secretary-General for his very instructive introductory
statement. In addition, I should like to welcome the
presence among us of eminent personalities whose rich
experience in the service of the international
community will, I am convinced, help to enhance the
quality of our debate.

It should be recalled that one of the primary
objectives that the United Nations set for itself is the
establishment of a climate of trust and peace among
States. In order to accomplish that, the Organization
offers vast possibilities. Therefore, by virtue of Chapter
VI of the Charter, it has defined ways to prevent war
and to create understanding and harmony among
nations. In that context, many mediation efforts have
been undertaken at the bilateral, subregional, regional
and multilateral levels.

We must acknowledge, however, that several
conflicts of diverse natures have developed to the point
where they jeopardize the regional and even
international balance. The pacific settlement of such
conflicts is incumbent on all of us. In that arduous task,
the Security Council, for its part, has a crucial role to
play by virtue of its mandate. It must try to prevent
potential sources of tension by extolling the virtues of
dialogue - direct or indirect - because it is from such
dialogue, with an underlying spirit of tolerance, that
enlightening ideas that might enable us to transcend
differences can arise.

Beyond that preventive role, this body is called
upon to intervene with a view to facilitating
negotiations among the parties once a conflict has
erupted. It goes without saying that such negotiations
require a spirit of compromise and responsibility on the
part of the parties involved, in conformity with the
provisions of Chapter VI of the Charter.

My delegation emphasizes, furthermore, that
subregional and regional organizations are appropriate
channels for the prevention, management and
settlement of conflicts. The mechanisms created for
that purpose by the African Union and the Economic
Community of West African States, which have often
shown themselves to be active and useful, are there to
prove that. In order to lend greater effectiveness to the
actions of those organizations, it would be desirable to
convene a permanent evaluation and coordination
mechanism based on strengthening the partnership with
the Security Council.

Experience teaches us, moreover, that civil
society actors can play an important role in the
settlement of disputes. In that context, the action of
women of the Mano River Union deserves more
attention.

If there is no doubt that the quest for and
maintenance of international peace and security are
incumbent primarily on the Security Council, we must
recognize that other United Nations bodies play a role
that is no less important. Many legal disputes arising
from the interpretation of treaties have caused
differences of evaluation as to their implementation.
We are pleased to note that more and more parties to an
emerging conflict are resorting to the International
Court of Justice to find a peaceful settlement to their
disputes, thereby sparing themselves an overt
confrontation with unforeseeable consequences.

In conclusion, my delegation would like to
reaffirm its conviction that the preservation of
international peace and security is a long-standing task
that challenges all of us. At a time when humanity
faces many threats, we should, in the last analysis,
further coordinate our efforts with a view to finding, on
a case-by-case basis, the best ways to avoid
confrontation and to create conditions for a better
world.

