Mrs. Haley (United States of America): I thank
Mr. De Mistura and Mr. Markram for their briefings.

Almost exactly one year ago, I stood on the floor
of the Security Council and held up pictures of dead
Syrian children (see S/PV.7915). After that day, I
prayed that I would never have to do that again. I could;
there are many truly gruesome pictures. Many of us
have worked hard to ensure that one day we would not
have to see images of babies gassed to death in Syria.
However, the day we prayed would never come, has
come again. Chemical weapons have once again been
used on Syrian men, women and children. And once
again, the Security Council is meeting in response.

This time I am not going to hold up pictures of
victims. I could; there are many, and they are gruesome.
Worse are the videos imprinted in our minds that no
one should ever have to see. I could hold up pictures of
babies lying dead next to their mothers, brothers and
sisters * even toddlers and infants still in diapers, all
lying together dead. Their skin is the ashen blue that is

now tragically familiar from chemical-weapon scenes.
Their eyes are open and lifeless, with white foam
bubbles at their mouths and noses. They are pictures
of dead Syrians who are unarmed, not soldiers and fit
the very definition of innocent and non-threatening.
Rather, they are women and children who were hiding in
basements from a renewed assault by Bashar Al-Assad.
They are of families who were hiding underground to
escape Al-Assad's conventional bombs and artillery,
but the basements that Syrian families thought would
shelter them from conventional bombs were the worst
place to be when chemical weapons fell from the sky.
Saturday evening, the basements of Douma became
their tombs.

It is impossible to know for certain how many
have died, because access to Douma is cut off by
Al-Assad's forces. Dozens are dead that we know of,
and hundreds are wounded. I could hold up pictures of
survivors - children with burning eyes and choking
for breath. I could hold up pictures of first responders
washing the chemicals off of the victims and putting
respirators on children, or of first responders walking
through room after room of families lying motionless
with babies still in the arms of their mothers and
fathers. I could show pictures of a hospital attacked with
chemical weapons. I could show pictures of hospitals
struck by barrel bombs following the chemical attack.
Ambulances and rescue vehicles have been repeatedly
attacked, maximizing the number of dead civilians.
Civil defence centres have been attacked in order to
paralyse the medical response so as to increase the
suffering of the survivors. Who does that? Only a
monster does that. Only a monster targets civilians, and
then ensures that there are no ambulances to transfer
the wounded, no hospitals to save their lives and no
doctors or medicine to ease their pain.

I could hold up pictures of all of that killing and
suffering for the Council to see, but what would be
the point? The monster who was responsible for those
attacks has no conscience, not even to be shocked by
pictures of dead children. The Russian regime, whose
hands are all covered in the blood of Syrian children,
cannot be ashamed by pictures of its victims. We
have tried that before. We must not overlook Russia
and Iran's roles in enabling the Al-Assad regime's
murderous destruction. Russia and Iran have military
advisers at Al-Assad's airfields and operation centres.
Russian officials are on the ground helping direct the
regime's starve-and-surrender campaign, and Iranian
allied forces do much of the dirty work.

When the Syrian military pummels civilians, they
rely on the military hardware given by Russia. Russia
could stop that senseless slaughter if it wanted, but it
stands with the Al-Assad regime and supports without
any hesitation. What is the point of trying to shame
such people? After all, no civilized Government would
have anything to do with Al-Assad's murderous regime.
Pictures of dead children mean little to Governments
like Russia, who expend their own resources to prop up
Al-Assad.

The Council, which saw the pictures last year, has
failed to act because Russia has stood in its way every
single time. For a year we have allowed Russia to hold
the lives of innocent Syrians hostage to its alliance
with the Al-Assad regime. That also allowed Russian
to weaken the credibility of the United Nations. We are
quick to condemn chemical weapons in the Security
Council, but then Russia prevents any action. It vetoed
five draft resolutions on this issue alone and used 11
vetoes all together to save Al-Assad. Our lives go on
as usual.

The Council created the Joint Investigative
Mechanism. It found the Syrian regime responsible for
the attack at Khan Shaykhun a year ago. Because Russia
supported Al-Assad and his actions, Russia killed the
Mechanism. We condemned it, and our lives went
on as usual. We pushed for a ceasefire. The Council
unanimously agreed, but it was immediately ignored by
Russia and Al-Assad. We condemned it, and our lives
went on as usual. Now here we are, confronted with
the consequences of giving Russia a pass in the name
of unity - a unity that Russia has shown many times
before it does not want. Here we are, in a world where
chemical-weapons use is becoming normalized - from
an Indonesian airport to an English village to the homes
and hospitals of Syria. Since the Al-Assad regime used
chemical weapons at Khan Shaykhun one year ago,
chemical weapons have been reportedly used dozens of
times, and the Council does nothing.

What we are dealing with today is not about a spat
between the United States and Russia. It is about the
inhumane use of chemical agents on innocent civilians.
Each and every one of the nations in the Council is on
record opposing the use of chemical weapons. There
can be no more rationalizations for our failure to act. We
have already introduced and circulated to the Council a
draft resolution demanding unrestricted humanitarian
access to the people of Douma. Al-Assad is doing all
he can to assure maximum suffering in Douma. Our
priority must be to help the starving, the sick and the
injured who have been left behind. We also call on the
Council to immediately re-establish a truly professional
and impartial mechanism for chemical-weapons attacks
in Syria, including the attack this weekend. We hope
that our colleagues on the Council will join us, as they
have before.

That is a very minimum we can do in response to
the attack we just witnessed. Russia's obstructionism
will not continue to hold us hostage when we are
confronted with an attack like that one. The United
States is determined to see the monster who dropped
chemical weapons on the Syrian people held to account.
Those present have heard what the President of the
United States has said about that. Meetings are ongoing.
Important decisions are being weighed, even as we
speak. We are on the edge ofa dangerous precipice. The
great evil of chemical-weapons use, which once unified
the world in opposition, is on the verge of becoming
the new normal. The international community must
not let that happen. We are beyond showing pictures
of dead babies. We are beyond appeals to conscience.
We have reached the moment when the world must see
justice done. History will record this as the moment
when the Security Council either discharged its duty or
demonstrated its utter and complete failure to protect
the people of Syria. Either way, the United States
will respond.

