Mr. Beck (Solomon Islands): First of all my
delegation would like to sincerely congratulate you,
Sir, and your delegation on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council and to thank you for
convening an open debate on the role of regional and
subregional organizations in the maintenance of
international peace and security. This is consistent with
Chapter VIII of the Charter - as has been said by
previous speakers- and recognizes the role of regional
and subregional security arrangements in preserving
international peace. The changing international
climate, with shifts by the bigger Powers in the
international system, has had an impact upon and has
redefined all security mechanisms globally, at both the
regional and the international levels.

My delegation is pleased that the presidency has
taken the initiative in reaching out to the wider
membership to discuss this important issue. This
debate allows us not only to review but to appraise
how secure the world has become with the
contributions from regional and subregional
mechanisms. It further permits us to draw the Council's
attention to some of the challenges confronting
subregional and regional mechanisms in preserving
international peace and security and to see how these
can best be addressed, given the role and purpose of
the Council. In saying that, my delegation recognizes
that different regions have their own particularities and
realities.

One of the glaring gaps my delegation has
identified on the issue is the lack of observance of
Article 54 of the Charter. The Article underlines the
requirement that the Council be kept fully informed on
all activities under regional and subregional
arrangements in the maintenance of international
peace. At the moment, some regions have received
more attention than others. This presents an
institutional gap that could be accommodated within
the working methods of the Council by having periodic
reports presented to the Council, by the Secretariat and
the States concerned, on all regional and subregional
security mechanisms. That could be done on a six-
monthly basis or quarterly.
The 2005 World Summit Outcome (General Assembly resolution 60/ 1) also supports that proposal
and calls for a formalized agreement between the

United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations and involvement of such organizations in
the work of the Security Council. This is in addition to
strengthening United Nations and regional and
subregional cooperation in the economic, social and
cultural fields. In other words there needs to be some
movement beyond the holding of biannual
consultations between regional organizations and the
Secretary-General. On this note, if there is a draft
memorandum of understanding, Solomon Islands will
be happy to take this through its regional process in
trying to formalize relations with the United Nations.

Solomon Islands is a post-conflict country and
particularly welcomes this occasion as a recipient of an
ongoing subregional security arrangement. This
occasion presents an opportunity to put the Regional
Assistance Mission to the Solomon Islands on the
Council's radar screen with its successes and
challenges.

The maintenance of international peace and
security at the regional level is a financially expensive
exercise and is, therefore, driven by those with
resources. The subregion my delegation hails from has,
within its membership, two industrialized members
among many small island developing States. This has
allowed for a active regional cooperation mechanism.
The issue with regional mechanisms is that, if they are
not properly managed or are unbalanced in their
approach, regional organizations could address
symptoms rather than the causes of conflicts.
Differences could occur between the recipient State
and the regional organization. It is important that the
regional organizations working to maintain regional
stability do so in strong partnership with the recipient
country while being flexible regarding the changing
security, economic and social climate. It must be a
partnership and must take a participatory form, so as to
ensure that the ownership and leadership of the peace
and nation-building processes are country-led and
country-driven. Decisions to use public, as well as
quiet diplomacy, are also important.

The absence of such a balance will expose the
receiving State to the dangers of slipping back into a
conflict situation. Security and development are two
sides of the same coin and can only instil real peace if
applied simultaneously. The economic and
development needs of the country tend to be
overlooked, with the issues of the rule of law,
democracy and governance receiving more emphasis in
the cooperative effort. Solomon Islands, a least
developed country, is off track in terms of meeting its
Millennium Development Goals and is in a vulnerable
position, as its development needs are not receiving the
necessary attention. In this regard, enhanced
cooperation between regional organizations and the
United Nations is crucial in order to address the
concerns of all parties, ensuring that security and
development cooperation remains on track. This is
based on the understanding that, in many of today's
conflicts, regional organizations have gone further into
countries than our multilateral institution would have
and have, therefore, accumulated acquired both
positive and negative experiences.

The Regional Assistance Mission to the Solomon
Islands, led by Australia and strongly supported by
New Zealand and my fellow Pacific Islands small
island developing States, is in its fourth year in the
Solomon Islands. It comprises military, police and
civil-servant support, all rolled into one. It has been
successful in its mission; however, like anything new,
it has its strengths and weaknesses and faces certain
challenges. Regional mechanisms, being external
actors, do face challenges in aligning their efforts with
the national, political and economic realities they seek
to support and need to be refined and adapted to the
changing climates in which they operate.

It is in this spirit, this past month at the annual
Pacific Islands Leaders Meeting, it was noted that the
Solomon Islands had decided to review the 2003
Facilitation of International Assistance Act. The review
will seek to increase the partnership between the
receiving State, Solomon Islands and the Regional
Mission. Solomon Islands would like to see a
strengthened United Nations Security Council
mechanism, so as to ensure that no problem issues are
allowed to aggravate but will be confronted with
international attention, where necessary. After all, the
centrality of the Security Council must be preserved
and protected.

