Mr. Kim (Slovenia): It is my honour to speak on
behalf of the Human Security Network, namely
Austria, Canada, Chile, Costa Rica, Greece, Ireland,
Jordan, Mali, the Netherlands, Norway, Switzerland,
Thailand, Slovenia and the observer country of South
Africa.

Let me begin by thanking the Danish presidency
of the Security Council for having organized this open
debate, as well as the Under-Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief
Coordinator, Mr. Jan Egeland, for his presentation and
in particular his recommendations on possible practical
measures to strengthen our collective ability to protect
civilians.

After the publication of last year's report of the
Secretary-General, the States of the Network look
forward with great interest to the coming report, due
next year. Violence in internal armed conflicts in
various parts of the world continues disproportionately
to affect the civilian population and often forcibly
displaces them. The suffering of civilians caught in
armed conflict remains one of the most disturbing
features of armed conflicts, constituting a major
challenge to peace and security. We are also more
aware today of the effects on the civilian population of
the societal breakdown accompanying armed conflict.

We are particularly concerned about the
proliferation, illegal trafficking and misuse of small
arms, light weapons and ammunition, which increase
armed violence, endanger the security of civilians and
jeopardize development activities aimed at stabilizing
post-conflict societies. Urgent measures are needed to
reverse the cycle of violence and its effects on civilian
populations caused by small arms and light weapons.
In that regard, we would like to draw the attention of
the Council to the Geneva Declaration on Armed
Violence and Development of 7 June 2006, which
contains a set of recommendations on how to tackle
armed violence.

The 2005 World Summit Outcome document
affirmed the responsibility to protect populations from
genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes
against humanity. The Network is committed to further
promoting the understanding of the notion of
"responsibility to protect". We welcome the Council's
reaffirmation of paragraphs 138 and 139 of the 2005
World Summit Outcome document. We encourage the
Security Council to devise appropriate implementation
mechanisms in that respect. Furthermore, we
encourage the permanent members of the Security
Council to refrain from exercising their veto powers
with regard to the aforementioned four international
crimes.

We would also like to underline the fact that the
responsibility to protect is a continuum that ranges
from prevention to protection and rebuilding. In this
regard, we welcome the Council's emphasis on
prevention and the need for a comprehensive approach
involving the promotion of economic growth, poverty
eradication, sustainable development, national
reconciliation, good governance, democracy, the rule
of law, and respect for and protection of human rights.
With regard to the challenge of rebuilding, we
welcome the establishment of the Peacebuilding
Commission, which met for the first time last week,
and the role it can play in facilitating the transition
from relief to development towards sustainable peace.

As members of the Human Security Network, we
fully support the mandate of the Special Adviser of the
Secretary-General on the Prevention of Genocide. His
work and cooperation with the various actors involved
on the ground is important for collecting early and
solid data that can better inform our preventive efforts
as well as provide the basis for bringing relevant
situations to the attention of the Security Council. We
encourage the Security Council to strongly support this
mechanism, working towards the actual prevention of
violations and abuses of international human rights and
humanitarian law.

The Security Council's role in addressing civilian
protection as a component of its peace and security
responsibilities is now well established and was
reinforced by the Outcome Document. The Council
must continue to explore how it can best and most
effectively respond to violations and abuses of
international humanitarian law and human rights law. It
is also important that the Council aim at achieving
consistency of practice in upholding its responsibilities
under the Charter so as to enhance the predictability
and transparency of its work.

In order for the Council to set realistic objectives
for the protection of civilians in armed conflict, the
Council must first and foremost be well informed. The
practice of sending Council missions to affected
regions and countries is commendable. The Council
can also benefit from regular briefings by other
relevant actors Within the United Nations system,
including the Under-Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief
Coordinator; the Special Adviser of the Secretary-
General on the Prevention of Genocide; the High
Commissioner for Human Rights; the Representative
of the Secretary-General on Internally Displaced
Persons; and pertinent United Nations agencies, as well
as other important implementing humanitarian
partners.

The ongoing strengthening of the field presence
of the Office of the High Commissioner for Human
Rights should contribute significantly to translating
United Nations decisions and basic humanitarian and
human rights norms into improved local realities and
partnerships with local actors. Well-informed decisions
contribute to the necessary clarity of protection
mandates that are tailored to the specific needs of the
situation on the ground. The Council also must pay
particular attention to basing its decision-making on all
relevant principles, norms and standards of
humanitarian, human rights and refugee law.

In order to protect civilian populations and to
alleviate their plight, the Network calls on States and
on non-State armed actors to ensure safe and
unimpeded access to affected populations by
humanitarian actors. We welcome in this regard the

adoption in December 2005 of the Optional Protocol to
the Convention on the Safety of United Nations and
Associated Personnel, which greatly contributes to the
effective work of humanitarian agencies and
organizations on the ground, which is indispensable.

We welcome the current reforms to enhance the
timeliness, predictability and effectiveness of the
global humanitarian response system, including
through the expanded Central Emergency Response
Fund, as well as efforts to strengthen humanitarian
coordination capacity, to improve needs assessments
and to ensure accountable sector coordination,
preparedness and response. Those reform efforts are
mutually reinforcing and should result in better
cooperation among agencies with a View to avoiding
gaps in meeting the protection needs of affected
populations, including, in particular, those of the
internally displaced.

Compliance by all parties to a conflict with
international law is an essential guarantee for ensuring
the safety of the civilian population.

The fight against impunity is essential for
enabling war-affected societies to come to terms with
their past and move towards reconciliation and
sustainable peace. It is the obligation of all States to
prevent impunity through the adoption of national
laws, policies and programmes and the effective
functioning of the justice system. Furthermore, the
work of international or mixed tribunals and, in
particular, of the International Criminal Court, is
proving to be valuable when justice cannot be achieved
at the national level. It is of the utmost importance that
national and international criminal justice institutions
receive all necessary support on the ground.

We have noted in previous open debates in the
Security Council the alarming and pervasive nature of
sexual and gender-based violence in conflict-affected
areas. Women and children constitute the majority of
the civilian population and are therefore particularly
affected by conflict. Security Council resolution 1325
(2000) on women, peace and security was a response to
the fact that women's experiences in conflict situations
are marginalized to an unacceptable degree. Sexual
violence is repeatedly used as a deliberate method of
warfare with frightening persistence. In some contexts,
such sexual violence has led to an increase in the
transmission of HIV/AIDS, with devastating results.
More action is required to document and report on
those matters so that effective preventive measures and
remedies can be put in place. It is a significant
development in combating sexual violence as a method
of warfare that rape, sexual slavery, enforced
prostitution and forced pregnancy have been included
in the definition of crimes against humanity and war
crimes in the Rome Statute of the International
Criminal Court. But more must be done.

Children are particularly vulnerable in situations
of armed conflict and are often targeted for abduction
and recruitment into armed groups. We welcome the
work of the newly created Security Council Working
Group on Children and Armed Conflicts and encourage
the effective implementation of resolution 1612 (2005).

Let me conclude by saying that we should keep in
mind our common responsibility to act in a timely,
proactive and decisive manner in order to prevent
further suffering.

