Mr. Loncar (Serbia and Montenegro) (spoke in Serbian; English text provided by the delegation):
Permit me at the outset to express my great pleasure at
being able to address the Security Council today. I
should like to thank Judge Meron, President of the
Tribunal, and Chief Prosecutor Carla Del Ponte for
their comprehensive briefings and for submitting
reports that are positive for Serbia and Montenegro.
Those reports are the result of great efforts over the
past year by the Council of Ministers of Serbia and
Montenegro, the Government of the Republic of
Serbia, of which I am a member, and the National
Council for Cooperation with the International
Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY),
of which I am also a member.

I should like to highlight just a few facts that
illustrate the scope of cooperation between Serbia and
Montenegro and the Tribunal and the progress
achieved since my previous statement to the Security
Council.

Thanks to the great efforts of the Government of
the Republic of Serbia and of all other competent
authorities of the State Union of Serbia and
Montenegro, 13 indictees from Serbia and two from
Republika Srpska have voluntarily turned themselves
in to the Tribunal since last November as a result of a
concerted effort by the Government of Republika
Srpska and the Republic of Serbia. I should like to
point out that those individuals are mostly high-ranking
military and police officers.

As a sign of trust, and in recognition of the
consistent and effective cooperation of the Republic of
Serbia and the State Union of Serbia and Montenegro
with the Tribunal, the Tribunal has temporarily
released seven indictees who are awaiting trial. That
represents two-way cooperation with the Tribunal,
which is perhaps the best example of the positive
cooperation of the Republic of Serbia and the State
Union of Serbia and Montenegro with the Hague
Tribunal. It indicates that the State authorities of Serbia
and Montenegro, who have provided guarantees for the
indicted persons, enjoy the Tribunal's trust. Moreover,
it will encourage other indicted persons wanted by the
Tribunal and by the Serbia and Montenegro authorities
to turn themselves in voluntarily.

Over the past five years, the Office of the
Prosecutor of the Tribunal has submitted to Serbia and
Montenegro more than 850 requests for cooperation
regarding the provision of documents, the granting of
waivers or for other information. Thanks to the recent
progress, almost all of those requests have been
granted. As many as 290 witnesses have been granted
waivers, and since I became a member of the National
Council, 84 persons have been granted waivers.
Furthermore, the same number of requests for
documents have received positive responses. As a
result, because of the progress made in cooperation
with the Tribunal, there are practically no outstanding
requests for cooperation regarding documents. All new
requests are processed promptly with the utmost
attention by State authorities.

All of that indicates how much the Republic of
Serbia and the State Union of Serbia and Montenegro
have done over the past year in the area of cooperation
with the Tribunal. Of course, all of us in the
Government are fully aware that we must continue to
cooperate and honour our international obligations. We
know very well that this issue will remain unresolved
until full cooperation has been achieved, which implies
that all indicted persons must end up in The Hague. I
should like to take this opportunity to assure the
Security Council that the Government of the Republic
of Serbia and the State Union of Serbia and
Montenegro remain fully committed to honouring all
our international obligations concerning cooperation
with the Hague Tribunal. The results achieved so far
are the best proof of that.

We continue to make every possible effort to
track down other indicted persons and to determine
whether some of them are hiding in Serbia and
Montenegro. Serbia and Montenegro is fully
determined to ensure that all those indicted for war
crimes are tried, whether by the Tribunal or by the
national courts. A proof of that is the recent efficient
operation carried out by the State authorities of the
Republic of Serbia in which all members of the
"Skorpioni" Unit located in Serbia were swiftly
arrested following the broadcast of the killing of
innocent civilians, which profoundly shocked our
public. Those individuals will be tried before the
national courts, as will others indicted for war crimes.

From the very beginning, the Government of the
Republic of Serbia has emphasized the need to
establish mutual cooperation with the Tribunal. We
believe that significant steps have recently been taken
in that direction. Our mutual cooperation has several
aspects, one of which is cooperation between the
Office of the ICTY Prosecutor and national judicial
authorities in tracking down and prosecuting
perpetrators of war crimes. Ms. De] Ponte has stated on
several occasions that there has been excellent
cooperation between her Office and the Republic of
Serbia's Prosecutor's Office for War Crimes. As a
result of that cooperation, a number of the cases
investigated by the Prosecutor's Office have been
referred to the national courts.

The Prosecutor's Office for War Crimes in
Belgrade is currently processing 881 war crimes cases.
Investigation requests have been filed against 113
persons, and 23 persons have been indicted. The
Prosecutor's Office is cooperating with the
prosecutors' offices and the judicial and police
authorities of other States in the region, primarily the
Republic of Croatia and the Republic of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. The proceedings before the Prosecutor's
Office for War Crimes in Belgrade with regard to the
"Ovcara" case have been assessed by all relevant
international observers as very successful and as being
in accordance with international standards. I am
confident that this effective cooperation will be
continued and even promoted in the future.

Another form of two-way cooperation - perhaps
the most important from the Security Council's
perspective - is the referral of cases under rule 11 bis
of the Tribunal's Rules of Procedure and Evidence.
Even today, speakers have referred to the importance
of the Tribunal's completion strategy, and the referral
of cases is one of the strategy's most important
elements. Although I have already spoken about that, I
should like to reiterate that we are prepared for the
referral of cases and that we are willing and able to
conduct fair and impartial trials against war crimes
perpetrators.

I should like to emphasize in particular that we
consider it extremely important that the Tribunal refer
to Serbia and Montenegro the case against Mrksic,
Sljivancanin and Radio for the crimes committed in
Ovcara. I believe that the referral of that case to our
judiciary would be yet another powerful confirmation
of the great progress that has been made in cooperation
over the past year.

Finally, I should like to emphasize once again our
satisfaction with the reports of the Tribunal's chief
officials, which are positive for Serbia and
Montenegro. I should also like to assure the Council
that as a result of those reports, we will be no less
active and will continue to undertake all available
measures to achieve full cooperation with the Tribunal
and to fully honour our international commitments.

