The President: I thank the representative of
China for his kind words addressed to me.

Mr. Granovsky (Russian Federation)
(interpretation from Russian): The Russian delegation
is grateful to the Secretary-General and to you,
Mr. Minister, for the very important and valuable
information on and analysis of the situation regarding
the settlement of the Ethiopia-Eritrea conflict. We
share your assessment of the prospects for a settlement
of this grievous inter-State conflict, that has divided
two fraternal nations.

We are pleased to note the dynamic deployment
in the zone of conflict of a full scale United Nations
peacekeeping operation. This has been made possible
by the high level of cooperation between the parties
and the United Nations and the Organization of African
Unity (OAU), which are promoting the negotiation
process among the parties. I would like to believe that
the prospect for a peaceful settlement is not too remote.
The road to it goes through the successful conduct of a
peacekeeping mission of the United Nations aimed at
promoting the implementation of the Algiers agreement
of 18 June and through the parallel conduct of
negotiations to achieve a final and lasting peace.

Positive steps have already been taken in both
areas. The first two stages of deployment of the United
Nations peacekeeping mission have already occurred,
with the cooperation of the parties. The formation of
UNMEE troops, in accordance with resolution 1320
(2000), is proceeding at full speed. Russia, like other
Council members, is relying on this to help strengthen
positive measures to resolve the Ethiopian-Eritrean
territorial disagreements and to give the United Nations
a constructive role in promoting the settlement process.

It is important that at the resumed negotiations, to
be held under the auspices of the OAU with the
participation of the United Nations representative, the
parties state their commitment to the resolution of the
conflict by peaceful means. Maintaining the de facto
ceasefire regime in the area serves as an eloquent
confirmation of this commitment. Under present
circumstances restraint and the good will of the parties
are particularly significant, prohibiting all provocative
acts that may complicate the situation in the conflict
zone. In accordance with the obligations they have
assumed regarding security, both parties must show
maximum good will in creating a climate of mutual
confidence. We highly appreciate the efforts of the
OAU and its former Chairman, President Bouteflika of
Algeria. We believe it is important that the Security
Council continue to provide full support and
encouragement to these efforts to ensure further
progress in the political dialogue.

Unblocking the crisis situation can only be
ensured by political methods in the context of norms of
international law. We have been consistently and
purposefully supporting this approach in the Security
Council and through contacts with all the parties
involved. We share the concern about the serious
humanitarian consequences of the conflict, which have
led to a large-scale displacement of population and
increased need for greater food aid.

A resolution of these problems requires that
priority attention be given by the international donor
community and the United Nations specialized
agencies. The Russian Federation will provide
appropriate humanitarian assistance to the populations
of Ethiopia and Eritrea, who have suffered as a result
of drought and military action, and to the Ethiopian
refugees who are in Sudanese territory.

As a Security Council member and a sincere
friend of the States of the Horn of Africa, Russia will
continue to actively encourage the establishment of a
lasting peace between Ethiopia and Eritrea. We will be
prepared to work with interest on the draft statement to
be prepared by the President of the Security Council,
with the aim of adopting it next week.

The President: I thank the representative of the
Russian Federation for the kind words he addressed to
me.


