Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (interpretation from Russian): We associate ourselves with the words of
congratulation addressed to you, Mr. President, on your
assumption of this post, and I express my gratitude to the
previous President.

The military coup of 25 May in Sierra Leone
interrupted Sierra Leone's progress on the path to
democratic development and derailed the peace process
that had been established with such difficulty with the
assistance of the countries of the region and the
international community. A new threat has emerged to
stability in that already troubled region.

The Russian Federation, given that its unacceptable
to forcibly overthrow democratically elected
Governments, decisively condemned the perpetrators of
the coup and firmly supported the demand made by
African States that constitutional order be restored.

We commend Africa's position of principle on this
question and the efforts of the member countries of the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) - in particular, the Committee of Five - to
resolve the crisis in Sierra Leone. We are convinced that
in order to attain that goal peaceful means should be
used, first and foremost. Given the active involvement of
ECOWAS in resolving the crisis in Sierra Leone, we
attach particular importance to strengthening coordination
between the Security Council and that subregional
organization.
On the whole, our main premise is that cooperation
between the United Nations and the regional organizations
on questions relating to the maintenance of peace and
security should be based on the Charter of the United
Nations and that enforcement action should not be
undertaken by regional organizations without the
authorization of the Security Council. The draft resolution
reaffirms the willingness of the international community
actively to support the efforts of ECOWAS to reach a
peaceful settlement of the crisis in Sierra Leone, inter
alia, through negotiations with all parties. A clear signal
is being sent to the perpetrators of the coup to the effect
that they have no way out, that there can be no way out
for them other than to relinquish power and take
immediate steps to restore the legitimate Government and
constitutional order.

The powerful means of pressure on the junta brought
into play by the Council - the embargo on the delivery
of arms, military equipment, petroleum and petroleum

 

products and visa restrictions on the leaders of the coup -
have been fine-tuned and are aimed at specific targets. We
are pleased that in this case the Security Council has taken
additional precautionary measures to try to minimize any
unintended side effects of the sanctions, in particular, any
negative impact on the humanitarian situation. We also
assume that member countries of ECOWAS, the Secretary-
General of the United Nations and the sanctions Committee
will carefully monitor the situation in Sierra Leone and will
regularly inform the Council of what impact the sanctions
are having on the humanitarian situation there.

At the same time, we cannot hide our concern that the
draft resolution does not establish a clear time-frame for the
application of sanctions, although this was provided for in
the document on the problem of sanctions which was
approved by the consensus resolution on the Supplement to
an Agenda for Peace at the fifty-first session of the General
Assembly. This question is exceptionally important both for
the effective impact on the conduct of parties targeted by
the sanctions and for timely adjustments by the Council of
measures it has adopted, in the light of the results achieved.

We are convinced that the point of sanctions is not to
punish the party that has threatened international peace and
security, but to Change the conduct of that party. The logic
and practice of indefinite sanctions regimes cannot, in
principle, do that, and in our view they are counter-
productive.

Nevertheless, given the careful review of sanctions in
six months' time, as envisaged in the draft resolution, and
in order to accommodate the wishes of African countries
which have repeatedly stressed how much they want the
speedy and unanimous adoption of a resolution, the Russian
delegation is prepared, in this specific case, to be flexible
and to support this draft resolution.

