Mr. Kamara (Sierra Leone): Let me first of all
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month. Allow
me also to pay tribute to you, to your predecessors and to
other members of the Council for making it possible for
us to arrive at this important stage of the Council's
deliberations on the situation in Sierra Leone.
The people of Sierra Leone are anxiously but
patiently waiting for the decision that the Security
Council will be making this afternoon to approve the
establishment and deployment of a full-fledged United
Nations peacekeeping operation in the country. The
adoption of this draft resolution will bring some relief to
our people, who were beginning to ask whether this body,
which has the primary responsibility for the maintenance
of international peace and security, had relegated their
concerns to the bottom of the Council's agenda. By its
action today the Council will erase that perception, and
convincingly so. For this we are very grateful. On their
behalf, and on behalf of the Government of Sierra Leone,
I would like to express our sincere gratitude to all
members of the Council, and to non-members as well, for
their individual and collective contributions and support.

My delegation would like to speak briefly on three
aspects of the draft resolution that the Council will be
adopting this afternoon.

For a country that has suffered from what has been
described as some of the starkest and most brutal human
rights violations the world has seen in recent years, no
one should underestimate the importance that the
Government attaches to the security and safety of the
people, especially innocent young children. Indeed, the
Council has itself has emphasized that the plight of
children is among the most pressing challenges facing
Sierra Leone. Therefore, in our View, the draft resolution
that the Security Council will be adopting provides for an
additional and more durable security blanket for all Sierra
Leoneans.

Of course, we are aware of and appreciate the role
that the United Nations Observer Mission in Sierra Leone
(UNOMSIL) has played in the peace process. However,

 

we must admit that it was not equipped to deal with certain
situations before and after the Lome Peace Agreement
signed by the Government of Sierra Leone and the
Revolutionary United Front (RUF). This is why the Sierra
Leone delegation could not help but highlight paragraph 14
of the draft resolution, which says that acting under Chapter
VII of the Charter, the new United Nations Mission in
Sierra Leone, in discharge of its mandate, may take the
necessary measures to ensure the safety and freedom of
movement of United Nations personnel and, circumstances
permitting, to afford protection to civilians under imminent
threat of physical violence. In the View of my delegation,
whatever interpretation others may give to this particular
paragraph, we regard it as an insurance policy for both
international peacekeepers and innocent civilians. We also
believe that it sends a clear message to any potential
violator of human rights on a gross scale: the international
community will not turn a blind eye if and when innocent
civilians are under threat of physical violence.

A second aspect of the draft resolution that my
delegation wishes to address is that it has underscored the
efficacy of practical cooperation between the United
Nations and African regional or subregional organizations
in peacekeeping activities. In every presidential statement
and in every resolution on the situation in Sierra Leone
since 1997, the Security Council has emphasized the key or
indispensable role that the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) Monitoring Group (ECOMOG)
has played in the maintenance of security and stability in
Sierra Leone. Led by the Federal Republic of Nigeria,
ECOMOG'S performance has been exemplary. In the
absence of a United Nations peacekeeping force, and in
cooperation with UNOMSIL, ECOMOG has held the fort.
It also enjoys the confidence of all the parties, especially
the RUF, in the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration process for ex-combatants.

The continued presence of ECOMOG in Sierra Leone
is crucial for the successful implementation of the Lorne
Agreement and the consolidation of peace in Sierra Leone.
As the Secretary-General points out in his recent report to
the Security Council, even the deployment of a sizable
United Nations force of up to 6,000 troops will not fully
substitute for the functions so ably performed by
ECOMOG. We agree with him that the concept of
operations of the new force that will be approved by the
Council today is predicated upon ECOMOG's continued
presence in Sierra Leone.

While we welcome the contingency plan recommended
by the Secretary-General in the event of a withdrawal by
ECOMOG or the eventual withdrawal of Nigerian troops,
my delegation would like to take this opportunity to
appeal to the Security Council to do everything in its
power to ensure that ECOMOG remains in Sierra Leone
for the time being. ECOMOG and the United Nations are
partners for peace and security in Sierra Leone. The
presence of the two organizations in Sierra Leone and
cooperation between them are required under the Lome
Peace Agreement. In addition, the Security Council, in
paragraph 7 of the draft resolution that we are about to
adopt, has approved the new mandate given to ECOMOG
by its parent body, the Economic Community of West
African States.

The third and last aspect of this draft resolution,
which my delegation would like to stress, pertains to the
implementation of the draft resolution. The people of
Sierra Leone are grateful to the Security Council for the
decision that is about to be taken to provide what I
described earlier as a more durable security blanket for
them, and to assist in the implementation of the Lome
Peace Agreement. Here it is relevant to ask how soon this
will take place. How soon will the international
community provide the required resources for this
sensitive process of disarmament and demobilization?
How soon will the first contingent of the new United
Nations peacekeeping force arrive in the area of
operation? Will it take as long as the deployment of the
210 observers approved by the Security Council several
months ago?

In closing, let me recall that just over a year ago,
and long before the devastating rebel onslaught on the
nation's capital on 6 January last, and long before the
peace talks between the Government and the RUF in
Lome, the Sierra Leone Government had launched a
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration programme
for ex-combatants. It barely got off the ground due to
lack of resources. Under the terms of the Lome Peace
Agreement, the encampment, disarmament and
demobilization process was to have commenced within
six weeks of the signing of the Agreement. There has
been a delay, which is primarily due to the lack of
resources.

Two days ago, as a symbolic demonstration of the
urgency of the matter, the Government went ahead and
launched the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration process, in the hope that the United Nations
would act quickly and deploy the new peacekeeping force
in Sierra Leone. In his address on that occasion, President
Kabbah said: "No more time should be wasted in the

 

disarmament process, as combatants want to go back home
to start rebuilding their lives." The people, victims of the
conflict, and the combatants themselves are waiting
anxiously for this to begin. Undoubtedly, this is the first
step towards lasting peace and reconciliation.

It is our fervent hope that the adoption of this draft
resolution will reassure the people of Sierra Leone that their
plight, and international efforts to alleviate it, is still one of
the priority items on the agenda of the Security Council.

