Mr. ngowe (Botswana): The recent military
usurpation of power from the democratically elected
Government in Burundi completed what the Burundi Army
had intended to do as far back as 1993. Several reasons,
some contradictory, others self-serving, have been advanced
to justify this coup. I believe that it is not difficult to find
reasons to defend one's actions, however illegitimate or
illegal. But that is beside the point. What is at issue, and a
matter of profound regret, is that today some of the elected

 

representatives of the people of Burundi, including
President Ntibantunganya, have had to seek refuge in the
embassies of Western democracies because of the
undemocratic action of the Burundi Army. It was equally
regrettable that the coup was not greeted with outright
condemnation by all Members of the United Nations as a
reprehensible overthrow of legitimate authority, as some
delegations, including my own, would have preferred. A
coup d'e'tat is an illegal assumption of state power, and
political illegality must not be tolerated, irrespective of
the credentials of the leader of the military regime.

The coup d 'etat in Burundi, a country whose people
have experienced indescribable bloodbaths and untold
suffering in its recent history, especially shattered the
hope of the international community, which had been
pinned on the success of the Mwanza peace process and
the Arusha initiative. History will record that Mr. Buyoya
and company not only ousted the Government of Burundi;
they have also derailed a promising peace process. The
coup ridiculed all the efforts aimed at bringing about a
comprehensive political dialogue. It defied the decision of
the assembly of Heads of State and Government of the
Organization of African Unity (OAU), which met in
Yaounde in July and, among other things, endorsed the
Mwanza peace process and the Arusha initiative.

The message from Africa regarding the Burundi
coup has been loud and clear: the military regime should
not be allowed time to consolidate power and give itself
an undue mandate to rule Burundi against the wishes of
the majority of its people. The neighbouring States have
spoken with one voice and have acted in a cohesive
fashion. The OAU Central Organ of the Mechanism for
Conflict Prevention, Management and Resolution, meeting
in Addis Ababa on 5 August 1996, issued a communique
supporting the conclusions of the second Arusha regional
summit. Botswana strongly supports the neighbouring
States in their determination to bring about a
comprehensive political settlement in Burundi. We are
therefore gratified by the decision of the European Union
to also lend its support to the efforts of the regional
leaders and the OAU. It is our hope that a similar
message of support will emerge from this debate.

This is not the first time that African States have
reacted this way to a coup d 'etat. It is not as if the coup
leaders in Burundi were being singled out for punishment
because they happen to be Burundians. In 1994 an
attempt was made to unseat the Government of the
Kingdom of Lesotho, which had assumed office after
internationally observed multi-party elections. Southern

 

African States made it abundantly clear to the coup leaders
that their actions were unacceptable and the status quo ante
was restored. This is therefore the second time in the
history of coups in Africa that a group of African States
has drawn a line in the sand and told the coup leaders that
political illegality is unacceptable. This time the regional
leaders have decided to back up their words by boycotting
the military regime in Bujumbura. The actions of the
neighbouring States deserve the commendation of the
international community. The time of coups and army rule
in Africa must be relegated to the junk heap of history, and
military leaders must not be encouraged to assume power
illegally because they are considered benevolent or
moderate democrats. They have ample time to practise
those attributes in the barracks.

We have already stated that there can be no
justification for the overthrow of a legitimate Government.
We have also indicated that anyone can find plausible
reasons to explain or defend their actions. The military
regime in Burundi has made strenuous efforts to justify the
coup on the grounds of possible genocide. The legitimate
Government was ostensibly overthrown in order to restore
peace and security in the country and organize a national
debate. There is no denying the horrendous and merciless
killings and massacres in Bururi, Gitega, Muramvya and
Bugendana. These were despicable acts of human barbarity.
They are as unacceptable and unjustified as the coup, but
they did not trigger the coup. If the killings prompted this
coup, what prompted the coup attempt which led to the
assassination of President Ndadaye? Why did the coup
leaders not wait for the outcome of the Mwanza peace
process and the Arusha initiative, which were clearly
addressing the same issues of peace and security and
national dialogue.

The answers to these questions cannot be found among
the reasons for the coup which have been advanced by the
regime. The real answers lie in the composition and
structure of the Burundi Army. The Burundi Army appears
to become paranoid and fearful of any leader who proposes
any changes to its composition and structure. Unfortunately,
this culture of fear which pervades the army is tearing
asunder the whole Burundi body politic. The people of
Burundi are engaged in a brutal tug-of-war in which one
section of society lives in perpetual fear of extermination
and the other section is in eternal fear of subjection. And
the Burundi Army does not seem to enjoy the trust and
confidence of all sections of Burundian society.

In these circumstances, it is clear that left alone the
people of Burundi are unlikely to find a lasting solution to

 

their problems. It is for this reason that we had hoped the
Mwanza peace process and the Arusha initiative would be
given a chance to come up with an amicably acceptable
solution which could lead to the fulfilment of the
aspirations of the majority, while guaranteeing the
protection of the minority. The coup reversed all the gains
that had been made in Mwanza and Arusha. It is in this
context that the anger and frustration of the regional
leaders must be understood.

The Burundi Army must also understand, and should
be under no illusion to the contrary, that it cannot for
ever enjoy the monopoly of the use of fire power. A day
may come when the opposing forces which are
mushrooming all over the place may become strong
enough to challenge the Army, and the consequences of
such an eventuality on the ordinary men and women on
the street are too ghastly to contemplate. Peace and
security for one and all in Burundi lie in political
dialogue and not in the balance of military power.

Burundi has already produced approximately 200,000
refugees; 120,000 are in Zaire; 94,000 are in the United
Republic of Tanzania. The large number of refugees
imposes economic and environmental pressures on the
host countries. The actions of the military leaders
postponed the day when these people could return to their
communes and brought to the fore the real possibility of
an increase in the number of refugees. It is in view of this
possibility that the countries of the region want an early
solution to the Burundi crisis, as any further exacerbation
of the present situation would have far-reaching
consequences on the peace, stability and development of
the Great Lakes region.

My delegation is fully aware of and sensitive to the
humanitarian needs of the people of Burundi. We strongly
support the efforts which have been made by the
Secretary-General of the United Nations, in consultation
with the neighbouring States and the Secretary-General of
the OAU, to open humanitarian corridors. We encourage
them to continue their efforts in this direction so that
humanitarian goods can continue to reach all the people
in Burundi.

The focus of this debate, however, should not be on
the effects of the boycott of Burundi by its neighbours.
The Security Council and the international community
should focus attention on the objective of the boycott
instead. The boycott, like sanctions, is intended to modify
the behaviour of those who have usurped state power in
Burundi. It is clear that the neighbouring States have

 

made a painful but deliberate decision. The boycott is a
double-edged sword. It hurts the interests of those for
whom it is intended as much as those of the States
imposing it. The boycott, however, seemed to be the only
option open to the regional leaders.
The Security Council has been seized of the situation
in Burundi for a considerable period of time now. It has
adopted several resolutions and presidential statements,
stating clearly what should be done to resolve the political
stalemate in that country. The Council has encouraged all
of Burundi's political parties to engage in dialogue aimed
at establishing a permanent political settlement. It has
supported the efforts of Mwalimu Julius Nyerere and has
encouraged him to continue to assist the Burundians to find
common ground. The regime in Burundi removed the
Government from power at a time when these efforts were
nearing fruition.

There can be no doubt, therefore, that the time has
come for the Council to act decisively. What should come
out of this meeting must be a clear statement of principle
which should include the following elements: first, strong
support for the neighbouring States in their efforts to find
a lasting and peaceful solution which can guarantee security
and democracy for all the people of Burundi; secondly, the
demand that all Burundi's political parties and factions
abandon violence and engage in a comprehensive dialogue
under the auspices of the Mwanza peace process, being
facilitated by Mwalimu Julius Nyerere, within 60 days;
thirdly, imposing an arms embargo on all Burundi's
factions, including those outside the country; and, lastly,
declaring its readiness to impose further measures
specifically targeted at those leaders who obstruct the peace
process.

