We are grateful for Prosecutor Bensouda's briefing this morning. As always, it is a pleasure to receive her reports and to discuss the progress made by her Office, which is crucial in the fight against impunity. The Dominican Republic applauds the Juba Peace Agreement signed in October. To be able to hold our last meeting as non-permanent members of the Security Council on this subject with such welcome news for the Sudanese people fills us with satisfaction. We urge the signatory parties to the Agreement to implement it efficiently and without delay. The Agreement must become the basis for a hopeful future leading to the progress of a people who have already suffered enough. There can be no peace without justice. We therefore welcome the openness that the Agreement proposes in the relations between the Sudanese authorities and the International Criminal Court. That new phase of collaboration will undoubtedly be essential to bring justice to the victims of the terrible acts committed in the Sudan as a result of the protracted conflict. We acknowledge the efforts made by the authorities in the Sudan to receive Prosecutor Bensouda in Khartoum and urge the Sudanese Government to follow up the interesting results of that visit, especially by responding to the requests made by the Prosecutor to clarify decisive aspects of the case against the accused Mr. Abd-Al-Rahman. We are pleased to see progress in the cases against Mr. Abd-Al-Rahman and Mr. Al-Bashir and urge the Government of the Sudan to cooperate so that the remaining outstanding arrest warrants can be successfully executed. Furthermore, we regret the Prosecutor's reports on the deterioration of the security situation in Darfur. Intercommunal clashes, attacks against civilians by unidentified armed men, attacks on displaced persons camps, violence and rape of women and girls are exacerbating the chaos and blocking Sudanese society from living in peace under the rule of law. We urge the parties to the conflict to continue working for peace. Death, displacement, hunger and sexual abuse have no place in a Sudan that is on the road to progress, whose resilient people carry the weight of war on their shoulders but look forward to a tomorrow free of guns and fighting. Finally, the Dominican Republic reiterates its support for the work of Prosecutor Bensouda and her team, as well as that of the other offices of the International Criminal Court, whose work is essential if the Security Council is to fulfil its mandate to maintain international peace and security, as provided by the Charter of the United Nations.
