Mr. Rana (Kenya): The Angolan peace process is at
a critical and very sensitive stage where utmost cooperation
is required in order for the parties to meet their obligations
and to make irreversible progress. The international
community has provided resources and manpower to
facilitate the peace process in Angola. It is therefore
disheartening that the parties, and in particular UNITA,
have not taken full advantage of the resources made
available to them in order successfully to complete the
peace process.

Kenya will vote in favour of draft resolution
S/ 1997/ 823. However, my delegation had hoped that by this
time we would be talking of programmes and projects for
the economic rehabilitation of Angola. Instead, we are
discussing the extension of the mandate of the United
Nations Observer Mission in Angola (MONUA) and the
imposition of sanctions. This situation is very disappointing
considering that it could have been avoided altogether if the
parties in Angola, and UNITA in particular, had fully and
unconditionally complied with the provisions of the Lusaka
Protocol.

We are equally disheartened by the fact that the two
protagonists, President Dos Santos and Mr. Savimbi, have
not met despite the numerous calls by the international
community for them to do so. Kenya believes that a
meeting between these two leaders, even if symbolic, would
have contributed to confidence-building, thereby moving the
peace process forward. In this regard, we are encouraged by
the information that the two leaders are planning to meet
early next month. We hope that the meeting will lead to a
quick resolution of the remaining issues in the peace
process. In the meantime, we call upon UNITA to comply
fully with its obligations under the Lusaka Protocol and
resolution 1127 (1997) without any further delay.

My delegation would like to commend the troika
countries and the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Mr. Alioune Blondin Beye, for the positive role
they have played in the Angolan peace process. We cannot
but encourage them to continue their efforts.

