Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): Today
is World Humanitarian Day. The Security Council's
discussion today on the protection of humanitarian
workers is of special significance. 1 would like to
thank Deputy Secretary-General Jan Eliasson for his
briefing. China has also listened conscientiously to the
briefings by Mr. Maurer, President of the International
Committee of the Red Cross, and the representative of
non-governmental organizations.

This year marks the fifteenth anniversary of the
adoption by the Council of resolution 1265 (1999),
on the protection of civilians in armed conflict. Over
the past 15 years, the international community has
made unremitting efforts to protect civilians in armed
conflict, provide timely humanitarian relief and assist
the victims of conflict to improve their plight, and there
have been positive achievements. Meanwhile, regional
hot-spot issues continue to crop up. Conflicts have
become increasingly complicated. The humanitarian
workers of the United Nations, humanitarian agencies
and relief organizations working on the front lines
are facing an ever-deteriorating security environment
and conditions. From Iraq to the Gaza Strip and from
Somalia in the Horn of Africa to the Central African
Republic, humanitarian workers are constantly subject
to various forms of violent attacks. Some of them have
even lost their lives as a result of those attacks.

China attaches great importance to the protection
of humanitarian workers. We condemn attacks and
violent acts against humanitarian workers. We pay
tribute to those who brave difficulties in providing
selfless, life-saving services in armed conflicts.

China supports discussions by the international
community on the strengthening of the protection
of humanitarian workers. 1 would like to make the
following four observations.

First, the protection of humanitarian workers is
the inescapable responsibility of the parties to a given
conflict. All parties to armed conflict should abide by
international law, including international humanitarian
law and the conventions governing the safety of
United Nations personnel, and honour the obligation to
protect humanitarian workers. With regard to attacks
on and violent acts harming humanitarian workers,
the international community should encourage the
countries involved to carry out investigations, and we
should respect their findings. Perpetrators must be
held accountable, and assistance must be provided to
countries in need of financial and technical support.

Secondly, United Nations humanitarian agencies and
relief organizations, while carrying out humanitarian
relief work in conflict, should comply with the
Charter of the United Nations; uphold the principles
of humanitarianism, namely neutrality, impartiality
and independence; fully respect the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of the countries involved; and avoid
engaging in the conflict or supporting any ofthe parties.
That is essential if humanitarian relief efforts are to
win the understanding and trust of all parties. It is also
an important guarantee of the safety of humanitarian
workers.

Thirdly, the prevention and resolution of conflicts
is key to enhancing the protection of humanitarian
workers. The Security Council has the primary
responsibility to maintain international peace
and security. It should actively carry out political
mediation and preventive diplomacy, encourage the
parties concerned to resolve their differences through
peaceful means such as dialogue and negotiation,
prevent and curb the escalation of conflict and work
for a political solution, thus alleviating the harm
inflicted on humanitarian workers by addressing its
root causes. The Security Council's authorization and
deployment of United Nations peacekeeping operations
can play an important role in supporting the success of
humanitarian relief efforts and protecting humanitarian
workers.

Fourthly, in providing comprehensive protection
to humanitarian workers, Member States, the United
Nations and humanitarian agencies must take
coordinated and concerted actions so as to create
synergies. The United Nations should fully leverage
its comprative advantage, carry out an in-depth
analysis and evaluation of the risks in and challenges
to humanitarian relief work in conflict zones based on
respect for the views of the countries involved, maintain
communication and coordination with the parties to the
conflict and strengthen the protection of humanitarian
workers. Comprehensive measures must be taken to
effectively cope with all the security challenges faced
by humanitarian workers.

