Mrs. Schwalger (New Zealand): We appreciate the
opportunity to hear directly from Minister Steinmeier
on the priorities that Germany will pursue as
Chairperson-in-Office of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE). We welcome in
particular the Chairperson's goal of strengthening
OSCE capacities in all aspects of conflict, from early
warning and prevention to ending conflict and restoring
lasting peace. This aligns closely with the Council's
mandate, including areas where it needs to improve,
especially in terms of conflict prevention.

New Zealand is a strong advocate of the positive
role of regional organizations in addressing conflict.
Experience in our region has shown that regional
organizations can be highly effective and support
the United Nations efforts to prevent conflict and
restore stability. It is therefore not surprising that
on many occasions we have highlighted the need for
enhanced cooperation between the United Nations and
regional organizations.

The OSCE is no exception. It has a long history
of defusing conflict and promoting human rights and
democratic principles, and it continues to demonstrate
its relevance today in a number of conflict zones and
across a wide array of security issues, all of which
complement the Council's mandate of maintaining
international peace and security. With respect to
territorial disputes, the OSCE is carrying out important
work to reduce tensions and engage parties in dialogue.
We also welcome its programmes aimed at countering
other threats to security, such as Violent extremism,
radicalization and human trafficking.

The OSCE's stature and reputation mean that it is
often the best suited to tackle security challenges or
support conflict resolution in its region. We applaud the
OSCE's continuing and important role in maintaining
security in many parts of Europe that have been
and continue to be troubled by conflict, as outlined
by Minister Steinmeier this morning. This is most
obviously evident in Ukraine, where the parties have
bestowed particular and difficult roles on the OSCE to
monitor and verify compliance with the terms of the
Minsk agreements. The Minsk agreements remain the
best path to a durable peace. This was recognized by the
Council, which endorsed the package of measures for
implementing the Minsk agreements and the OSCE's
important role in monitoring them when it adopted
resolution 2202 (2015) last February.

Yet on almost all counts, implementation by the
parties is far from perfect. Lives continue to be lost,
the humanitarian situation is poor and the availability
of weapons presents the ongoing risk of a resumption
of conflict. As we have heard today, the OSCE reports
almost daily that its monitors are encountering
freedom-of-movement restrictions, mostly in separatist-
controlled areas. We commend the OSCE monitors for
their work under challenging circumstances, and call
on all parties to ensure their safety and security at all
times. OSCE monitors must be allowed to access all
areas necessary to verify a ceasefire and the withdrawal
of proscribed weapons. We repeat our call on Russia to
use its influence over the separatists to ensure that they
comply with all aspects of the Minsk agreements.

The parties to the Minsk agreements decided that
local elections in eastern Ukraine would be held in
accordance with OSCE standards and monitored by the
OSCE. These elections will need to take place in a safe
and stable environment, which is another reason why
security aspects of the Minsk agreements need to be
implemented urgently.

As Foreign Minister Steinmeier noted, the United
Nations and the OSCE share many common goals and
responsibilities. As others have mentioned here today,
we hope that the two organizations can strengthen
their cooperation to mutually reinforce their efforts to
maintain peace and security.

