Mr. Martinez Blanco (Honduras) (interpretation from Spanish): First allow me to congratulate you, Madam
President, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for this month of February. We are
convinced that, given your great skill and experience, the
work of the Council under your leadership will be
successful. My delegation offers you its full cooperation
towards this end.

I also wish to congratulate your predecessor, Sir John
Weston, the Permanent Representative of the United
Kingdom, on the exceptional work he and his delegation
accomplished during January.

My delegation is grateful to the Secretary-General for
his report on the United Nations Angola Verification
Mission (UNAVEM. III), dated 31 January of this year,
which shows that the situation in Angola has not changed
significantly and that the peace process continues its slow
pace.

The initiatives of the Government of Angola in
fulfilment of its commitments - especially those related
to the release of prisoners, the repatriation of mercenaries,
the withdrawal of government troops from the vicinity of
the UNIT A quartering areas and the initiation of the
quartering of the rapid reaction police - have not
received the hoped-for response from UNITA, which still
displays a lack of action regarding implementation of the
Lusaka Protocol.

In spite of the fact that the Government of Angola
has adopted these measures, and that there have been
other events that are positive for the peace process, such
as the formulation and acceptance of a new timetable for
implementation of the understandings reached by the
parties last December, UNITA has still not taken concrete
measures allowing for the resumption of the peace
process - in particular, measures regarding the
quartering of its troops.

Although cease-fire violations have continued, as a
result of small-scale attacks or acts of banditry, we regard
as an important step the parties' agreement in January to
establish a "conflict prevention group" of high-ranking
military representatives to avoid major violations. At the
same time, we regret the fact that the parties are not
cooperating in mine-clearance activities and the
reconstruction of access roads and bridges, whose neglect
affects the peace process in Angola. The process is also
affected by the fact that the disarmament of the civilian
population has not begun, that the human rights situation
is not improving and that the free movement of persons
throughout the country is impeded.

My delegation believes it is imperative that the
Angolan parties comply with the provisions of the Lusaka
Protocol as soon as possible. We remind them that for
lasting peace in Angola to be achieved they must resume
the quarterng of their troops as soon as possible and
refrain from any military activity that could increase
tensions. It is vital that the talks continue without
interruption. It is necessary that negotiations continue on
the structure of the joint armed forces, a fundamental
aspect of the process of national reconciliation. They must
also implement without delay the plan for the separation
of forces prepared by UNAVEM; take all measures
necessary to ensure the safety of the staff of the
Verification Mission; and cooperate with the humanitarian
organizations, facilitating their work and offering their
staff sufficient security assurances. On this last point, my
delegation takes note of UNITA's public statement on 1
January this year in which it pledged to respect the

 

integrity of the staff of humanitarian organizations and to
protect their property.

It is clear that many tasks remain uncompleted in the
Angola peace process, but, as the Council has repeatedly
underscored, peace and security in Angola are in the final
analysis the responsibility of the Angolans themselves. It is
they who must display firm political will by adopting
concrete measures in support of the peace process. The role
of the international community is to help them in that task.
We believe that UNAVEM. III should continue to support
them in so far as that will for peace exists, and we would
therefore agree to extending its mandate.

