Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): For a year, the work of the Security Council on
the matter of Iraq has been deadlocked. The blame for
that lies with the force used by the United States and
Great Britain against Baghdad, circumventing the Security
Council. That action was provoked by the biased and
tendentious report of the former Special Commission on
the lack of full cooperation by Iraq with the disarmament
inspectors. At that time, many members of the United
Nations, including Russia, gave their principled
assessment of that illegal action and advocated an
essentially new approach to the Iraqi issue based on strict
compliance with the resolutions adopted by the Security
Council and the Charter of the United Nations.

The chance to prepare such comprehensive
approaches appeared after the work of the three panels
chaired by Ambassador Amorim, who submitted to the
Security Council carefully weighed and realistic
recommendations. In April this year, Russia advocated the
adoption of a draft resolution that would have approved
those recommendations and instructed the Secretary-
General to prepare practical steps for implementing them.
That initiative was blocked by those who wanted to do
things in the old way and to continue using the burden of
anti-Iraq sanctions in order to attain their own unilateral
goals, going beyond the scope of United Nations
decisions on post-crisis settlement in the Gulf region.

 

The advocates of such actions, whether or not they
wanted to, in fact brought the situation to a repetition of
what it had been when the leadership of the former Special
Commission, under no form of control whatsoever, virtually
passed its own verdict on the implementation of Security
Council resolutions, constantly accusing Baghdad of
violating its obligations to eliminate programmes of
weapons of mass destruction. But it never provided any
specific proof of a threat emanating from Iraq. It is good
that members of the Security Council were not taken in by
such attempts; thanks to the efforts of Russia, China,
France and other members of the Security Council, the
discussion focused on seeking a response to the key issue
of how to resume international monitoring in Iraq and at
the same time lessen and then halt the sanctions.

This was promoted to a large extent by the French,
Chinese and Russian draft resolution submitted in June this
year, whose provisions were spelled out in the joint
Russian-Chinese document of 9 September. The heart of the
document was the conclusion of Amorim's panels to the
effect that conditions now existed for shifting the whole
Iraqi disarmament dossier onto the ongoing monitoring
system, along with the View that the remaining disarmament
problems could be resolved successfully within that
framework.

Another very important criterion contained in
Amorim's recommendations was the need to ensure that the
Security Council resolution on the new monitoring system
should be acceptable to Iraq, because without cooperation
from Iraq, any plans or projects would just remain on
paper. As a result of lengthy discussions, including at the
ministerial level, it proved possible to bring positions closer
together on a number of issues. There is agreement on the
establishment of a new monitoring body, which, unlike the
former Special Commission, would be based on the norms
contained in the Charter of the United Nations and on
collegial methods of work and would be truly answerable
to the Security Council.

For the first time the Council's willingness is set forth,
as a first step, really to suspend sanctions. There was
agreement on radical improvements in the humanitarian
programme for Iraq in the period up to the suspension of
sanctions, although of course it should have been possible
long ago to resolve many problems in that area by lifting
unjustified holds on contracts in the sanctions Committee.
Additional measures were prepared with a view to speeding
up the solution of problems relating to missing persons and
Kuwaiti property. At the same time, the draft resolution
submitted by the United Kingdom, right up until the last
moment, remained ambiguous on crucial issues, primarily
on the criteria for suspending sanctions. Vague wordings
on that matter in the draft provided certain members of
the Council an opportunity to interpret the draft in such
a way as to require virtually full completion of the key
disarmament tasks by Iraq and then, on that pretext, to
postpone suspension endlessly. However, in strict
pursuance of the earlier decisions of the Security Council,
the completion of such disarmament tasks would entail
the final lifting of sanctions. To suspend sanctions, it is
sufficient simply to note progress being made in the
remaining disarmament areas.
It was also unacceptable to have a provision in the
draft about the need for Iraq to demonstrate full
cooperation with the new monitoring body. We have
always stressed that the wording "full cooperation" is
extremely dangerous. Nobody has forgotten that it was
under the pretext of an absence of full cooperation from
Iraq that the former Special Commission provoked large-
scale strikes by the United States and Great Britain
against Iraq in December last year, circumventing the
Security Council.

Faced with the firm stance of several Security
Council members, the sponsors corrected these very
harmful provisions of the draft. The discredited argument
about full cooperation was removed. A clarification was
introduced to the effect that progress on the remaining
disarmament tasks - and not their Virtual completion -
would be grounds for assessing the conditions necessary
to the suspension of sanctions. The wording about control
of the financial aspects of the suspension, which
essentially predetermined the continuation of the sanctions
regime in another guise, was removed. The reference to
Chapter VII of the Charter was spelled out more clearly
so as not to provide any legal grounds for unilateral
actions of force against Iraq contrary to positions held in
the Security Council.

We note all of these shifts that have been made by
the sponsors.

At the same time, we note all of the deficiencies of
the draft resolution and some hidden dangers that remain.
We must not forget that certain countries still have their
own agendas with respect to Iraq that may be at variance
with the collective position of the Security Council. The
Council never authorized the establishment of "no-fly
zones", from which the civilian population of Iraq suffers
to this day, nor did it authorize subversive acts against the
Iraqi Government. It would seem that if we all seek truly

 

new approaches in the Council to a long-term settlement in
the Gulf, such illegal unilateral actions must end.
Unfortunately, that has not happened.

In these circumstances, Russia cannot support the draft
resolution before us today. We have decided, however, not
to hinder its adoption since, at our insistence, serious
changes have been introduced into the text. These changes
offer an opportunity to break the Iraqi stalemate, in which
the Secretary-General could play a very special role. Much
will depend on the specific parameters of the new
monitoring body; on who will lead it; on whether it is able
to free itself from the pernicious heritage of the self-
immolating Special Commission and to work honestly
under the Security Council's control; and on how
professionally and realistically the remaining key
disarmament tasks and financial modalities for the
suspension of sanctions are prepared.

How these practical matters arising from the draft
resolution are resolved will directly determine the position
of Baghdad. We are not trying to shield Iraq. We believe
that it must resume cooperation with the United Nations. It
is unacceptable, however, to allow the recreation of a
situation in which the fate of an entire country was in the
hands - or, to put it gently, under the inadequate
leadership - of the former Special Commission.

From our past experience, we know that efforts may
eventually be made in the Security Council to pressure
Baghdad, to require it urgently to implement the provisions
of this draft resolution and to threaten it with the imposition
of additional measures. We issue this warning from the
start: The fact that we are not blocking the adoption of this
imperfect draft resolution should not be taken to indicate
that we are obliged to play along with attempts to impose
its forcible implementation.

Our position remains unchanged. Baghdad must meet
the demands of the United Nations that it eliminate its
weapons of mass destruction programmes. In response, the
Security Council must lift sanctions. Judging from existing
objective assessments, Iraq is already no threat to
international and regional peace and security. In any event,
no concrete proof has been submitted to the Council in
recent years.

It is now up to the Security Council to act objectively
and in an unbiased way. The very near future will reveal
whether the collective good will of members of the Security
Council can lead to strict and fair implementation of its
own decisions, or whether the work of the Council on the
issue of Iraq will once again slide into a politicized track.
Depending on what happens, Russia reserves its right to
determine its future position on this matter.

At this stage, it is important that, despite all the
disagreements on the draft resolution before us, it has
been possible to avoid a split in the Council, which would
have been fraught with unilateral, and possibly even
forcible actions, and to confirm the key role of the
Council in the political settlement of the most important
problems of the world today. As a permanent member of
the Security Council, Russia will continue to do its utmost
to strengthen that role.

