Mr. Drobnjak (Croatia): At the outset, allow me to
congratulate you, Sir, upon your assumption of the
presidency of the Council for the month of September. My
delegation is fully confident that the Council will be on a
safe and prudent course under your guidance. Further, I
would like to express the deep appreciation of my
delegation to His Excellency Ambassador Nugroho
Wisnumurti of Indonesia for leading the work of the
Council last month.

The Republic of Croatia fully and firmly supports the
present ongoing operation of the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization (NATO) in the Republic of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. We strongly believe that it is necessary to
continue exerting pressure on the Bosnian Serb party, and
that NATO's course of action will decisively assist to bring
about an overall lasting peaceful settlement in the region.
Croatia is assisting in that effort by allowing the use of its
airspace by NATO air forces, and providing the use of its
ports for the rapid reaction capacity of the United Nations
Protection Force (UNPROFOR). Croatia will continue to
give its full support and assistance to these endeavours of
the international community, with the confidence that we
are finally on the right track towards peace and stability in
that part of Europe.

While supporting the newest peace initiative, let me
emphasize the importance of mutual recognition of the
countries in the region of the former Socialist Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia. It is essential to protect and
unconditionally respect all international borders in the
region, as well as the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
all the successor States of the former Socialist Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia. Only upon the recognition of
Bosnia and Herzegovina and Croatia by the Belgrade
Government will the world community be able to conclude
that their quest for "Greater Serbia" has been abandoned,
and that the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro) is bona fide involved in the peace process.

In this regard, my delegation must state that Croatia
does not find encouragement in today's reluctance of the
delegation of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro) to subscribe to the basic principle of the
peaceful reintegration of Eastern Slavonia into the rest of
the Republic of Croatia.

Finally, let me emphasize that Croatia remains
determined to pursue the path of peace taken today in
Geneva.

