Mr. Angel] (Canada): I wish to thank Mr. Annabi
for his very comprehensive briefing. We would like to
add only a few brief remarks to what has already been
said by others.

Special Representative Kouchner's issuance of
the municipal election law for Kosovo, which Mr.
Annabi has spoken of, is an important further step
towards free and fair elections in the fall. Self-
government on the local level will give Kosovars a
chance to elect the leaders who conduct the politics
which affect people most directly.

We are particularly pleased that, through
extensive consultations with both local representatives
and international organizations, the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
has decided on a system which will create optimal
conditions for candidates to participate in local politics.

Pluralism will be promoted by the use of a
proportional system with open lists. Representatives of
smaller parties, groups or communities will stand a fair
chance of being elected to office. The requirement that
one third of all candidates on the top of the lists be
women will reinforce the importance of equitable
representation for all segments of society.

UNMIK faces important challenges in organizing
free and fair elections. The support of the international
community is essential if UNMIK is to succeed. Efforts
must be made to prevent violence and intimidation
from being a factor in the elections. Ongoing intensive
security measures are clearly needed in this regard.
UNMIK's actions to ensure that the media refrain from
publishing information which can reasonably be
expected to incite hatred, intolerance or violence are
also important. We encourage UNMIK to continue to
monitor closely media operations in the run-up to
elections in order to maintain civil law and order and to
protect human rights.

As the close of the registration process
approaches, we believe that all Kosovars have an
interest in participating in the electoral process. Full
participation is the best guarantee for all communities
to be fairly represented at all levels of public
administration and to contribute to the shaping of the
future of the province.

Lastly, we support the creation of an
ombudsperson institution in Kosovo and welcome the
recent signing of its regulation by Mr. Kouchner. This
institution can contribute in a meaningful way to the
implementation of resolution 1244 (1999). It will
provide Kosovars of all ethnic backgrounds with a
legal recourse against the violation of their human
rights. We hope that Mr. Nowicki will start his
important work as soon as possible.

