Mr. Kafeero (Uganda): Thank you,
Mr. President, for organizing this open debate. I also
thank Special Coordinator and Personal Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Robert Serry, for his
briefing.

Today the Israeli and Palestinian parties, as well
as the international community, are at a critical
juncture. It is regrettable that, despite efforts by the
parties and the support from regional and international
actors, no tangible progress has been achieved and the
peace process remains deadlocked. It was the
expectation of my delegation that the recent meetings
this month of the Quartet and the Arab League would
result in the resumption of the stalled direct
negotiations, leading to an agreed framework.

This is a defining moment. It is a test of
statesmanship on the part of the Israeli and Palestinian
leaders. While the support of the international
community is vital, the primary responsibility for
negotiating and reaching a comprehensive and lasting

peace lies with the Israeli and Palestinian parties.
Uganda reiterates its call upon both parties to urgently
resume negotiations and summon the necessary
courage to take bold decisions, bearing in mind that the
legitimate aspirations of the Palestinians for statehood
cannot be delayed much longer and that the legitimate
security concerns of Israel must be addressed.

My delegation remains deeply concerned about
recent approvals for the construction of new settlement
units by Israel and once again calls for a complete
freeze on all settlement activity.

We commend the Palestinian leadership for their
State-building efforts and for fulfilling their obligations
under the Road Map, particularly in the sectors of
security and economic development. We also commend
their efforts at forging unity and reconciliation.

We remain concerned about the humanitarian
situation in Gaza and the continued obstacles to the
movement of goods and persons to and from Gaza. We
call on Israel to lift the blockade on Gaza, and we
reiterate our call on all parties to fully implement
resolution 1860 (2009).

In conclusion, my delegation wishes to
underscore that the current situation is unsustainable.
We encourage the Israeli and Palestinian parties, with
the support of the international community and the
Security Council in particular, to overcome the current
stalemate and work towards the realization of a two-
State solution, in the interest of peace, security and
prosperity for their people.

