Monsignor Kassas: My delegation commends
you, Sir, for convening this first-ever Security Council
open debate on the peace and security challenges
facing small island developing States (SIDS). For
SIDS, climate-related threats are more than just an
environmental issue, or even a development issue, they
are an existential threat.

My delegation sees concern for climate change
as inseparable from concern for human development.
Caring for the environment and alleviating poverty are
not separate challenges, but parts of one and the same
challenge: providing integral and authentic human
development. Pope Francis proposes this "integral
ecology" as a paradigm able to articulate harmoniously
our fundamental multidimensional relationships. He
has affirmed that we are not faced with two separate
crises, but rather one complex crisis that is both social
and environmental. Therefore, strategies for a solution
demand an integral approach to combating poverty,
restoring dignity to the underprivileged and, at the
same time, protecting nature. If we lose sight of our
oneness with the environment, our attitude to it will
be that of masters, consumers and ruthless exploiters,
unable to set limits on immediate needs. By contrast,
if we feel intimately united with all that exists, then
sobriety and care will well up spontaneously.

Our care for the Earth should therefore be much
more than a "green" attitude; it must also be a social one,
because we human beings are a part of nature, included
in it and in constant interaction with it. As Pope Francis
told the mayors of the world's major cities gathered at
the Vatican on 21 July, care for the environment is a
social attitude. My delegation wishes to mention briefly
three areas where we can make a difference in the next
few months.

First, we can do so by achieving a deal in Paris to
combat climate change. Pope Francis challenges global
political leaders to be courageous and move beyond the
mind-set of short-term gain that dominates present-day
economics and politics. In Paris, we need a deal that
will leave behind a testimony of selfless responsibility.

Secondly, we can do so by allocating sufficient
financial resources to tackle climate change and to
respond to current needs. Climate finance is a key part
of paying the ecological debt, and is vital for building
trust towards a successful climate deal in Paris.

And, thirdly, we can do so by increasing access
to renewable energy as an enabler of sustainable
development. Billions of people need access to energy
to lift them out of poverty. Richer countries must help
poorer countries develop less-polluting forms of energy
production by giving them greater access to technology
and financial resources.

While climate change and underdevelopment are
primarily socioeconomic issues, they can severely
impact the peace and security of local communities,
of regions and of entire nations - and, indeed, of the
international community. My delegation will continue
to engage in these discussions in the context of the
General Assembly and other relevant forums.

