Mr. Matjila (South Africa): At the outset, South
Africa wishes to congratulate Your Excellency President
Teodoro Obiang Nguema Mbasogo, and the Republic of
Equatorial Guinea on assuming the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of February. You may be
assured of South Africa's full support and cooperation
during your presidency of the Council.

We also want to thank the Dominican Republic for
its excellent presidency of the Council in January.

We thank the Secretary-General, Mr. Antonio
Guterres, and the Chairperson of the African Union
Commission, Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat, for their
insightful briefings. We further thank His Excellency
Mr. Richard Sezibera, Minister for Foreign Affairs and
International Cooperation of the Republic of Rwanda,
for his remarks on behalf of President Paul Kagame, in
his capacity as the President of the African Union. We
also welcome His Excellency Mr. Marcel Amon-Tanoh,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of C6te d'Ivoire, and His
Excellency Mr. Abdu Kambogo, Minister for Foreign
Affairs, International Cooperation and Regional
Integration of Gabon.

South Africa welcomes the convening ofthis timely
debate and the selection of the important theme on the
role ofmercenary activities as a source ofinsecurity and
destabilization in Africa. It is an important, undisputed
fact that over the years, Africa has been at the receiving
end of mercenary activities, which have contributed
to undermining peace, security and stability on the
continent. Several African countries have been targets
of ongoing attempts by mercenary groups to overthrow
legitimate and democratically elected Governments.
Their transnational activities also threaten regional
stability, especially in cases where the security of
neighbouring countries is intertwined. South Africa
condemns such activities, as they pose serious
challenges to our collective efforts to promote and
ensure peace and stability in our respective countries.
Equally concerning, the activities of mercenaries pose
a serious threat to the peace and stability of several
regions on the continent, which is already fragile owing
to ongoing conflicts.

Since the advent of democracy in 1994, South
Africa has been part ofthe collective efforts to promote
peace and stability throughout our beloved continent.
We support the objectives of the African Union aimed
at achieving greater unity and solidarity among
African countries and the people of Africa, while also
defending the sovereignty, territorial integrity and
independence of its member States. These objectives
and principles are clearly articulated in the Constitutive
Act of the African Union. Key among these principles
is the condemnation and rejection of unconstitutional
changes of Government, as well as non-interference by
any member State in the internal affairs of another.

As a responsible member of the African Union
and the United Nations, South Africa condemns all
mercenary activities in any African or non-African
country. We believe that these activities are in
clear contravention of continental and international
conventions and legal instruments. As eloquently
captured in the concept note for this meeting (S/2019/97, annex), the recruitment, use, financing and training of
mercenaries violate the principles of the Charter of the
United Nations and those of the Constitutive Act of the
African Union.

South Africa reaffirms the need for the unequivocal
implementation of all international and continental
legislation and instruments against mercenaries, in
particular the 1989 International Convention against
the Recruitment, Use, Financing and Training of
Mercenaries and the 1977 Organization of African
Unity Convention for the Elimination of Mercenarism
in Africa.

For our part, South Africa has an uncompromising
and strict policy against its nationals who partake in any
mercenary activities. The Constitution of our country
provides that the resolve to live in peace and harmony
precludes any South African citizen from participating
in armed conflict, nationally or internationally, except as
provided for in the Constitution or national legislation.
In pursuance of this objective, in 1998 the
Parliament of South Africa passed legislation entitled
the "Regulation of Foreign Military Assistance Act".
The objective of the Act is to regulate the rendering
of foreign military assistance by our nationals, persons
permanently residing within our borders and foreign
citizens rendering such assistance from within our
borders. Through these actions, South Africa has
consistently taken strict measures against its nationals
found to be involved in mercenary activities or
violating the Regulation of Foreign Military Assistance
Act. We have previously cooperated and collaborated
with fellow African countries in instances where our
nationals were implicated in mercenary activities.

My delegation stresses that it is the obligation of
all States to take all necessary measures to eradicate
mercenary activities wherever they may occur. In that
regard, the Security Council should encourage all
Member States to commit to preventing their nationals
and foreigners in their respective territories from
engaging in mercenary activities.

Representatives will recall that, during its sixty-
second session, the General Assembly adopted
resolution 62/145 on the use of mercenaries as a means
of violating human rights and impeding the exercise of
the right of peoples to self-determination. South Africa
is concerned about the new forms of mercenary acts in
the form of private security companies. Over the years,
there has been a clear nexus between the activities of
mercenaries and private military companies and the
negative consequences of such companies on some
of the continent's protracted conflicts. We call on the
international community to put in place a regulatory
and legally binding framework on the work of those
companies. The Montreux Document on the self-
regulation of private military companies could be used
as required once that instrument has been universally
agreed. My delegation is convinced that we should
address the perception around the privatization and
corporatization of security services, as such a role should
be the sole responsibility of sovereign Governments.

In conclusion, I wish to stress that South Africa
is firmly committed to working with fellow African
States and members of the Security Council to address
the challenge of mercenary activities and their negative
impact on peace and stability both regionally and
internationally. That is in line with the aspirations of
the African continent as envisaged in Agenda 2063:
The Africa We Want, in particular the desire for a
peaceful and secure Africa, and through the flagship
project Silencing the Guns by 2020.
We wish our Chinese friends a happy new year.

