Mr. Frontaura (spoke in Spanish): Permit me at
the outset to express our deep condolences and concern
with respect to yesterday's catastrophic earthquake in
the sister Republic of Haiti, a State member of the
Organization of American States (OAS). Yesterday,
OAS Secretary General Jose Miguel Insulza issued a
press release that conveyed his condolences to Haitian
families and of the staff of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti. It also expressed the
willingness of the Organization of American States to
immediately begin a cooperation and assistance effort
for that sisterly country. Indeed, the OAS Permanent
Council is meeting today in Washington, D.C., to
discuss the matter and determine the best way to help
in some way to alleviate the difficulties being
experienced by the Haitian members of our family.

Allow me to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council,
and to express our gratitude for your initiative to hold
this dialogue between the Council and regional
organizations.

The possibilities for international cooperation to
prevent and manage crises - and, more broadly, for
the maintenance of peace and security - have grown
in recent years as the result of the conclusion of
agreements that allow for mediation and cooperation in
cases of conflicts between States as well as in matters
pertaining to internal situations in States. Those
agreements cover such areas as human rights, torture
and, as is the case in Europe and America, oversight of
the democratic system.

The distinction between inter- and intra-State
conflicts is crucial when we talk about peace and
security, the management of crises and the instruments
that make it possible for international bodies to act,
because the guiding norms and options for action are
different in each case. The principles of
non-intervention, the legal equality of States, the
peaceful resolution of disputes, collective self-defence
in cases of aggression, respect for fundamental human
rights and the promotion and strengthening of
representative democracy are enshrined in today's
prevailing basic norms.

The main legal instruments at the disposal of the
Organization of American States in that regard are the
OAS Charter and the Inter-American Democratic
Charter. Our organization's Charter enshrines the main
provisions that allow the organization to take action in
the event of conflicts between States. Although other
instruments also exist, such as the American
Convention on Human Rights and the Inter-American
Convention against Corruption, they deal with matters
already addressed by the OAS Charter. Nevertheless, it
is worth pointing out that the American Convention on
Human Rights set up the Inter-American Court of
Human Rights, whose decisions are binding on
signatory States. Those instruments are in constant use.
An assessment of some recent problems allows us to
evaluate the potential and limitations of their
implementation.

When it comes to the norms governing inter-State
conflicts - except when it comes to cases of open
conflict or when a dispute is considered to threaten
peace on the continent - the prevailing norm in the
inter-American system is that bilateral matters can be
taken up by the organization only when they are
referred by the States involved in the conflict.
Generally, States inform the organization of the
emergence of conflicts among them. However, that
information is insufficient to launch any mechanism.
Of the inter-State conflicts dealt with by the OAS, two
bear mentioning: the border dispute between Belize
and Guatemala and the crisis provoked by the bombing
by Colombian planes of a clandestine camp on
Ecuadorian territory of the Fuerzas Armadas
Revolucionarias de Colombia on 1 March 2008.

The first of those matters was submitted by both
countries for the mediation of the OAS Secretary
General, who almost two years ago suggested that the
border dispute be put before the International Court of
Justice. That suggestion, which was accepted by the
Governments of both countries, is currently being
approved in the context of the domestic legal
frameworks of the respective countries.

In the second matter, the crisis on Ecuadorian
territory broke out suddenly, illustrating the fact that
not all crises can be predicted. Despite the high level of
conflict in the border area, neither the Government of
Ecuador nor any other international body or specialist
foresaw that crisis. That international crisis, which
involved the use of armed force by one member State
against another, threatened international peace and
security. Faced with such a crisis situation, the
organization nevertheless had at its disposal the
necessary instruments to address it through the speedy
convening of a meeting at the ministerial level at which
an agreement was reached that made it possible for us
to at least ensure that no new action would be taken
and that the conflict would not escalate. At the same
time, our Secretary General was charged with carrying
out good offices, which ultimately led to the
re-establishment of relations between the two countries
at the level of charges d'affaires and to the formulation
of a road map to fully restore trust between the two
States.

With regard to the issue of democracy, the OAS
has at its disposal the Inter-American Democratic
Charter. Here, I should like to highlight two cases that,
in a way, illustrate our organization's capacity to act
and how we can expand cooperation between regional
organizations.

In the case of Honduras, to which Secretary-
General Ban Ki-moon referred, the weeks preceding
the removal of President Zelaya enabled us take stock
of the great risk to that country's institutional stability.
Nevertheless, in line with its own provisions, the OAS
Charter could not be applied without the consent of the
Government concerned. It was only on Friday,
26 June - two days before the coup d'etat - that the
Government made that request. As a result, the OAS
Permanent Council was convened, which decided to
deploy an urgent mission led by our Secretary General.
The mission was to travel on 29 June, but the coup
took place on Sunday, 28 June. It was therefore not
possible to prevent the use of force. It is still an open
question whether it could have been prevented had the
OAS mission reached Tegucigalpa on Saturday,
27 June, and had the request of the Government of
Honduras to postpone the mission's arrival until
Monday, 29 June, not been sent.

In order to better illustrate these limitations, it is
useful to refer to other cases which, in contrast to that
of Honduras, were successfully prevented. First, in the
case of Nicaragua, it was possible to avert a
parliamentary decision to remove the President. In
accordance with articles 17 and 18 of the OAS Charter,
the Government of Nicaraguan President Bolafios
requested that a special OAS mission look into the
matter. The mission lasted for several months, during
which a crisis could have taken place at any time.
Although, unfortunately, we do not have sufficient
tools to prevent crises, in this case we were ultimately
successful. The Government served out its term and the
elections in Nicaragua took place successfully under
OAS observation.

A similar situation transpired in Bolivia, where
on several occasions the country has gone to the very
edge of confrontation owing to the profound political
and social changes taking place in that country.
Nevertheless, the Government of President of Evo
Morales opted to turn to the Democratic Charter.
Although few people are aware of it, the OAS missions
that have visited Bolivia have done so at the request of
the Government under the Inter-American Democratic
Charter, which provides that a Government can request
a special OAS mission when it believes that democracy
is under serious threat. We were there throughout the
entire process of drafting a new constitution, including
its adoption and enactment and the elections of last
December.

I believe that the experience gained over the
years provides various lessons that will surely be
considered by member States with a view to improving
the capacity of the OAS to act, both with regard to
conflicts between States and those that take place
within States as a result of problems of a political
nature.

It is not merely desirable, but absolutely
necessary that there be cooperation between
international, regional and subregional organizations in
order to achieve and strengthen international peace and
security. That cooperation should be based both on
comparative advantages and, in particular, on the
respective mandates of each organization. It is also
necessary that we take institutional capacity into
account, as well as knowledge of, and presence on, the
ground.

We have had fruitful cooperation with the United
Nations - in Haiti, as the Secretary-General has
mentioned, but also in other places, such as Honduras.
We are completely open to expanding and deepening
that cooperation. A dialogue such as today's is of
course helpful to that end. We also believe that
dialogue both between Secretaries-General and at the
secondary and tertiary levels will contribute to making
that cooperation ever more effective while also
avoiding duplication of effort.

