Mr. Ipo (C6te d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): Cdte
d'Ivoire congratulates Poland on its assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council and wishes it every
success. We also congratulate the delegation of Peru for
an excellent presidency in July.

My delegation welcomes the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Poland, who is presiding over today's open
debate on children and armed conflict. It demonstrates
that your country, Mr. President, is interested in solving
the problem. We also cordially welcome Ambassador
Zhang Jun, Permanent Representative of China.

My delegation congratulates Ms. Virginia Gamba,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict, on her briefing on the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2019/509). We also
commend Ms. Henrietta Fore, Executive Director of
UNICEF and Ms. Mariatu Kamara and Mr. Majok
Peter Awan, civil society representatives, for their
illuminating briefings.

In recent years, the issue of the protection of
children in armed conflict has been a source of concern
for the international community, in particular the
Security Council, whose commitment to the subject is
reflected through its adoption of resolution 2427 (2018),
That resolution provides an adequate framework for
protecting the rights of the child and promoting the well-
being and empowerment of children throughout the
conflict cycle as well as during peacebuilding. However,
my delegation notes that, in spite of the relevant legal
norms, as underscored in the report, the fate of children
in armed conflict is increasingly worrisome.

In 2018, the United Nations documented and
reported more than 24,000 violations of all kinds
of which children were victims in 21 countries, as
compared to 21,000 in 2017. In addition, according to
the monitoring and reporting mechanism created by
resolution 1612 (2005), the total number of children
murdered or maimed rose to 12,038. Against that
already grim backdrop, there is also a growing trend
of using child soldiers to carry out suicide attacks or
as human shields, as well as of destroying schools and
health facilities, which deprives thousands of children
of their right to education and health.

Cote d'Ivoire believes that cooperation among
affected States, the United Nations and bilateral partners
must be strengthened in order to prevent and combat
violations of all kinds that undermine the well-being
and development of many children. The Secretary-
General's guidelines with respect to the commitment of
the parties to conflict and the responsibility borne by
Governments with regard to the protection of children
affected by armed conflict, which align perfectly with
the provisions of resolution 1539 (2004) and 1612
(2005), are, for my country, the relevant measures that
enabled tangible progress to be made on the ground.

Today's debate provides my delegation with an
opportunity to humbly recall that, C6te d'Ivoire, which
was listed in the annex to the Secretary-General's
reports on the plight of children in armed conflict from
2003 to 2006, during its sociopolitical crisis, provides
a good example of implementing an action plan for the
protection of children in armed conflict. As early as
2005, the Forces armees des forces nouvelles signed
with the United Nations the first-ever action plan for
the protection of children in armed conflict.

Thanks to the collaboration between the United
Nations and partner non-governmental organizations,
that action plan and those that followed allowed for the
release of hundreds of children and for them to return
to school and reintegrate into society. In addition,
national efforts resulted in bringing together former
child soldiers in a transit centre in order to facilitate
their social reintegration through skills-training and
schooling. Progress recorded in 2007 showed that
Cote d'Ivoire was the first country to be removed
from the annex to the Secretary-General's reports on
the plight of children in armed conflict. That outcome
demonstrates that excellent cooperation among affected
States, the United Nations and international partners in
implementing international norms and reintegration
programmes remain indispensable to the protection of
children in armed conflict.

Cote d'Ivoire encourages the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General to continue her efforts with
all parties with a view to integrating the protection of
children into initiatives to resolve conflicts and build
peace. We believe that achieving that goal requires
adequate training in all components of security
institutions. From 10 March 2004, the authorities of
Cote d'Ivoire have included training on the protection
of the rights of the child in the training manuals at
military training schools, including for combat units,
by employing decentralized focal points throughout the
country. All of Cote d'Ivoire's military regions today
have in place a unit for the protection of the rights of
the child.

Cote d'Ivoire also believes that the protection
of children in conflict must be accompanied by the
strict application of the principle of accountability for
armed organizations or groups that use child soldiers,
encourage them to engage in violent extremism or
reduce them to sexual slavery. We also underscore the
essential role of civil society organizations in raising
awareness and developing and implementing assistance
programmes for affected States in transition.

In conclusion, my delegation reiterates its support
for the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
UNICEF and all relevant actors, and encourages them
to continue their efforts to protect children in general,
and, in particular, children who are the victims of abuse
of all kinds in armed conflict.

