Mr. Suazo (Honduras) (spoke in Spanish): It is an
honour to address the Council under your able
leadership, Mr. Minister. We thank in particular the
delegation of Argentina for its wise decision to
convene this public meeting of the Council on the
situation in Haiti, a brotherly country with which
Honduras maintains excellent relations of friendship
and cooperation. Since the creation of the United
Nations we and Haiti have sat side by side, as we do at
this table.

We welcome the interest - heightened by you,
Sir - which has led to the participation of the Foreign
Ministers of Brazil, Chile, Barbados and the
Dominican Republic; the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Haiti, Mr. Juan Gabriel Valdes;
and the Acting Secretary General of the Organization
of American States, Mr. Luigi Einaudi. We welcome
with particular optimism the message delivered to the
Council by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Haiti.

The participation of the United Nations and the
Organization of American States in Haiti prior to the
establishment of the United Nations Mission in Haiti
(UNMIH), in 1993, and the subsequent missions
leading to today's United Nations Stabilization Mission
in Haiti (MINUSTAH), cause us to recall our
participation in the Council's debates on the need to
restore democratic and constitutional order in that
brotherly country. In those debates, Argentina and
Honduras, which were members of the Council at the
time, were filled with optimism and hope. A decade
later, in January 2005, we understand how difficult it
can be to achieve some objectives, no matter how
simple they may seem.

At that time, Honduras introduced the question of
the humanitarian situation in Haiti in the General
Assembly. It was duly followed up until the item was
biennialized and then practically forgotten. The two
times the General Assembly considered the item, there
was neither a resolution nor a debate on the
humanitarian situation in Haiti. The international
community shares the blame.

The passing of a decade and the repetitious nature
of the situation today would seem discouraging.
However, it is preferable to underline the positive
elements and state that we will not forget the people of
Haiti. We will continue to seek the best formula to
remedy their problems and help them to achieve
political and socio-economic recovery. The Millennium
Development Goals are the same for all, but not all
have the same resources and means to achieve them.
For that reason, the convening of this meeting leads us
to envision a new opportunity and renewed hope for
Haiti.

The report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (S/2004/908)
unambiguously states that

"Haitians will vote in local elections on
6November 2005. On 27 November 2005, the
first round of national elections (presidential and legislative) will be held, with the option of a
second round of voting '- if necessary,
7

according to our understanding - on
18 December 2005". (para. 29)

The report adds that

"The memorandum of understanding
between the United Nations and the Organization
of American States (OAS) concerning electoral
assistance to Haiti was signed on 2 and
3 November 2004". (para. 31)

The political landscape seems to be becoming
clearer, and we hope that the timetable can be adhered
to without setbacks.

With respect to humanitarian problems, the
situation is very different. In that regard, we make a
special appeal to the international community in
connection with the fragility of the environment and
the need for international assistance to continue, as The
New York Times recently put it, beyond the period that
the media keeps the crisis situation on the front page.
The international community must not forget its long-
term commitments when the situation is no longer
news or, in particular, when faced with the constraints
that always arise when such commitments are carried
out.

The report of the Secretary-General is clear on
the devastation and the destruction of the environment
caused by the recent floods in Haiti, but today that is
no longer news. Tragically, another, unprecedented
natural disaster has struck brotherly countries of the
Asia Pacific region - and we express our solidarity to
those countries. It has led us quickly to forget the more
than 2,000 dead and the 30,000 others affected in Haiti.

Haiti is also seriously afflicted by pandemics
such as HIV/AIDS. An additional effort could be made
in the area of cooperation to reinforce health-care
programmes in the country. We make an appeal to the
international community in that regard.

Haiti has a special place in the history of the
international community, in particular of Latin
America. It was among the first of the discovered
lands. It achieved independence in 1804, and in 1816 it
gave refuge and unreserved support to the liberator of
America, Simon Bolivar. Thus, we owe a debt to that
brotherly republic. Honduras expresses its solidarity in
these difficult times and raises its voice so that the
Haitian people will not be forgotten again.

