Mr. Shen Guofang (China) (spoke in Chinese):
At the outset I would like to thank the Under-
Secretary-General, Mr. Guehenno, for his very
important, informative and comprehensive briefing.

While the situation in Kosovo remains unstable,
we are pleased to note that the contact and dialogue
between the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) and the Federal Republic
of Yugoslavia Government has increased. Some of this
contact and dialogue is quite constructive. We hope
that such contact and dialogue will continue and will
ultimately be beneficial for the solution of the Kosovo
problem.

At the present time we are most concerned about
the progress in the preparations for Kosovo-wide
elections. It has a direct bearing not only on the
comprehensive and lasting solution to the Kosovo
problem, but also on the peace and stability of the
Balkan region as a whole. China is of the view that the
preparations for the Kosovo-wide elections must be
carried out in all seriousness strictly within the
framework of Security Council resolution 1244 (1999).
Of course, the key issue is to ensure the full and
equitable participation of all the ethnic communities.

With regard to the Kosovo-wide elections, I have
two questions that I would like to pose to the Under-
Secretary-General, Mr. Guehenno. First, at the present
time the Joint Working Group on the Legal Framework
for Kosovo has achieved considerable progress on the
issue of Kosovo-wide elections, especially on the core
issue of the self-government of the future Kosovo. As
we certainly know, however, such progress has been
achieved without the full representation of the Kosovo
Serbs. We also noted that UNMIK is trying hard to win
more participation from the Kosovo Serbs. Without the
full participation of the Kosovo Serbs, what kind of an
effect will such progress have on the future of Kosovo-
wide elections? Will people raise doubts about the
fairness and the universality of such Kosovo-wide
elections? What are Mr. Guehenno's comments?

Secondly, according to the information provided
by the Secretariat, since the armed conflict in the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia began, nearly
8,000 former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia
Albanian residents have fled to Kosovo to seek refuge.
Surely this will cause instability and a worsening in the
law and order situation in Kosovo. However, will this
presence of former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia
Albanians have any impact on the Kosovo-wide
elections? What are the measures that UNMIK will
take to take care of such refugees?

In conclusion I would like to stress that China
supports the proposal made by Ambassador Lavrov,
namely that at an appropriate time the Council should
send a mission to Kosovo and Belgrade in order to
obtain first-hand information.

