Mr. Abdelaziz (Egypt): I have the pleasure of
addressing the Security Council today on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement (NAM). I start by expressing
the Movement's appreciation to the Portuguese
presidency for organizing this debate and to President
Cavaco Silva for presiding. I would also like to thank
the Secretary-General, the High Commissioner for
Human Rights, the Assistant Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs, and the Director for
International Law and Cooperation of the International
Committee of the Red Cross for their statements to the
Council today.

It is obvious from current world events that
despite all efforts by the United Nations, including the
Security Council, civilians are still suffering in massive
numbers around the globe. The measures adopted so
far fall short of addressing the wider implications of
attacks against civilians and their impact on
international peace and security, as well as their
humanitarian impacts.

The last report of the Secretary-General
(S/2010/579), submitted in November 2010 pursuant to
resolution 1894 (2009), also highlights ongoing and
emerging concerns regarding the state of protection of
civilians. These include the proliferation and
fragmentation of non-State armed groups, the
displacement of civilians within and across borders, the
continued Violence and hardship that women and
children face during armed conflict, and the continued
existence of a culture of impunity.

In this regard, the Non-Aligned Movement
believes that due priority should continue to be given
to the promotion of knowledge of, respect for and
observance by States of their obligations assumed
under the Charter of the United Nations, international
law, international human rights law and international
humanitarian law, in particular those of the four
Geneva Conventions of 1949 and their 1977 Protocols.

We call upon all parties to armed conflicts to redouble
their efforts to comply with their legal obligations
through, inter alia, prohibiting the targeting of civilian
populations and civilian property and stressing their
responsibility to ensure general protection against
dangers arising from military operations to civilian
installations, hospitals and relief materials and the
means to transport and distribute such relief materials.

The Movement reiterates its condemnation of the
increasing attacks on the safety and security of
humanitarian personnel and urges the Governments of
States Members of the United Nations to ensure respect
for the protection of the personnel of humanitarian
organizations, in conformity with the relevant
provisions of international law. In the meantime, we
reaffirm that humanitarian assistance personnel should
respect international humanitarian law and the laws of
the countries where they operate, the guiding principles
of humanitarian assistance set out in the annex to
General Assembly resolution 46/182, and
non-interference in the cultural, religious and other
values of the population in the countries where they
operate.

Furthermore, the Non-Aligned Movement
emphasizes that respect for the principles of the
sovereign equality, political independence and
territorial integrity of all States and of non-intervention
must be upheld. Consent of the country is imperative
for granting access to humanitarian assistance to its
territory and for its continued operations at all times.

In a peacekeeping context, NAM. stresses that
protection of civilians under imminent threat of
physical violence remains the primary responsibility of
each country hosting any peacekeeping operation. It
stresses further that peacekeeping missions with this
mandate should conduct their tasks without prejudice
to the primary responsibility of the host Government to
protect civilians. Efforts of the United Nations come in
support of and not in substitution for those of the
national authorities. In this regard, NAM. stresses that
the successful conduct of tasks relating to the
protection of civilians wherever a United Nations
mandate exists requires the integration of efforts at all
levels and a holistic approach that encompasses the
provision of timely and adequate resources, logistical
support and the required training, as well as clearly
defined and achievable mandates. The principle of the
consent of the host State as a founding principle of
peacekeeping must also be fully respected.
The development of strategies for the protection
of civilians in peacekeeping missions where it is
mandated is significant. The Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations should continue to discuss
the best ways to overcome the challenges that remain.
These challenges include the operationalization of such
strategies in action on the ground, the gap in resources
needed to carry out this complex mandate task, and the
legal aspects of categorizing civilians in combat
situations in accordance with international law.

Let me conclude by reiterating the firm belief of
the Non-Aligned Movement in the importance of the
protection of civilians in conflict situations,
establishing accountability for violations of
international humanitarian law and putting an end to
impunity.

