Mr. Cunningham (United States of America): I
want to thank Special Representative Haekkerup for
that not just comprehensive, but even eloquent
explanation of where we are in this process, where we
need to go and, more importantly, where the people
Kosovo need to go in the future.

The upcoming elections are a watershed event
and my Government fully supports his efforts and those
of the United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo to prepare for the transition of authority to
locally elected leaders after the voting in November. I
want to emphasize that the elections cannot be
divorced from the political process outlined in
resolution 1244 (1999). Provisional self-government
will require responsibility and discipline from
Kosovo's elected leaders.

There was a clear message from the Council,
during its mission to Kosovo and since, that we support
a democratic, inclusive vision of the future for Kosovo
with respect for law. That point is again, I think,
reaffirmed in the statement that the Council will be
issuing shortly.

I do not think any of us expect miracles, but we
can and should insist on respect for the road map and
the way ahead that the Special Representative has laid
down, in keeping with the resolution. In pursuing that
path, there can be no place for violence. There must be
participation by all in the upcoming elections and in
the institutions of Kosovo's provision self-government.
I want to applaud UNMIK's efforts to that end. There
must be improved security and support for the return of
Serb and other groups that have been forced to leave,
so that they can be participants.

We are encouraged by the support of the
Government of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia for
the registration of Kosovo Serbs and hope it will take a
similar stance with regard to the voting. Full
participation in the 17 November elections is the only
way to ensure that a multi-ethnic character is preserved
and that Kosovo Serb interests are embedded and
respected in the post-election period.

