Ms. DiCarlo: We are at yet anotherjuncture in the
Syrian conflict where civilians are paying the price
for a never-ending war. We have been here before: in
Aleppo, in eastern Ghouta and in Raqqa. Today it is
Idlib, where 3 million civilians are at risk.

Until recently the Russian-Turkish memorandum
of understanding, signed on 17 September 2018, had
significantly reduced violence in northwest Syria.
However, we now see increasing hostilities on the
ground. If the escalation continues and the offensive
pushes forward, we risk catastrophic humanitarian
fallout and threats to international peace and
security. The United Nations therefore welcomes the
announcement made on 15 May of a Turkish-Russian
working group as a means towards re-establishing
a cessation of hostilities in northwest Syria. That
cooperation is desperately needed.

The United Nations has followed with great
concern the dangerous intensification of violence in the
de-escalation area of north-western Syria, involving
Syrian Government forces, their allies, armed opposition
forces and the Security Council-listed terrorist group
Hayat Tahrir al-Sham. Between February and March,
we received reports of Syrian Government air strikes
resuming on areas inside the Idlib de-escalation area,
Hayat Tahrir al-Sham stepping up its cross-line raids on
Government forces and mutual exchanges of mortars
and rockets. We have continued to receive reports
of Hayat Tahrir al-Sham launching attacks towards
Government areas, including a Russian airbase.

On 8 March, Turkey, in coordination with Russia,
began patrols inside the demilitarized zone. We
welcomed those coordinated patrols, which somewhat
de-escalated violence. Yet, outside the patrol hours or
patrols areas, attacks from both sides continued and
increased significantly in late April.

On 6 May, Government forces began a ground
offensive, which reportedly included Russian air
support, opening two fronts - one in northern Hama
and the other in north-east Latakia. As of 15 May,
the Government had seized several towns in northern
Hama inside the demilitarized zone.

Turkey reports that two of its soldiers were injured on
4 May by Government shelling on a Turkish observation
post in northern Hama. As the fighting moved closer to
the observation post, Syrian Government and Russian
strikes were reported in close vicinity to the post.

Since late April, this escalation in violence has
reportedly killed and injured more than 100 civilians
and displaced 180,000 people. The aerial bombardment
is alarming, including the use of barrel bombs on
populated areas. Air strikes, barrel bombs and shelling
have damaged or destroyed multiple health facilities
and schools in greater Idlib, several of which had been
deconflicted with the United Nations. There was also
reported shelling from the de-escalation zone into areas
under the Government's control, including a rocket
strike on the Neirab camp for Palestine refugees.

We appeal to all parties to cease hostilities, uphold
international humanitarian law and protect civilians.
We condemn all attacks on civilians and civilian
infrastructure, in particular medical facilities and
schools, and urge the parties to respect the safety and
neutrality of health and humanitarian workers. The
Secretary-General has called for an urgent de-escalation
of the situation and urged the parties to recommit fully
to the Russian-Turkish ceasefire arrangements. He
has urged the Astana guarantors, in particular Turkey
and Russia, to ensure that this takes place. I strongly
reiterate that appeal today.

The current escalation once again reminds us of
the urgent need for a political solution to the conflict.
The international community agrees that the presence
of Hayat Tahrir al-Sham in Idlib must be addressed but,
with 3 million civilians in close quarters, combating
terrorism cannot be allowed to supersede obligations
under international law.

Special Envoy Pedersen has elaborated priorities for
the political process. The Council has expressed support
for his efforts. Alongside the urgent imperative to end
the current violence in north-western Syria, we need to
revitalize the United Nations-facilitated political track.
We must continue a sustained dialogue with the parties,
building trust and confidence. We should work together
in support of Russia and Turkey's recommitment to a
ceasefire on Idlib. We can then work towards restoring
a nation-wide ceasefire and focus on advancing the
political road map in resolution 2254 (2015).

We need concrete action on the release of detainees
and the clarification of the fate of missing persons.
Reported estimates of the number of detained and
missing since 2011 are well in excess of 100,000 people.
The single greatest contribution that could be made
now would be the large-scale release of children, the
elderly, the infirm and women.

Much progress has been made towards convening
a credible, balanced and inclusive constitutional
committee. The United Nations continues to consult
parties on a package addressing the committee's
composition and rules of procedure that would be
acceptable to both the Government and the opposition
Syrian Negotiation Commission. With a bit of
compromise, it could move forward, and that step could
help to unlock a broader political process. International
cooperation and support of the Geneva process
are critical if Special Envoy Pedersen is to realize
his mandate.

The conflict in Syria is complex but there is a
path forward. Let us unite today for the first step to
support an immediate de-escalation of the violence in
greater Idlib and work towards a political solution that
meets the legitimate aspiration of the Syrian people.

