Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
wish to thank Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Staffan de Mistura and Ambassador Zahir
Tanin, Permanent Representative of Afghanistan, for
the briefing and statement they have made,
respectively.

The Independent Electoral Commission recently
published the results of the parliamentary elections in
Afghanistan. The holding of those elections was a
major event in the political life of Afghanistan this year
and represented another significant step towards the
Afghan people governing their country themselves. It
is our sincere hope that the Afghan people will seize
this opportunity to further consolidate unity and
consensus and push ahead for the early achievement of
peace, reconciliation and development.

Achieving durable peace, stability and
development in Afghanistan is in the common interests
of the international community. The Afghan peace and
reconstruction process is currently undergoing a
critical period of transition in which it still faces
numerous challenges. That process must be effectively
Afghan-owned and -led.

China supports the Afghan Government in its
efforts to strengthen its national capacity-building to
effectively exercise its authority over the whole of its
territory. Balanced efforts are needed to advance all
sectors - including economic development, security
and stability, national reconciliation, governance, the
rule of law and drug control - in order to make
continuous progress in the Kabul process. We
encourage the Afghan Government to take effective
measures to expedite its economic development and
improve its people's livelihoods.

China supports progress in building up Afghan
police and security forces, thereby upgrading the
country's own capacity to maintain national security.
The transfer of security responsibility to the Afghan
Government should be conducted in an orderly manner
on the precondition of ensuring security and stability.

We support the Afghan Government in advancing
the peace and reintegration programme. We hope that it
will seriously consult its people and different political
factions to steadily expand the political base for
reconciliation.

In order to achieve durable peace, stability and
development, Afghanistan still needs the sustained
attention and support of the international community.
The international community needs to respect the
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Afghanistan, deliver in earnest and fulfil its
commitment to aid the country and respect its priorities
in that process.
The United Nations is an important partner in the
Afghan peace and reconstruction process. China
supports the United Nations and UNAMA in
continuing to play a leading and coordinating role in
the Afghan peace and reconstruction process, and
hopes that UNAMA will make a greater contribution to
coordinating aid to Afghanistan.

