Mr. Tumysh (Kazakhstan): I wish to thank you,
Mr. President, for bringing the crisis in South Sudan
to the attention of the Security Council, and I express
my appreciation to the Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Lacroix, and the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Sudan and
South Sudan, Mr. Haysom, for their comprehensive and
insightful briefings.

We fully endorse the recommendations contained in
the Secretary-General's quarterly report (S/2017/7969)
and his monthly update on the deployment of the
Regional Protection Force. My delegation would like to
make the following observations and recommendations.

First, despite efforts made by the Transitional
Government and Joint Monitoring and Evaluation
Commission, in general slight tangible progress has
been made in the peace process. Only inclusive and
transparent dialogue, as well as the full-fledged
implementation of the Agreement on the Resolution of
the Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan can result
in genuine reconciliation.

In that regard, we need to fully support the concerted
efforts of the United Nations, the African Union and the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD)
to achieve our objectives in South Sudan. At the same
time, we need to ensure that the national dialogue
launched by President Salva Kiir one month ago be truly
inclusive and transparent. We therefore welcomed the
decision made at the thirty-first IGAD Extraordinary
Summit of the Assembly of Heads of State to convene
a revitalization forum. It is noteworthy that that
platform will include all parties so as to discuss the
implementation of the peace agreement and prepare for
the upcoming democratic elections. The foundations
will therefore be laid to help build State institutions.

Secondly, Kazakhstan commends the efforts of
the United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS)
to ensure the delivery of humanitarian assistance to
those areas in need. We note the report's mention that
UNMISS continues to encounter bureaucratic obstacles
and restrictions in connection with its operations and
freedom of movement in implementing its mandate.
My delegation expresses its support for the three-tiered
approach to the protection of civilians, especially
with regard to women and children. We endorse the
Secretary-General's recommendation that the Mission
remain structured under resolution 2327 (2016).

Thirdly, severe humanitarian and security
conditions, as well as the increasing number of
internally displaced persons, demand our serious
consideration. All sides and non-State actors should
stop attacks on humanitarian workers and ensure
unhindered humanitarian access, especially to areas
affected by famine. Similarly, perpetrators must be
brought to justice. We must ensure that no destruction
occurs in close proximity to homes, schools, hospitals
and other life-saving infrastructure.

We call on international partners and donors
to ensure the necessary funding for implementing
the humanitarian response plan. We also urgently
call for the cessation of hostilities by all parties and
the implementation of security sector reforms so
as to ensure the rule of law and bring an end to all
impunity. Whenever possible, hybrid courts should be
set up to carry out the process of transitional justice
and reconciliation.

Furthermore, the engagement of women and
youth would greatly promote conflict prevention and
settlement processes. We therefore commend the
appointment of women to the leadership organ of the
National Dialogue Steering Committee and call for an
additional increase in their numbers.
Lastly, the situation in South Sudan should remain
a top priority for the Council. We pay sincere tribute to
the personnel of UNMISS and Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Shearer for their work on the
ground in such a difficult environment. Kazakhstan
will work with Council members and key actors in
finding a lasting solution to the conflict.

