Mr. Al-Nasser (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): Thank

you, Mr. President, for giving me the opportunity to
speak today in my capacity as Chairman of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1132 (1997) concerning Sierra Leone and of
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1521 (2003) concerning Liberia. I have
had the privilege of chairing those Committees since
the beginning of this year. In my statement, I should
like to give the Council an overview of the work
undertaken by these two subsidiary organs under my
chairmanship and to make a few personal observations.

More than a decade has passed since the adoption
of resolution 1132 (1997), which imposed an arms
embargo on Sierra Leone and a travel ban on members
of the military Government of the day. Since that time,
the country has made great progress towards political
stability and security. The Committee's mandate was
amended by resolution 1172 (1998), and the ban on the
export of diamonds from Sierra Leone was lifted in
2003. The security situation in the country has
improved. Free and fair parliamentary and presidential
elections were held in August. The most recent
milestone was the country's inclusion on the agenda of
the Peacebuilding Commission. A few days ago, the
Sierra Leone Peacebuilding Cooperation Framework, a
document promoting partnership with the Government
in order to meet the challenges of peacebuilding, was
issued.

The work of the Committee is now limited to
tasks related to the embargo on the export of weapons
to non-State actors in Sierra Leone and the travel ban
imposed on individuals included on the Committee's
list, who currently number 30. The list has not been
amended over the past year. However, in the context of
the Committee's consideration of whether the list
should be updated, I wrote a letter on 25 July 2007 to
the Permanent Representative of Sierra Leone
requesting his Government's views concerning the
individuals included on the list and whether the list
should be updated to better reflect the current situation
in Sierra Leone. The Committee is still awaiting that
information from the Sierra Leone Government.

There have been no violations of the arms
embargo or the travel ban during the past year.

The Committee held an informal meeting on 4
December to consider communications received from
the Registry of the Special Court for Sierra Leone
concerning travel to The Hague by certain individuals
included on the list, for purposes related to the trial of
former Liberian President Charles Taylor. I sent a reply
to the Registry explaining the established procedure for
granting exemptions from the travel ban. I believe that,
in order to facilitate the work of the Court and the
procedures for travel ban exemptions, the Security
Council should adopt a resolution granting a
comprehensive travel ban exemption to persons
required to testify before the Court, similar to
resolution 1688 (2006) on Liberia. This morning, the
Council discussed a draft resolution in that regard at
the expert level.

I now turn to the Committee on Liberia, which
has been more active in terms of the number of
meetings held. This year, the Committee has held nine
informal meetings. At its two most recent meetings,
held on 5 and 12 December 2007, the Committee heard
a presentation of the final report of the Panel of Experts,
which is doing a professional and useful job. The report
included specific technical recommendations aimed at
improving the arms embargo regime. I believe that
those recommendations deserve to be considered by the
Committee. I believe also that the Committee must
examine and update the sanctions list so that it reflects
developments on the ground, serves the broader goal of
the sanctions and takes legal due process into account.

I am pleased to inform the Council that, on
12 June 2007, the Committee succeeded in adopting
revised guidelines that take into account the procedures
for delisting from the lists of the sanctions committees,
as set out in resolution 1730 (2006). Pursuant to the
new procedures, the Commission has already delisted
one individual, in November.

Over the past year, the Committee has continued
to receive requests for exemptions from the arms
embargo, in accordance with the provisions of
resolutions 1521 (2003) and 1683 (2006), as well as
requests for exemptions from the travel ban, in
accordance with the provisions of resolutions 1521
(2003) and 1532 (2004). The Committee has continued
its consideration of these requests. It has also received
State notifications on authorizing payments out of
frozen assets, in accordance with the exemption
granted in paragraph 2 (b) of resolution 1532 (2004).

Like Sierra Leone, Liberia, which is located in
the same subregion, has made great strides towards
achieving security and political stability. A President
07-64646
was elected in free and fair elections. The Security
Council responded to these developments by amending
the Liberia sanctions regime in order to reflect the
positive developments in that country.

After lifting the ban on the export of timber last
year, the Security Council adopted resolution 1753
(2007) in April of this year, lifting thereby the ban on
the export of diamonds, based on the commendable
progress made in the Government's control over the
diamond sector and on its effective coordination with
the Kimberley Process. This was affirmed by the
representative of the Kimberley Process before the
Committee in a meeting held on 13 April, shortly
before the adoption of resolution 1753 (2007). The
Committee continues to play a pivotal role in
coordinating with the Kimberley Process in order to
ensure compliance with the terms upon which the
diamond ban was lifted. The Committee has received
two letters, on 7 May and 23 July 2007 respectively,
that, combined, constitute the report of the Kimberley
Process requested by resolution 1753 (2007).

In closing, I would like to thank my fellow
members of both Committees, with whom I have
enjoyed working. I would like to express my gratitude
to the Security Council Subsidiary Organs Branch in
the Department of Political Affairs. I would to like to
make special mention here of Mr. James Sutterlin, who
was Secretary of both of the Committees I chaired and
who showed a high level of professionalism and skill
throughout this period.

