Mr. Amorim (Brazil): It is indeed a very positive
initiative that we are meeting today to listen to
Mrs. Ogata in an open format. I think that corresponds to
the desire for transparency not only of the members of the
Council, but also of the United Nations Members outside
the Council. I have to commend you, Sir, for taking this
very important initiative and also thank Mrs. Ogata for
agreeing to talk with us under this format.

If I may be allowed this brief comment, this is all
the more important as we know that, even in the statute
of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees (UNHCR), the Security Council is supposed
to receive policy directions from the General Assembly
and the Economic and Social Council. Of course, we do
recognize, as the subject today shows, the interrelation
between security matters and refugee and humanitarian
questions. It is very appropriate that we deal with this

 

interrelation in this forum, but it is also very positive that
we do it in an open fashion.

Concerning this division of labour, I would also like
to make a quick comment on the perception of some that
there is an automatic correlation between the notion of
collective responsibility and the concept of collective
security in the humanitarian field. I would like to note in
this regard the statement made by Mrs. Ogata on 5 October,
in which she said that the prevalence of the use of military
force over political negotiations slows down or even blocks
solutions to refugee problems. I think we see these
questions very much in the same light and, as I said,
although recognizing that there is this interrelation, her
explanation today showed us that the refugee problem may
be not only a consequence of armed conflict, but also a
cause. So it is very appropriate that the Security Council
and the departments of the Secretariat, including the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations, can work together
with UNHCR to solve these aspects of these questions.

If we look into the long term - if we look, for
instance, into what Mrs. Ogata has described as a global
solidarity agenda for the next millennium, which of course
we support and call on all the other members of the
Council to support - I think it is also crucial to look into
what she mentioned today in relation to long-term peace-
building efforts.

In this connection, I also have two questions. One
relates to the former Yugoslavia. She very appropriately
mentioned the question of amnesty in relation to the
Kosovars in the Kosovo province of Serbia. In this
connection, and going a little further, I would ask if, in
situations which are not at a crisis point, as they are now in
the case of Kosovo, further confidence-building measures
can be looked into. I am referring to a programme of
education and cultural efforts to really bring these ethnic
groups together as much as possible. In other words, what
I am asking is whether UNHCR could work together with
other organizations, such as the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP), the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization
(UNESCO) and others, in really building a culture of peace
in order to make it possible to tackle these problems in the
long run.

I think that the same problem is also central to the
question of Africa. The cooperation of UNHCR with other
organizations and support for UNHCR by other entities of
this Organization are crucial. When we look at the figures
in Guinea-Conakry, with 300,000 refugees and the prospect
of having these people returning to their countries in a
difficult reintegration process, again I think these are
tasks that probably go beyond the means and the
possibilities of UNHCR. So I would also like to ask Mrs.
Ogata to comment on the possibility of cooperation with
other organizations, including such organizations as the
World Bank and UNDP, possibly under the supervision
of the General Assembly or the Economic and Social
Council, for the peace-building efforts in this area.

