The candidate countries Turkey, the Republic of North Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia and Albania; the country of the Stabilization and Association Process and potential candidate Bosnia and Herzegovina; and the European Free Trade Association country Liechtenstein, member of the European Economic Area, as well as Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova and Georgia, align themselves with this statement. A peaceful and prosperous Afghanistan free of terrorism is not only essential for its own stability and development,but also for that of the entire region and beyond. A negotiated political settlement leading to peace must result from an inclusive Afghan-owned and Afghan-led peace process. The peace process should be built on the democratic and human rights achievements made by the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan since 2001. The European Union (EU) and its member States urge the Government of Afghanistan and the Taliban to seize the current historic opportunity for lasting peace and genuine reconciliation and engage in intra-Afghan negotiations. This will mark an important step towards the peace the people of Afghanistan deserve and have long demanded. We call for the parties to accompany the start of the peace talks with a ceasefire that would stop the unnecessary suffering and create the right conditions for the negotiations to prosper. We also call on Afghanistan's neighbours and regional stakeholders to actively and honestly engage in promoting a peaceful resolution of the conflict. We underline the need to safeguard women's active participation in the talks. The political process should strengthen the independence, sovereignty, territorial integrity, constitutional order and national unity of Afghanistan. To this end, the EU is working with all parties to ensure that peace negotiations are inclusive and respectful of the wishes of Afghans to live in a peaceful, secure and prosperous country, providing new opportunities for all of its citizens, where rights are upheld and vulnerable groups protected. The EU and its member States are ready to support the parties as they embark on this peace process and wish to see the immediate start of intra-Afghan negotiations that are truly representative, where the voices of all Afghans, including persons belonging to minorities, are represented in a meaningful way. The EU notes in particular Afghanistan's commitment to enhancing women's meaningful participation in the peace process in its national action plan on the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), on women and peace and security. The intra-Afghan negotiations must lead to a fair democratic process, and therefore reinforce the fundamental rights and freedoms of all Afghans. The EU and its member States remain concerned at, and condemn the unacceptable levels of, violence - including sexual and gender-based violence - in Afghanistan, which have continued even after the Doha agreement. The EU's position remains clear and unchanged: Afghanistan needs a comprehensive ceasefire to accompany the peace negotiations and create a conducive environment for sustainable peace in the country as well as stability in the region. The EU and its member States fully support recent Security Council resolutions and the Secretary- General's call, of 23 March, for a global ceasefire, which have so far gone unheeded. The Afghan Government has so far proven its readiness to start the talks. The Loya Jirga Assembly, composed of political leaders and elders in Afghanistan, sent in its last recommendations a loud signal of peace, compromise and goodwill, including by recommending the release of thousands of prisoners convicted of the worst crimes. The Taliban must now demonstrate their willingness for peace, by entering into negotiations through dialogue and accepting the genuine ceasefire the people of Afghanistan deserve. Lasting peace cannot come at any cost and must not be built on impunity. The EU and its member States, together with the United Nations and the international community, have demonstrated their commitment to remaining engaged in supporting the process and ensuring the best conditions for achieving a sustainable political settlement. We support NATO-led Resolute Support Mission efforts to provide further training, advice and assistance to the Afghan security forces and institutions. The unanimous adoption by the Security Council, on 10 March, of resolution 2513 (2020), which the EU fully supports, goes in that direction. The message sent by the Security Council was clear: the international community is ready to constructively support the start of intra-Afghan negotiations towards a lasting peace in Afghanistan, but commitments have to be met and sanctions will not automatically be softened or lifted only in correlation to their genuine commitment to peace. The EU's sustained support for peace and development in Afghanistan will not be unconditional but assessed against political progress and the commitment of the parties to the conflict to a meaningful peace process. The European contribution will be rooted in our transparent, democratic values-based and principled approach, including safeguarding the human rights and fundamental liberties of all Afghans, including women, youth, minority groups, as well as victims of war, which must be preserved and further promoted. The EU also expects strong structural reforms to be carried out, especially to reinforce the rule of law, promote good governance and better fight corruption, illegal immigration and drug-trafficking, as well as further enhancing cooperation regarding readmission. Financial support remains above all a political commitment. We recall that the EU, together with the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) and international partners, has been mobilizing significant resources to support the Government in its fight against corruption. Assuring donors that funds are being used efficiently and appropriately is an essential step. To see reforms fade or fail now would also mean a loss of these investments and a loss of Afghanistan's credibility. International partners will therefore carefully follow the progress made. At this point, a strong and positive signal is needed. Looking ahead, the upcoming November 2020 Afghanistan conference in Geneva will be an important opportunity for the international community to confirm its continued commitment, including financially, to a peaceful, prosperous and self- reliant Afghanistan. Afghanistan is at a major crossroads and needs support from us all now more than ever. The EU reiterates its full support to the Government of Afghanistan, Finland and the United Nations in organizing that conference. The spread of the coronavirus disease pandemic in the country and the lack of a health care system is also a matter of serious concern. Finally, the EU recalls the strong and crucial role played by UNAMA and all United Nations agencies in supporting the Afghan people, encouraging peace and reconciliation, monitoring and promoting human rights, as well as implementing the commitments from the 2018 November ministerial conference on Afghanistan. The EU will continue to fully support UNAMA and cooperate closely with it on the ground and in all related international formats for the ultimate benefit of Afghanistan.
