Mr. Fonseca (Brazil): I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for this opportunity to participate in the
debate on the situation in the Middle East, particularly
the occupied Palestinian territories. The debate today
occurs in the wake of a new wave of violence, which
continues to distance the world from the goal of a
peaceful and prosperous Middle East. No one can be
indifferent to the sad events and to the escalation of the
confrontations in the Middle East. Peace must not
elude us. Peace should not be an unachievable goal for
Israelis and Palestinians. The international community,
with a sense of urgency, has a responsibility to help
both parties to find a solution to this long and tragic
conflict.

We extend to the families of the victims, as well
as to the Government of Israel and the Palestinian
Authority, our deepest condolences for the loss of life
and the pain inflicted on countless civilians.

Brazil deplores and vigorously condemns the
violent terrorist acts that took place in the region
recently, which caused dozens of fatalities and
hundreds of injuries. In the same vein, we deplore the
attacks by Israeli forces on civilian targets in the West
Bank, which result in civilian Palestinian casualties.

In repudiating those acts and measures, the
Brazilian Government reaffirms its conviction that
violence on both sides leads only to a further
deterioration of the situation in the Middle East, adding
to the already dangerous level of hostility and
intolerance between Israelis and Palestinians. Acts of
violence will not further anyone's cause. The only way
to produce mutually beneficial and lasting results is
through negotiation, constructive dialogue and respect
for agreements and for Security Council resolutions
242 (1967) and 338 (1973). Reconciliation should be
achieved through the mechanisms for the peaceful
solution of disputes accepted by the international
community. Dialogue and negotiations between Israel
and the Palestinian Authority should be urgently
resumed. It is not necessary to stress that the
Palestinian Authority is the only legitimate
representative of the Palestinian people.

Brazil underlines the importance of the safety of
all civilians in the Middle East, the protection of
human rights, respect for cultural and religious values
and symbols, and progress, while cooperation is being
developed among all peoples of the region. It is
especially relevant that the parties embrace tolerance as
their main guiding principle. In line with the Rio Group
statement issued during the ministerial week of the
General Assembly, we call on the parties to consider all
proposals that may lead to the resumption of peace
negotiations and to adhere to the peace initiatives
offered by the international community, in particular,
as regards the implementation of the recommendations
contained in the Mitchell report.

Once again, Brazil exhorts the parties involved to
exert all possible efforts to cease the spiral of violence.
We join the international community and the United
Nations in their determination not to allow extremist
actions of any nation to prevent the resumption of the
peace process.

Ever since this question was placed under the
aegis of the United Nations, Brazil has consistently
advocated a peaceful solution to the Middle East
conflict. At the General Assembly's 44th meeting, in
the opening statement of the general debate last month,
President Fernando Henrique Cardoso renewed our
commitment to a balanced and just solution to the
question of Palestine and underlined that

"Just as it supported the creation of the
State of Israel, Brazil today calls for concrete
measures towards the setting up of a Palestinian
State that is democratic, united and economically
viable.

"The right of the Palestinian people to self-
determination and respect for the existence of
Israel as a sovereign, free and secure State are
essential if the Middle East is to rebuild its future
and peace.

"This is a moral debt owed by the United
Nations. It is a task that must not be postponed."

All the peoples of the region deserve an
environment of political freedom, peace and stability,
in which they can concentrate their efforts on
prosperity and social and economic development. For
this to happen - the message of this meeting is
clear- it is necessary that tolerance prevail over
violence and that political dialogue and a true wish for
reconciliation prevail over extremist attitudes.

The United Nations, especially the Security
Council, is the fundamental instrument of the
international community for resolving conflicts. Its role
should be strengthened in times of crisis. In this sense,
we reaffirm our support for the work of the Secretary-
General and his representative in the Middle East on
the question of Palestine. We hope this meeting of the
Security Council will prove to be a valid step in the
efforts for the achievement of peace in the Middle East.
We also hope that in the future the Council will be able
to fully exercise its responsibilities on this question.

