Mr. Wetland (Norway): Norway is fully
committed to the rebuilding of Afghanistan. At the
Paris Conference in June, Norway pledged €500
million for the period covered by the Afghanistan
National Development Strategy. That makes
Afghanistan the number one recipient of Norwegian
development and humanitarian assistance.

As friends of Afghanistan, we are concerned by
all the negative reporting on developments in the
country. We must not inflict fatigue on our people on
the ground or on our soldiers and aid-workers by
speaking the language of defeat and decline. Let us
instead focus on the improvements and important
nuances in the security situation. Not all of
Afghanistan is equally troubled. Three quarters of
security incidents this year have occurred in a part of
the country where only 6 per cent of the population
lives.

I would like to raise three issues today.

First, let me mention elections. The United
Nations and, in particular, the United Nations
Development Programme, are doing an important job
in assisting the Afghan authorities to prepare for
elections. Our main priority now must be to assist voter
registration, to provide information about the election
and to make it safe to vote - in particular, to make it
safe for women to vote. The elections, which we hope
will demonstrate that the Taliban is losing ground,
must take place according to plan.

Secondly, we - the donors who pledged our
support in Paris - must honour our pledges. We
should all be held accountable at regular intervals and
we must let ourselves be coordinated, as we agreed in
Paris. At the same time, the Afghan Government,
which pledged to fight corruption and narcotics, must
also be held accountable. The recent appointment of
Mr. Atmar as Minister of the Interior is encouraging
and promising in that respect.

Thirdly, we must not lose time by slowing down
the efforts of Special Representative Kai Eide to build
a lean and professional United Nations organization in
Afghanistan. Mr. Eide was welcomed as a United
Nations representative who brought hope to our efforts
in Afghanistan, so we should not - to borrow a phrase
from the financial crisis - push our bad loans onto
him and wish him good luck. We have a serious
obligation to support him every day.

If our joint endeavours in Afghanistan are to
succeed, it is crucial that the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) have the necessary
resources and sufficient qualified personnel to do the
job. That is the only way that UNAMA can fulfil its
strengthened mandate and meet our expectations,
which are high. We urge Member States and the
Secretariat to support UNAMA and Kai Eide in their
efforts to rebuild Afghanistan and to fight bureaucracy
when it stands in the way.

