Mr. Elnour (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): I thank
your friendly country, Mr. President, for convening
this important debate. I also thank the briefers for their
valuable briefings this morning.

My delegation aligns itself with the statement
delivered earlier by Ambassador Fatima Mohammed,
Permanent Observer of the African Union.

Armed conflicts and international terrorism are
not the sole fundamental threats posed to international
peace and security in today's world. The list now
includes threats caused by climate and environmental
changes, which represent an additional driver of the
factors threatening international peace and security,
thereby causing deterioration in living conditions,
human security and Governments' abilities to provide
their citizens with their basic needs, particularly in
situations simultaneously involving other economic,
social, demographic and political challenges. We note
that societies and States that are vulnerable to scarcity
of resources are most exposed to the negative impact of
climate change.

The Sudan is one of the States that has suffered
from the impact of climate change, leading to the
outbreak of conflict and complicating the resolution of
conflicts, including the conflict in Darfur, which began
in 2003. The main cause underlying that conflict was
climate change, which led to drought, desertification
and scarcity of water. The major economic activity of
Darfur's population had been grazing and agriculture.
Tensions arose among farmers and herders as a
result of competition over scarce resources, which
were diminishing due to drought and desertification
throughout the entire African coastal region. That
was complicated by an increase in the population, the
proliferation of weapons and easy access to them as a
result of conflicts in neighbouring States.

At the national level, in order to confront climate
change, the Government of the Sudan has taken several
measures. We have stepped up efforts to achieve peace
throughout the country, as peace is the first, fundamental
step towards achieving sustainable development in its
economic, social and environmental dimensions. We
have also striven to achieve development throughout
the country, in addition to increasing hydroelectricity
and seeking other sources of renewable energy,
particularly solar energy, while planting more trees
through Africa's Green Wall initiative, which includes
a number of African States from Senegal in the west to
Djibouti in the east.

In order to move forward in addressing
climate-related threats, we would offer the following
suggestions on how to cooperate among various actors
in order to address the great challenge that faces
our world.

First, we must strengthen preventive diplomacy
and address the effects of climate change before they
lead to conflict, while promoting cooperation among
the Security Council, the Secretariat and its related
agencies with respect to climate change, on the one
hand, and international financial institutions, on the
other. Efforts must be stepped up to implement the
Paris Agreement on Climate Change. In that regard,
my delegation hopes that the 2019 September climate
summit, to be convened by the Secretary-General on
the margins of the seventy-fourth General Assembly,
will be a criticaljuncture in our work to address climate
change and its effects.

Secondly, greater attention must be paid to
early-warning systems, particularly with regard to
climate-related conflicts.

Thirdly, developed States must honour their
pledges to developing States, thereby empowering them
to achieve sustainable development and enabling them
to be more resilient in facing effects of climate change.

Fourthly, efforts must be intensified to achieve
peace, especially in areas affected by climate change,
while increasing focus on post-conflict countries.

Fifthly, the capacities of developing countries must
be strengthened in order to enable them to address
climate change and adapt to environmental change
while benefiting from technological advances in
that regard.

Sixthly, we must promote cooperation between
the United Nations and regional organizations on
climate issues and conflicts, and pay greater attention
to the regional aspects of security threats caused by
climate change.

Lastly, we mustconferagreaterrole on peacekeeping
missions, special political missions and United Nations
regional offices in addressing climate change, and offer
solutions at the local and national levels.

