Mr. Ahmad (Pakistan): My first word must be
one of gratitude to you, Mr. President, for suspending
the debate on Friday and carrying it over the weekend.
Whether you say it or not, I take it that, since I was
travelling overseas, you awaited my return so that I
could come and make this statement personally today. I
am indeed privileged to be the first speaker this
afternoon in this important meeting.

Once again we return to this Chamber, as we have
done so many times before, to discuss the issue of
Palestine, an issue which, like others, remains on the
agenda of this Council, unresolved.

As the Council will recall, on 4 October last year,
in this very room, we spoke of the image of that small
child, Mohammed Al-Durra, lying at his father's side
as the last breath of life slipped out of him. This was,
as I said then, "only one glimpse of the fate that is
suffered by thousands of children in different parts of
the world that are under foreign occupation or in
conflict situations" (S/PV4204 (Resumption I),
p. 4). The tragedy is that, in these last five months,
scores more of innocent people have died. I ask the
Council again: are the killings of children not sufficient
reminders that a part of humanity dies each time an
innocent life is snuffed by violence?

We have debated in this very Chamber the issue
of Palestine for well over half a century. The
international community has unequivocally pronounced
its support for the inalienable rights of the Palestinian
people. Security Council resolutions have also called
for Israel's withdrawal from the occupied territories.
Yet the Palestinians have not been given the land that is
theirs by right. Peace in the Middle East still remains
as elusive as ever. As the Council's resolutions remain
unimplemented, the Palestinian people and others in
similar circumstances continue to be deprived of their
right of self-determination. While we have waited for
this body to act and to implement its own resolutions,
flickers of hope have turned into ashes of despair.
Unfortunately, power politics and political expediency
have continued to disable this body in addressing its
Charter obligations.

The present deteriorating situation no doubt
warrants our urgent attention. The international
community must act with determination to prevent the
situation from worsening. There are two issues at stake
here. The first is of a more immediate nature: the
protection of the Palestinian people, who are being
subjected to the repressive and disproportionate use of
force as well as Virtual economic strangulation. We
urge the Security Council to take the necessary
measures to protect the Palestinian people by deploying
a United Nations observer force in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including Jerusalem. Such a
measure is the least that can be done to prevent the
aggravation of the situation on the ground.

In addition, further actions need to be taken to
end the violence in Palestine. As in the case of other
peoples under foreign occupation, Pakistan has been a
steadfast supporter of the just struggle of the
Palestinian people for their inalienable rights. The
international community, particularly the guarantors of
the peace process, must use their influence and good
offices to ensure full Israeli compliance with the peace
agreements and with its legal obligations and
responsibilities as an occupying Power, under the
Fourth Geneva Convention of 12 August 1949.

The second issue is the broader, fundamental
issue of the realization by the Palestinians of their
inalienable rights. This involves a concerted approach
aimed at the restoration of the peace process. It is
essential to facilitate the fulfilment of all agreements
reached and to implement Council resolutions 242
(1967) and 338 (1973) in order to avert the region's
return to conflict. We urge the parties concerned to take
the necessary measures to end hostilities and restore
calm. In this regard we also call on the Security
Council to take urgent steps to safeguard peace and
security in the region.

Last year we saw bold steps taken in the direction
of peace. But soon thereafter we also saw how the
provocative actions of some individuals severely
undermined the progress towards peace. This progress
now stands blocked by intransigence. The international
community must not allow the continuation of such a
state of affairs, which could only wreck the future of
the Middle East. Instead, the Israeli leadership must be
compelled to return to the negotiating table in good
faith. The process of peace, which has been so cruelly
derailed, needs to be urgently put back on track.

We believe that no lasting peace in the Middle
East would be possible without achieving a peaceful
settlement of the question of Palestine in accordance
with the relevant Security Council resolutions. The
realization of the inalienable rights of the Palestinian
people and the withdrawal of Israel from the
Palestinian territory, including the dismantling of
illegal settlements, are essential for any meaningful
progress in the peace process.

An overarching peace settlement for the Middle
East question, by definition, must also include the
vacation of the Syrian Govan Heights by Israel and full
respect for the territorial integrity and sovereignty of
Lebanon. Long-term stability and security for all in the
region can be guaranteed only on the basis of the
principle of land for peace.

Prompt action is therefore required, particularly
by the Security Council, to protect the Palestinians, to
ensure the safety and sanctity of Al-CDs Al-Sheriff and
to facilitate the realization of the national rights of the
Palestinian people. The prospects of peace in that
region once again rest with this body. How many more
innocent people will have to die, and not just in
Palestine but also in other "forgotten" conflict areas,
like Kashmir, before this Council finds the resolve and
capability to fulfil its own responsibilities and Charter
obligations? How long shall we continue to wait for the
oppressed peoples in all parts of the world to regain
their fundamental rights and for the conscience of
humanity to awaken to the imperatives of justice and
fair play?

