Mr. Rastam (Malaysia): On behalf of the Non-
Aligned Movement, I wish to express our sincere
appreciation to you, Sir, and to the members of the
Security Council for convening this open meeting to
allow the larger membership of the United Nations to
express once again their views on the question of
Palestine.

This meeting is focused in particular on the
construction of the expansionist Israeli wall in the
occupied Palestinian territory. This is a matter of grave
concern to all members of the Movement and should
also be of grave concern to the international
community as a whole.

The Non-Aligned Movement expresses once
again its grave concern at the further deterioration of
the situation in the occupied Palestinian territory,
including East Jerusalem. We condemn the continuing
and escalating Israeli military campaign against the
Palestinian people, in particular the wilful killing of
civilians and including extrajudicial executions, the
demolition of homes, paralysing closures, the excessive
and indiscriminate use of force, and continuing settler
colonial activities.

Much as we condemn the deadly suicide
bombings against innocent Israeli civilians, we
reiterate that the Israeli Government must exercise
restraint. It must act in accordance with international
law. It must act rationally. The disproportionate use of
force against the Palestinian people and the
implementation and enforcement of severe policies and
practices in furtherance of occupation by the Israeli
Government will not guarantee enhanced security for
the people of Israel. On the contrary, such actions by
Israel have provoked violent retaliation from
Palestinian militant groups. Clearly, both sides are now
locked in a continuing cycle of violence, which makes
it all the more difficult to move forward to achieve a
peaceful solution.

The Non-Aligned Movement is extremely
concerned about the implications and long-term effect
of Israel's continued settlement policies and the
construction of the wall in the occupied Palestinian
territory. We were dismayed to learn about Israel's
recent announcement of its intention to build about 600
homes in three large West Bank settlements. Israel has
obviously chosen to ignore the numerous calls made by
the international community for it to cease settlement
activities in the occupied Palestinian territory.

The total number of settlers has reached more
than 230,000. This is double the total a decade ago.
Palestinian lands are being confiscated to make way for
illegal settlements and bypass roads for them. Barriers
are being built to protect such illegal settlements.
Effluent from those settlements has caused the
destruction of Palestinian farmland. Israeli soldiers are
deployed to protect the settlers. Those facts are there
for all to see. One needs only to look at the present-day
map of the occupied Palestinian territory to know how
many settlements have been built. How could the
international community ignore those facts? It is clear
that Israel's settler colonialism activities impact
gravely on the Palestinian people. This policy cannot
remain unchallenged by the international community.

We stress that the implantation of Israeli colonies
in East Jerusalem, the West Bank and Gaza is in
violation of international law, in particular the Fourth
Geneva Convention. The Israeli Government and
others must surely realize that settler colonialism has
become the primary obstacle to Palestinian self-
determination. It remains a major impediment to
progress in the peace process. We strongly urge Israel
to dismantle the settlements and freeze all settlement
activity, as envisaged by the road map.

With regard to the separation wall, we believe
that its construction is severely jeopardizing the
creation of a viable contiguous Palestinian State and
the realization of the two-State solution. The Israeli
Government says that the wall is necessary to protect
Israel from terrorists. But the plans for the wall, and
the actual construction itself, indicate that it is more
than just a security wall. It appears to be a devious way
to create new facts on the ground and impose a
unilateral solution which would prejudge the outcome
of future negotiations on the boundaries of the two
States, Israel and Palestine.

According to available information, the wall
could extend for up to 650 kilometres, be eight metres
high, and have a concrete base, as well as watch towers
every 200 metres. The wall is to have trenches, roads
and fences running parallel to it. For this purpose,
hundreds of thousands of dunums of Palestinian land,
including prime agricultural land, have been, and will
be, confiscated by Israel and turned into what would
practically be no-man's-land adjacent to the wall. The
Palestinian town of Qalqilya is effectively surrounded
by walls on almost all sides, virtually imprisoning
41,600 of its people. The wall is not just a problem; it
will be a major obstacle to peace.

We note with grave concern that the wall is not
being built in accordance with the internationally
recognized boundary of the Armistice Line of 1949.
Large portions of the wall are being constructed deep
into occupied Palestinian territory, separating
Palestinians from their agricultural land and water
resources. The wall is designed to engulf settlements.
Besides the massive confiscation of fertile Palestinian
land, valuable subterranean water reservoirs have also
been annexed.

In his report on the situation of human rights in
the occupied Palestinian territories, the Special
Rapporteur of the United Nations Commission on
Human Rights estimated that the wall would cut off
about 210,000 Palestinians from social services,
schools and places of work. He has also stated that it
would likely lead to a new generation of refugees or
internally displaced persons. The wall would also
isolate the primary resources of the West Bank on
which the future Palestinian State would depend. This,
indeed, should be alarming to the international
community, Israel included. Could the world allow this
to happen? Could we seriously allow an already
deprived population to be subjected to such degrading
and inhumane treatment on their own land?

We believe that the crisis caused by occupation
and settlement is more pronounced and desperate now
than ever before. It deserves immediate action on the
part of the Security Council. The world cannot afford
to allow Israel to boldly press on with its settler
colonialism activities and - more imperatively as a
matter of greater urgency - its ongoing and future
construction of the expansionist wall. Israel must be
prevented from using security as a pretext to annex
Palestinian territory.

The extensive impact of the wall demands the
immediate action of the Security Council, particularly
those members with the power to influence Israel. We
urge them to undertake serious efforts to prevent the
wall from being used as a means to annex Palestinian
lands and effectively prevent the creation of a
Palestinian State. The wall must not be allowed to be
used as a tool to further suppress the already
downtrodden Palestinian people. We call on the
Security Council to act decisively by adopting a
resolution calling for the destruction of the wall and
preventing its completion. Pressure must be brought to
bear on Israel to comply with the demands of the
international community in respect of this wall.

