Mr. Calderisi: We are grateful for this
opportunity to address the Council. Like other
specialized agencies of the United Nations system, the
World Bank has been very concerned about the
situation in the Central African Republic. In
conjunction with the International Monetary Fund, we
have been trying to help the Government improve its
economic management and to lay the basis for serious
efforts to improve the lives ofits people.

Conflicts within and outside the country's borders
have complicated those efforts, but, fortunately, they
have not stalled them altogether.

In our statement to this body on 23 January of
this year, we said that we had confidence in the then-
Prime Minister and his economic team, that they had a
clear sense of their country's interests and that they
were effective in defending those interests internally
and externally. That assessment remains true today,
despite changes in the Government since then and the
sad events of late May and early June.

In my three visits to the country in the last year,
including one just two weeks after the attempted coup
d'etat - when fear and insecurity were still high - I
have been impressed by the courage and determination
of senior decision makers. Despite difficulties that
would perplex and frustrate many of us around this
table, the Prime Minister and his colleagues have kept
their sights trained on medium- and long-term issues
that will be important for strengthening growth and
reducing poverty.

A good example of this was the holding of a
national economic conference nine days ago, which
involved about 500 participants from across the
country and was an important act of national
reconciliation, not just public discussion of important
policy choices.

Another example has been the rapid preparation
of a national program for fighting HIV/AIDS, for
which the World Bank completed negotiations of a $17
million credit last week.

There is similar focus and similar openness to
new ideas in the community more broadly. In meetings
with the business community, trade unionists, young
people and women's groups, I have found an
impatience to move forward, rather than a sense of
resignation that the country's problems are
insurmountable.

In the months ahead, the World Bank hopes to
contribute to solving those problems, through
supplementary support for the national budget, linked
to reforms already underway for strengthening public
finances; through approval of a post-conflict grant to
fund emergency needs arising from the events of late
May; through analytical support for the preparation of
a solid poverty reduction strategy necessary in its own
right and as a means of obtaining debt relief from the
international community, drawing on resources
provided under the Policy Support Project approved
last year; and also through early implementation of the
HIV/AIDS project, in which half of the resources will
go directly to local communities.

Looking beyond the next six months, three points
remain important. A sound economy is essential for
underpinning peace-building efforts. Secondly, the
entire United Nations community must continue to
work together to help the country. And third, outsiders
can only do so much.

Public revenues in the Central African Republic
were sagging from an already low level in April -
before the coup d'etat. Political events have worsened
but have not fundamentally altered the economic
challenge. Bold efforts by the Government to improve
public management and strengthen governance will
create new opportunities for the people of the Central
African Republic and attack the roots of conflict once
and for all.

