Mrs. ngu (Nigeria): As the representative of
one of the newly elected members of the Security
Council, let me seize the opportunity provided by this
first formal debate of the Council in 2010 to reiterate
Nigeria's unwavering commitment to the preservation
of international peace and security. I want to assure
you, Mr. President, of our solemn obligation to work in
concert with other members in the discharge of the
daunting responsibilities of the Council.

We congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of
the presidency of the Council for this month and on
having convened this important meeting. We also
greatly appreciate the presence of Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon in our midst. We commend him
especially for his report on the situation in Afghanistan
and its implications for international peace and security
(S/2009/674). The report contains cogent observations
critical to the attainment of peace in the country. We
also thank Mr. Kai Eide, Special Representative of the
Secretary General for Afghanistan, for his succinct
briefing and for the resolute manner in which he
discharged the duties of his office. We wish him the
best in his future endeavours. We also greatly
appreciate the insightful statement of Ambassador
Tanin.

Nigeria is concerned that, in spite of intensified
global efforts, the challenges in Afghanistan, in
particular the security challenges, remain intractable.
The Secretary-General's report notes the deteriorating
security situation in the country and the expansion of
the insurgency, including suicide bombings, rising
conflict-related civilian casualties and escalating
threats to United Nations and international aid
personnel. This deplorable situation constricts not only
aid delivery around the country but also the efforts of
the Government to deliver basic services to the people.
The situation is exacerbated by existing and new
political challenges, as well as severe economic
stagnation.

In spite of these challenges, we appreciate the
resilience and commitment of the Afghan people to
democratic governance. We also appreciate the roles
played by the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) and by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General in the
successful resolution of the political crisis following
the elections.

Nigeria believes that the new Afghan
Government deserves support to strengthen and
consolidate its capacity to deliver basic services,
maintain domestic peace and security, facilitate an
inclusive process of dialogue and national
reconciliation and fortify its relationship with its
neighbours. Indeed, the rule of law and a vibrant
political process capable of supporting national
reconciliation are prerequisites for the gradual return of
peace and stability to the country. The international
community must augment its investment in these areas.
That is why we welcome the London Conference
scheduled for 28 January 2010 and the subsequent
Kabul conference, in the hope that both conferences
will help to galvanize international resources and
support for the country. The task for the international
community is to ensure that progress is effectively
monitored.

To reverse the deteriorating security situation in
the country will require the consolidation of existing
security mechanisms and the adoption of fresh
initiatives, including the proposal to use local security
agents under the Community Defence Initiative, and
security sector reform. We share the Secretary-
General's view that this combination of measures must
be underpinned by national reconciliation and good
governance. In addition, there must be sustained
cooperation between local security forces and their
international counterparts. Meanwhile, we urge greater
protection for United Nations personnel and aid
workers and for Afghan civilians.

Nigeria is mindful that electoral contests have
increasingly constituted a major challenge to the
security and stability of emerging democracies. We
therefore welcome the proposal for electoral reforms in
Afghanistan. The reform should be a measure to
reinforce the country's nascent democracy and should
constitute the foundation for sustainable political
development in the country. In effect, the focus of the
reform should be to bolster the electoral process, to
sustain continuous electoral exercises and to guide
meaningful political relationships. In this regard, the
Electoral Complaints Commission and the Independent
Electoral Commission should be reformed to conform
to international best practices by being truly
independent and free of partisan bias and control. The
reform should be all-encompassing, affecting all levels
of government and involving all the stakeholders in
Afghan society. We urge the country's political actors
to understand and defend the electoral process and also
to approach the political system with a sense of
compromise and reconciliation.

In the final analysis, under the rubric of lesson
learned, it is important to make public the
recommendations of the ongoing investigations into the
electoral irregularities in the country, as a means of
forestalling future occurrences.

Nigeria supports the need for the international
community, within a framework of a strategy of
transition, to reinforce the coordination structure in
Afghanistan, under a United Nations umbrella. We
appreciate the central role which UNAMA plays in
these efforts and we hope that the full implementation
of its 2010 budget, as approved, will help to strengthen
the Mission. We appreciate the contributions of
Afghanistan's neighbours to the efforts to tackle the
challenges confronting the country and urge
international support for sustained regional
engagement.

