Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): As we all know, the Russian Federation was
unable to support the draft resolution (S/2017/962)
submitted by the United States delegation. Today we
have been told that we refused to engage in consultations
or to communicate. That is not so, since our experts
did indeed communicate whenever they were reached
out to.

Over the past few weeks, we have patiently explained
that we cannot take the proposed concept seriously. It
was wrong from the start in that it was geared towards
entrenching the systemic flaws in the work of the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons-
United Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism as well
as that of the Fact-finding Mission of the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) in
the Syrian Arab Republic.

Today's statement by the Permanent Representative
of the United States was focused not on the Mechanism
but, as usual, on Russia. Clearly, we will also be
hearing repeated accusations of Russia in interviews
and press releases.

Today my British colleague referred to - even,
one might say, blurted out and betrayed, and I am
very grateful to him for his frankness - the main
point that this spectacle was conceived and based on.
The Permanent Representative of the United Kingdom
said that there is no place for Russia in the political
process in Syria. There we are. That is why this whole
unscrupulous performance was devised, to cast doubt
on Russia's role in the political process for resolving
the Syrian crisis. I would like to thank Mr. Rycroft for
saying out loud what many could not bring themselves
to do.
There was nothing balanced about the United
States draft resolution. The main emphases in the text
remained the same throughout the expert discussions.
The changes made were merely cosmetic and did not deal
with a single one ofthe flaws in the bodies investigating
the Syrian chemical weapons dossier. We would like to
remind our United States colleagues - and those who
were not interested in examining the details when they
supported the draft resolution, divorced from reality,
submitted by the United States - that it is they who
will bear the burden of responsibility if the Mechanism
cannot be preserved. Russia is doing everything it can
to prevent that from happening. It had appeared that we
were united by one goal - extending the Mechanism's
mandate and increasing its effectiveness in the interests
of identifying the real perpetrators of chemical weapon
crimes. It turns out, however, that some of our partners
in the Security Council have other priorities.

From a historical perspective, many have now
observed that the endless distortions regarding
Damascus and chemical weapons, which were in fact
removed and destroyed under OPCW oversight, are
strongly reminiscent of the situation in Iraq almost 15
years ago. At the time, the representatives of the United
States deliberately misled the international community,
including the Security Council, in order to establish
grounds for the intervention that ultimately resulted in
immeasurable misery for Iraq and the entire region.

In his recently published memoir, Gordon
Brown, former United Kingdom Prime Minister,
openly discusses the dubious nature of the arguments
supporting the military campaign launched against Iraq
in 2003. As it turns out, the United States deliberately
concealed from its closest allies the conclusions of its
military specialists, who had been unable to establish
any credible traces of Iraqi activity linked to weapons
of mass destruction. This is not the first statesperson
and will probably not be the last who over time has a
stroke of insight or epiphany in relation to the mosntrous
experiments in Iraq and Libya. Will this geopolitical
laboratory never shut down?

Russia, which has always unconditionally supported
the international regime on the non-proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction, has proposed, not for
the first time but so far without success, together
with its Chinese partners, that the Security Council
should tackle the issue of chemical terrorism in the
Middle East seriously. Last year, at the Conference on
Disarmament in Geneva, our Foreign Minister Sergey
Lavrov proposed drafting an international convention
to combat acts of chemical and biological terrorism. We
call on everyone to join the discussions on the issue.
Any delay on it could be very costly.

In conclusion, I would like to support my Bolivian
colleague's proposal to resubmit draft resolution
S/2017/933. We would like to be a co-sponsor of the
draft resolution and propose that it be put it to the
vote today.

