Mr. Aboul Gheit (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): I
would like at the outset to extend to the Council
President our sincere thanks for organizing and
presiding over this important meeting. We also wish to
express our appreciation for the high-level participation
that characterizes this debate, which reflects the
enormity of the challenges we are facing as an
international community in the Central African region.
It also shows our common aspiration to assist this
critical region and enhance cooperation between it and
the United Nations system.

We cannot discuss means of enhancing
cooperation between the international community and
the Central African region, with all that it embodies in
terms of potential, capabilities and resources, without
pausing at the major hot points of conflict afflicting it
and agreeing on means to resolve them. From this
standpoint, the Egyptian delegation would like to
mention a number of specific points that we feel must
be emphasized when addressing the ongoing armed
conflicts in the region.

First of all, the conflict in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo is the primary one, for its
shadows loom over any attempts to establish peace in
the Great Lakes region in particular and the Central
African region in general. Thus, we feel that the efforts
being made by the international community, and
specifically the efforts of the United Nations system,
should be focused on finding a comprehensive and
lasting solution to that conflict in a manner that will
pave the way for addressing all the other problems
facing the region in terms of security, economic,
humanitarian and developmental dimensions.

Secondly, and accordingly, we invite the Security
Council to quickly expand the military component of
the United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of Congo (MONUC) to 8,700
personnel, as recommended in the latest report of the
Secretary-General. We hope that the United Nations, in
close cooperation with the troop-contributing countries,
will be able to deploy the additional units in the eastern
parts of that country as soon as possible, in order to
create an environment conducive for launching the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programme for the elements of the armed groups that
are not parties to the Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement.

Thirdly, we invite the international community to
throw its political weight behind the recent agreements
signed between the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and Rwanda, and between that
same Government and Uganda, in Pretoria and Luanda
respectively, in a manner that will guarantee full and
coordinated implementation of their provisions. We
hope that the current negotiations between the
Congolese Government and other parties will lead to an
imminent breakthrough that establishes the broad
foundations under which the brotherly Congolese
people can enjoy the security, peace and prosperity
towards which they aspire.

Fourthly, we must at the same time address the
other hot points of conflict which continue to the north
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo into the
Central African Republic and to the east into Burundi.
We thus invite the United Nations to continue its
support for the region and efforts aimed at concluding a
ceasefire agreement between the Government of
Burundi and the rebel Front for the Defence of
Democracy (FDD) and National Liberation Forces
(FNL) groups that remain outside the Arusha peace
process.

We hope that the international community will
consider supporting the decisions of the regional
initiative, should the rebel groups continue their
intransigence and their refusal to work with the
Transitional Government that came into power in
November of last year.

On the other hand, we invite the United Nations
to continue its support for the peace-building efforts in
the Central African Republic through the United
Nations Peace-Building Support Office in the Central
African Republic (BONUCA) in Bangui. We hope that
the Security Council will be forthcoming in supporting
the initiatives of the Economic and Monetary
Community of Central Africa (CEMAC) and the
Community of Sahelo-Saharan States (CEN-SAD) in
that regard.

If the international community is indeed serious
in its efforts to support the peace frameworks in the
three countries to which I have referred, to nurture
them and to achieve the desired results, then it will
have taken the first step towards establishing a strong
cooperative relationship between the international
community and the entire Central African region. The
establishment and maintenance of that partnership will
undoubtedly require each side to display the necessary
political will and to assume the accompanying
obligations, each within the limits of its capabilities
and in accordance with its responsibilities under the
Charter.

In that context, the following points should be
taken into consideration. First, there are many existing
regional frameworks for cooperation in Central Africa
aimed generally at establishing the foundations of
peace, security and stability within and among its
States. We feel that the United Nations can exert more
efforts to support those frameworks and that the
Security Council should strive to establish an
institutional relationship with them. In that context, we
wish to mention particularly the Protocol establishing
the Council for Peace and Security in Central Africa,
which includes a non-aggression pact and a mutual
assistance pact. That is an initiative that deserves
commendation and requires political support from the
Security Council and technical support from the
Secretariat and other United Nations specialized
agencies, in order to implement it.

Secondly, the illegal flow of small arms and light
weapons in the Central African region is a major
contributing factor to the emergence and fuelling of
armed conflicts in the region. Thus, the United Nations
is called on to pay greater attention to the scourge and
to put into effect comprehensive programmes that
address the problem in its regional dimension. In that
context, we welcome the mission undertaken by the
United Nations Development Programme in the Great
Lakes region last March to assess the scope, nature and
impact of the flow and the use of small arms in the
region. We also call on the international community to
contribute towards the implementation of the strategy
put forward for that purpose at the regional and
national levels in the States concerned. We also support
the proposal previously submitted by the Secretary-
General to give the United Nations Regional Centre for
Peace and Disarmament in Africa a more prominent
role in encouraging transparency and confidence-
building among the States of the region with regard to
military expenditures.

Thirdly, since they took the initiative to establish
the Mechanism for Conflict Prevention, Management
and Resolution in Africa in 1993, Africa's leaders
previously accepted the limits to the capabilities
available to them in order to undertake peacekeeping
operations in the continent. Such limitation, of course,
also applies to the Central African region. That is why
we are calling on the Security Council to assume
responsibility when necessary and when the region
lacks the necessary military, logistical and financial
capabilities to implement them. We also call on the
Council to give its political weight to the limited
peacekeeping operations that the regional organizations
are able to undertake, such as the one undertaken by
CEN-SAD in the Central African Republic and the one
to be undertaken by CEMAC in Bangui.

We also feel that the United Nations Department
of Peacekeeping Operations can play an effective role
in collaborating with the subregional organizations and
within the context of the United Nations Standing
Advisory Committee on Security Questions in Central
Africa, in order to contribute to training and readying
military units of the Central African States in the area
of peacekeeping operations and to coordinating the
assistance that donor countries may provide in
preparing and equipping such forces.

Fourthly, and lastly, we must affirm that
confronting the root causes that make the Central
African region vulnerable to armed conflict and
security upheavals will require the allocation of large
amounts of financial assistance for many years to
come. If the international community is serious about
translating the results of this meeting into tangible
reality on the ground, its assistance will lead to
consolidating the foundations of peace, stability and
development in the region. That is why we believe that
the major test of the international community's
determination in this area will be provision of financial
and developmental incentives that will encourage
implementation of the results of the upcoming
international conference on security, peace and stability
in the Great Lakes region, in order to provide its States
with an example of success that can be applied
elsewhere in the African continent.
