Mr. Holbrooke (United States of America): I
want to thank you, Mr. President, for calling this very
important meeting. You have had a very intensive
presidency this month, as did Ambassador Wang of
China last month. I wish to point out that at this time
last week you said there would be a five-minute
meeting on Saturday, and it was 11 hours. I hope you
have a better weekend than you had last week. I
congratulate you on your stewardship.

I particularly want to thank you for inviting today
statements by the European Union, as given by
Ambassador Monteiro, and presentations by my friends
and colleagues and our esteemed visitors, Carl Bildt
and Javier Solana. I have had the pleasure of working
with both of them now for many years. They have both
played seminal roles in the history of the Balkans and
in European matters. Their statements are extremely
important, and although I was unable to hear Carl
Bildt's, I am very familiar with it. I have read it. I
talked to Carl in advance, and I endorse everything that
both men said.

Before I turn to my own remarks, I would like to
make one additional comment about the procedural
vote that just took place. The outcome was correct
from every standpoint - legal, political and moral. In
addition to my remarks preceding the vote, I need to
make one additional point, and I hope that the countries
that voted in favour of Mr. Jovanovie's speaking would
please note what I am about to say.

I wish to remind everyone that in Security
Council resolutions 777 (1992) and 821 (1993), it was
decided that the State known as the Socialist Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia had ceased to exist and that the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia should apply for
membership. Therefore, I do not understand, leaving
aside the specifics which led to the vote today, how this
situation exists. Tito's old flag is still flying on First
Avenue, despite these two resolutions. I consider that a
travesty of the United Nations spirit; a flag that
represents a nation that the United Nations itself
decided did not exist. Yugoslavia is not a member of
the General Assembly. We have long urged Belgrade to
apply as one of the successor States to the Socialist
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. Four others -
Slovenia, Croatia, Macedonia and Bosnia and
Herzegovina- did apply. They were accepted. The
reason for this - and I have spent many hours talking
with the leadership in Belgrade about this, as has Carl
Bildt - is that the Belgrade authorities assert that they
are the sole legitimate successor State to the Socialist
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, and the United
Nations has rejected that claim. So the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia should - and this has nothing
to do with the war crimes issue - follow the request of
the Security Council, and they should not be invited to
speak when they purport to speak for a successor
regime that does not exist. That was the unanimous
view of the Dayton signatories, even though Belgrade
did sign the Agreement, because they had to make it
work. That was the view of the Security Council. That
was the view of the European Union, under the
Badinter Commission. I would just reaffirm that today.

I consider this discussion a continuation of one of
the most important events in recent European and
world history, and I think it is a solemn obligation of
the Security Council to continue to discuss the
Balkans.

On the positive side of the ledger, we have recent
events in Croatia, where a new democratic
Government, headed by people fully dedicated to
democratic principles, is moving Croatia rapidly into
the community of nations, oriented towards openness
and democratic principles. Their commitment to
transparency with the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia, and their dealings with the
Croatian Democratic Union in Bosnia and their support
for dealing with refugee returns have all made a
tremendous and positive difference in the region. I
wish again today to use this occasion to express our
Government's high respect and admiration for the
Government in Zagreb. I will be visiting Zagreb next
month, and I look forward to having these discussions
directly with the Croatian authorities.

Let me turn briefly to Bosnia, where we have
recently heard in this Chamber reports from the Special
Representative, Jacques Klein, and the High
Representative, Carl Bildt's successor plus one,
Wolfgang Petritsch. I think we need to recognize that
in the midst of difficulties progress can be made, and
as Javier Solana just said in a characteristically upbeat
and positive manner, we are making progress.
The world's press has long since turned away
from Bosnia, so the world does not realize how much
progress is being made. But let us recognize that the
press turned away from Bosnia because good news is
old news, and that is why they are not giving it as
much attention as they should. I think all of us should
take every occasion to point out that refugee returns to
minority areas are up 400 per cent this year and
movement is being made.

Nonetheless, the forces of darkness still exist in
Bosnia. Mostar is still a tragically torn city. Karadzic is
still at large - one of the most dangerous men in the
world - and he needs to be brought to justice, as do
all the other indicted war criminals. The criminal
element is threatening the social fabric of all of Bosnia.
So I do not wish to say that progress is undiluted, but I
think we should acknowledge it.

In Kosovo we face a much more complicated
situation as we have heard from our speakers. Now, as
we mark the one-year anniversary of the adoption of
Security Council resolution 1244 (1999), UNMIK,
under the brilliant leadership of Bernard Kouchner, has
made impressive progress in building an administrative
structure responsive to the needs of the people to
replace a repressive state structure dominated by the
Belgrade authorities.

But I do not wish to gloss over the serious
security problems which we discussed in our last
meeting with Mr. Kouchner present. I am deeply
distressed, more than anything else, at any attempt by
either ethnic group to impose its will through
intimidation and force on the other. I need to repeat, as
I said here last time we met on this subject, that, while
we condemn unreservedly the Albanian attacks on the
Serb minorities now in Kosovo and while we recognize
fully what the purpose of this is- a reprehensible
purpose - it is not a one-sided story. We must have a
full accounting of the 4,000 Albanians who are
missing, many of whom I assume are no longer alive,
and we must have a resolution ofthese problems.

Those who resort to violence on either side of the
ethnic line in Kosovo must be forced to stop. We have
the means to do it if we have the will. A lot of what is
happening in this Chamber undermines that will by
diversionary discussions, such as an attempt to
reinterpret resolution 1244 (1999) or the hour that we
spent on the procedural discussionjust resolved.

I support Mr. Kouchner's repeated calls for
progress on the missing and detainees. We also need to
establish a more representative set of structures of
government. The critical step is to give the people
more authority over their own destiny. I therefore
warmly support the statements of Javier Solana and
Carl Bildt that the municipal elections should stay on
schedule for October. If they are delayed, it jeopardizes
the rest of the structure in Kosovo and we will lock
ourselves into a worse situation. The people arguing for
delay are arguing it for no reason related to the needs
of the people of Kosovo, but solely to argue the
question of international sovereignty. That is not what
municipal elections are about. That is not what they are
about, and I hope we can move forward in that regard.

I regret that the Serb community has not
participated in the registration process, but we cannot
allow that process to be held hostage by one group or
by people in Belgrade. All the people of Kosovo-
there are many ethnic groups there - will have
representatives in their administrative governmental
structure. If they do not choose to participate, seats will
be set aside to protect their interests until they are
ready to return as full partners in the political process. I
underscore the importance of these events.

Let me conclude with some comments about
Serbia and Montenegro. My delegation continues to
believe that the issue of Kosovo's security will never
be truly solved and long-term peace and stability not be
possible until the current regime in Belgrade is
replaced by one that is more open and more
representative. Meanwhile, Belgrade continues to
threaten democracy in its sister Republic of
Montenegro. These efforts are unacceptable and, in that
regard, I am delighted that the Foreign Minister of
Montenegro, Minister Lukovac, is here with us today. I
met with him this morning and I urge all those who
have time to meet with him. He has important ideas
and thoughts which all of us should hear. I salute the
courage of President Djukanovic's Government and I
recommit the United States to our support of
Montenegro's efforts to build a peaceful democratic
society.

In regard to the war crimes issue, we should
remember that the Tribunal for Yugoslavia, like that for
Rwanda, is not some arbitrary institutional creation. I
repeat again here today our Government's view that the
umbrella of that process should be extended over
Foday Sankoh and his henchmen in the Revolutionary
United Front in Sierra Leone. These Tribunals and their
possible extension to Sierra Leone are created by
decisions of this body in this very Chamber. They are
vested with the enormous authority of the United
Nations. We have a profound responsibility to
ourselves, to this institution and to innocent victims
everywhere to support them and give them the power
they need. I am distressed that countries that supported
their establishment now attack them.

The combination of justice with political
freedom, expressed through free and fair elections, is
the key to stability and peace in the Balkans. Justice
with freedom: these principles make up the foundation
of all democratic societies. They are principles that we
are committed to upholding.

I want to stress in closing that the Council's
efforts in the Balkans have relied heavily on the
strength and support of other organizations, including
the European Union (EU), the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe and the Peace
Implementation Council- which Carl Bildt was so
deeply involved and helped to establish- and the
military contribution made by the Stabilization Force
and the Kosovo Force. The EU has played and will
continue to play a particularly crucial role. I hope that
High Representative Solana will convey to the
European Union our deep appreciation of their efforts.

As all know, I have been critical frequently about
the operational structures in Kosovo, and I continue to
be critical because I do not think they are efficient
enough and I think the system was not adequately
conceived and structured from the outset. However,
those criticisms, which I make openly, are the
criticisms of somebody who is deeply grateful to the
EU and to the United Nations for their efforts; who is
mindful of the fact, as Carl Bildt pointed out, that the
bulk of the money has come from the European Union
and not from our own Government; and who deeply
appreciates these efforts and makes these comments in
a spirit oftotal commitment to their goals. Thus, I hope
that Mr. Solana will convey to Brussels our
Government's high appreciation for his being here
today and for the efforts ofthe European Union.

With that, Mr. President, I want to thank you
again for holding this very important meeting. I hope
that we can revitalize the effort, in addition to simply
hearing these important reports today.

