Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-General for
Political and Peacebuilding Affairs, Ambassador Vale
de Almeida, Head of the Delegation of the European
Union to the United Nations, and Mr. Pecsteen de
Buytswerve, Ambassador of Belgium, in his capacity
as Facilitator for the implementation of resolution 2231
(2015) for their very enlightening briefings. I also wish
to commend the professionalism and commitment of
the Secretariat, which has produced a high-quality,
very detailed and balanced report (S/2019/492).

The challenges that bring us together within the
Council are more numerous and more serious than
ever and our responsibilities are immense with regard
to both non-proliferation issues and all regional issues
with which we have to deal. In that context, our
responsibility is to be fully engaged in preventing and
resolving crises. From 2003, at the initiative of the E3
and with the support of the Council, that collective
commitment and engagement made it possible to chart
the way for negotiations with Iran, which led to the
adoption of the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action
(JCPOA) in 2015. The agreement was formalized by
the adoption of resolution 2231 (2015), which was
supported by the five permanent members of the
Council, reflecting their unity and our collective unity
on non-proliferation issues, which are at the heart of
our security. France remains firmly committed to
the preservation of that framework and will actively
continue its efforts to implement its obligations under
the JCPOA, with its partners in the European Union, as
long as Iran respects its nuclear commitments.

The JCPOA, which put an end to a serious nuclear
proliferation crisis, is a cornerstone for the stability of
the entire Middle East and an essential non-proliferation
instrument. As we witness a worrying increase in
tensions in the region, everyone must refrain from
statements and measures that could weaken the JCPOA
and precipitate an escalation. The withdrawal of the
United States from the agreement last year, followed by
the American sanctions, started a very worrying period
of uncertainty. France, in conjunction with its partners
and in line with the Secretary-General, has clearly
expressed its regret and concern about the decisions of
the United States.

In that context, recent Iranian announcements
with regard to non-compliance with the provisions
of the JCPOA, which the Secretary-General has also
regretted, are extremely worrying. I would like to
reiterate my country's position on that point: it is
imperative that Iran continue to fully and rigorously
implement its nuclear obligations. Apart from the
announcements, Tehran must refrain from any measure
that would constitute a violation of its commitments.
The JCPOA is the outcome of a fragile balance. Any
suspension, even partial, of Iran's commitments would
have negative repercussions in terms of the threat of
nuclear proliferation and would further destabilize
the region.

As France has said in the Chamber on many
occasions, the preservation and full implementation of
the agreement must go hand in hand with compliance
with all the provisions of resolution 2231 (2015),
which endorses it. Everyone knows that the collective
commitments made in 2015 do not end with the JCPOA
framework. In that regard, I would like to express
France's concern over the various elements identified
by the Secretary-General in his report concerning
Iran's continued non-compliance with several of the
provisions, in particular with regard to its ballistic
activities and the transfer of various arms to other
actors in the Middle East. Iran is conducting highly
destabilizing missile activities, whether it be its efforts
to develop a ballistic missile programme, contrary
to resolution 2231 (2015), or transfers to State and
non-State actors in the Middle East, which place Iran in
breach of several resolutions of the Council, including
resolution 2231 (2015). It is therefore essential that
Iran cease such activities and fully comply with the
resolutions adopted by the Council.

Allow me to make an urgent appeal for pragmatism
and clear thinking. Given the risk of escalation caused
by the incidents in the Gulf of Oman, it is crucial that all
the actors concerned exercise the utmost restraint and
prioritize the path of dialogue and peaceful settlement,
thereby urgently contributing to regional de-escalation.
France encourages and supports all mediation efforts
between the parties. Ways must be found towards
pacification through the efforts of all the actors
involved. The crisis should also be an opportunity to
pursue regional stabilization and security mechanisms.

The collapse of the JCPOA would represent a
dangerous step backwards, bringing uncertainty and
potentially far-reaching consequences for the region,
the non-proliferation regime and our collective security.
We must all work to prevent such a scenario, the price
of which we would all pay, and to preserve the nuclear
agreement. I call on everyone around this table to rally
behind that goal.

As members know, France advocates a
comprehensive approach, supported by the European
Union, which seeks to ensure the preservation of the
JCPOA while also addressing the long-term framework
of the Iranian nuclear programme and Iran's conduct in
the ballistic sphere and in regional conflicts.

Given the worrying developments under way, I
would like to conclude by calling, on behalf of France,
for all stakeholders to exercise restraint, disengage
their autopilot and shoulder their responsibility through
respect and dialogue in order to find common ground
and achieve de-escalation. Let us not sleepwalk into a
military confrontation but be actors in an exclusively
political solution. The Council may rest assured of
France's resolute commitment to that end.

