The President: I now give the floor to Mr. Paul
Badji, Chair of the Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People.

I express to you, Sir, my most heartfelt
congratulations on your outstanding presidency of the
Security Council for this month of July 2008. I would
also like to express my deep gratitude to all Council
members for having allowed me to participate, on
behalf of the Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People, in this
public debate on the situation in the Middle East,
including the Palestinian question.

Almost eight months after the Annapolis
Conference, the holding and outcome of which were
welcomed by our Committee, the situation in the
occupied Palestinian territory, including East
Jerusalem, still remains grim. However, the Committee
did not hesitate to give its full support to that initiative,
which was aimed at obtaining agreement by the parties
on final status by the end of this year. Accordingly, the
08-43361

Committee's programme of work for the current year,
2008, is geared towards supporting the creation of a
climate conducive to the advancement of permanent
status negotiations between the parties, including,
particularly, the complete cessation of all acts of
violence.

That positive dynamic was echoed by the
participants in the three international meetings that our
Committee has organized in recent months: the
Seminar on Assistance to the Palestinian People, held
in February in Amman, Jordan; the United Nations
International Conference on Palestine Refugees, held
in April at UNESCO headquarters in Paris; and the
United Nations International Meeting on the Question
of Palestine, held in June in Malta.

As a prerequisite for successful negotiations
between Israel and Palestine, tangible changes must
occur on the ground in accordance with the parties'
obligations under the first phase of the Quartet's Road
Map. Our Committee is seriously concerned over
Israel's ongoing settlement policy, which contradicts
all of the obligations set forth in the Road Map. The
very presence of Israeli settlements in the occupied
Palestinian territories is a violation of international
law. The expansion and consolidation of large
settlements in and around Jerusalem, especially in the
E-l area, raises serious doubts about Israel's good faith
in these negotiations.

In fact, since the Annapolis Conference, the
Israeli authorities have announced plans to build more
than 3,000 apartments in and around Jerusalem, and the
construction of some 300 new buildings has already
begun, according to reports of the Israeli
non-governmental organization Peace Now. These
settlement blocks, together with the wall being built by
Israel, sever Jerusalem from the rest of the West Bank,
which it cuts into two parts, thus forming an enormous
challenge to the permanent status negotiations.

The Committee calls upon Israel to immediately
cease all settlement activity and to dismantle
settlement outposts. Four years after the advisory
opinion of the International Court of Justice declaring
the separation wall illegal under international law and
insisting on its removal, Israel stubbornly continues
construction of the wall on Palestinian land. The
Committee calls upon the international community, and
the Council in particular, to take more serious action to
5
challenge the presence of the wall in the occupied
Palestinian territory.

With regard to Jerusalem, it is the Committee's
position that a negotiated solution based on
international law is critical for resolving the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict and for establishing lasting peace
in the entire region. No agreement that does not
include East Jerusalem as the capital of a future
Palestinian State can help bring about a sustained
settlement to the conflict.

Israel's ongoing settlement activity in Jerusalem
and the discriminatory measures taken against
Palestinian residents of the city are in clear violation of
resolution 252 (1968), which stated that

"all legislative and administrative measures and
actions taken by Israel, including expropriation of
land and properties thereon, which tend to change
to change the legal status of Jerusalem are invalid
and cannot change that status". (para. 2)

Our Committee welcomes the ceasefire
agreement between Israel and Hamas, which went into
effect last month. The parties must do their utmost to
respect the ceasefire and it should be extended to the
West Bank without delay.

The humanitarian situation remains critical. The
crossings into Gaza are not opened frequently enough
to provide the minimum basic necessities to the
population. The Committee reiterates that Israel, as the
occupying Power, is obligated under the Fourth Geneva
Convention to protect civilians under its occupation
and is responsible for providing basic services such as
food and medical care and for ensuring the overall
welfare of the population. The applicability of the
Convention to the occupied Palestinian territory has
been repeatedly confirmed by the Conference of High
Contracting Parties, the General Assembly and the
Security Council.

The Gaza Strip is no exception, with Israel fully
controlling every aspect of the daily life of the
population. Through me, the Committee again urges
the Council to take robust, urgent action to settle the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict and to meet its
responsibilities as guardian of international peace and
security by upholding its own resolutions, which
continue to be flouted by Israel: resolutions 242
(1967), 338 (1973), 1397 (2002) and 1515 (2003).
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Malaysia.


