Ms. Loj (Denmark): Denmark aligns itself with
the statement to be delivered by Finland on behalf of
the European Union.
Yet again, we are called to this Chamber by the
tragic loss of civilian life in Gaza. Yet again, we are
called upon to consider how we can restore hope to the
people of the Middle East and how we can overcome
their increasing sense of desperation. And yet again,
the outlook seems increasingly discouraging.

Denmark was shocked at yesterday's news that 19
Palestinian civilians - ll of them children - were
killed when Israeli artillery hit a housing block in Beit
Hanoun. I offer the deepest condolences of the Danish
Government and people to the victims' families and to
President Abbas.

We welcome Israel's official recognition that the
attack was a tragic mistake and its pledge for a full
investigation. We urge Israeli authorities to complete
the inquiry promptly and to make the results public.

Yesterday's tragedy was the culmination of days
of intense military action in Gaza, causing the loss of
many civilian lives and great damage to houses and
civilian infrastructure. Denmark is deeply concerned
about the continued escalation of violence and deplores
the fact that Israeli military operations have taken a
heavy toll in civilian lives.

The right of a State to defend itself against
terrorist threats does not justify disproportionate or
indiscriminate action or use of force. Disproportionate
use of force is contrary to international humanitarian
law and tends to undermine the very political purpose
it is supposed to serve by fuelling further hatred and
conflict.

The solution is not more violence. All sides must
cease the use of force for political purposes. That
requires an immediate halt to attacks on Israel. The
continued rocket attacks from the Palestinian territory
into Israel are unacceptable and must be condemned.
The Palestinian Government must take action to ensure
that such attacks are stopped. At the same time, Israel
must ensure that its short-term measures designed to
improve the security of Israeli civilians conform to the
requirements of international law and do not hamper
the achievement of a lasting solution to the conflict.

But to pave the way for progress, the kidnapped
Israeli soldier must be released immediately. Likewise,
the Palestinian ministers and legislators in Israeli
custody must be freed promptly. Regional players
should do everything they can to support efforts that
can lead to the resumption of the peace process.
The challenge is to support and strengthen those
forces which are committed to a political solution. That
is the only way out of the current stalemate of
violence. We must keep alive the vision of two
independent States, Israel and Palestine, living side by
side in peace within recognized borders. Indeed, this
vision is a core principle of the Road Map. Certainly,
the violence that brings us here today is leading us in a
wrong and worrisome direction.

Increasingly, the collapse of the Palestinian
Authority and chaos in the territory both seem
imminent. It is a social, economic as well as political
collapse that is about to become a grim reality. Clashes
among Palestinian factions only aggravate the human
suffering and desperation. They run counter to the
interest of the Palestinian people.

Thus, we support President Abbas' attempt to
build national unity and establish a credible Palestinian
Government with a platform that reflects the principles
laid down by the Quartet. A functioning Palestinian
Government is essential for governing the Palestinian
territories and as a viable partner for the international
community in its efforts to alleviate the dire
humanitarian situation in Palestine, breathe life into the
Palestinian economy, and relaunch the peace process.
The international community stands ready to support
such a Government.

Israel has a crucial role to play in improving
Palestinian economic prospects. The tax and customs
revenues now being withheld should be released
immediately. These revenues can be channelled
through the temporary international mechanism, which
has proven itself valuable in channelling aid directly to
the Palestinian people. Moreover, the Agreement on
Movement and Access must be implemented fully and
immediately.

In conclusion, I would re-emphasize that all
parties must participate if the peace process is to
succeed. Neighbours, including Syria, must play
constructive roles and the international community, led
by the Quartet, must be willing and able to provide
whatever incentives are needed to set the healing
process in motion.

