Mrs. Booto (Democratic Republic of the Congo) (spoke in French): Mr. President, allow me first of all
to convey to you the heartfelt congratulations of my
delegation for the great work you have accomplished
as President of the Security Council throughout this
month of December. I would like to thank you for
having convened this meeting on the Great Lakes of
Africa, the subject under discussion today. In
particular, I wish to pay tribute to the United Republic
of Tanzania for the important role it played in the
decisive stage of the signing of the Dar es Salaam
Declaration in November 2004, which led to more
constructive interaction in the region and to the
restoration of a climate of trust, which helped stave off
the demons of division.

My delegation has already voiced at the highest
level its recognition to His Excellency Mr. Jakaya
Mrisho Kikwete, President of the United Republic of
Tanzania, and to His Excellency Mr. Mwai Kibaki,
President of the Republic of Kenya, who, with the
invaluable assistance of His Excellency Mr. Kofi
Annan, maximized the support of the international
community to organize the Second Summit of Heads of

State in Nairobi. We would like to thank them for the
important effort they have made in the cause of peace
and in the resolution of the various crises in the region.
I would also to thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Ibrahima Fall, for his very
informative briefing and for his organization of the
Second Summit of Heads of State and Government of
the International Conference on the Great Lakes
Region, especially for his tireless efforts in the cause
of peace in the region.

My delegation is honoured by the presence here
of Her Excellency Ambassador Mulamula, the
Executive Secretary of the Secretariat of the
Conference on the Great Lakes, and I congratulate her
very warmly.

The Second Summit of Heads of State and
Government on the Great Lakes Region was an historic
event for the region as well as for the international
community. Indeed, the Summit once again stressed the
importance of the partnership between the countries of
the Great Lakes region and the international
community to build on the momentum created by the
countries of the region. The Summit marks the end of
the preparatory process of the International Conference
on the Great Lakes Region, which is to identify the
causes of armed conflict in the region, conflicts which
have hampered the development of the countries
concerned, and to permit the region to regain
ownership of this fortunate initiative in order to
relaunch its development.

After several mishaps, important stages were
gone through, and the results are increasingly tangible.
My country conscientiously took an active part in all
the monitoring and follow-up mechanisms and has
actively implemented the resolutions and
recommendations of the various forums devoted to
questions relating to the Great Lakes. We welcome the
new momentum based on a new regional security
order, the expansion and integration of economic and
commercial space, democracy and good governance,
the stabilization and improvement of the collective
handling of social and humanitarian problems resulting
from the internal readjustments going on in each of the
Great Lakes countries, and the adaptation to the rules
of this new peaceful coexistence among States.
This new agreement has been crowned with
success in the signing of the regional Pact for Stability,
Security and Development as an act of commitment to

non-aggression and mutual defence, which lays out the
optimal conditions for sustainable development. In
particular, we welcome the adoption of the structure
for the Special Fund for Reconstruction and
Development, which will undoubtedly enhance
economic progress and reconstruction by facilitating
development and economic integration among
countries of the region.

As proof of its goodwill, and despite the
enormous challenge of reconstruction and the tasks that
await these newly elected institutions, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo has announced an initial
contribution of $1 million to this Fund.

My delegation agrees with the Secretary-General,
who stressed in his message to the Conference that
ownership of the Conference by the States of the
region gives the Pact an important dimension with
regard to democracy, good governance and economic
development. That ownership remains key, as it sets
out the priorities and means for working together. It is
not a vision, but a programme of action eagerly
followed by millions of people in the region. As for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, our objective is to
make every necessary effort to implement the
programme of action, with the support of all our
partners.

The Democratic Republic of the Congo, which
has been chosen as the host country for the 2008
summit, intends to be a driving political, economic and
social force. It will do its all to promote respect for the
Pact on Security, Stability and Development in the
Great Lakes Region and to make the special fund for
reconstruction and development operational, stressing
the responsibility of each and every actor to create a
zone of peace, stability and prosperity throughout the
region.

The Democratic Republic of the Congo reiterates
its commitment to participating in the creation of
conditions of peace and security for its people and the
peoples of neighbouring States. The world has seen the
progress our country has made in implementing its
commitments to establishing a new internal political
order and to normalizing relations with neighbouring
States. Thus, as we consolidate our internal political
process, the Democratic Republic of the Congo has
also worked concretely to meet its commitments to
providing security for our neighbours.
As is well known, the transitional period in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo culminated in the
inauguration of Mr. Joseph Kabila as President-elect.
The National Assembly has been elected and installed,
as have the provincial assemblies. The Senate, local
assemblies and future Government are now being
established. My delegation welcomes the orderly
holding of the elections. The turnout was enthusiastic
and the participation of women, both as candidates and
as electors, was most encouraging and a reflection of
the efforts made at the national level to promote
women.

With the establishment of all of the Republic's
institutions, the Congolese people is now counting on
the ongoing support of the international community as
it pursues policies to foster national reconciliation,
economic and social recovery, and national
reconstruction.

In conclusion, I thank the Security Council,
which has always been dedicated to the cause of peace
in the Great Lakes region. The Council has identified
three principal and closely linked aspects of the insane
regional conflict that should be addressed in parallel:
the outcome of the inter-Congolese dialogue, the
withdrawal of foreign forces from our national
territory, and the disarmament, demobilization and
repatriation of armed groups. That has had a favourable
impact not only on my country, but also in the broader
context of the Great Lakes region.

Finally, I reiterate my country's gratitude to the
international community for its attention to the
launching of a new era of relations based on trust,
security and mutual benefit for all States of the Great
Lakes region.

