I thank the President of the Security Council for organizing today's meeting. I also thank Under-Secretary-General Lowcock for his briefing and salute the work of all humanitarian workers intended to help the Syrian people. More than 9 million Syrians live under the care and protection of Turkey. Nearly 5 million of them live right across Turkey's border with Syria. I am participating in today's meeting to voice what those individuals urgently expect from the international community. In the north-west, the situation in Idlib remains desperate. The regime's indiscriminate military campaign has made the health services in place unprepared to confront the coronavirus disease (COVID-19). Today only 55 per cent of the health facilities in the region are operational, while 75 per cent of health workers have fled or been killed. There are currently no confirmed COVID-19 cases in the region. Yet, given the population density, the number of highly vulnerable groups, the insufficient means available and the inadequate measures taken, this is a high-risk region. Against the backdrop of this imminent threat, United Nations cross-border operations continue unabated, with the support and facilitation of my Government. We have increased the duration and volume of deliveries via Bab Al-Hawa and Bab Al-Salam. As a result, in March and April, the number of truck crossings per month reached the highest levels. The Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and the Turkish Red Crescent have dispatched masks, coveralls and ventilators to north-west Syria. More than 10,000 test kits and thousands of other pandemic-related items have been delivered to Idlib through the cross-border mechanism. However, these figures cover only | per cent of current needs. It is crucial that all international stakeholders, especially the World Health Organization, increase their humanitarian assistance. Donors must also continue to prioritize funding for this response. We must note that the United Nations cross-border assistance is the only way to meet the humanitarian needs of these people. There is no alternative that can match the scale and scope of these operations. In this time of pandemic, we must strengthen the existing mechanism. In the north-east, the health-care system is broken, and there is no capacity to mitigate the pandemic. By disrupting the humanitarian response, the regime is weaponizing the virus against Syrian civilians. In his review of United Nations humanitarian cross-line and cross-border operations (S/2020/401), the Secretary-General reports that, since the closure of Al-Yarubiyah border gate, diminished cross-line deliveries can cover only 31 per cent of the facilities previously supported. Again, the regime imposes death or surrender as the only options. To meet the needs of hospitals, we must urgently authorize the United Nations to conduct cross-border humanitarian aid in the region. As recommended by the Secretary-General, the Tel Abyad border gate is the most feasible alternative to Al-Yarubiyah. The people of the region urgently need the inclusion of Tel Abyad in the aid mechanism. Otherwise, the pandemic could create additional devastating consequences for civilians. Once the Security Council provides the necessary authorization, we are ready to immediately operationalize the Tel Abyad border gate for cross-border assistance and meet all the humanitarian needs in the north-east. I would also like to touch upon issues relating to water and electricity supplies. Despite our repeated calls and initiatives, there is a serious shortage of electricity and water supply in Ras Al-Ayn and A1-Bab. This is causing serious concern among the local populations and impedes efforts to effectively combat COVID-19. Electricity grids to the Ras Al-Ayn region and the water supply lines to the Al-Bab region come from the south. The electricity supply from Tishrin Dam to Ras Al-Ayn is interrupted on a regular basis by the terrorist organization People's Protection Units/Kurdistan Workers' Party. Furthermore, the Tishrin Dam is the only source of electrical power to the region. As the water pumps operate on electrical power, the power cut in Ras Al-Ayn affects the proper functioning of the Allouk water station and eventually constrains the water supply from the south. As we have explained on numerous occasions, the allegation that the water supply to the Al-Hasakah region has been deliberately prevented is baseless. And, as it comes from the murderous Al-Assad regime, it is a shameless lie. In the last 10 years, the Al-Assad regime has killed hundreds of thousands of people. The regime has used chemical weapons, shelled schools and bombed hospitals. We thought we had seen the worst in Syria. But now we are faced with a situation where the regime is ready to use COVID-19 as a biological weapon by further restricting humanitarian access. Since February, the Secretary-General has published three reports, all of which emphasize the suffering of the Syrian people at the hands of the Al-Assad regime. For more than nine years, my country has assumed the responsibility of protecting the Syrian people on behalf of the international community, not only in Syria but also in our own homeland. We will continue to do so until Syrian people's dignity is restored. That can be achieved only with the strong support of the Security Council. In the face of the pandemic, we need the cross-border mechanism more than ever. Renewal of the mechanism with two current crossing points in the north-west and one additional gate in the north-east is an absolute necessity. To enable the United Nations and its partners for longer-term humanitarian planning under the unpredictable circumstances resulting from COVID-19, the Security Council must authorize the mechanism without delay and for at least 12 months, as Under-Secretary-General Lowcock has requested. This is not a political matter, but our humanitarian duty for millions of Syrians. The Security Council has the obligation to prevent the recurrence of another humanitarian tragedy in Syria. It is time for the international community to stay united and act in concert. This is what the Syrian people expect from all of us now. The previous speaker again repeated his usual delusional allegations and shameless lies and does not deserve any response from me. It is the Syrian people who will answer the criminal regime he represents when they save and rebuild their country. These criminals - the Al-Assad regime and its representatives - will be held accountable and brought to justice for all the war crimes and crimes against humanity they have committed.
