Mr. Li Baodong (China) (spoke in Chinese):
Allow me to thank Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Haile Menkerios, President Mkapa
and Ambassador Mahmoud Kane, speaking on behalf
of President Mbeki, for their respective briefings. We
welcome the presence of representatives from Northern
and Southern Sudan at today's meeting.

Thanks to the joint efforts of Northern and
Southern Sudan, the referendum in Southern Sudan
was held smoothly and its final results were announced
two days ago. China respects the will and choice of the
Sudanese, and appreciates the unremitting efforts made
by Northern and Southern Sudan to promote the peace
process between them. The referendum is a crucial step
in the implementation of the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement (CPA), but it is not the end of the road.

The Security Council should pay close attention
to the new situation, new challenges and new tasks that
have emerged following the referendum. It must also
formulate corresponding strategies in a timely manner.
We also hope that Northern and Southern Sudan will,
in the spirit of mutual understanding and compromise,
continue to seek solutions to the outstanding issues
through dialogue and consultation, and see the
implementation of the CPA through to its culmination
in order to maintain peace and stability in the Sudan
and the region.

China appreciates the assistance and support
provided by the United Nations Mission in the Sudan
(UNMIS) and the Secretary-General's Panel on the
Referenda in the Sudan towards the orderly holding of
the referendum. We welcome their ongoing assistance
to Northern and Southern Sudan in the comprehensive
implementation of the CPA. The mandate of UNMIS
will expire at the end of April. At that time, the
Security Council will need to make a decision on the
future of the Mission. In that regard, China believes
that the views of the parties should be taken into full
consideration.

The African Union (AU) is a major strategic
partner of the United Nations in addressing the issue of
the Sudan. The AU and its High-Level Implementation
Panel on the Sudan, led by Mr. Mbeki, played an
important role in promoting the smooth holding of the
referendum in the Southern Sudan. China welcomes the
declaration on the Sudan issued at the recent AU
Summit.

In order to achieve lasting peace in the Sudan, it
is imperative that a comprehensive peace agreement be
reached in Darfur as soon as possible. China has
always been closely attentive to and supportive of the
Doha talks, in which we welcome the recent progress.
We urge all parties in Darfur that have yet to join the
Doha talks to do so immediately and without condition.
China supports the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur and its positive
contribution, under resolution 1935 (2010), to
promoting the political process in Darfur.
