Mr. Koonjul (Mauritius): Allow me first of all,
Sir, to congratulate your country on its assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council for the month of
August. It is indeed a pleasure for my delegation to see
you, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Colombia,
presiding over this open debate of the Security
Council. Your presence among us bears testimony to
the commitment and tireless efforts of Colombia in the
global fight against the proliferation of small arms and
light weapons. The recent conclusion of the United
Nations Conference on the Illicit Trade in Small Arms
and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects under the
presidency of Ambassador Reyes further underscored
the importance that Colombia attaches to this issue. I
am grateful to your delegation for providing a
background paper (S/2001/732, annex) to guide us in
our deliberations.

I wish also to express the appreciation of my
delegation to the Secretary-General for his valuable
statement this morning.

It is a widely acknowledged fact that small arms
and light weapons are today the weapons of choice in
armed conflicts. They continue to be extensively used
by rebel groups, warlords and terrorists to sustain
conflicts, to destabilize Governments and societies and
to create havoc. The brutal civil wars in Somalia,
Angola and Rwanda during the past decade, which
claimed more than 2.5 million lives, were fought
mainly with small arms.

These weapons are small and light only in name.
The miseries they cause have been immense and
widespread. Their proliferation remains a major threat
to international peace and security. Having primary
responsibility under the United Nations Charter for the
maintenance of international peace and security, the
Security Council has more than a moral obligation to
address the issue of small arms.

Africa is the continent most affected by small
arms and light weapons. In its resolution 1209 (1998),
on illicit arms flows in Africa, the Security Council
expressed grave concern over the destabilizing effects
of the illicit flow of arms, particularly small arms, to
Africa. Three years later, Africa is still awash in small
arms and light weapons, which continue to fuel and
sustain innumerable conflicts. Expert panels have
established beyond doubt the nexus between the
acquisition of weapons through illegal means and the
illegal exploitation of natural resources, such as
diamonds and other precious metals, which are used to
pay for the weapons.

Although the Security Council is relentlessly
making intensive efforts to find ways and means to end
various African conflicts, we have yet to witness a
decrease in the flow to Africa of small arms and light
weapons, most of which are manufactured in the
developed countries. Resolution 1209 (1998) stressed
the importance of all Member States, in particular
those involved in the manufacturing or marketing of
weapons, restricting arms transfers which could
provoke or prolong armed conflicts or aggravate
existing tensions in Africa. Unfortunately, when it
comes to Africa, such words are not adequately
translated into deeds.

In the statement (S/PRST/1999/28) made by its
President on 24 September 1999, the Security Council
called for measures to discourage arms flows to
countries or regions engaged in or emerging from
armed conflicts. That presidential statement also
encouraged Governments of arms-exporting countries
to exercise the highest degree of responsibility in their
transactions. In that regard, my delegation believes
that, before selling weapons, those countries have a
moral duty under international law to ascertain that the
end user will put the consignments to rightful use.
They should also be in a position to verify and confirm
the identity of end users and their capacity to maintain
control over the arms and the ammunition.

In June, the Council had a thorough discussion of
the report of the Secretary-General on prevention of
armed conflict (S/2001/574), in which it was
acknowledged that there could be no effective strategy
to prevent armed conflicts if the illicit trade in small
arms and light weapons were not properly addressed.
The Security Council can and should play an effective
role in that regard.

With conflicts becoming more and more complex,
peacekeeping operations should increasingly be viewed
as part of a broader process that should include post-
conflict peace-building strategies. Experience has
shown that well planned disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration programmes are an important and
effective instrument for reconstructing post-conflict
societies. In that regard, it is important that we
strengthen peacekeeping operations to incorporate
comprehensive programmes of disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration. The first United
Nations peacekeeping operation with such a
component, deployed in Central America in 1989,
paved the way for similar operations elsewhere. The
United Nations Mission in the Central African
Republic and the United Nations Transitional
Administration in East Timor, which had been
mandated to carry out the destruction of weapons as
part of their peace-building activities, should be
emulated.
Experiences such as the one in Liberia have
shown that large quantities of small arms which are not
destroyed in the aftermath of a conflict represent a
serious hurdle to the post-conflict peace-building
process and hinder reconstruction efforts when they
find their way into the hands of thugs, terrorists and
other antisocial elements.

In both conflict and post-conflict situations,
peacekeeping personnel and humanitarian workers
have been the victims of armed groups. In most cases,
small arms have been utilized to perpetrate these
assaults, resulting in loss of life and undermining the
confidence of co-workers in the field.

The disarmament process should not only involve
the collection of small arms and light weapons; it
should also include programmes dealing with arms
management, including measures for the safe storage of
these arms and for their eventual destruction.

Peace agreements should make provisions for
accurate information on the size and location of armed
forces and for details of weapons used in the conflict in
question. In that field, the cooperation and assistance
of civil society and of non-governmental organizations
is most desirable. Such provisions would facilitate the
easy retrieval of these weapons for their eventual
destruction. The destruction of these small arms not
only serves as a means of creating an atmosphere of
security, but also sends a strong signal that the
countries emerging from conflict are now embarking
on an era of peace. This would generate greater
confidence among their citizens.

Most people in post-conflict regions will not
readily give up their weapons unless they feel that their
lives and property are adequately secure. For an
effective and successful demobilization programme,
former combatants should be given such assurances,
and should also be the object of appropriate
reintegration programmes - except, of course, when
there is justification for prosecution for crimes against
humanity. Incentives should be given to combatants to
surrender their weapons. Similarly, adequate measures
need to be taken when dealing with the disarmament
and demobilization of child soldiers. Provisions should
be made for their education and training, which would
facilitate their reintegration into society. Special efforts
should be made also to reunite such children with their
families. The Programme of Action of the United
Nations Conference on the Illicit Trade in Small Arms
and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects includes several
recommendations in that regard, and it is important for
the Council to take them fully into account when
formulating peacekeeping mandates.

In recent years, targeted sanctions have shown
their effectiveness. The imposition of sanctions in the
form of arms embargoes by the Security Council has to
some extent helped in reducing the flow of arms to
areas of conflict. Such measures also make the
acquisition of these weapons more difficult and
expensive. However, we note that unscrupulous
elements continue to breach many United Nations arms
embargoes. In the case of the United Nations arms
embargo against UNITA, the Panel of Experts
established by the Security Council pursuant to
resolution 1237 (1999) last year systematically detailed
and denounced the role of arms brokers and shipping
agents in providing UNITA with arms. The Security
Council, in resolution 1196 (1998), called upon States
to adopt legislation making the violation of arms
embargoes a criminal offence. Such a call was
reiterated in the Programme of Action of the United
Nations Conference on the Illicit Trade in Small Arms
and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects.

But the Security Council will have to take further
measures to improve the effectiveness of its arms
embargoes. The ability of the Security Council, of
sanctions committees and of the Secretariat to monitor
arms embargoes needs to be enhanced, and the Security
Council has to show the political determination to do
this. It would be very important for the sanctions
committees to be provided with the means to submit in
their annual reports a section on the implementation of
the arms embargoes, on possible violations of the
measures reported to them and appropriate
recommendations for strengthening the effectiveness of
the arms embargoes.

The United Nations Secretariat should have a
permanent pool of experts to verify any non-
compliance with arms embargoes, which must then be
followed by concrete actions. We also have to intensify
the "name and shame" campaign against those involved
in breaching arms embargoes.

Mauritius welcomes the decision of the Economic
Community of West African States to renew for a
further period of three years the moratorium banning
the importation, exportation and manufacture of small
arms and light weapons. Such initiatives should be
encouraged and emulated by other regions.

The recent United Nations Conference on the
Illicit Trade in Small Arms has now added a new
impetus for fighting the illicit trade in small arms at all
levels. The Programme of Action is indeed an
important road map that should guide us all in
constraining the scourge caused by the illicit trade in
these weapons. However, we Africans are somewhat
disappointed that there was not a consensus on the
issue of the sale of small arms and light weapons to
non-State actors. The international community is fully
aware that when it comes to Africa, it is the heavily
armed negative forces that continue to undermine
peace and security for decades.

My delegation hopes that in the coming years,
good faith will prevail and a consensus will eventually
emerge in this regard.

