The President (interpretation from Spanish): I shall
now make a statement in my capacity as the
representative of Honduras.

My delegation received with satisfaction the
Secretary-General's report on the United Nations Mission
in Haiti (UNMIH). We believe that the progress made by
UNMIH in the short time since it assumed its functions
is extremely significant.

It is commendable that it has been possible, in
cooperation with the Organization of American States
(OAS) Electoral Observation Mission and the
International Civilian Mission (MICIVIH), to create the
right environment for the holding, on 25 June, of
municipal elections and the first round of the legislative
elections.

My delegation also believes that it is a positive sign
that, thanks to the presence and the activities of UNMIH,
the security situation in Haiti has improved. However, we
do agree with what the Secretary-General states in his
report and with the Council's presidential statement of 24
April this year to the effect that although UNMIH's
presence is intended to assist the Haitian Government in
establishing a secure and stable environment, the early
deployment of a permanent and effective independent
police force in Haiti is a key element for the long-term
stability of the country.

Accordingly, we support the expansion of the
Haitian National Police force, because this will to a great
extent help to strengthen democracy and to revitalize the
Haitian justice system.
 

We recognize the importance of sustaining a stable
and secure environment in Haiti, as well as the need to
bolster its social and democratic institutions. For this
reason, we would highlight the importance for Haiti of
continuing cooperation in the development of the country
being carried out by the United Nations Development
Programme and a number of important international
financial institutions.

In co-sponsoring this draft resolution, my delegation
endorses the statement of the Secretary-General in
paragraph 63 of his report:

"It is my hope that the Government, the political

parties and the people of Haiti will find ways to

move forward together, taking full advantage of the
presence in their country at this time of a large
number of personnel deployed by the international
community to assist them in their efforts to return
Haiti to the family of democratic nations"
(5/1995/614, para. 63).

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

There are no further speakers.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The meeting rose at 12.35 pm.
