We thank Mrs. Izumi Nakamitsu for presenting the reports of the Director General of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) (see S/2020/1056, annex) and the OPCW Fact-Finding Mission (see S/2020/1082, annex) in the Syrian Arab Republic. The report of the Director General on the July decision of the Executive Council was not a revelation for anyone. It predictably accuses the Syrian Arab Republic of non-compliance with that decision. That outcome was also predictable. It was obvious, from the very beginning, that this decision was unrealistic and its only one goal was to make Damascus look even worse in the eyes of the international community. No one cares to understand that Syria was being asked to do the impossible. The condition could not be met even in theory, as it required previously undeclared chemical weapons and facilities that were allegedly related to them to be declared within 90 days. These were the very facilities that were destroyed, which was verified, and not a single OPCW inspection since 2013 has been able to demonstrate the opposite. We have repeatedly expressed our detailed criticism of that decision, as well as the report of the OPCW Investigation and Identification Team on the incidents in Ltamenah in March, 2017, which the decision was based on. The decision itself was pushed through the Executive Council by a very small margin. The Investigation and Identification Team report is politically biased, factually unreliable and technically unconvincing. It cannot claim to be any sort of expert investigation. However, even that pseudo report, when touching upon the military situation in Ltamenah and Hama in March and April 2017, comes to the conclusion that the Syrian Arab Armed Forces had no need - even hypothetically - to use chemical weapons. We agree with the authors of the report on that point. At that time, the Syrian army's offensive had been successful in Hama governorate and had regained control of most of its territory. There was no reason, even in theory, for the Syrian army to use chemical weapons and thereby draw the fire onto itself. In any case, logic has not been a part of the arsenal of our Western colleagues for a long time now. If it were, they would have to admit that conclusions on a number of high-profile cases of alleged chemical-weapon use, baselessly ascribed to Syria, and recently also to Russia, lie outside the bounds of common sense. It is telling that Western colleagues had started to call upon the Security Council to punish Syria as early as in July, long before this report of the Director General was issued. In other words, they understood perfectly well that Syria stood no chance of complying with the July decision of the OPCW Executive Council. We hope that the other Security Council members take a critical approach to the current developments and will refuse to participate in this farce that threatens to undermine the authority of the Council. The last time (see S/PV.8764), we drew attention to the fact that, in the cover letter transmitting the monthly report on the implementation of resolution 2118 (2013), the Secretary-General all of a sudden used the language of that biased and unrealistic decision of the OPCW Executive Council that it is imperative "to hold accountable all those who have used chemical weapons" and that it allegedly requires the unity of the Council to uphold this "urgent obligation". Regrettably, we are seeing the same situation repeat itself. Condoning such biased approaches does not do the Secretariat any favours. It is even more inappropriate to directly and publicly side with those who besmirch Syria, while knowing how unfounded, or at least dubious, such allegations are. We cannot allow distorted and politicized phrases of warning to seep into reports published on behalf of the Secretary-General. This is a matter of his personal authority and of the authority of the United Nations as a whole. We are concerned by the inclusion of accusatory paragraphs on outstanding issues with regard to the initial declaration, especially now that we have learned from former OPCW inspector Henderson during the Arria Formula video-teleconference on 28 September 2020 that the Technical Secretariat leadership is instructing the Declaration Assessment Team to keep those issues open. Syrians will never be able to close those issues with such an approach. Let me also recall that, according to the same experts, many States encountered similar problems when filing their declarations at the initial stage of joining the Chemical Weapons Convention. However, in those cases they were interpreted as minor drawbacks that did not undermine the integrity of the declarations. We are therefore seeing that the Technical Secretariat's treatment of Damascus is biased. Why is the Secretariat participating in such political games? Moreover, it is unclear on what basis Western delegations are try to initiate a detailed discussion of Syria's initial declaration at the Security Council. The Hague has the prerogative to address these issues. Information that States submit in the framework of initial declarations is strictly confidential. It should not be discussed publicly, especially not in New York. This looks like another clumsy attempt to catch Syria red-handed. The Fact-Finding Mission reports on the incidents in Aleppo in November 2018 and Saraqib in August 2016 are another example of the double standards being used by the OPCW Technical Secretariat. Those documents were prepared only upon our repeated insistence. At the same time, for over a year we and the Syrian side had been bombarded with requests for more information. Something was always lacking; the Technical Secretariat encountered new insurmountable obstacles; samples were lost and, at some point, we became exhausted with trying to prove that we had transmitted all the materials. Why did the investigation of those incidents take so long and become so complicated? Perhaps it was because the Syrian army, not the opposition, was accused of using chemical weapons. Of course, we have no illusions that the Fact-Finding Mission would adopt a principled and unbiased approach. The mission could not establish the use of chemical weapons by opposition groups. There was no need for the Technical Secretariat to pretend that it was conducting an investigation. It could have issued its conclusion at the outset and admitted that it would not even consider a scenario in which the Syrian opposition might have used chemical weapons. We are seeing our Western colleagues increasingly resort to the practice of fabricating accusations of the use chemical weapons to punish inconvenient countries everywhere. Just yesterday, the First Committee adopted an extremely politicized and confrontational draft resolution on the Chemical Weapons Convention (see A/C.1/75/PV.12). At one time, that document was genuinely consensus-based and aimed at strengthening the integrity of the organization. Now it has lost all of its initial meaning and become another biased instrument used by the West to impose sanctions. What is especially telling is the inclusion in the draft resolution of the paragraph about the incident with Russian blogger Alexei Navalny. During the general debate in the First Committee, we asked the German party a number of concrete questions on that matter. However, there was no response. The "highly likely" paradigm does not favour citing facts and providing answers. Instead of frank and direct talk, our Western colleagues pretend that Russia's guilt has already been proven. We are seeing this tactic being used in the context of the Skripal incident. Let me pose a direct question to our Western colleagues. Do they realize the results of their acts? We are witnessing symptoms, if not the metastasis, of a severe disease - a large-scale crisis of confidence at the OPCW. The consequences of such a disastrous situation extend far beyond the organization. This is not a critique of the results of particular investigations; it is a systemic problem, which, unless solved, will not allow the OPCW to function normally and reliably. We have accumulated a critical mass of challenges to the OPCW Technical Secretariat and leadership. Proof of manipulation and falsification in its reports has become too overwhelming to ignore. Let me remind the Council that our claims regarding the report of the Fact-Finding Mission in the Syrian Arab Republic (FFM) on the April 2017 incident in Khan Shaykhun were ignored despite abundant evidence that the incident had been staged. We are still waiting for an explanation from the Technical Secretariat regarding various instances of manipulation in the FFM report on the events in Douma in April 2018, as well as a response from the Director General on how he is going to address the exposed irregularities. Many direct and concrete questions asked by Mr. Ian Henderson, Mr. Aaron Mate and Mr. Theodore Postol during an Arria Formula meeting on 28 September were left unanswered. Again, there has been complete silence regarding the facts raised in the statement made by Mr. Jose Bustani, whom our colleagues failed to silence in October. That is why Russia continues to insist that such files be discussed in the open. We are glad we have already managed to ensure that three times, even though they would always covertly try to prevent it. As we have said on many occasions, neither Syria nor - we hope - members of the Security Council have anything to hide from the global community. It is regrettable and very telling that OPCW Director General Arias is not taking part in this meeting, even after our Western colleagues explicitly stressed, at the previous meeting on the same item (see S/PV.8764), the importance of his participation. We remember perfectly well that this was why they were so hysterical and unwilling to accept our proposal of having former Director General Bustani as a briefer. Now a month has passed, but incumbent Director General Arias has not yet briefed the Security Council. If the OPCW leadership is entirely proper, professional, and unbiased in its actions with regard to the Syrian chemical file, as Western delegations claim, then it surely has nothing to fear. It should be more interested than anyone to respond to all the criticism. If the criticism is inadequate, the OPCW should counter it. The more it tries to evade this conversation, the more everyone is inclined to think that the OPCW leadership has something to conceal. We hope that Director General Arias will summon up his courage to respond to these questions in December. Let me state right now that there are many questions and we see no reason why we should not pose them in an open meeting. The times when we could technically discuss a Director General's reports on the progress of resolution 2118 (2013) are long gone. At stake now is the authority, integrity and fate of the OPCW. Only those who enjoy impunity and stage chemical-weapons provocations stand to benefit from systemic OPCW problems remaining unsolved. Like all responsible members of the international community, Russia remains committed to the goals of the CWC and recognizes its responsibility with regard to the future of the OPCW and the global chemical-weapons non-proliferation regime. That is why we will continue to stand up for objective investigations and oppose disinformation and blatant lies. Second statement by the Permanent Representative of the Russian Federation to the United Nations, Vassily Nebenzia In response to the statements made today by the representatives of Germany and, in particular, the United Kingdom, regarding allegations we hear time and again in the form of "Russia did such and such a thing and must be held to account", we agree with only one thing - the use of chemical weapons is unacceptable and, if it really took place, the guilty must be punished. Beyond that, we agree with nothing else that has been said. The situation with regard to Mr. Navalny and the Skripals has again been raised. Let me remind the Council what many have started to forget or prefer not to remember at all - the bulk of our questions relating to the Skripal incident remained unanswered. The British side would rather ignore them because it has already proclaimed that Russia is to blame, saying "Why delve into detail? Everyone knows that it is highly likely". However, I think we will find a way to refresh the memory of our British colleagues of those issues and to demand answers to the questions raised. The situation with Alexei Navalny unfolds along the same lines - a conclusion is made, a verdict pronounced, and Russia just needs to confess. In the meantime, our German colleagues avoid answering our very basic questions. Ambassador Heusgen asserted that the German side had answered all the questions we posed to them in the First Committee. I have here our representative's First Committee statement, which contains those questions. The German delegation has not answered them. On Syria, some try to convince us that everything has been proven and that Damascus just needs to confess and repent. But here is the point - nothing has been proven. The IIT's falsification is not a proof. The IIT is their play toy for manipulation. Sadly enough, the OPCW is starting to be used for the same purpose. We have just seen our German colleague employ a classic case of propaganda. As if trying to mesmerize the audience, he says over and over that there is no crisis of confidence, that the Al-Assad regime killed its subjects with chemical weapons, among other ways, and that this is a verified fact that Russia is covering up. Our response is that it is a nice try at hypnosis, but it is not persuasive enough. We stress to Mr. Heusgen that nothing has been proven or the proof convinces only those who ended up plunging Syria into the abyss of civil war. Or does Germany live under alternative laws of physics and logic that make it take for granted tales and fables worthy of the Grimm brothers? Experts cite dozens of concrete and obvious discrepancies in OPCW investigations; Germany ignores them. Those who took part in the investigations point to blatant fabrications; Germany does not care. If we stick to this approach of ignoring the elephant in the room, we will not only fail to uncover the truth, but - as I warned - will ultimately discredit the OPCW. Third statement by the Permanent Representative of the Russian Federation to the United Nations, Vassily Nebenzia In response to the Permanent Representative of Germany, I had a chance to visit the Caesar exhibit in in 2018. I saw those photographs at the Holocaust Memorial Museum in Washington, D.C., where we were invited by Nikki Hailey, who served back then as the United States Permanent Representative to the United Nations. We can discuss the so-called Caesar report issue on another occasion, since it is not directly related to the Syrian chemical dossier, which we are discussing today. We can discuss it with Mr. Heusgen in a bilateral format or devote a separate meeting to it. With regard to Syria and the case to which Mr. Heusgen was referring, I would once again like to draw the Council's attention to the statement made by the Russian representative in the First Committee, which is full of questions that have remained unanswered. With regard to what he said on that matter and the role of Germany in the Navalny incident, the case to which Mr. Heusgen was referring, I think that he has revealed himself. In his statement, he emphasized that the German side deliberately redacted the chemical formula of the substance that - based on the allegations of the German side - might have been used to poison Alexei Navalny, which we had requested. His is trying toe persuade us that we are blaming others, but I think that is exactly what he is doing. The bigger part of his intervention was about allegations against Russia. The issue of Syria was overshadowed by that. I would also like to remind the Council that the OPCW report concluded that the substance that was allegedly used to poison Mr. Navalny is not on the prohibited chemical weapons list, under the Chemical Weapons Convention. Mr. Heusgen's assertion that it had been done for reasons of confidentiality is, of course, redundant. The formula is absolutely necessary, so we will continue to insist that it be provided. I also confirm that the Russian Federation is today in consultations with the OPCW on how to proceed and cooperate on that issue.
