Mr. Lopez Garcia de Lomana (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): The two previous speakers discussed the issue
of education. Spain also wishes to address that matter.

I should like to begin by reaffirming the widely
shared notion that children, and especially girls, are
the most exposed victims in any armed conflict. They
are vulnerable on account of a twofold defencelessness,
both as members of the civilian population and owing to
their status as minors. This means that crimes against
children are particularly appalling and reprehensible.
The protection of children must therefore always
remain our priority.

As part of Spain's firm commitment to humanitarian
law and diplomacy, which is widely recognized in the
Council, Iwish to address today the important dimension
of education, because an organization without training
is an organization doomed to paralysis. In the same
vein, a country without access to education is a country
without possibilities for development or stability.

In post-conflict situations, education is the
key - and practically the only key 4 that allows
access to reintegration, economic prosperity and
social reconciliation in coexistence. In the face of
those challenges, the 2015 Safe Schools Declaration
is an effective political commitment that articulates
tangible measures. In May, Spain had the privilege of
organizing the third Safe Schools Conference in Palma
de Mallorca, following on from those that took place in
Oslo in 2015 and Buenos Aires in 2017. Three lines of
action underpinned the Mallorca Conference: gender,
accountability and doctrine.

First, attacks on schools and the military use
of educational facilities have particularly acute
consequences on the gender dimension. In wartime,
women and girls are often a specific target - they
suffer rape and abduction, they are victims of human
trafficking, and they suffer greater atrocities and
for longer periods of time, with longer-lasting
consequences. In the field of education, girls are the
first to leave school and the last to return. We should
keep that in mind when we apply the Lucens Guidelines
for Protecting Schools and Universities from Military
Use during Armed Conflict, which is a fundamental
reference point in the Safe Schools Declaration. We
cannot simply remove our gender glasses as they are
essential to identifying those who are most vulnerable.

Secondly, on accountability, Spain will continue to
promote monitoring, reporting and the establishment
of mechanisms to attribute accountability for attacks
against students, teachers and schools. In that regard,
we commend the excellent work of both UNICEF and
the Global Coalition to Protect Education from Attack,
which includes UNESCO.

Thirdly, the incorporation of all of these principles
into the domestic legal systems of States is linked to
the implementation of the Guidelines for Protecting
Schools and Universities from Military Use during
Armed Conflict. We advocate the incorporation of
these principles into military doctrine manuals, the
design of defence policies and the legislation of States
parties to the Safe Schools Declaration. Our Ministries
of Foreign Affairs and Defence are already working on
organizing a specific seminar on this topic that will
take place in the first half of 2020 and will allow us to
offer assistance to other countries that are a party to the
Declaration that have experienced conflict situations.

The third Safe Schools Conference allowed us to
share lessons learned, articulate practical responses
and reflect on some of the main challenges that remain.
Progress is always the fruit ofjoint work. The Mallorca
Conference brought together 78 national delegations,
13 international organizations and 23 civil society
entities. Without their support and without our close
collaboration with Norway and Argentina, which we
value greatly, none of that would have been possible.
Ninety-five countries have so far acceded to the Safe
Schools Declaration. We hope to soon surpass the
symbolic figure of 100 States and gain further accessions
to the Declaration, not only because of the landmark
importance ofthose numbers, but also because it will be
a sign of growing support and momentum and promote
the effective application of our operational principles.

I conclude by thanking Poland for having
convened this debate and especially for its work in the
humanitarian field on the Council, culminating in the
recently adopted resolutions. I wish to underscore the
value of the statements delivered by today's briefers.
We are especially pleased to have heard today from
Ms. Virginia Gamba and Ms. Henrietta Fore, and we
wish to express our most sincere gratitude to both of
them for their contributions at the Conference in Palma
de Mallorca.

We need to ensure that the Safe Schools Declaration
is progressively consolidated as a framework of
universal validity - as universal as the principles that
support it; as universal as human rights themselves; as
universal as the right to life and childhood education.

