Mr. Makharoblishvili (Georgia): At the outset, I
would like to express my delegation's gratitude to the
Australian presidency for convening today's debate.

Georgia fully associates itself with the statement
made by the observer of the European Union. In
addition, I would like to make some comments in my
national capacity.

We acknowledge the growing threat of international
terrorism and its new forms. In order to effectively
respond to that threat, Georgia is developing national
anti-terrorist capabilities. Accordingly, to avoid the
misuse of Georgian territory for transit by international
terrorist groups, the Government of Georgia is
strengthening border protection and is cooperating
closely with neighbouring countries in anti-terrorist
activities. We have ratified all United Nations counter-
terrorism conventions and continue to take the necessary
measures to facilitate the implementation of sanctions
imposed by the relevant international organizations.

We recognize the need to fully implement resolution
1540 (2004), on preventing non-State actors from
obtaining weapons of mass destruction, their means
of delivery and related materials. As that resolution
is a vital component of the international community's
toolbox for combating the proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction, we welcome the extension of its
mandate to 2021.

The risk posed by the occupation of a large part
of our territory is our most important problem. The
occupied territories of Georgia, like other grey zones of
the world where international control mechanisms are
either non-existent or very weak, have a serious potential
to be used for a variety of illegal activities, including
those related to terrorism. The fact that in recent years
there have been several attempts to smuggle nuclear
and radioactive materials through occupied Georgian
territory further amplifies the sense of danger. It must
be stressed that such challenges should be a matter of
concern not only for individual countries but for the
international community as a whole.

Before concluding, I wish to reiterate Georgia's
readiness to offer constructive and open cooperation
aimed at strengthening security and minimizing the
possible negative impact of the emerging challenges
that are typical in our rapidly developing world. In that
regard, I would like to mention Georgia's support for
and active contribution to international anti-terrorist
operations. To give one example, Georgia is one of the
largest non-NATO troop contributors to the International
Security Assistance Force (ISAF) in Afghanistan
and continues to serve as a transit country for ISAF
supplies. Bearing in mind the tremendous efforts and
sacrifices made in Afghanistan, Georgia intends to
remain the largest non-NATO troop contributor, with
no draw-down until the end of ISAF operations. Let me
also reiterate our determination to play an active role in
NATO's Resolute Support Mission to train, assist and
advise the Afghan National Security Forces.

