Mr. Lamek (France) (spoke in French): I too
would like to thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Zarif, for his briefing, and
I welcome the two Ministers who have done us the
honour of being here today, Mr. Dacie and Mr. Hoxhaj.

France is pleased that the elections on 8 June in
Kosovo took place peacefully and transparently. The
robust participation by the Serb community in the
national elections is also a very positive sign. The
election proves that the path of dialogue will enable
balanced solutions to be found for all communities in
Kosovo. We hope now that a compromise will finally
be found on the speedy formation of a Government,
in full respect for democratic institutions. Kosovo
needs a stable Government. That is in the interests of
all the people of Kosovo, given its pressing economic
challenges, as well as in the interests of the region. It is
also the Council's expectation.

More than a year after the historic First Agreement
of Principles Governing the Normalization of
Relations, of 19 April 2013, it is in everyone's interests
that the dialogue between Pristina and Belgrade
resume quickly. Both parties will have to demonstrate
a constructive spirit and search for compromise to
allow for the normalization of their relations and for
the implementation of the agreement reached last
year. That will also have an impact on their European
rapprochement, a subject to which I will return. To
accomplish that, the formation of a Government in
Kosovo is a prerequisite. A return to the parties'
courageous willingness to look to the future together
that prevailed in spring 2013 is another.

Kosovo will not be able to turn confidently to
the future without light being shed on its past. We
thank Chief Prosecutor Clint Williamson, the Special
Investigative Task Force and the European Union Rule
of Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) as a whole for their
tireless work over the past three years on the allegations
of crimes contained in the Marty report. Now it is up
to Kosovo to shoulder its responsibilities and facilitate
the establishment of a tribunal charged with following
up on the work of EULEX. Given the gravity of the
alleged crimes, the European Union has also expressed
its expectations vis-a-vis the Kosovo authorities as to
the appropriate response.

We do not doubt the willingness of Kosovo to
engage in a legal process that will respond in a fair and
impartial manner to those allegations and to deal with all
aspects of the difficult times that Kosovo experienced
in the late 1990s. A satisfactory outcome to the case
now depends in particular on the political parties in
Pristina, which must demonstrate their maturity and
determination, as they have done in the past.

I would like to condemn the violent incidents that
rocked Kosovo on 22 July, while at the same time
acknowledging the responsible stance adopted by the
security forces in Kosovo in their measured response.
Despite occasional incidents such as the death of a
Serbian policeman and a Kosovo citizen yesterday in the
border area, which we strongly condemn, the security
situation in Kosovo, fortunately, remains stable overall.

I conclude by commending Kosovo and Serbia's
joint progress towards European Union integration,
following the normalization of their relations. Important
steps have been taken recently by the European
Commission and Pristina for the conclusion of the
European Union-Kosovo Stabilization and Association
Agreement, which is aimed at supporting Kosovo's
development and reforms and thereby contributing
to the stabilization of the region. We hope that the
Agreement will be finalized very soon.
Serbia, meanwhile, has made significant efforts
in terms of internal reforms and relations with its
neighbours. The negotiations for its accession to the
European Union, launched on 21 January, continue and
will have to focus in particular on issues related to the
rule of law. That aspect is advantageous for the entire
region, and we welcome the efforts already made by
Serbia.

It is now up to Serbia and Kosovo to meet their
mutual commitments in order to together continue their
process of European rapprochement.

