Ms. Citaku: I am honoured to be here today, and I
sincerely appreciate the opportunity given to me by the
members of the Security Council, whose time is very
valuable. I know that, as we speak, the world has many
pressing challenges and problems to address.

It was in 1993 that members of the Council in
this Chamber spoke about Kosovo for the first time.
At that time, when based solely on our ethnicity we
were exposed to apartheid, imprisoned for our political
beliefs and expelled from our schools and rightful
jobs, the Security Council members in this chamber
spoke up. Later in 1998 and 1999, as we were living the
nightmare of brutality, the Security Council adopted
seven resolutions calling for peace and the end of
ethnic cleansing. For that we will be forever grateful.
All members spoke on our behalf. They were with us
when approximately 1 million Kosovars - half of our
population - were deported, while assisting us in the
refugee camps in Albania and Macedonia. And they
were with us when we returned home. Although we
found everything in ashes, we rebuilt our homes and
lives with their help and support. They were there for
us during the most difficult days, but now it is simply
unnecessary, counterproductive and, frankly, cynical
to come here every three months, repeat the same old
stories just for purely political reasons and a power play.

Resolution 1244 (1999), adopted 18 years ago,
expired a long time ago. First of all, it refers to a union
that no longer exists. I am sure that the members of
the Council have heard about Montenegro's recent
accession to NATO. According to the resolution,
however, Montenegro is part of a union called Serbia
and Montenegro. Secondly, it was precisely in this
Chamber that on 24 October 2005 the Council adopted
a presidential statement (S/PRST/2005/51) calling
for the beginning of a political process to determine
Kosovo's future status.

It was precisely the Secretary General's Special
Envoy, the wise President Ahtisaari, who, after a
very intensive and extensive process of negotiations,
proposed independence for Kosovo as a final solution.
It was precisely the International Court of Justice
that, at Serbia's request for review, specifically and
unambiguously stated that Kosovo was within its
rights when it declared independence and that its
independence did not violate the international law. I
invite everyone to come to Kosovo and see the reality,
because - trust me - the discussions in this Chamber
do not correspond to it.

I have said it before, and I will say it again: just
because Serbia does not recognize us as a State does
not mean that we are not within our rights to be an
independent State and people. Just because we are not
yet a State Member of the United Nations - because
of purely geopolitical power plays beyond our
control - does not make us any less of a State. And,
yes, we are not a perfect State. We face many challenges.
We have much that remains to be done. But we all know
that the reason that we came and sat here today - and
why we do so every three months - is not because we
are not perfect.

Let us take the example of minority rights. If the
situation of minorities in any given country were to
be the criterion for meeting here every three months,
believe me when I say that Kosovo would be far down
on the list, not because the situation concerning the
integration of minorities is perfect but because we
have gone to great lengths to accommodate their
needs. Serbs in Kosovo are the most privileged
minority in Europe. Does anyone know where the most
discriminated community in Europe lives? The answer
is in Serbia f Presheve, Medvegje and Bujanoc, where
every day the Albanian community is faced by all forms
of harsh discrimination. I am not talking only about
high levels of intolerance or hidden discrimination,
which has always existed, but the visible and constant
discrimination of ethnic Albanians, especially in the
areas of the economy and education, including their
underrepresentation at the local and central levels
of employment in the public sector and many other
restrictions that they face on a daily basis.

I know that because I visited them myself. Yet
there is no Security Council meeting or discussion
concerning their rights. The bottom line is that
Serbia uses this platform and somehow insists on an
asymmetrical representation. lt insists that we are
somehow not equal, that somehow they are superior. Let
me to say it again, loud and clear. We are independent,
equal and confident, and we are not inferior. There
is something inherently racist in that attitude. Serbia
has always tried to portray us as an unworthy class of
people with no culture, a second class. Try saying that
to Majlinda Kelmendi, our Olympic gold medallist;
or Petrit Halilaj, who was honoured last week at the
Venice Biennale; or Mergim Cahani, who three years
ago had an idea and today is running the fastest-
growing information and technology company in the
region; or the brand-new graduates I met the other day
at the American University in Pristina, who were full
of hopes, dreams and curiosity, no different from their
peers in Europe and America.

What I am trying to say is that although Kosovo has
many challenges, this Chamber is not where we should
address them. Furthermore, spending the Security
Council's precious resources on a Mission that no
longer serves a purpose is an injustice to all the people
who do need its help. The United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) has no
role in Kosovo, which is why we were surprised to see
that its budget and staff for next year are increasing.
The Council may choose to keep an expensive Mission
in Kosovo, but there is no role for it to play in its
current form.

The most recent Security Council debate on
peacekeeping missions (see S/PV.7918), initiated by
the United States delegation in the presence of the
Secretary-General and supported by the members of
the Council, highlighted conclusions that the Council's
approach to peacekeeping missions should change,
which is precisely what we have been calling for a long
time now. Without undermining the vital importance
that peacekeeping missions have for security in
general, I should point out that the mandates of some
missions - UNMIK being a good example - were
drafted years, sometimes even decades, ago. I would
therefore like to take this opportunity to thank
Ambassadors Haley and Delattre for saying that this
was the right time to close the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo.

The second thing I want to talk about is the
dialogue with Serbia. While we will remain committed
to it, we are tired of double standards, double games
and ambiguity. On the one hand Serbia tells us that it is
for peace and reconciliation; on the other, every day it
misuses the INTERPOL Red Notice system and issues
warrants against our leaders and freedom fighters who
defended their homes from atrocities, as the Council
and the entire world are well aware. That seems to be
part of the old pattern of brutality mixed with fake
bureaucracy that tormented Kosovars for decades.
After beating, humiliating, killing or, in the best cases,
expelling them from Kosovo, Serbian police would
draw up terrorism charges against them to prevent them
from returning home or having a normal life.

By the way, those subject to these kinds of fake
bureaucratic tactics and fake allegations were not just
Kosovars. Many were leaders from other countries,
including a former United States President, a Prime
Minister of the United Kingdom and Prime Ministers
of Italy and Germany, as well as Foreign Ministers and
Ministers ofDefence were included on Red Notices. The
most recent episode, involving Mr. Ramush Haradinaj,
the former Prime Minister of Kosovo, has thankfully
ended, and although it took a few months, he has finally
been released by the French authorities. What happened
to him says a lot about the state of mind that prevails in
Serbia today. Mr. Haradinaj was acquitted not once but
twice by the Tribunal in The Hague.

Serbia knows very well that it has lost the battle
with Kosovo. Militarily, it was lost in 1999; politically
in 2008; juridically in 2009, with the ruling of the
International Court of Justice. And it is now clear
that Serbia wants to win the moral challenge by
trying somehow to artificially create a moral parity
between itself and the rest of the countries of the
former Yugoslavia. That is simply false. There was one
aggressor in the former Yugoslavia, and it was Serbia.
There was one military that fought for expansion
and committed genocide. The rest of us - Slovenia,
Croatia, Bosnia and Herzegovina and Kosovo - were
fighting for freedom and our lives. Even today, Serbia
refuses to accept historical responsibility for what
happened. Even today we heard a representative of
Serbia's Government deny a massacre that happened
before the eyes of the world. The point I am trying to
make is that for reconciliation to happen, Serbia has to
accept Kosovo as an equal and as a State. And it also
has to accept its historical responsibility. Would the
reconciliation between France and Germany have ever
happened if Germany had denied its responsibility for
the Second World War?

Serbia has failed to deal with its own past. It has
failed to deal with the real - not fictional, but real and
well-documented - crimes that were committed in
Kosovo during the war. The Centre for Human Rights
in Serbia published a horrifying report with facts and
figures that illustrate the unprecedented measures that
Serbia undertook to hide traces of its war crimes, going
as far as to erect buildings on top ofmass graves. Imagine
the feelings of the thousand families in Kosovo that
are demanding answers and a proper burial. Instead of
finding the strength to deal with its own past, instead of
seeking catharsis, Serbia has chosen the path of denial.
The number of Serbians charged with or convicted for
crimes committed in Kosovo is zero. Rather, they are
being promoted to high-level positions, as in the case of
General Dikovie, whose responsibility for killing 1,400
civilians is documented.

Regardless, however, we will not allow Serbia to
deter us from our own commitments. Between 2009
and 2015 alone, Kosovo institutions issued more than
20 indictments for war crimes. Every life is important
and every death should be properly investigated. We
will remain committed to peace and dialogue, just as
we have always been. And we will work harder and
harder to become a responsible member of the family
of the free nations of the world.

We also want to become contributors to regional
and global security. In accordance with our laws
and Constitution, therefore, we have initiated the
establishment of a Kosovo army. We will engage in an
intensive and serious effort to convince the local Serbian
population to support this project. All other minorities
in Kosovo support it. But we will not allow anyone to
hold us hostage, nor will we give veto power to anyone
in that regard. We will push for constitutional changes,
but if it becomes obvious that Serbia is interfering and
not allowing local Serbian members of Parliament to
decide on their own, then we will move ahead with
legislative changes.

We are not buying MIGs, so there is no room
for panic. This is a small defensive force, which
will complete our State security infrastructure, in
accordance with the security sector review that we
conducted together with NATO.

As Council members may have already heard, after
the no-confidence motion last week, Kosovo will hold
early parliamentary elections in June this year. We have
invited international observers to monitor the process.
For Kosovo, the credibility of the electoral process is
far more important than the outcome. Way too many
challenges lie ahead this year, and the new Government
will need full credibility and legitimacy to push forward
the agenda.

Furthermore, while there are obvious differences
between the political parties in Kosovo, just like in any
democracy, there is a fundamental agreement and a
broad social consensus about the Euro-Atlantic future
of Kosovo. There is no Great Kosovo or Great Albania;
there are Albanians living in Kosovo, Albanians living
in Albania, Albanians living in Macedonia - our
common goal and shared objective is to be equal citizens
of the European Union.

