Mr. Vieira (Brazil): I would like to begin
my statement on behalf of Brazil by thanking the
Government of Sweden for organizing this debate and
welcoming the newly elected non-permanent members
of the Security Council: Bolivia, Ethiopia, Kazakhstan,
Italy and Sweden.

The various conflicts in the Middle East are a matter
of grave concern for the international community,
particularly the United Nations, but more so for the
inhabitants of that region - the first victims of what
looks like an endless cycle of violence. Brazil, as well
as the international community in its overwhelming
majority, supports a negotiated settlement to the
conflict between Israelis and Palestinians * one that
meets Israel's security needs and the Palestinian right
to statehood and sovereignty, as Brazil has constantly
advocated, and one that fully takes into account
resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973), among others.
We have repeatedly appealed to both sides to refrain
from acts of Violence that may push the parties further
away from the negotiating table and the two-State
solution that we all envision. We firmly repudiate all
terrorist activities, regardless of their motivation. As
Secretary-General Antonio Guterres has stated, such
acts should not be allowed to deter the parties from the
need for a renewed commitment to dialogue.

Brazil appreciatively takes note of and welcomes
Security Council resolution 2334 (2016), which
condemns all acts of violence against civilians,
including acts ofterror as well as all acts ofprovocation,
incitement and destruction, and reaffirms that Israeli
settlements in Palestinian territory are illegal under
international law and an obstacle for a just, lasting
and comprehensive peace. It comes as an important
addition to a stock of Security Council resolutions:
resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973), 478 (1980), 1397
(2002), 1515 (2003), and 1850 (2008), which represent
an instrument that the international community uses to
point the parties in the direction of peace. We expect
that that initiative and the Paris Peace Conference held
last weekend will motivate further multilateral efforts
favouring the return to meaningful negotiations between
the parties, thereby leading to the establishment of two
States, Israel and Palestine, living peacefully side-by-
side with internationally recognized borders.

The recently announced nationwide ceasefire in
Syria, brokered by Turkey and the Russian Federation
and supported by resolution 2236 (2016), represents a
much-needed measure of hope in the efforts to reach
a political solution to the conflict. We welcome those
developments. Brazil urges all parties to respect the
ceasefire and engage constructively in the negotiations
to take place in Astana and Geneva, based on the road
map established by resolution 2254 (2015), allowing for
an inclusive and Syrian-led political process.

Last month, Brazil supported two important
decisions of the General Assembly concerning Syria.
Resolution 71/ 130 demanded an immediate end to
attacks on civilians throughout the country, while
resolution 71/248 established the International,
Impartial and Independent Mechanism to assist in the
Investigation and Prosecution of those Responsible
for the Most Serious Crimes under International Law
committed in the Syrian Arab Republic since March
2011. Those initiatives confirmed that the Assembly can
have a relevant role in seeking peace and accountability
for Syria without prejudice to the responsibilities of the
Security Council.

Brazil welcomed the resolution of the political
impasse in Lebanon with the election of President
Michel Aoun and the formation of a Government of
National Accord under Prime Minister Saad Hariri.
We congratulate the new Lebanese leadership and
reiterate our long-term commitment to the development
and stability of Lebanon, including through our
participation in the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon (UNIFIL). Brazil underlines that the strategic
review of UNIFIL currently being undertaken by the
Secretariat, as called for in resolution 2305 (2016),
must take into consideration the strategic, operative
and financial needs of the mission, as well as its highly
volatile security environment.

With regard to Iraq, we are concerned by
the humanitarian impact of the ongoing military
operations in Mosul. The Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs reports that approximately
140,000 people have been displaced by hostilities in and
around the city - a figure that continues to rise. Food
and water shortages are affecting the civilians ofMosul,
who are already being subjected to a harsh winter. In
Mosul and elsewhere in Iraq, we strongly condemn
tactics attributed to the what is known as the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) that may constitute
war crimes or crimes against humanity, including
forced displacements, attacks against humanitarian
workers and the use of civilians as human shields.
We highlight the need to plan long-term stabilization
and reconstruction efforts in Mosul. Another priority
should be the long-term reconciliation of all ethnic
and religious communities coexisting in the areas once
occupied by ISIL. Women, girls, minorities and other
vulnerable populations deserve particular attention in
that regard.

Lastly, on Yemen, we regret the absence of a
durable cessation of hostilities as well as the parties'
unwillingness to accept the road map for negotiations
proposed by Special Envoy Ismail Ould Cheikh Ahmed,
whose work we support.

In conclusion, Brazil urges all Yemeni actors and
their external supporters to renew efforts towards a
negotiated solution and to avoid unilateral measures
that might jeopardize this process.

