Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): At the outset, I would like
to express our appreciation to you, Sir, for convening this
important meeting. We consider today's deliberations
and presidential statement S/PRST/2016/12 to be an
important step towards the practical implementation of
resolution 2282 (2016), on post-conflict peacebuilding,
first of all in the African continent.

While Ukraine aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the observer of the European Union, I would
like to highlight several points in my national capacity.

First, with regard to conflict prevention, it is
clear from resolution 2282 (2016) that the focus of
the peacebuilding architecture has to shift to conflict
prevention in order to avert an escalation of inter-State
or internal tensions into violent conflict and to prevent
imminent relapses into conflict. The Council should
be more proactive in considering emerging conflicts
and fragile situations. In that regard, let me again
underscore the important role that the Secretary-
General should play in providing input into Council
deliberations on such issues. At the same time, visiting
missions of the Council are a very useful tool that
should be actively used with respect to all situations
under the Council's consideration. In our opinion, the
idea of inviting representatives of the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC) country-specific configurations to
participate in Council field mission visits also deserves
thorough consideration. While a number of recent
visiting missions of the Council to African countries
went smoothly and efficiently, we must mention that it
took six months for the Council to agree on the terms
of its field visit to Burundi. That only underscores that
that mechanism, which is deemed to be an instrument
that can help the Council better understand and assess
situations on the ground, is sometimes affected by
political horse-trading in the Council, and therefore
needs serious improvement.

Secondly, with regard to the importance of the
transition period from peacekeeping operations to
other forms of United Nations presence, we witnessed
the successful story of the steady restoration of peace
in Cote d'Ivoire. My country is proud to have been
among those that actively contributed to that endeavour
by supporting the United Nations Operation in C6te
d'Ivoire. Last April, the Council renewed its mandate
with eventual withdrawal set for mid-2017. However,
we have to follow up on the situation there closely and
implement a successful exit strategy so as to strengthen
positive trends aimed at restoring stability and
sustaining peace in C6te d'Ivoire. The same approach
should be applied to Liberia, where State authorities are
already making the transition towards assuming full
responsibility for the country's security, taking over
from the United Nations Mission in Liberia. We are
heartened by the fact that earlier this year the Council
fully lifted sanctions against those two countries. We
believe that during the transition period it is essential
to receive timely advice from the PBC and take into
account the primacy of national ownership. In-depth
consultations need to be conducted with national
authorities, the main political actors and civil society
on existing priority needs on the ground.

Thirdly, with regard to the issue of overreliance on
the part of the host country on support from the United
Nations mission, the constitutional referendum in the
Central African Republic, which was held successfully
last December, and the general elections - conducted
with support of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic - helped to partially stabilize the country.
At the same time, despite the positive political
developments since the beginning of the year, the
recent events in Bangui and in several other parts of
the country demonstrate that the security situation
remains fragile and a potential for re-escalation exists.
We must therefore encourage the authorities in the
Central African Republic to redouble their efforts to
stabilize the situation in the country. During my recent
visit there last May as Chair of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 2127
(2013), concerning the Central African Republic,
many officials stressed that a successful reform of the
national military forces was of high importance. In
that regard, I think that the 2127 Committee should
make its contribution to that endeavour by considering
applications for arms-embargo exemptions so as to
meet the needs of security-sector reform in the Central
African Republic, thereby supporting the country in
developing its armed and security forces.

Last but not least, over the past decade the role of
the African Union in promoting peace and sustainable
development among African States has expanded. The
African Union has demonstrated its ability to take
the lead in the effective resolution of conflicts, and
its views and policies on that matter are of particular
value for the United Nations. The launch of the African
Peace and Security Architecture, the establishment
of its structures and the deployment of the African
Union's peace-support operations, authorized by the
Security Council, are a clear testimony to the growing
importance of enhancing United Nations-African
Union cooperation. Ukraine, as a Council member and
with observer State status in the African Union, stands
ready to actively contribute to that endeavour.

