Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland): At the outset, I would like to offer
my sincerest condolences to the representative of the
United States following the horrific attack in Orlando
on Saturday. This was a hateful act of terror against the
lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender community, and
the United States has the fullest support of the United
Kingdom and, I hope, of the whole Council as it comes
to terms with this unspeakable tragedy.

Sadly, it is clearer than ever that we are all
threatened by terrorism and those who follow terrorist
ideologies. It is absolutely imperative that we fight
these threats together - that we fight them as a united
Council. So I warmly welcome the unanimous adoption
of resolution 2292 (2016) today. As the penholder on
this issue, the United Kingdom has made it a priority
to take meaningful action against the illegal flow of
weapons to Libya. We do so as a sign of our support
for the Libyan Government of National Accord. It is
making progress, taking control of the machinery of
Government in Tripoli, and beginning to assert their
authority, but it is clear that such progress still faces
challenges. The existing arms embargo has not fully
stopped the flow of weapons.

Illicit weapons are undermining the peace and
security of the region. They are enabling terrorists to
murder, to maim, to bring yet more chaos to the people
of Libya and the region, who have suffered for too long.
So this resolution authorizes all Member States and
regional organizations to take specific and measured
steps in response. It enables us to interdict vessels on
the high seas off Libya when we believe that there are
arms going to or from Libya on board. It enables us
to inspect, seize and dispose of weapons and to divert
vessels to a suitable port to facilitate that disposal.

In adopting this resolution today, let us remember
that we have taken but one step. It is sensible,
proportionate and necessary. The Libyans need our
support, and I want to pay tribute to the courage of
the Libyan forces fighting and increasingly defeating
Da'esh in Benghazi, in Sirte and elsewhere. But Libya
faces a twin threat. Just as Da'esh continues to exploit
Libyan territory, criminal gangs continue to exploit the
fear of people seeking a safer future. The waters of the
Mediterranean are now synonymous with suffering; so
many people feel they have no choice but to flee, to risk
all they have, so that they might escape to safety.

So in adopting this resolution today, let us also
reassert our support for the European Union mission,
Operation Sophia, and all that it is doing to address the
migrant crisis. We fully support its efforts to build the
capacity of the Libyan coast guard, and as the British
Prime Minister made clear at the Group of Seven
Summit, we stand ready to provide an additional ship
to increase interdiction efforts further.

Let me close by thanking all the members of the
Council, including our European colleagues from Spain
and France, for their support for this resolution today.
Together, we have taken an important step forward
that will help secure the coast of Libya, that will limit

Da'esh's freedom of movement, and that will ultimately
help tackle the migration crisis.
