Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): As you suggested, Mr. President, we will
dissolve all our welcomes and diplomatic formalities in
the sand of the Thuringian hourglass and get right down
to business.

We have very mixed feelings about the situation
in Haiti. On the one hand, we are seeing increasingly
optimistic assessments of the restoration of national
ownership in each succeeding report on the United
Nations Mission for Justice Support in Haiti. The
Secretary-General's assertion that the Haitian National
Police will be able to assume full responsibility for the
country's security and protection by October is quite
indicative in that regard. On the other hand, the Haitian
people's awareness of their national responsibility
for the future of their country is spurring society to
greater social activism and the expression of its civic
Views. That has led to challenges that are typical for
mature States.

We have been watching the spiralling new tensions
in the social and political life of the country with alarm.
The popular unrest of recent months has been unfolding
in waves, with outbreaks in October and November of
last year that ripened into mass protests by February
that swept across the entire country and claimed dozens
of lives. While we see that the leadership is attempting
to normalize the situation, we have nonetheless been
compelled to conclude that the resignation of the Prime
Minister and his Government could not prevent the
opposition forces from calling for a general protest.
Needless to say, while peaceful assembly and freedom
of expression are inalienable rights, we should not
forget that they should be exercised in strict compliance
with national legislation.

Such disagreements between Government and
society are not new. They occur in other parts of the
Western hemisphere and indeed all over the world. We
will continue to reiterate that the only effective way
to resolve internal differences is through an inclusive
national dialogue, which is the only path to a viable
and sustainable resolution regardless of the State in
question. We have always said that we see attempts to
forcibly oppose legitimate authorities to be extremely
dangerous, as they do not help to consolidate society
or meet the demands of States' gradual development.
Like the Secretary-General, we therefore hope that
the people of Haiti will be able to overcome their
differences through a constructive internal dialogue
that is as inclusive as possible and, crucially, peaceful.
That is particularly important in the light of the
country's upcoming elections.

At this difficult moment for Haiti, we also believe
firmly that the international community cannot
remain indifferent and must help the Government
and the people of Haiti to implement their national
responsibility for post-conflict peacebuilding. a great
deal of work lies ahead for the United Nations staff,
whose task is to provide the Haitian authorities with the
greatest possible assistance.

The issue is how exactly international assistance
can be most effective. For example, we have long said
that the situation in Haiti is not a threat to international
peace and security. That means that there is no need to
continue to act under Chapter VII of the Charter of the
United Nations in the country. That is why a year ago,
we abstained in the voting on resolution 2410 (2018) (see S/PV.8226), which, at the insistence of the American
delegation, extended the application of the provisions of
Chapter VII even to the Mission's mandate to support
human rights monitoring in the country. Our position
on that remains unchanged.

In conclusion, allow me to affirm that Russia
supports Port-au-Prince and will continue to work to
ensure that the Security Council's efforts will result
in genuinely normalizing the situation in Haiti and
strengthening its sovereignty and self-sufficiency.

