Mr. Lamek (France) (spoke in French): I too would
like to thank the Egyptian presidency and Spain for
having taken this initiative to convene this important
and extremely timely debate. I also thank all the briefers
for the excellent quality of their statements - Mr. Ibn
Chambas, Mr. Laborde, Ms. Barbut and Ms. Ibrahim.
The views that they shared with us are very helpful in
guiding our work.

To a great extend I share what has already been
said. I will limit my statement to three main ideas.

First, the challenges to the security and development
of the Sahel are immense. The effects of climate
change have particularly affected the region, and that
at a time of strong demographic growth, especially as
between 2015 and 2050 the population will increase
from 85 million to more than 200 million inhabitants.
That could be an asset, or it could be a major liability
if the growth of the population is not accompanied by
sufficient development, because that could produce
tragedies - forced migration, political instability,
insecurity and the temptation of extremism. The Sahel
today therefore is at a crossroad, but there is no foregone
conclusion if the Sahel countries and their partners
come together to meet those challenges. Already, we
see in Mali how the mobilization of the international
community can bear fruit in a situation that is much
better today than in 2012.
My second thought concerns the strategy to adopt to
meet the numerous challenges in the Sahel. Our approach
can be effective only if it integrates that complexity.
That means meeting the challenges in different areas.
Here it is crucial to underscore the link made here
today among climate, security and development. In
the Sahel, clearly there are many problems. There is
food insecurity linked to soil and land degradation,
which is made worse by population growth and climate
warming. In that framework, all initiatives need to be
encouraged. The United Nations Integrated Strategy
for the Sahel should be quickly implemented. We also
welcome the streamlining of the prevention and crisis
management plans in the framework of the United
Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel.

Furthermore, regional initiatives need to be
promoted. The framework of the Group of Five Sahel
(G-5 Sahel), as we have underscored on numerous
occasions, today seems to be very pertinent in terms of
meeting challenges. Here, I would like to mention the
Great Green Wall for the Sahel and the Sahara Initiative
and the sustainable development projects around Lake
Chad. Over and beyond that, the work of the Economic
Community of West African States and the Africa
Union is also to be encouraged, as is the work of the
European Union, which, as members are aware, is very
committed to the Sahel.

Looking at a more global dimension, the universal
integrated approach to development - which is that
of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
(resolution 70/1) and the Paris Agreement - establishes
a deadline. Its implementation, especially in the Sahel
and in other large areas of vulnerability on the planet,
is the major issue facing our generation. But we can
change the situation in the Sahel only if we move
forward determinedly and collectively with all the
relevant stakeholders - the States, the United Nations,
international financial institutions, civil society
and businesses.

All things considered * and this will be my
last point - I can confirm France's full support for
the long term to meet those challenges of the Sahel.
France has been involved in an unprecedented manner
in terms of security to deal in the short term with the
threat of terrorism and the instability that it engenders.
Security in the Sahel region does not affect just the
Sahel, because terrorism has also become globalized,
as everyone is well aware. The French approach, with
Operation Serval and then with Operation Barkhane, is
based on a sustainable partnership with the armies of
the Sahel with a View to making them more able to fight
terrorism efficiently, in an autonomous manner and
over the long term. I wish to renew, to our African and
international partners, our full commitment to stand by
their side in the fight against violent extremism.

Above and beyond the essential security measures,
President Francois Hollande confirmed- at the summit
on 1 December 2015 with the African Heads of State on
the margins ofthe twenty-first session ofthe Conference
of the Parties to the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change (COP21) - his
commitment to mobilizing the donors and the entire
international community to focus on Africa's three
major priorities: energy sources, the Great Green Wall
for the Sahara and the Sahel Initiative, and restoring
Lake Chad. The French Agency for Development and
the French Global Environment Facility finance or
co-finance numerous development projects. President
Hollande announced on that occasion that France will
donate $6 billion towards African energy needs by 2020,
$2 billion of which is earmarked for renewable energy.

Finally, President Hollande announced a significant
increase in official development assistance - €4 billion
more, starting in 2020 - which will increase our aid
from €8 billion to €12 billion, demonstrating France's
exceptional commitment on behalf of the most poor and
the most vulnerable.

