Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): I see that you are turning over your wonderful
hourglass once again, Mr. President. I have to tell you
that it will not help you turn back time or change the
past. Incidentally, I did not see the hourglass at the open
debate on sexual violence in conflict (see S/PV.8514).
Or is sexual violence in conflict the only subject that
can be discussed interminably and with no regard for
the clock?

Needless to say, I thank the briefers for their
briefings today. Frankly, however, I fail to understand
what they have to do with the issue that brings us to the
Chamber today at Ukraine's request or what that issue
has to do with the Minsk agreements, although in the
opinions expressed by Ms. Mueller and Mr. Sajdik, they
are apparently related to its discussion because of the
dire situation of many Ukrainians and residents of the
various areas in the Donetsk and Luhansk regions that
Kyiv does not control.

I will not hide the fact that we were surprised by
our Ukrainian colleagues' initiative in convening
today's meeting, which was immediately supported
by the German presidency. After all, it obliges us to
talk about some things that are extremely unflattering
for Ukraine - actions that have essentially outlawed
4 million of the country's citizens, whose existence has
been obstinately ignored by the Western parts of the
international community. Of course it would be better
for Ukraine to stay modestly quiet about this kind of
thing rather than flaunting it before the whole world,
but since it insists, let us talk about it, despite the fact
that the issue poses no threat whatever to international
peace and security.

To listen to our Western colleagues, one might get
the false impression that Russia is forcing the people
of Ukraine to change their citizenship, while, of
course, and how else could it be, "violating" the Minsk
agreements. Let me ask once again: What aspect of the
Minsk agreements have we violated? Has anyone here
read the Minsk agreements? How many utterly absurd
accusations have we not heard today? Let us describe
the real version rather than the false, ideologized one
that has been put forward. The President of Russia
signed a decree under which residents of the self-
proclaimed Donetsk and Luhansk People's Republics
have the opportunity to obtain Russian citizenship
in a simplified procedure. To do that, they are not
required - please listen carefully - they are not
required to renounce their Ukrainian citizenship. Given
that the process of drafting and passing the decree was
carried out transparently and began some time ago,
there is no reason to claim that the President's decree
was timed to coincide with any event or meant to send
a message to anyone.

According to data from Russia's Ministry ofInternal
Affairs, in the period from 1 April 2014 to 2 April 2019,
925,548 citizens from the south-eastern regions of
Ukraine entered Russian territory and remained there.
Overall, there are 2.3 million Ukrainians in Russia.
During the same period, more than 334,000 Ukrainian
citizens applied for Russian citizenship, numbers that
demonstrate that there is a high demand for Russian
citizenship among people from south-eastern Ukraine
whose living conditions Kyiv has made intolerable. In
other words, Russia's legislative initiative is a response
to the aspirations of many thousands of people. It is not
we who are forcing them to become Russian citizens
but rather they themselves who desire it. We are simply
providing them with an opportunity and significantly
simplifying the process.

Why was it done? The conflict in Donbas has been
going on for five years. For five years, the inhabitants
of Donbas have been deprived of the ability to exercise
their human rights and freedoms in Ukraine. They
were denied the right to vote in the recent presidential
elections. Since 2017 the socioeconomic blockade of
Donbas, which has de facto existed since 2015, has
been toughened and legitimized. For five years, Kyiv's
officialdom has been sabotaging the implementation
of the Minsk agreements, subverting, changing and
distorting their content. For five years, the Ukrainian
authorities have been calling the inhabitants of Donetsk
and Luhansk terrorists and separatists. Today's speakers
have all referred to the Minsk agreements, which most
of them have not read. I will read out two paragraphs
from them.
Paragraph seven states that Ukraine must

"[e]nsure safe access, delivery, storage, and
distribution of humanitarian assistance to those in
need, on the basis of an international mechanism."

Paragraph eight requires the

"[d]efinition of modalities of full resumption of
socioeconomic ties, including social transfers such
as pension payments and other payments (incomes and revenues, timely payment of all utility bills,
reinstating taxation within the legal framework
of Ukraine).

To this end, Ukraine shall reinstate control of
the segment of its banking system in the conflict-
affected areas and possibly an international
mechanism to facilitate such transfers shall
be established."

None of that has happened.

It is obvious to us that most people here have
no interest in the people who live in Donbas. It suits
them much better to obscure their daily suffering
and deprivation behind mythical stories of Russia's
imaginary aggression and blame anything and
everything on it. They cannot see that the residents of
Donetsk and Luhansk have survived all these years in
spite of what they have done. They have been deprived
of income sources, pensions and benefits that other
Ukrainian citizens are entitled to. They would not have
survived without Russia, which despite all the West's
threats and sanctions refused to abandon a people whom
we feel very close to. Yet all this time they kept hoping
that the Kyiv authorities would nevertheless fulfil the
Minsk agreements and that a long-awaited peace would
return to their land.

But in five years nothing has changed, and we
can no longer pretend that it has. Five years is quite
long enough to define one's view of such a sensitive
and important humanitarian issue. The people of
Donetsk and Luhansk deserve to have reliable State
care and social protection once again. Like all of us
in this Chamber, they hope to see the realization of
their legitimate right and those of their children to
education, social services, health care and other rights
enshrined in the 1966 International Covenant on
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights. They are getting
none of that from the Ukrainian Government, and we
therefore felt compelled to offer them assistance. And
no one is taking anything away from anyone. On the
contrary, we are consciously taking on a significant
socioeconomic burden. And perhaps now the elderly
people whom Mr. Sajdik mentioned will not have to
cross the line of contact and risk their lives to collect
their miserable pensions on territory controlled by the
official authorities. And yet instead of commending us
all we have heard from our Western colleagues today
are hypocritical, cliched accusations of Russia's acts of
aggression and insidious plans against Ukraine.

The decree under discussion today was signed on
the basis of article 14 ofRussia's federal citizenship law,
which provides for the possibility of granting Russian
citizenship through a simplified process. It in no way
contradicts Russian legislation. According to part one of
article 29 of the federal law, for humanitarian purposes
the President of the Russian Federation may determine
categories of foreign citizens and stateless persons
having the right to apply for Russian citizenship through
a simplified process. Besides, our actions are part of
a more general trend aimed at simplifying migration
procedures and the rules granting residency and
citizenship. In 2018, for example, according to Eurostat,
States in the European Union provided protection to
more than 300,000 people requesting asylum. I would
like to point out that granting citizenship is a sovereign
right of every State. In accordance with the European
Convention on Nationality of 1997, each State has
the right to determine in its own legislation who its
nationals are. The preamble to that international treaty
establishes that in matters concerning nationality,
account should be taken of the legitimate interests of
both States and individuals. Article 15 of the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights declares that no one can
be arbitrarily deprived of his nationality or the right to
change his nationality.

We know what Mr. Yelchenko will say in his
statement. He will say that this is interference in
Ukraine's internal affairs, a flagrant violation of
international law and the Russian Constitution, the
creeping annexation of the territory of Donbas and the
creation of an opportunity to challenge its affiliation. I
want to answer him now. None of that has anything to
do with reality. We are not interfering in the internal
affairs of Ukraine or engaged in a creeping annexation.
We are simply giving people the opportunity to finally
solve issues of vital importance to them, because
the Kyiv authorities have refused to, in violation of
the Minsk agreements. The people will decide for
themselves whether to exercise that right or not. In
the final analysis, even before the decree was issued
hundreds of thousands of Ukrainians had applied for
Russian citizenship. We have never refused them and
now we have just simplified the process for the most
vulnerable of them. Of course, for Kyiv, the number
of applications for Russian citizenship will become a
litmus test and a referendum on the attitude to it of the
residents of Donbas, and apparently that is precisely
what the current Kyiv Government fears. I want to
underscore once again that Russia is not imposing
citizenship on the inhabitants of Donbas but rather
giving them an opportunity to apply for it voluntarily
and independently under the established procedure to
the competent Russian authorities while preserving
their Ukrainian citizenship.

We seriously and sincerely hope that the new
Ukrainian authorities will not only change the previous
Government's rhetoric regarding Donbas and its
inhabitants, a good illustration of which is the hackneyed
cliche's of today's statement by the Ukrainian Foreign
Ministry, but will also take real steps to implement the
Minsk agreements and take into account the interests
of its citizens in south-eastern Ukraine. If that happens,
we will be only too glad.

