Mr. La Yifan (China) (spoke in Chinese): I wish
at the outset, Sir, to congratulate you on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month. Also, we appreciate the outstanding
contribution made by the delegation of Viet Nam last
month.

We thank Under-Secretary-General Pascoe for his
briefing, and we welcome the briefings provided by
Ambassador Wolff and the Permanent Representative
of Iraq on the situation in that country.

It has been a year since the Security Council
adopted resolution 1770 (2007), which expanded the
mandate of United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq
(UNAMI). We are pleased to note that, in extremely
complex and difficult circumstances, UNAMI has
strictly abided by its mandate pursuant to the Council's
resolutions and has made good progress on all fronts.
Those are facts that we fully acknowledge. Changes
and developments in the situation concerning Iraq have
created more space for a United Nations role, while
posing more challenges to the Organization.

We support a 12-month extension of the current
mandate of UNAMI. We hope and expect that Mr. De
Mistura and his team will continue to fulfil their
mandate with great enthusiasm and professionalism
and in an innovative spirit. We wish to stress a number
of points with respect to the future of UNAMI.

First, UNAMI should continue close
consultations with the Iraqi Government. At the same
time, it should increase its engagement with all
segments of Iraqi society and carry out all its work in a
pragmatic manner, so as to gain as much understanding
and support as possible.

Secondly, UNAMI should carry out all its
mandated tasks in a comprehensive and balanced way,
in areas such as progress on the political front,
electoral assistance, constitutional review, regional
cooperation, economic reconstruction and the
protection of human rights - areas on which UNAMI
can do more.

Thirdly, UNAMI should also play a coordinating
role in the sphere of humanitarian assistance and
economic and social reconstruction, and it should
create synergy with the various United Nations offices
in Iraq.

And fourthly, the safety and security of United
Nations personnel in Iraq is, as always, a key priority.
The Iraqi Government and the countries concerned
should continue to bear primary responsibility in this
area. Any future new arrangement should take full
account of concerns regarding the safety of United
Nations personnel.

We welcome the remarkable progress that Iraq
has achieved in the political, security and
reconstruction areas. But we must not ignore the fact
that the security situation in Iraq remains fragile and
that the number of civilian casualties remains high.
Once again, we urge that military activities in Iraq
avoid causing civilian casualties to the greatest
possible extent. Sustainable security is the basis for the
resolution of other problems faced by Iraq. In order to
cement the gains made on the security front, further
efforts must be made to advance political dialogue and
national reconciliation. We hope that all Iraqi parties
will put national interests above all else, enhance
dialogue and consultation and establish a solid political
consensus on important issues such as the country's
future. We encourage UNAMI to play an active role in
that regard.

The provincial elections now being prepared will
be a key step in the Iraqi political process. To ensure
that those elections play a positive role in the political
process, it is of no less importance to avoid delays than
to ensure the impartiality and inclusiveness of the
elections themselves.

The security situation, the political process and
socio-economic reconstruction are complementary. Iraq
abounds in natural and human resources and has vast
potential for economic rehabilitation and development.
The international community should honour its pledges
of assistance to Iraq, fully tapping the potential of
mechanisms such as the International Compact with
Iraq and the meetings of Foreign Ministers of
neighbouring countries so as to further promote the
development and reconstruction of Iraq.

Although Iraq continues to face all manner of
challenges and difficulties, we firmly believe that the
situation will gradually improve. Like the peoples of
every other sovereign State, the Iraqi people have the
right and the ability to govern their own affairs and to
live their lives in dignity, free from want and fear.
