Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): We
should like once again to thank Under-Secretary-
General Stephen O'Brien for his briefings. We wish
also to express gratitude for his work and that of his
team, as well as for the courage shown by the thousands
of humanitarian workers on the ground, who are risking
their lives every day, as has been demonstrated time
and again. We pay tribute to all of them.

As the United Nations is an Organization of States,
our primary calls are always aimed at States, and we
therefore join in the call made recently by Stephen
O'Brien on the authorities in Syria to do their utmost
urgently to cooperate to ensure access by humanitarian
workers to all areas to which the United Nations is
prepared to deliver assistance. What is most tragic
here is that the United Nations has the material and
personnel necessary to provide such humanitarian
assistance, but cannot access areas in need owing
to what Mr. O'Brien described as being, in the best-
case scenario, bureaucratic delays, and, in the worst,
deliberate attempts to block such access. We are
therefore united behind the call made on the Syrian
authorities by Stephen O'Brien.

The situation has not changed much since last
month. As has been stressed, the Syrian war in now in
its seventh year. This war has now lasted even longer
than the Second World War and shows no sign of
coming to an end. There has been some improvement
owing to the ceasefire signed last year, which has given
the population some respite. Yet the violence continues
to escalate, terrorist activities continue in the context of
an utterly inhumane level of violence, with the obvious
consequent impact on the civilian population, which is
the preferred target.

Da'esh and other extremist groups continue to
have tremendous potential to cause devastation in the
country. As Mr. O'Brien confirmed, an agreement was
recently reached to evacuate civilians from various
areas, including the so-called four towns, but we share
his concern with regard to the conditions under which
the evacuations are being carried out. They should
be voluntary in nature and to locations chosen by the
evacuees themselves, with the freedom to return to
their places of origin when conditions permit.

We have also taken note of the fact that several
agreements relating to such evacuations are being
facilitated. These are agreements between parties, States
and groups that had previously been sworn enemies
fighting on the ground, but have nonetheless been able
to reach agreement so as to enable evacuations to occur.
This shows that with political will, it is possible to make
progress. We hope that this type of agreement will not
be limited to the humanitarian area but also extend to
other areas so as to once and for all put an end to the
violence and war in Syria.

