The President (spoke in Russian): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as representative of
the Russian Federation.

I wish first to thank the sponsors of today's
resolution. We studied it carefully and suggested
certain amendments to make the document more
relevant to contemporary realities in Iraq. Some of our
proposals are reflected in the text. We welcome the
outcome of the involved consultations on the
document, which reflects the great complexity of the
situation in Iraq. It was important that the document
reflect the basic principles of an Iraqi settlement:
respect for the country's sovereignty and territorial
integrity, and the necessity of holding a national
dialogue aimed at achieving reconciliation among all
sectors of Iraqi society.

The resolution will allow the Iraqi security forces
to assume full responsibility for maintaining long-term
stability and security in the country, permitting the
multinational force to fulfil its mandate and fully to
withdraw from Iraq.

The United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq
has its work cut out for it. It must, in the near future,
resolve the significant challenges of organizing the
elections and promoting mutual understanding among
the various factions of Iraqi society. We and the
sponsors made concessions in the drafting of the
resolution. On the Russian side in particular, we felt it
necessary to include a reference to the need to convene
a new international meeting on Iraq. Bearing in mind
the appeal from the Iraqi side that the resolution not
address that issue, as well as the ongoing consultations
between Baghdad and the League of Arab States on the
organization of an inter-Iraqi conference under the
League's auspices, we thought it expedient not to insist
on including in the resolution a provision on
international follow-up to the Iraqi political process.

At the same time, we are convinced that
significant international input will be necessary in the
next phase to complete the process in Iraq, as it will
facilitate the promotion of the inter-Iraqi dialogue to
achieve national reconciliation.

In conclusion, I would note that Russia stresses
the importance of a constructive atmosphere, including
here in the Security Council, to the success of an Iraqi
settlement. On the basis of such considerations, we
were able to support the resolution.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I call on the representative of Iraq.

