Mr. Cengizer (Turkey): Mr. President, at the
outset, I would like to thank you for convening this
open meeting on one of the most important issues of
our time. Your initiative gives Member States the
opportunity to put forward their views on ways of
combating international terrorism as well as to address
the work of the Counter- Terrorism Committee.

I would like also to thank whole-heartedly Sir
Jeremy Greenstock, Chairman of the Counter-
Terrorism Committee, for his cogent briefing and for
the remarkable work that he and his colleagues are
doing.

We know without a doubt that terrorism poses a
very great danger to civilization as we know it,
threatens the fundamental rights of the individual and
endangers the fabric of societies everywhere and at all
times. It represents a violation of human rights, in
whatever form it occurs. As such, it is a potent means
of oppression.

Turkey has given unequivocal support to efforts
aimed at combating in earnest this modern scourge. We
have been trying for some time now to impress on the
international community the need to defend a
bipartisan position on this issue. Last year's tragic
events should have put to rest any doubts about the true
nature of terrorism. There can be no degree of support
and no leniency with respect to a phenomenon that has
absolute and irredeemable consequences.

Let me say it loud and clear: there is no such
thing as "better terrorists". There are no worthy causes
pursued by terrorists. Their very choice of that method
nullifies the end they desire.
Furthermore, in this increasingly global world, it
is more and more common to see terrorist groups
forming complex relationships and interrelated
structures among themselves. After all, from their
perspective, this is an easy and achievable thing to do.

However, it is worrying and deeply disturbing
that some segments of the international community are
still shying away from achieving a similarly feasible
cluster of means in combating terrorism. Definitional
problems might conceal important philosophical
differences, but the results of terrorism will be the
same for everyone.

It is high time that we choose the only viable
option before us: intensify international cooperation
against terrorism, and stop looking for worthy terrorist
causes, as there are none. It is on this understanding
that we are actively involved in the work of United
Nations bodies.

We regard Security Council resolution 1373
(2001) as an effective instrument and fully support its
implementation. Our appreciation goes to the Counter-
Terrorism Committee for its work. We look forward to
working closely with the Committee and are
cooperating with other States in our region and beyond,
as well as within the fold of relevant international
organizations. As testimony of our degree of
commitment to deal forcefully with this scourge, we
have signed nearly 50 bilateral agreements concerning
cooperation in combating terrorism.

Turkey is party to 10 of the existing 12 United
Nations conventions. The process of ratification of the
remaining two is under way. We support the early
completion of the ongoing discussions on a
comprehensive convention against international
terrorism and on an international convention on the
suppression of nuclear terrorism.

In this context, we attach particular importance to
the denial of safe haven to terrorists and to their
extradition. It would be neither prudent nor just to
allow terrorists not to face a blanket regime or to
enable them to benefit from impunity with respect to
the offences they have committed.

Turkey, as an associate country of the European
Union and one that normally aligns itself with the
European Union's declared positions on a wide
spectrum of issues, regrets today that it cannot do the
same with respect to this vastly important issue.

We agree with the essence and the general thrust
of the statement made on behalf of the European
Union. However, we cannot sustain a credible fight
against terrorism if we address the problem only
partially and are selective with regard to terrorist
groups and organizations. We believe that the list of
individuals, entities and organizations annexed to the
common position of 27 December 2001, to which the
European Union statement referred, is incomplete in its
present form and is deficient. We hope that known
terrorist organizations will be included in that list. We
are waiting to see a more resolute stance on the part of
the European Union that befits the philosophy
contained in its statement.

