I thank you, Sir, for this opportunity to brief the Council. I apologize that at 10 a.m. I will need to leave to attend the start of a General Assembly meeting. The multifaceted crises in Mali and the Sahel continue to take a heavy toll on people across the subregion. Terrorist and criminal groups continue to expand their activities and exploit long-standing tensions along community lines. I express my sincere condolences on recent killings in central Mali where, over the past few days, at least 100 civilians have been killed in attacks in the Mopti region. I also extend my condolences to neighbouring Burkina Faso, where more than 80 people died in the north in separate attacks attributed to terrorist groups. The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) has added another layer of complexity to an already extremely challenging situation, with attempts by terrorist and other armed groups to capitalize on the pandemic. Mali has not been spared by the virus, and neither has the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA), our peacekeeping Mission on the ground. More than 100 United Nations personnel have been affected. While many of them have recovered, two peacekeepers lost their lives and we mourn that loss. I am encouraged by the swift action taken by the Government to respond to the pandemic, in close cooperation with the MINUSMA and other international partners. MINUSMA also took early measures, which have been further strengthened, in order to prevent the spread of the virus while ensuring the continued implementation of the mandate. It has been five years since the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali was signed by the Malian parties in Algiers. In spite of protracted delays in its implementation, important progress has been made over the past year. An inclusive national dialogue was held in Mali, with the participation of Malians of the diaspora. That provided an opportunity for Malian men and women to express their concerns and discuss solutions. It also yielded a number of resolutions and enabled the parties to refocus on the implementation of the Bamako Agreement. Following the integration of 1,330 former combatants of the armed movements into the national defence and security forces, more than 1,100 personnel were redeployed to Kidal, Gao, Timbuktu and Menaka as part of the reconstituted units of the national armed forces. Action will resume soon to integrate 510 additional combatants and another batch of 1,160 fighters in order to reach the objective of 3,000 newly integrated soldiers by mid-2020. The arrival of the first reconstituted unit in February marked the first formal presence of the national armed forces in Kidal since rebel forces took control of the main cities in northern Mali in 2012. Once fully operational, the reconstituted units will strengthen the national armed forces in northern Mali. A more robust presence of the national defence and security forces is key to combating terrorism and restoring State authority. It will also pave the way for a more significant deployment of State administration and justice. It is now paramount for all redeployed units to become operational while creating the conditions to gradually assume their mandated security responsibilities. To that end, we need urgent measures, including continued efforts by all parties concerned to live up to their commitment to provide additional infrastructure, equipment, training and appropriate measures to strengthen cohesion. An effective community-oriented police force is equally important to stabilize Mali and fight terrorism. Steps were taken to put in place the legislative framework for the creation and deployment of a territorial police force, a key aspect of the decentralization process. The good offices of MINUSMA have been crucial to helping the parties overcome mistrust, resolve numerous problems and reach an agreement on the modalities for the redeployment. That is just one of many examples illustrating the pivotal role that MINUSMA continues to play in supporting the parties and creating a space for the peace process to unfold. In that connection, I would like to take this opportunity to commend the outstanding leadership of my Special Representative, Mr. Mahamat Saleh Annadif. Steps have also been taken to operationalize the Northern Development Zone with a view to improving people's daily lives and helping them address the underlying drivers of instability, including poverty, underdevelopment and the lack of opportunities for young people. Legislative elections were held in March and April, with the support of the Mission. Although there is still a long way to go, the number of elected women is three times higher than during the previous legislature and represents the highest percentage ever recorded. Nevertheless, the low voter turnout, just as we have seen in previous polls, calls for continued efforts from all political actors to enhance the population's trust in national institutions. Furthermore, I call for the immediate release of opposition leader Soumaila Cisse, who was abducted during the electoral campaign. The new Parliament, currently in session, is expected to play a key role in enacting institutional reforms envisaged in the peace agreement, including through the holding of a constitutional referendum. These mostly positive developments are promising. I encourage the signatory parties to strengthen mutual trust and to work together to keep up the momentum in the peace process, which remains the only pathway to a politically stable and more secure Mali. My Special Representative stands ready to further extend his good offices to help create conditions for progress. I remain very concerned about the situation in central Mali, where terrorist activity continues to fuel violence among communities, thus taking a heavy toll on the local population. I am encouraged by the Government's efforts and the Prime Minister's personal engagement, particularly community dialogue initiatives. These have yielded some positive results but there is a very long way to go. Efforts to combat impunity remain essential to curbing the violence in the centre, and more needs to be done by the authorities to demonstrate their commitment in that regard. MINUSMA's adaptation plan seeks to enable the Mission to deliver on its mandated strategic objectives, particularly its second objective concerning Mali's central region. I would also like to highlight the need to bring to justice the perpetrators of crimes against peacekeepers. A total of 128 peacekeepers have been killed as a result of malicious acts and not a single perpetrator has been held accountable. I am appalled by the allegations of summary killings and executions of at least 38 civilians by the Malian armed forces in two villages in the Mopti region last weekend, in one case with the support of traditional hunters. I welcome the Government's announcement to investigate these serious violations and I call on the authorities to do everything possible to hold the perpetrators of these heinous crimes accountable. The humanitarian situation is equally concerning. The number of people in need of assistance is expected to increase to 5 million over the next months. I call for swift and determined international action to address the most urgent humanitarian needs and mitigate the destabilizing effects of COVID-19. The conclusions of the 2019 inclusive national dialogue have raised hopes among the Malian people and deserve diligent implementation. The growing calls for civil society to improve governance and fight insecurity, as heard during last weekend's demonstrations in Bamako, must be answered accordingly. I welcome the President's openness to dialogue in that regard. MINUSMA and the Secretariat have taken important steps to enhance our presence and activities in central Mali and to better protect civilians. The Mission's adaptation plan remains a viable proposal for a more agile, mobile and flexible operation, with tailored units and enhanced capabilities - most important among them additional air mobility. I am encouraged by the pledges made during the recent MINUSMA force generation conference by troop-contributing countries in early May to deploy additional specialized capabilities to the Mission. In an increasingly challenging security environment, additional air assets are urgently needed to enable the Mission to continue ensuring the implementation of its mandate. I reiterate my call upon Member States to support the plan when considering contributions and the Mission's budget, in keeping with their commitments under the Action for Peacekeeping framework. Fighting terrorism is a joint responsibility. I commend the Malian army, the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel) and the French forces for stepping up their operations and improving their coordination in the Liptako-Gourma region with the aim of defeating terrorist groups operating in that critical area. An exclusively military solution does not exist. Security responses must go hand in hand with the restoration of State authority and sustainable development. Respect for human rights in the conduct of operations is also essential. Success in the fight against terrorism in Mali and the Sahel region will depend on the ability of the international community to remain united and to adhere to a comprehensive and joint approach. In that regard, I am encouraged by the continued commitment of our key partners. I commend France, Germany and the European Union for spearheading the Sahel coalition established at the Pau summit in January. The coalition provides a broader framework to coordinate security, development and governance initiatives in the region. Support for the G-5 Sahel remains vital. In that connection, I reiterate my call for a comprehensive support package, funded by assessed contributions, to allow for predictable and sustainable support to the Joint Force. I also call on the international community to continue to support regional initiatives, including those of the Economic Community of West African States and the African Union. Building a politically stable and more secure Mali requires our collective and sustained commitment and MINUSMA's continued support. We owe that to the people of Mali and the Sahel region, who deserve a better future.
