Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): Our delegation joins others in expressing
our appreciation to the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL), Mr. Ghassan
Salame, for his comprehensive briefing, and offers
him our complete and unwavering support for his
work, especially during this very difficult time in the
situation in Libya. We also thank Ambassador Schulz,
in his capacity as Chair of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya,
for his briefing.

Allow me to express Equatorial Guinea's solidarity
with the Libyan people. We are troubled by the situation
in our brotherly country, and we reiterate the call made
by President Obiang Nguema Mbasogo of the Republic
for unity among Libyans themselves. They must put
national interests before their own in order to end to
the crisis, which is impeding the development of that
great country.

We are steadfast in our conviction that there is no
military solution in Libya; dialogue is the only option for
resuming the national conference, which was supposed
to be held from 14 to 16 April, under the auspices of
UNSMIL, and would have led to the holding of credible
and transparent elections to restore the mechanisms for
peace and national reconciliation.

In line with the communique of the Peace and
Security Council of the African Union issued on 5 July,
as well as the African Union High-Level Committee
on Libya held on 7 July, we would like to express our
concern over the humanitarian situation in the country,
particularly the situation of migrants and refugees
being held in detention centres in inhumane and
appalling conditions. In that regard, we again condemn
the 2-3 July attack on the Tajoura detention centre,
which claimed the lives of 53 people and wounded
another 130. In that regard, we hope that the relevant
investigations will be conducted and the perpetrators
brought to account.

We are deeply concerned over the number of
internally displaced persons and the hundreds of
migrants who have lost their lives off the coast of Libya.
Just a few days ago, we learned that dozens of people
perished when they tried to cross the Mediterranean,
which constituted one of the deadliest tragedies of the
year. Such facts call for the international community's
utmost attention to find a solution to save the innocent
lives of those seeking a better future. Migrants seeking
a safe place to live and a better future for themselves
and their families are not criminals or terrorists; they
are people who deserve decent and respectful treatment.

We understand that at this stage, and given that the
situation is deteriorating, it is important to consider
the role played by the Security Council and the
necessary, real and transparent international support
that the Libyan people deserve. In that regard, we again
emphasize the need for close cooperation between the
United Nations and the African Union in addressing
the conflict by promoting dialogue and reconciliation,
taking into account the importance of the work of
neighbouring countries, which is crucial.

We reiterate the call to uphold the unity, sovereignty
and territorial integrity of Libya and condemn all
external interference in the internal affairs of Libya,
as such interference only undermines any progress in
attempts to reach a ceasefire and restore a solid and
lasting peace.

A Security Council with hands folded and bound
together does not contribute to solving the problem,
but instead indicates permissiveness. From our point
of view, that is not the message that we should be
sending to the world, much less to the thousands of
families who are suffering in the barbaric conflict
that is claiming hundreds of lives. It erodes credibility
and effectiveness of this decision-making body of the
United Nations, despite the repeated calls made by the
Secretary-General.

To conclude our statement, we therefore call for an
immediate ceasefire and a return to the political process
ofpeaceful negotiations. The implications ofthe Libyan
conflict go beyond Libyan territory, wreaking havoc
in several countries in the region. We are thinking of
the consequences that this conflict - with the massive
influx of weapons used - will have in the short and
medium term in the regions of West Africa, East Africa,
Central Africa and Southern Africa.

On the other hand, the recent deterioration of the
situation and the increase in violence in Libya, causing
the alarming numbers of deaths that Mr. Salame has just
cited for us, demonstrates once again the urgent need
for the arms embargo imposed on Libya to be respected.
States must fully respect and comply with the embargo
adopted by the Security Council in order to fully curb
the influx of weapons of all kinds - sophisticated,
recycled and cutting-edge - as Mr. Salame also just
clearly described to us, which are being used against
civilian centres and the civilian population. That is why
we welcome the recent resolution 2473 (2019), in the
hope that this time it can have a real and enforceable
deterrent effect.

We offer our deepest condolences to the Libyan
people and to the families of all the victims of
this conflict.

