Mr. Musayev (Azerbaijan): At the outset, I should
like to congratulate the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan
on its assumption and effective discharge of the
presidency functions of the Security Council during the
month of January. We are also grateful to the delegation
of Jordan for having organized this open debate on such
an important topic.

The concept paper (S/2014/30, annex) prepared
by the presidency raises a very fundamental problem.
Indeed, too often we encounter premeditated attempts
to falsify history, in particular its most traumatic
episodes, or to weaponize the past in order to inculcate
enmity and hatred and instigate wars against other
nations. Hence, generations are born trapped in a deep
sense of hatred and intolerance. But history can also
serve or be taught to promote respect towards other
peoples and cultures, to accept differences and to
develop an ability to coexist.

In a number of situations, important efforts have
helped to reduce tensions and have ensured that peace
and reconciliation processes have moved forward. At
the same time, more should be done to address the major
threats and challenges that continue to affect the basic
elements of the international legal order, undermine the
sovereignty, territorial integrity and stability of States
and regenerate disregard and contempt for human
rights.

There should be a better understanding that States
acting in contravention of the Charter of the United
Nations and international law, undermining the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of States, violating
international humanitarian and human rights law
and disregarding Security Council resolutions, may
forestall enforcement countermeasures only by putting
a prompt end to their illegal acts and negotiating in good
faith the prospects for permanent peace, stability and
cooperation. The fact that illegal situations continue
because of political circumstances does not mean that
they are thereby rendered legal or can go on forever.

It is important to underline the role of the rule
of law in preventing conflict, mitigating the effects
of the conflict once it has arisen and in resolving
conflicts and thus establishing a stable and durable
peace. Integral to the existing challenges and efforts
towards searching for a sustainable peace is the need
to ensure accountability for violations of international
humanitarian and human rights law, both for individual
perpetrators and for parties to conflict.

As practice shows, wrongs left unpunished or
unrecognized can impede the achievement of long-
awaited peace and reconciliation and can easily lead to
the eruption of new conflicts and the commission of
new crimes. The establishment of truth about serious
violations of international humanitarian and human
rights law committed during conflicts, and the need
for institutional actions to prevent the repetition of
such violations, are all necessary prerequisites for true
conflict resolution.

It is essential to address conflict-related violations
by all available means, including, inter alia, by creating
judicial mechanisms and mandating international
commissions of inquiry or fact-finding missions
to ascertain precisely the facts in contention. The
imperative of establishing and documenting truth,
shedding light on real facts and combating impunity is
undeniable. Such efforts must be free of selectivity and
politically motivated approaches.

It is obvious that no peace settlement can be reached

that is inconsistent with international law, particularly
where peremptory norms are concerned, such as the
prohibition on the use of force and the obligation to
respect the territorial integrity and sovereignty of States.
It is important that conflict settlement frameworks are
not used as a tool to consolidate a priori illegal and
fait accompli-based solutions. No doubt, attempts to
impose or encourage such solutions will fail to provide
the necessary foundations for enduring peace and long-
term stability.

