Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): We are very happy to see a Peruvian friend,
well versed in diplomacy, returning to preside over
today's emergency Security Council meeting to
consider the current Israeli aggression against the
Palestinian people in the occupied territory,
particularly in the Gaza Strip.

I would like at the outset to align myself with the
statements made by the representative of Qatar on
behalf of the Arab Group, by the representative of
Cuba on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement and by
the representative of Azerbaijan on behalf of the
Organization of the Islamic Conference.

Over the decades, a great deal has been said
before the Council about the crimes perpetrated by
Israel's Government, army and terrorist gangs in the
occupied Arab territories. The collective consciousness
of the Security Council is full of innumerable
memories of hundreds of long meetings devoted to
considering the massacres and the crimes perpetrated
by Israel against the Palestinians, the Lebanese, the
Syrians, the Jordanians and the Egyptians.

How many times has the Council considered draft
resolutions condemning Israeli massacres? How many
times has a well-known State used its veto power to
block a collective and otherwise unanimous trend
within the Council to condemn Israel for its crimes and
hold it responsible for its criminal acts?

The Palestinian question is not a humanitarian
issue; it is first and foremost a political issue. As long
as we ignore the need to impose a just and
comprehensive political solution to this problem, Israel
will feel that it is not subject to accountability, that it is
allowed to do what nobody else can do and that it is
exempt from legal principles. This has led Israel to
escalate its aggression against the unarmed Palestinian
people under the yoke of occupation and against its
immediate neighbours.
It is axiomatic that we must call upon the Council
today to put an end to the bleeding of our people, our
tragedies, our pain and suffering. It is as though such a
call had become a matter of routine for the Security
Council and the United Nations. We wonder very
seriously about the real reason why Israel dares to
continue blindly to kill Palestinians.

Many people, whether they be politicians,
diplomats or political analysts, believe that the answer
is that some influential Powers in the Security Council
have paralysed its capacity to punish Israel for its
previous crimes and to hold it accountable to the
Council for the State terrorism that has been its
foundation since its inception.

Our astonishment increases when some speakers
make every effort to turn the facts upside down in
asserting that the right of Palestinians to defend
themselves, in the face of a brutal and barbaric
occupation that has no precedent in history, is itself a
form of terrorism, while depicting Israel's terrorism
against unarmed Palestinians as legitimate self-
defence. Is there a falsification of facts more painful
than this? Is it rational that such a falsification should
occur within the walls of the Council Chamber?

In July, the delegation of the United States
prevented the Security Council from adopting a draft
resolution condemning an Israeli massacre similar to
the one perpetrated yesterday in Beit Hanoun, namely,
the Gaza massacre, even though the draft resolution
enjoyed otherwise unanimous support. If the Council
had succeeded in condemning Israel's criminal
behaviour at that time in July, yesterday's massacre
would not have occurred. Those who impede justice
and accountability for Israeli war crimes in the
occupied Palestinian territory bear a large part of the
responsibility for the present shedding of innocent
blood there.

The climax of this absurdity is that some have
taken to saying that the massacre at Beit Hanoun
occurred because of an error, as Israel claims. In fact,
we have heard such claims many times before in this
Council; we have heard the same pretext used as Israeli
justification for killing women, children, members of
the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL)
and even United Nations staff members. This Israeli
justification, which has been totally rejected,
demonstrates that Israel is an irresponsible State, not
qualified to deal with the international community.
Most speakers have referred to the terms of
reference of a just and comprehensive peace: Security
Council resolutions, the Madrid terms of reference and
the Arab Peace Initiative. The walls of the Council
Chamber reverberate with those terms of reference
because they have been echoed here many times
before. The pretexts offered for the continuation of
Israeli's occupation and aggression are no longer
acceptable. It is as if some were trying to push the
region towards despair, towards the unknown and
towards an explosion as the only solution. Injustice has
long prevailed among the peoples of the region.

It is neither morally nor politically acceptable
that, for some, memory should be so short concerning
the Israeli-Arab conflict and the suffering of our people
under Israeli occupation. Nor is it acceptable that some
speakers should call upon Syria to exercise what they
call its influence or to play a positive role. Syria's
positive role is well known; Syria is part of the
solution, not part of the problem. Everyone knows the
sincere wish of my country to bring about peace - but
a just and comprehensive peace. Everyone knows the
will of my country, Syria, to bring about this peace as a
strategic option. The problem for those who have any
doubts about Syria's role is that they do not want to
understand the facts, or even to recognize their own
shortcomings and responsibilities, or their short-
sightedness in the way they deal with the question of a
just peace in the region.

My country is making every possible effort to
support the formation of a government of national
unity in Palestine. Some might make the error of
thinking that the problem lies in this aspect of the
Palestinian question. The problem lies in the continued
Israeli occupation and aggression against the
Palestinian people. That is the core of the problem.

The Arab Group has submitted an emergency
draft resolution to be adopted by the Security Council
in order to put an end to Israeli massacres in the
occupied Palestinian territories. The draft resolution
enjoys the direct support of the Non-Aligned
Movement, the Organization of the Islamic Conference
and most delegations that have spoken today. We
would prefer that endorsement of the draft resolution
not be limited to those groups. We would like to see
other States, from the North, join those that called for
and prepared the draft resolution. The issue of justice is
not geographic; it is political.
We appeal to all members of the Council to adopt
the draft resolution as quickly as possible in order to
maintain peace, so that the Council does not send the
wrong message to our peoples under occupation that
laws are worthless and that violence is the only way to
bring about the liberation of occupied lands.

The time has come to send this clear message to
Israel: that the continuation of its occupation of the
occupied Arab territories will lead to tension in
international relations and that it will seriously threaten
international peace and security. The time has come for
the Council to take action.

