Mr. Gatilov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian):
My delegation joins with other delegations that have
expressed their condolences to the people of Morocco at the
death of King Hassan II. Russia learned with great sorrow
of the passing of that wise political leader who, for almost
40 years, was one of the most significant and influential
Arab leaders.

We are grateful to Mrs. Ogata for her very
comprehensive briefing. Russia always supports the work
of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees (UNHCR) and regards it as an important element
in the overall humanitarian activities of the United Nations.
We believe that, in the present circumstances, the Security
Council is being asked to provide ever increasing active
political support for the work of humanitarian organizations,
and it is generally believed that humanitarian work must be
not only strengthened but defended by the authority of the
Security Council. At the same time, we do not regard the
role of the Security Council and that of the humanitarian
organizations as being one and the same; each has its own
part to play although, of course, in practice their tasks are
closely interrelated.

We are also deeply convinced that humanitarian
assistance must never be used as a means of bringing
political pressure to bear on either party to a conflict. If that
were to happen, such assistance would be directly in
conflict with its main objective, and rather than being an
effective means of stabilizing the situation and supporting
the process leading to a political settlement, it would
become a factor that could well aggravate the conflict.

We support the broadening cooperation and
consultation between the Security Council and humanitarian
organizations, in particular UNHCR, in planning and
preparing for peacekeeping operations with humanitarian
components. With regard to refugees and displaced persons,
we are deeply concerned about certain long-standing
problems about which Mrs. Ogata spoke in some detail. We
agree with her assessment and her conclusions.

We agree that effective international assistance is
required in many hot spots, for example in Angola, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Sierra Leone,
Rwanda, Burundi and many other places where armed
conflict has resulted in large numbers of displaced
persons.

We were pleased to note that UNHCR has addressed
refugee problems in the countries of the former Soviet
Union. Considerable experience has been acquired from
the joint work with UNHCR on implementing the
Programme of Action of the 1996 Geneva Conference on
refugees in the Commonwealth of Independent States
(CIS), which was convened under the auspices of
UNHCR. It is important that, working together with
UNHCR, we were able to help interested countries,
including donor countries, and the International
Organization for Migration, to understand the problems of
migration in the CIS region. We hope that the
understanding arrived at during the meeting of the
steering group of the Geneva Conference in June this year
regarding the extension of its Programme of Action for
the period after the year 2000 will be implemented, which
would be a step forward in resolving one of the most
acute humanitarian problems.
We share Mrs. Ogata's View that the continuing
difficult humanitarian situation in Kosovo is a matter for
serious concern. A recent positive change, namely the
return to the region of most of the Kosovar Albanians,
has to some extent been negated by another acute
humanitarian crisis. There is a continuing mass exodus
out of Kosovo of non-Albanians, primarily Serbs and
Roma people. According to some data, the total number
of such internally displaced persons in the rest of the
territory of Serbia and Montenegro exceeds 100,000,
including a large number of women and children. They
were forced to flee from Violence by Kosovo Albanians,
primarily the fighters of the Kosovo Liberation Army
(KLA), whose activities are in flagrant violation of the
provisions of Security Council resolution 1244 (1999) and
which has been openly squeezing non-Albanians out of
Kosovo. The recent tragedy in Gracko was another tragic
confirmation of this dangerous trend.

Non-Albanians who have left Kosovo find
themselves in a wretched situation, which will become
even worse with the advent of winter, a point also made
by Mrs. Ogata. The international community must provide
these people with adequate assistance. Double standards
and any kind of discrimination in the humanitarian area
are simply intolerable, as is any approach that would

 

enable Kosovo to receive international assistance for
reconstruction while other regions of Serbia and Yugoslavia
are denied such assistance.

We believe that the international community must take
action to achieve its goal of halting the exodus of non-
Albanians from Kosovo. Putting in place conditions in
which they can return home is directly linked to the success
of KFOR efforts to ensure security and law and order in the
region. These tasks were given to KFOR by Security
Council resolution 1244 (1999). They include, first and
foremost, the swift and complete demilitarization of the
KLA. This must be done as effectively and completely as
possible. Any delay or disruption could have serious and
long-term consequences, destabilizing the general situation
in Kosovo, not just the humanitarian situation. This would
have a very negative impact on the future of the political
process.

In conclusion, I should once again like to express my
appreciation to Mrs. Ogata for the work she has done and
for the very detailed briefing she has given us. I hope that
her recommendations will be implemented in practice and
that this very serious problem of refugees and displaced
persons in many parts of the world will be successfully
resolved.
