Mr. Dolgov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): Mr. Minister, we are delighted to welcome
you as President of the Security Council. We welcome
the participation in this meeting of the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of New Zealand and the Secretary of
State of Switzerland.

The topic proposed by the delegation of Denmark
for our discussion today is directly relevant to the
activities of the Security Council and the United
Nations as a whole. Experience has shown that the
achievement of lasting peace and the resolution of
regional conflicts are possible only when based upon a
comprehensive approach that combines traditional
diplomatic and peacekeeping efforts with the post-
conflict peacebuilding of States emerging from crisis.
Only in that manner can regional stabilisation and the
non-resumption of conflicts be guaranteed.

The Russian Federation agrees with many of the
assessments and points that have been put forward
concerning that question in the statements by the
Deputy Secretary-General, Ms. Frechette, and the
President of the World Bank, Mr. Wolfensohn. United
Nations peacekeeping operations are becoming
increasingly complex and multidimensional. The
growing complexity of problems caused by
contemporary conflicts, which often have a dangerous
regional dimension and carry socio-economic
consequences, requires that we keep focused on the
task of improving overall planning and the deployment
of multidimensional operations and that we enhance
interactions with other international partners in their
respective areas of responsibility.

In that context we should note that the experience
of United Nations peacekeeping in Haiti, in Timor-
Leste, in Africa - in particular in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Liberia and Sierra Leone -
and in other conflict areas has shown that there is an
intrinsic link between the restoration of peace and the
complete socio-economic rehabilitation of countries
emerging from conflict.

Wherever the United Nations has been
successful, even on a modest scale, that success has
been largely due to the close coordination and
integration of the military, political, civilian,
humanitarian and reconstruction components of
operations. That proves, once again, the growing
importance of strengthening interaction between the
Security Council and the other principal organs of the
Organization that are directly concerned with
peacebuilding - primarily the General Assembly and
the Economic and Social Council - as well as the
specialized agencies of the United Nations.

Cooperation in the peacekeeping and
peacebuilding areas needs to be deepened between the
United Nations and the regional and subregional
organizations, pursuant to Chapter VIII of the United
Nations Charter. New positive examples of the
development of that cooperation, in particular between
the United Nations and the African Union in the Sudan,
should be vigorously supported.

A comprehensive approach to post-crisis
situations requires a seamless continuity in moving
from one stage of peacekeeping to another. Political
support by the Security Council is of great importance
to peacebuilding efforts, particularly at stages when the
central implementing role shifts to operational
programmes and specialized funds of the United
Nations, and to international and regional
organizations.

The Russian Federation supports the idea of
establishing a Peacebuilding Commission to enhance
the coordination and effectiveness of post-conflict
assistance to countries emerging from crisis. It is
certain that the modalities for the functioning of that
body will have to be carefully and collectively worked
out, in order for it to be truly effective. The Russian
delegation is prepared to engage constructively in that
work.

The Russian delegation believes that the official
statement of the President of the Security Council -
the draft of which was kindly prepared by the Danish
delegation for adoption at the end of today's
meeting - contains a number of important points the
implementation of which by the United Nations system
and by its partners should make it possible to
strengthen the peacekeeping achievements of the entire
Organization and to strengthen stability throughout the
world.

