Mr. Ipo (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): At the
outset, my delegation congratulates Ms. Leila Zerrougui,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO), as
well as Ambassador Mansour Alotaibi, in his capacity
as Chair of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1533 (2004) concerning the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, for their detailed briefings on
the situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

Cote d'Ivoire welcomes the positive developments
in the sociopolitical situation in the country, marked
by the gradual establishment of institutions following
the most recent elections held for Parliament and the
provincial Governments and the appointment of the
Prime Minister. In addition, the return to the country of
several opposition members clearly reflects the desire
of the new authorities to open up the political space. My
country also notes with great interest the new impetus
given by the Congolese Government to the National
Oversight Mechanism of the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the Region. It particularly appreciates
the emphasis on justice sector reform, the fight
against impunity and disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration (DDR), which are essential pillars
of peacebuilding. C6te d'Ivoire urges the Congolese
authorities to maintain that momentum through the
careful formation of the new Government in order to
implement the sectoral reforms necessary to meet the
pressing needs of the Congolese people.

Persistent intercommunity violence and attacks by
armed groups on civilians and humanitarian personnel
involved in the fight against the Ebola epidemic in
eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo remain a
major concern for my delegation. It deplores the two
attacks perpetrated on 23 July by Ugandan militias of
the Allied Democratic Forces in Beni, in the east of
the country, which resulted in the death of 12 civilians,
including two children.

My delegation therefore urges the Congolese
authorities to further strengthen the DDR process
for the benefit of the ex-combatants of armed groups
operating in Tanganyika province and to encourage
all other armed groups to abandon violence once and
for all by firmly joining the process. Similarly, my
country calls on international partners to support the
DDR programme and the efforts of the authorities and
MONUSCO to restore peace and stability in eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

Instability in the east of the country continues to
have a negative impact on the humanitarian and health
situations in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Indeed, according to the estimates of humanitarian
organizations, some 13 million people, including
refugees from neighbouring countries, are in need
of protection and humanitarian assistance, while the
resources mobilized to respond to the crisis are well
below expectations.

With regard to the health situation, the persistence
of the Ebola epidemic in the east of the country
remains a matter of particular concern and highlights
the need for diligent and appropriate measures. My
country therefore welcomes the commitment of the
Congolese authorities, the World Health Organization
and MONUSCO to combatting the epidemic and urges
them to step up their efforts to eradicate the disease.
In that regard, my delegation strongly encourages
humanitarian organizations, donors and all other
partners of the Democratic Republic of the Congo to
increase their assistance in order to provide an urgent
response to the needs of those affected.

In conclusion, Cote d'Ivoire reaffirms its support
for the Congolese authorities, Ms. Zerrougui and her
entire team, and reiterates its call on the international
community to maintain its support for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo with a view to stabilizing and
consolidating peace.

