Mr. Vukasinovie (Bosnia and Herzegovina): We
too wish to extend our gratitude to the leadership of the
International Tribunal on Former Yugoslavia (ICTY)
and the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal

Tribunals for their respective reports and today's
detailed briefings on the progress of legal proceedings,
the completion strategy implementation and the transfer
of the Tribunal's functions to the Mechanism.

We are entering a final chapter in the work of the
ICTY. It is a culmination of all the efforts to bring
to justice those responsible for the horrific crimes
committed in the former Yugoslavia. Our continued
strong support is therefore as important as ever.
Furthermore, their legacy is important for the future
of international criminal justice. We note the continued
progress and steady work of the ICTY in its last
reporting period. We further acknowledge in that regard
the Tribunal's commitment to completing its work
expeditiously by a targeted date, the judges' efforts in
identifying further measures to expedite the pending
cases, and the overall effort to ensure the smooth
transfer of functions to the Residual Mechanism, in
accordance with resolution 1966 (2010). We encourage
the Tribunal to make every effort to meet the targets of
its completion strategy and forecast delivery dates of
judgements in order to avoid any further delays.

During all this time, the cooperation of Bosnia and
Herzegovina with the ICTY has remained steadfast and
full, and will continue as such with the Mechanism.
Since the very beginning, Bosnia and Herzegovina has
fully cooperated with the ICTY and implemented all its
decisions and rulings. Our support for the work of the
ICTY demonstrates our commitment to the rule of law
and sustainable peace.

The expiration date for the pursuit of justice will
not arrive in 2017, nor is the delivery of justice solely
dependent on the remaining work of the Mechanism.
Further accountability depends also on the efforts
of national judicial systems in the region, as well as
on their mutual, successful and strong cooperation.
Bosnia and Herzegovina remains committed to further
strengthening its national judicial system at all levels
in order to bring to justice the persons responsible
for atrocity crimes. We have adopted a justice sector
reform strategy for the period 2014-2018 that will
contribute to the long-term reinforcement of the rule
of law and further consolidate the judicial system,
including measures to improve judicial independence
and efficiency.

At the same time, the implementation of the
national war crimes strategy continues to improve the
consistency of juridical practices throughout the entire
country at all levels. The implementation of the strategy
is a complex process in which many institutions of
Bosnia and Herzegovina participate at all levels of
authority. Despite numerous challenges, important
results have been accomplished. That is reflected in
a steady increase in the efficiency of prosecutions of
war crimes cases and certain progress in resolving
outstanding Category II cases, as well as in issuing
important indictments. In that regard, we welcome in
particular the support of the European Union for the
implementation of the strategy, and the support of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
and the United Nations Development Programme,
principally in connection with witness protection
activities and the appropriate assistance and support
to victims.

We are also pleased that the European Union has
agreed to extend the joint European Union-ICTY
Training Project for National Prosecutors and Young
Professionals from the former Yugoslavia, as it has
played a very important role in building the capacities
of national justice sectors for the past eight years in
order to ensure an efficient transition from the ICTY to
national war crimes prosecutions.

We also remain committed to the promotion of
stronger and more coordinated regional cooperation
as the best possible continuation of the work of the
Tribunal and the preservation of its legacy. In the joint
efforts to deliver justice for numerous victims of our
region lies the true strength of reconciliation, while
in their remembrance and testimony lie a lesson and a
reminder for future generations.

We welcome the continued activities carried out
by the Residual Mechanism in the reporting period in
increasingly assuming its designated responsibilities,
and hope that the Mechanism will draw and build upon
the best practices of the ICTY and the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda in order to fulfil
its mandate.

The closure of the ICTY does not imply the end of
my country's fight against impunity. Fighting impunity
in a complex, multinational State is a prerequisite
for achieving national reconciliation and long-term
stability in the country and the region. In that regard,
processing war crimes, regardless of the national or
religious origin of the perpetrators and victims, is of
crucial importance to achieving our goals of building a
peaceful and prosperous Bosnia and Herzegovina that
is fully integrated into the European Union.

