Ms. Bolafios Perez (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
I should like to begin by expressing our appreciation for
the participation of France's Minister for Foreign Affairs
in this open debate, which tackles an issue that affects
the entire international community: the persecution of
minorities and the need to preserve cultural diversity,
in this case focusing on the Middle East. We are also
grateful to Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and to the
other keynote speakers for their important statements
earlier in this debate.

Guatemala is of the firm conviction that diplomacy
and dialogue are the best means to achieve a long-term
solution to each of the conflicts affecting the Middle
East region. We are convinced that a political solution
to the differences that for years have divided this region
is the only path to lasting stability and security.

However, we must be aware that the conflicts in
the region are now more complex, most of the time
involving non-State actors, which leads to varied and
complex situations. Over time, the clashes, battles and
killings taking place in the streets of various cities
in the Middle East have ushered in a reign of terror
among the civilian population. Each day we see even
more disregard for the basic elements of the human
condition. We are deeply moved by each unnecessary
death, especially those of women and Children, as well
as the ethnic and religious violence being experienced
in the region. My country firmly condemns all acts of
violence.

For almost four years now, we have seen an ever-
increasing number of reports of violence perpetrated
by non-State actors and terrorist groups, especially the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) and other
associated groups against civilian populations in the
Middle East. These groups are committing war crimes,
crimes against humanity and possibly genocide against
ethnic and religious minorities in the region. The
Christian, Yazidi, Kurd, Turkmen, Shabaki and even
Sunni and Shiite communities suffer brutal persecution
at the hands of these groups, which threaten their
future and right to remain in the region. This is in
addition to the already precarious conditions that these
communities live in, after years ofliving in areas where
political conflicts are being waged, as we see in Syria,
Iraq, Yemen and Libya.

Against this background, the international
community is now faced with the atrocity and
brutality of the crimes committed by ISIL and
other associated groups. The killing of civilians,
abductions, rapes, torture, trafficking in women and
children and the forced recruitment of children are
but a few of the serious Violations of human rights
and international humanitarian law that have been
committed intentionally and systematically against
ethnic and religious minorities. We reaffirm these
people's inalienable right to continue to live in their
own country in peace, freedom, equality and dignity.
We also condemn such groups' deliberate destruction
of irreplaceable religious and cultural objects. We call
for an end to the destruction of Iraq and Syria's cultural
heritage, including the selective destruction of religious
sites and objects, as well as the looting and illicit
trafficking in such assets, which generates income for
the groups, particularly since the proceeds obtained
are then used for recruitment and to strengthen their
operational capacity.

Combating impunity must continue to be a
fundamental aspect of our efforts not just to respond to
serious violations based on ethnic and religious motives
but also to prevent them. The International Criminal
Court can help in our efforts to counter impunity. In that
regard, my delegation believes that the Security Council
must be willing to assign responsibility in a consistent
manner and to afford justice to all the innocent people
affected by the actions of groups fuelled by hatred and
violence.

At the same time, the international community must
do everything it can to eliminate the threat posed by
such groups. We must be steadfast in our commitment
to supporting the advancement of existing political
processes, while emphasizing the importance of
suppressing ethnic and religious hatred that demonizes
and excludes the other and instead supporting tolerance
and mutual respect among different racial and religious
groups. That is why we reacted positively to the
Secretary-General's announcement this morning that
he would be establishing an advisory panel on these
issues.

In conclusion, we are aware of the enormous
challenges involved in stopping the threat that
radicalization and violence pose to ethnic and religious
groups. However, it is our political and historical
responsibility, as Member States of the international
community, to support every possible means of
achieving that goal. We also have an obligation to
promote truth, enlightenment and responsibility to all
those responsible for such violations and above all to do
our utmost to prevent further atrocities.

