Mr. Valdivieso: It is a great pleasure and
privilege to have the opportunity to come before the
Council today and contribute to this critical debate. It
is well known that we are very proud to be associated
with the leadership of the United Nations in assisting
the East Timorese on the road to independence and to
try to establish the necessary structures for securing the
future welfare oftheir society.

The role of the International Monetary Fund
(IMF) in East Timor has focused on helping the United
Nations Transitional Administration in East Timor
(UNTAET) develop a macroeconomic framework to
guide economic decision-making and capacity-
building, including developing institutions and skills,
to help ensure that economic policies are implemented
properly and that the resources made available to East
Timor are efficiently used and appropriately accounted
for.

The support provided has been quite specialized.
The support that we have provided under the strategies
that we have recommended transcends the political
transition process. The idea is to establish a framework
that will endure after independence, so it is extremely
important that whatever is being created, even during
the first month, should be sound enough to endure all
of the difficulties that are likely to be encountered in
future during the transitional process.

The IMF will continue to stress the need for
consistent and credible macroeconomic policies
throughout the initial humanitarian relief period, the
subsequent Transitional Administration, and the future
independent East Timor. We will continue to stress the
need for enhancing capacity-building and for creating
adequate incentives for the private sector, because we
believe firmly that the development of a vibrant private
sector will be the engine of growth and prosperity and
the only possibility of fighting poverty in East Timor.

The strategy developed in conjunction with
UNTAET, the East Timorese, other institutions, United
Nations agencies and the World Bank, and in
continuous consultation with various donors and
members of civil society, had three components. One
was to ensure that there would be a payment system.
Following the severe destruction of September last,
there was no banking system and no possibility of
making any meaningful financial transaction. Therefore
that was one ofthe important elements. I think we have
made some significant progress that will remain for
years to come. Obviously, it will be under continuous
monitoring and will require further adjustments to
make sure that things function well.

The second important component of the strategy
to ensure appropriate macroeconomic management was
the development of a basic fiscal framework. There,
the critical steps were to establish a central fiscal
authority, which eventually will become the Ministry
of Finance, and, more fundamentally, the adoption of a
sustainable, consolidated budget. This budget is the
national budget. It is not the assessed contributions
budget, it is not the budget that supports UNTAET
operations. It is the budget that supports the operations
of the local administration. We focus significantly on
that, but we have also broadened our perspective to
make sure that we monitor closely the inflow of
resources into the country, as an excessive amount of
resources give rise to distortions.

There have been important and significant
developments. They are very well documented and can
be found on the Web sites of the United Nations, the
World Bank, the IMF and various other agencies that
maintain Web sites with all the various reports, so I
will not go into detail about what the achievements
have been during these last 15 months of continuous
contact with East Timor. But let me just flag a few that
I think are important enough to keep in mind and that,
as I said at the beginning, transcend the political cycle.

The first is the adoption of a currency as a means
of payment and the design of a framework for the
operation of banks. There are already two banks in
operation, and, hopefully, there will be more in future.
There are a number of initiatives for micro-financial
institutions, and there is also some interest in foreign
exchange bureaus.

For the time being, there is no problem with
respect to the issue of monetary policy, as the currency
chosen in the transition is the United States dollar. It
will be up to a future independent Government of East
Timor to decide whether a different monetary
arrangement is suitable for its objectives.

With regard to fiscal developments, there was, for
the first time, a preliminary budget. For a post-conflict
country to present a preliminary budget right at the
outset of operations is a very important development. It
was rudimentary, but still a guideline to at least help
allocate resources in a somewhat sensible manner. It
also demands accountability, which is very important.

Subsequently, with the assistance of mainly the
Australian and Japanese Governments, the central
fiscal authority was staffed, and a very strong budget
team was assigned to East Timor for about 15 months
initially. These people have helped to develop a very
comprehensive budget process, and now we are about
to start discussions on the budget for fiscal year 2001-
2002. I think that this has been very, very important. I
mention the deficiencies in the design that need to be
tackled, but that will come with time and experience.
Furthermore, there has been the development of a tax
administration body, which is implementing a policy
that is being designed in consultation with the National
Council and through public forum discussions. Some
progress has also been made in that very important
area.

I think there has been some debate on the issue of
participation and ownership; it has been more and more
encouraging to see that the East Timorese are taking a
stronger interest. They are becoming better equipped
by getting support from donors in terms of technical
assistance, and they are developing their own views
with respect to various alternatives that are being
offered to them for a system of taxation, a system of
public tariffs for utilities and so forth.

Budget execution is a different matter, because it
depends not only on having a budget but also on the
spending agencies. This requires much more work. As
Mr. Rohland indicated, they are having additional
difficulties in procurement. There are some difficulties
in the execution that hopefully will be addressed. But
these two developments in banking and payments
management-because there is no real monetary
management - and in fiscal management are
encouraging. I think they will require future assistance,
and we stand ready to support the United Nations until
the transfer of the administration to a new East
Timorese government, and to support the future East
Timorese government.

With regard to developments in capacity-
building, we will focus initially on making operational
the institutions that we consider key for economic
management. We have provided comprehensive
technical assistance, and I think that one of the
important lessons we have derived from this situation
is that there are very detailed blueprints on how to
manage these institutions, what functions and what
type of people are required. I think we are now
proposing that this model be replicated, so to speak, for
other economic institutions that are being developed,
such as the national planning agency and the ministry
of economy, because it is extremely important that we
know ex ante what is required in terms of expertise, the
type of institution being built and the requirements
both for today and for the future. As previous speakers
have said, it is very important that we do not create
something that later will become difficult to sustain,
especially when the massive amount of external
support starts to decline.

We acknowledge that the process of building East
Timorese managerial capacity in the macro-financial
management area has been slow; it is quite a
specialized area. This will take time. We are now trying
to coordinate more closely with the World Bank, with
the Asian Development Bank and with other agencies,
trying to make sure that we have a systematic approach
that will enable us to deploy qualified staff for these
critical areas of macroeconomic management in the
months to come. We have already started some
comprehensive courses in Singapore. We have a
regional institute. We are trying to set up on-the-job
training approaches. All the experts that have been
recommended by our institution have, as part of their
terms of reference, a capacity-building mandate, and
they have the responsibility to identify and train local
counterparts during their stay in East Timor, with a
View to the latter eventually being in a position to
assume their responsibilities, even though we
anticipate that in these areas of expertise continued
support will be required for a number of years to come.

What are the major challenges that we see ahead?
I understand that the Council President wanted the
discussions to focus on the future, but I think it is
important to look at the past, especially in the area of
our concern, because we do not really believe that we
have to change the tune as independence approaches,
since, as I said, the institutions that have been set up
will be required in any market-based economy. I think
the skills that are being developed will be required in
the future. Policies may change, and then there will be
a need for developing analytical capacity and to ensure
that advice is understood, adopted and embraced by the
Timorese, because the last thing we need would be the
feeling that things were being imposed. I think it is
very important that whatever they adopt be embraced
and come from their own initiative. This dialogue is
important. It will take time. It will be slower than
things more familiar to us would have been. But I think
the dialogue is important, and we have to be tolerant
and patient.

The challenges that we see ahead in the economic
sphere are essentially in the area of the maintenance of
macroeconomic stability. I think that many people
believe it is sometimes too early to talk about
economic matters in a post-conflict situation; but it is
never too early, because normally what happens is that
in the rush of things, we make decisions that we may
later regret. One of our major concerns, for instance, is
wage policy. In the rush of things, sometimes we want
to hire whoever is available at the moment, and we
sometimes judge the adequacy of wage policy against
the objective of trying to bring qualified people to help
us as soon as possible. But in the process we may
distort the wage policy for the future independent
government of Timor. Another possibility is that we
embark on projects that may be too costly over time.
This pertains to the whole issue of sustainability over
time. It is never too early to raise questions about
sustainability. We are very concerned about that. I
think the challenge for East Timor will be to
continuously go over every decision that is being taken
and understand not only the short term benefits but also
the future implications. This is something that we have
raised in meetings with donors. Very generous bilateral
assistance is being offered, but we are asking donors to
be as specific as possible, with regard to what they are
willing to do today as well as the recurrent costs
needed to maintain in the future whatever is initiated
now.

Even though our friend Sergio Vieira de Mello
says that the budget is cruel, I think that the budget is
realistic and is consistent with the availability of
resources today and the medium-term potential of the
country. That is precisely what forces us to ask
ourselves continuously whether something that may be
beneficial today may be too costly tomorrow. It is not
that these questions should prevent us from making
decisions; I think they have to be made.

So this is a very important challenge: to
continuously have on the table the questions of
sustainability that are critical for macroeconomic
stability. Without macroeconomic stability, we cannot
expect growth, and we cannot expect to be in a position
to address serious poverty problems.

The other serious challenge is capacity-building. I
am very pleased to hear, as our friend from the United
Nations Development Programme indicated, that it has
a mandate to deal with this issue, which is so critical.
We stand ready to cooperate with it in all areas of our
expertise, and we will continue to support the United
Nations and our Timorese friends in the future
independent government of East Timor with whatever
resources we have.

The final major challenge is the creation of
adequate incentives for the private sector. I think we
have here a unique opportunity to move away from the
traditional governmental structure that was set up,
inherited from Indonesian times - that is, a large
government. I think this is a very good opportunity.
But for creating the right incentives for private sector
development, a lot has to be done. In a couple of
publications we have presented in detail what we think
would be the immediate steps. I will be glad to make
available to all the members of the Council the
references to these publications, which can also be
found on our Web site.

We believe that for creating the right incentives
there is an immediate need not only to maintain
stability and to continue with a sensible fiscal budget
and fiscal approach; it will also be important to move
forcefully on developing basic legislation that is still
missing, but not stopping at the level of legislation. In
this regard, I fully agree with Sergio Vieira de Mello
that enforcement is as important as having the laws in
place, so the development of the judiciary has to go
hand in hand with the development of legislation. Very
specifically, we are very concerned about the need for
developing quickly commercial law, the labour code
and a foreign-investment law, because without those
basic legal requirements and frameworks and the
assurances that the rights of investors are going to be
protected, we cannot expect an appropriate response.

We are also watching with great interest the
approach followed in the political transition. This will
also help, because political uncertainty also affects
investment decisions. But I think two important
elements that were mentioned by Sergio Vieira de
Mello are the participation in decision-making and in
the legislative effort of the East Timorese. These
elements are providing more and more clarity with
respect to where the country is likely to go, and this in
turn is providing some assurances to some investors
who are already analysing the possibilities.

We believe that every effort should be made to
create the right incentives for private initiative.
Without that, I think we run the risk of creating an
environment in which the Government will be forced to
take up obligations that I think the East Timorese have
a unique opportunity to decide not to put in the hands
of the Government - in contrast to what has
traditionally been the case.

Once again, I really appreciate the invitation to
speak to the Council. We are very pleased and we stand
ready to continue cooperating with the United Nations
Transitional Administration in East Timor, our
Timorese friends, all United Nations agencies, our
sister institution, the World Bank, and donors. We will
be glad to answer any questions and discuss bilaterally
any further issues that any of the members of the
Security Council may have, or to present more specific
briefings as required.

