Mr. Lewicki (Poland): At the outset, I would like
to thank Mr. Yury Fedotov, Executive Director of the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC),
for his very comprehensive briefing.

Over the past few years, drug use and drug use
disorder have become a growing concern in West
Africa. According to the World Drug Report 2018, not
only is West Africa a transiting hub for drugs but it has
also grown to become a consumption hub for cannabis
and cocaine. Addressing that challenge requires an
integrated approach to the drug problem that involves
tackling supply and demand together. In that regard,
Poland commends the UNODC presence in West Africa
through its Regional Office for West and Central Africa,
in Senegal, as well as the UNODC country office in
Nigeria. Cooperation with regional organizations and
States in the region is crucial. Therefore, we welcome
UNODC's support for the Economic Community
of West African States (ECOWAS) and its member
States in the area of border control through mentoring,
exchange Visits, study tours and advance training on
specific issues.

Strengthening the capacity of ECOWAS and its
member States to take sustainable actions against drug
trafficking, drug abuse and transnational organized
crime is of utmost importance. We need to remember
that drug trafficking is one of the main sources of
income for terrorist groups, as mentioned by several
delegations already. If they are to be more efficient in
detecting illicit financial flows, countries should focus
primarily on border security. However, bearing that
in mind, we cannot forget that the porous borders of
developing countries are one of the biggest challenges
they face in the course of the fight against terrorism.
We should be aware that drug trafficking will be one
of the main sources of income until the socioeconomic
problems of Africa are resolved and African citizens
are able to find beneficial and legal sources ofincome.
That is why supporting Africa's development is
potentially the most effective tool for combating drug
trafficking and drug use disorder.

It is our obligation to provide capacity-building
and respond to requests for technical assistance. Those
actions, in order to succeed, need to be undertaken in
coordination with relevant international, regional and
subregional organizations. Therefore, we commend
Project CRIMJUST, a joint initiative funded by the
European Union and implemented by UNODC, in
partnership with INTERPOL and Transparency
International, for contributing to effectively fighting
organized crime, in general, and drug trafficking in
particular, along the cocaine route in Latin America,
the Caribbean and West Africa.

We support the purposes of the project aimed at,
first, strengthening the capacities of criminal justice
institutions to detect, investigate and prosecute
drug trafficking and related crime cases; secondly,
fostering regional and interregional cooperation
among criminal justice institutions by promoting good
practices, information exchange and networking; and,
thirdly and lastly, enhancing institutional integrity
and accountability of criminal justice institutions
to reinforce mutual trust and confidence within and
between both regions, with the active involvement of
the civil society organizations.

In conclusion, let me express our full support to
UNODC's work on drug trafficking in West Africa,
based on its Regional Programme for West Africa
(2016-2020).

