The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the Federal Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Germany.

Our discussion has made one thing clear: we are
anything but indifferent to human suffering. Action
must be taken wherever help is needed. Unfortunately,
our discussion has also shown that doing that is
becoming increasingly difficult. The humanitarian
space is shrinking in many parts of the world. Armed
conflicts are more complex today than ever before. They
last longer and increasingly take place in urban spaces.
A growing number of non-State actors and rebel groups
are involved, and not only in Syria, where fragmentation
is especially evident. Sadly, attacks on hospitals and
medical personnel have become commonplace. Our
meeting this morning made that clear too. Instead of
being protected, the work of aid workers is becoming
more dangerous. Yemen, north-east Nigeria and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo are just a few of the
areas where that occurs. It is also vital that the Security
Council address those tragedies. Talking is not enough.
We have to take action. As today's discussion has
shown, three points are especially important.
First of all, upholding international humanitarian
law and humanitarian principles is vital. Such norms
are not an end in themselves. They protect the lives of
aid workers and the people they help. As the second-
largest bilateral donor, Germany rejects any kind
of political instrumentalization of humanitarian
assistance. Humanitarian space can be established only
if the neutrality, independence and impartiality of aid
workers are not in doubt. Humanitarian aid workers
live by those principles every day, often at great risk to
themselves. They deserve our thanks and full support
for the valuable work they do. Humanitarian space can
be established only where rules are in place. Only those
familiar with international humanitarian norms can
consciously apply them.

Secondly, therefore, we must help humanitarian
actorsimpartthenecessaryknow-howaboutinternational
humanitarian law. That is all the more important at a
time when an increasing number ofnon- State parties are
involved in conflicts. Humanitarian organizations must
therefore be able to continue working with such groups.
If that is prohibited, the international community will
lose influence over a group of players of increasing
importance, which is not in our best interest. We also
have a responsibility as States. What President Maurer
said earlier today is important: we are all bound by
international humanitarian law. Therefore, those of us
who support parties to conflicts must especially ensure
that those parties live up to their obligation to comply
unconditionally with international humanitarian law.

Thirdly, the law itself must not become the target
of attacks - for instance, through national laws that
supposedly take precedence over humanitarian law.
We see that ever-more frequently, especially in the
case of counter-terrorism laws. It is good that we at
the United Nations are now discussing the impact of
such laws as well as the consequences of sanctions
on humanitarian work. Germany will play its part in
that regard, including within the context of the various
sanctions regimes.

Germany and France are determined to advance
an exchange on this issue with all Council members.
Our aim is to compile concrete recommendations in the
coming months in a call to action intended to provide
answers to pressing questions. Where and how should
we ensure the protection of aid workers and those
receiving assistance? Where do we need training and
instruction in international humanitarian law? How
can we better support compliance with international
humanitarian law in conflict regions?
Today's discussion was a start. To mark the
seventieth anniversary of the adoption of the Geneva
Conventions in August, Poland, our partner in the
Weimar Triangle, will follow up on today's exchange.
I would like to take this opportunity to thank Minister
Jacek Czaputowicz for that. It is important that we all
pull in the same direction. We have act where help is
needed. That is the task of the Security Council. We
should, and will, rise to the challenge.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I would like to thank all participants for their
constructive contributions. Today's briefing underlined
the importance of a sharp focus on respect for
international humanitarian law and on the responsibility
of the Security Council in that regard. I am glad we
had such eminent briefers with us today. I thank them
for being here. Together with France, we will build
on today's debate and seek support from all Council
members in this endeavour.

The meeting rose at 5.30pm.
