Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola): I would like to
start by saying that, having listened to what you,
Mr. President, had to convey to and share with the
Council on the experience of Senegal and the exemplary
role that you have been playing in the management of
water resources in that region, I can understand why
the topic is important, not only for Senegal, but for
the world. I would therefore very much like to thank
you for convening this meeting and for your choice
for our debate this morning. I would also like to thank
the Secretary-General, Mr. Ban Ki-Moon; and to
welcome Mr. Danilo Turk, Chair of the Global High-
Level Panel on Water and Peace; Ms. Christine Beerli,
Vice-President of the International Committee of the
Red Cross; and Mr. Sundeep Waslekar, President of
Strategic Foresight Group, and thank them for the very
important and insightful remarks they shared with us
this morning.

Contemporary life is characterized by the scarcity
of clear, clean and safe drinking water in increasing
parts of the world. Nearly 1.7 billion people in the
developing world do not have access to water, while
in some countries and regions people take water for
granted, wasting it or turning it into an extremely
lucrative business. Water has become an essential part
of the international political agenda, a global challenge
and a critical issue confronting our societies. Water and
access to it are a core issue of climate change, health
and nutrition crises and environmental degradation,
and they are also at the origin of serious social and
political conflicts.

The recognition by the General Assembly that
water and sanitation constitute fundamental human
rights was a decisive step forward in changing the
paradigm on how the issue of water is perceived.
The establishment of the Global High-Level Panel
on Water and Peace - aimed at proposing a global
architecture to transform water from a source of
potential crisis to an instrument of cooperation and
peace - fully translates the contemporary concern for
and awareness of the issue, while the management of
water courses and river basins became a central piece
of international cooperation.

The management of rivers of Senegal and the Gambia
is an outstanding example of regional cooperation in
the management of water assets by bordering countries
through transcending national interests. However,
such good practice has not always been the rule, and
competition for water for irrigation and grazing and the
lack of access to drinking water are increasing sources
of conflict in some countries and regions.

The Lake Chad basin has become one of the most
dramatic cases where the linkage between water, peace
and security is at centre stage. Due to poor cooperation
among its adjoining countries, the basin faces
enormous challenges that threaten its very existence
and the survival of millions of its inhabitants, as it
is no longer affords them enough water resources for
their livelihoods. Lake Chad benefits around 20 million
people living on its shores in four countries, supporting
the local economy, which is fundamentally based on
fishing, agriculture and cattle-raising. However, the
inhabitants see their source of livelihood impaired,

with the lake on the brink of ecological disaster, having
become a tiny fraction of its former size. That situation
has led to security threats linked to growing poverty
and unemployment, youth radicalization and terrorism
and a huge humanitarian crisis against the backdrop of
high rates of population growth, extreme poverty and a
food and nutrition crisis.

The international community is called upon to act,
as a preventive measure, and to do something tangible
in helping to solve the environmental degradation of
a region that has historically been an economic and
cultural hub of African culture and civilization. To
manage the lake's shrinking water resources and reverse
the trend towards its extinction, several initiatives at the
international and regional levels have been undertaken
as a demonstration of the deep concern of the people,
Governments and the international community
regarding the current state of affairs.

The Lake Chad Basin Commission, a regional
initiative, has developed the Lake Chad replenishment
project with the objective of regenerating the lake - an
ambitious project with the potential to radically change
the situation of the basin and the lives of its population.
The countries of the region and the international
community should assume a collective responsibility by
seriously considering extending tangible support to the
project. That would turn it into a top priority among the
important infrastructure projects being developed by
Africa's key development partners, since the prevailing
situation has the potential to become yet another hotbed
of crisis and conflict, as well as a real threat to regional
and international peace and security.

I would like to take this opportunity to highlight
Angola's experience with regard to water resources
and their use and management. The Government of
Angola has created a water resources institute that
is implementing a national programme for water
distribution and sanitation all over the country, as
well as the management of transboundary watersheds.
However, despite the rich water resources with
which Angola is endowed, providing water to every
community in the country remains a huge challenge
and one that calls for a continuing serious financial,
technical and educational effort in which international
investment is a key factor.

At the regional level, the Okavango River Basin
WaterCommissionwasestablishedbyAngola,Botswana
and Namibia in order to promote and strengthen
the integrated, sustainable management, use and
development of the Cubango-Okavango basin. Respect
for best practices, aimed at protecting biodiversity and
improving the livelihoods of the basin's communities
and human development in the States concerned, has
been a fundamental consideration for the programme.
The countries of the Water Commission are currently
implementing a strategic action programme that can be
seen as a good case ofregional cooperation and one that
other speakers have already mentioned. Water is a key
factor in that kind of cooperation.

In conclusion, it is evident that water shortages,
shortsighted national interests and mismanagement
can cause tensions among populations and nations
in many regions of the world, leading to potential
sources of conflict. It is therefore key to promote
international cooperation on such a critical issue,
by raising international awareness, encouraging
developing countries to prioritize water and sanitation,
and integrating water management into global food
security, health and climate-change initiatives in order
to preserve peace and security in the world.

