Mr. Lacroix: I thank you, Madam President, for this opportunity to brief the Security Council on developments pertaining to the United Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA), including its support to the Joint Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism (JBVMM) and response to the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. I shall also update the Council on the latest developments since the publication of the report of the Secretary-General on the situation in Abyei (S/2020/1019). The reporting period was marked by enhanced collaboration between the Sudan and South Sudan. On 3 October, a historic peace agreement was signed between the transitional Government of the Sudan, the Sudanese Revolutionary Front and the Sudan Liberation Movement-Minni Minnawi in Juba, South Sudan. The South Sudanese authorities facilitated the negotiation process that led to the signing of the agreement. Also, in a positive development, the Sudan and South Sudan have broached their intention to relaunch the political process, with senior officials from South Sudan travelling to Khartoum to meet with Sudanese authorities to discuss the final status of Abyei and border areas. However, despite this continued rapprochement between the Sudan and South Sudan, the peace process has made little progress in Abyei. The main developments at the local level were the appointments by Juba and Khartoum of their respective chief administrators. On 29 June, President Kiir Mayardit appointed Lieutenant General Kuol Diem Kuol as Chief Administrator for the Abyei Special Administrative Area. On 20 August, the Chairman of the Sudan's Sovereign Council, Lieutenant General Abdel Fattah Abdelrahman AlI-Burhan, signed a decree appointing engineer Gumaa Dawood Musa Hamdan as Chief Administrator for the Abyei Administrative Area. This constitutes an unprecedented political development as it is the first time Abyei has two appointed chief administrators. The general security situation in Abyei during the reporting period remained rather volatile, with four attacks against UNISFA personnel being of particular concern and four instances of intercommunal violence, including armed attacks on villages. Two of the attacks against UNISFA personnel occurred on 24 April, and the third attack on 12 May, when two soldiers from the Force Protection Unit assigned to the JBVMM headquarters in Kadugli were fired upon while driving from the Kadugli base to Murta. In the fourth attack, an unknown armed group opened fire on an UNISFA convoy between Goli and Todach in Sector North, injuring three peacekeepers, one of them critically, who was subsequently airlifted to Addis Ababa for treatment. UNISFA continued to engage Ngok Dinka and Misseriya authorities and community leaders to further the local-level peace efforts. However, the incidents at Nainai and Kolom on 19 and 22 January, respectively, as well as the incident in Mabok on 13 April and the Ngok Dinka attack on Ibrahim village on 8 August 2020, compounded intercommunal tensions and negatively impacted peace efforts at the local level. UNISFA's efforts to have community representatives engage within the framework of the joint community peace committee were unsuccessful. In order to address potential violence at the local level during the migration season, a technical committee of the 2020 pre-migration conference was formed, comprising UNISFA, the International Organization for Migration and the non-governmental organization Concordis International, to discuss the pastoralist movement along the three migration corridors in Abyei. The pre-migration conference is aimed at resolving issues that could lead to conflict between herders and host communities along migration routes. On 17 October, members of the team met with officials of the Juba-appointed local administration in Abyei. The discussion centred around the need for the resumption of the joint community peace committee meeting and the proposed ore-migration conference for the forthcoming season. On 19 October, the team met with members of the Misseriya joint community peace committee at the Amiet market as part of the consultations towards the proposed pre-migration conference. The Misseriya warned that any delay in reaching an agreement between the two sides might lead to clashes and loss of lives along the migration corridors. They urged UNISFA to convene the traditional leaders conference before | November. UNISFA has emphasized the need to resume regular joint community peace committee meetings for the sake of peace and security within the communities. During the reporting period, minimum progress was made on JBVMM benchmarks and the Joint Political and Security Mechanism (JPSM) decisions, due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. That affected progress in the opening of the crossing corridors as agreed in the JPSM resolution of 19 February and border demarcation activities by both the Joint Border Commission and the Joint Demarcation Committee. The JPSM was unable to hold meetings as scheduled. Furthermore, planned JBVMM operational activities and meetings were suspended. Aerial and ground monitoring missions were also put on hold due to COVID-19-related restrictions imposed by the host countries. While ground monitoring missions resumed on 27 July, the onset of the rainy season rendered most areas inaccessible. Under resolution 2519 (2020), the Security Council mandated the deployment of 640 police personnel, including three formed police units of 160 members each and 160 individual police officers. Currently, the staffing of the United Nations police stands at 35, out of which 16 officers are finishing their two-year assignment in October or November. Since no visas have been issued for any new officers who could be deployed as replacements, the strength of the police component will decrease to 19 officers. Consequently, this situation will inevitably lead to the closure of some team sites in UNISFA and have a very negative impact on mandate implementation. The process of generating and deploying the three authorized formed police units has been hampered by the travel restrictions related to the COVID-19 outbreak, as well as the non-issuance of entry visas for the officials from those identified police-contributing countries (PCCs) intending to visit the Mission. On 4 October, two notes verbales were sent to the relevant authorities of the Sudan, requesting entry visas and travel permits to Abyei for the members of the reconnaissance teams from China and Tanzania. Those reconnaissance visits are mandatory for the PCCs, within the process of the deployment of their formed police units. The reconnaissance visit for the Chinese official delegation was scheduled from 18 October and the Tanzanian official delegation is expected to conduct its field visit from 1 November. So far, the entry visas and travel permits to Abyei have still not been granted by the Sudanese authorities. Regarding COVID-19, the mission has reported 11 COVID-19 confirmed cases since the pandemic started, including one national civilian staff member, four international staff, two international contracted staff, two military staff officers and two members from troop-contributing countries. There was one suspected death of a female soldier. Locally, on 6 October, the Abyei Health Cluster meeting for COVID-19 was held at Ameth-bek Hospital. The Minister of Health of the Juba-appointed administration chaired the meeting, which was attended by representatives of UNISFA, the GOAL non-governmental organization and Save the Children. During the meeting, it was reported that 2,702 people had been screened within the Abyei Area to date and the cumulative number of confirmed cases since the outbreak of the pandemic was 52, while the cumulative number of related deaths was five. Since July to date, no new positive cases have been recorded in the Abyei Area. UNISFA has continued to engage with the Government of the Sudan and the Government of South Sudan to facilitate the implementation of the pending aspects of their previous agreements, despite the obstacles posed by the COVID-19 pandemic. The newly appointed acting Head of Mission/Force Commander has visited Khartoum to address a number of substantive issues pertaining to UNISFA's mandate and the peace process. He has also visited Juba, where he interacted with the Minister of Foreign Affairs, the Minister of Defence and the South Sudan People's Defence Force Chief of Staff, as well as with the Deputy co-Chair appointed by South Sudan of the Abyei Joint Oversight Committee. He is committed to continuing his engagement with both parties. In conclusion, I would like to express my thanks for the continued support by the Security Council to UNISFA and seek the Council's support for the Secretary-General's recommendation to extend the mandate of UNISFA for a further period of six months, until 15 May 2021.
