I thank Ms. Zerrougui and Mr. Usseni Jamael for their briefings. I take this opportunity to address my deepest condolences to Indonesia and its Ambassador after the tragic death of its peacekeeper. The Democratic Republic of the Congo still faces many challenges. The United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) is helping, but the Mission cannot replace the action of the Congolese authorities. The country's long-term stability will depend on their ability to develop the capacity to bring security and stability to the citizens of the Democratic Republic. The election of President Tshilombo Tshisekedi has raised prospects that are encouraging. Progress is being made on the fight against corruption, on the implementation of certain aspects of the Government's programme and on reconciliation. On the security front, some regions are entering a post-conflict phase, and the focus must now be put on State-building and development to consolidate their stability. In these regions, the Congolese authorities can take over from MONUSCO, enabling the Mission to refocus its efforts on the regions that are still suffering from the actions of Congolese and foreign armed groups, intercommunal violence, the plundering of natural resources and numerous human rights violations perpetrated against civilian populations, particularly women and children. In these regions, a determined commitment by the national and provincial authorities is necessary, so that, beyond the military aspect, a socioeconomic response can be provided to address the root causes of conflict. This is the case in Ituri, where the re-emergence of a 20-year-old conflict illustrates the long-term risks to not addressing structural causes. As Mr. Usseni Jamael has shown us, that also requires strong action to stop the illicit exploitation and export of natural resources. France calls on the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the countries of the region to act decisively on this issue. On the health and humanitarian front, the situation remains worrisome because of the multiplicity of ongoing epidemics. The Government is engaging in voluntary action in this area and can count on France's support, as demonstrated by the visit to the Democratic Republic of the Congo by the French Minister for Europe and Foreign Affairs, Jean-Yves Le Drian, on 8 and 9 June. These encouraging prospects and persistent challenges must be taken into account in the establishment of a joint road map between the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the United Nations towards an exit for MONUSCO. This work must be completed as soon as possible. France encourages the Congolese authorities to commit themselves fully to this exercise. In the meantime, the constant improvement of MONUSCO's performance remains crucial. In particular, an ambitious reform of the Intervention Brigade is critical. Rapid progress must be made in this regard, and the commitment of the contributing countries is necessary to that end. We owe it to the populations that are suffering every day from attacks by armed groups.
