Mr. Thomson (United Kingdom): My delegation
fully subscribes to the statement to be delivered shortly
by the representative of Austria.

We are delighted to join our Council colleagues
in welcoming President Gusmao and Foreign Minister
Ramos-Horta to the Security Council today. Their
presence provides us an opportunity to pay tribute to
them personally, and through them to the people of
Timor-Leste, for all their remarkable achievements
over the past few years in building a stable, peaceful
and democratic Timor-Leste.

My delegation recognizes too the very important
role that has been played over the past few years by the
United Nations - most recently by the United Nations
Office in Timor-Leste (UNOTIL) under the leadership
of Sukehiro Hasegawa. We offer our thanks to him and
his team for their efforts. We also thank him for his
briefing to us today.

In the final few months of UNOTIL's mandate,
we hope to see a concerted effort to fulfil UNOTIL's
remit - for example, in the training of, and assistance
to, the Border Patrol Unit.

We welcome the advances that have been
achieved during the current reporting period. We are
encouraged that progress has been made in establishing
effective democratic governance, in adopting key
legislation and in security matters - for example, in
the negotiations on the unresolved border with
Indonesia.

We are also pleased to see the completion of the
work of the Commission for Reception, Truth and
Reconciliation through the submission of its report to
the President and now to the Secretary-General. The
Commission has done important and innovative work
in revealing the truth of past human rights abuses and
in fostering reconciliation. In that context, we look
forward to receiving the Secretary-General's report on
justice and reconciliation for Timor-Leste.

But of course, further progress remains essential
in key areas, in particular the establishment of
sustainable, robust democracy and the rule of law. The
presidential elections in 2007 will be a major challenge
and a key process for embedding democratic processes
and ensuring the country's future stability. Clearly, the
continuing support of the international community will
be crucial. We need to consider carefully the most
appropriate means of providing that support in the
various sectors where it is still required. The Timorese
people and Government also, of course, must take
responsibility as far as is possible.

That said, it appears that there could be a case for
a small United Nations political mission with a clearly
defined role to follow on from UNOTIL to help the
Timorese address the gaps and coordinate international
assistance. It would be helpful if the Secretariat could
do some early thinking and produce proposals for us
before the end of UNOTIL's mandate on what might be
most appropriate. We are meanwhile carefully studying
the proposals in Prime Minister Alkatiri's letter of 17
January to the Secretary-General.

