Mr. Weisleder (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish):
We are very grateful to you, Mr. President, for
convening this very important meeting. We welcome
the Secretary-General and would like to thank him for
his presence here today and for the report (S/2008/3 54)
he has provided to us. We would also like to welcome
His Excellency Mr. Boris Tadie, President of Serbia,
and Mr. Fatmir Sejdiu, President of Kosovo.

The Secretary-General's efforts to preserve peace
in Kosovo and in the region in general are very
commendable. We encourage him to continue those
efforts. It also seems to us to be of the utmost
importance to do everything possible to protect the
human rights of all the minority inhabitants living
together in Kosovo. We would like to ask the
Secretary-General to focus in particular on the efforts
needed to bring about the return of displaced persons
and the normalization of their living conditions.

We also support the Secretary-General's proposal
for the reconfiguration of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) in the
context of resolution 1244 (1999) and the powers it
confers and the limits it places on him. Like other
delegations, we too are of the view that the resolution
continues to be in force and that it should continue to
be the framework within which UNMIK and the United
Nations operate in Kosovo until the Council adopts a
different resolution. We believe that it is within the
power of the Secretary-General to propose the
reconfiguration he has made, which is now being
implemented.

We would like to thank the European Union for
its readiness to assume additional tasks and
responsibilities in Kosovo. That should always be done
within the framework of resolution 1244 (1999) and, as
stated in the report of the Secretary-General, in
coordination with the United Nations and under the
leadership of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General in Kosovo.

Finally, it is appropriate to call upon all the
communities that live together in Kosovo to make their
contribution to maintaining calm and to work together
constructively towards ending the conflict in the
framework of a political process. As in previous
occasions, Costa Rica hopes that the past, which has
unfortunately been very painful for the region, can be
overcome through a future of well-being, peace and
tranquillity for the peoples of Kosovo and the Balkans
in general.

