Ms. King (Australia): We express our appreciation
to Rwanda for its leadership on peacebuilding, including
the relationship between the Security Council and the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC). I thank Ambassador
Vladimir Drobnjak and Ambassador Antonio Patriota
for their briefings this morning.

Today's meeting is a key opportunity for us to
reflect on the United Nations peacebuilding efforts in
the lead-up to the 10-year review next year. In doing
so, we should recall the genesis of the Peacebuilding
Commission and what drove its establishment. Kofi
Annan referred to a gaping hole in the United Nations
institutional machinery. The United Nations had no
formal mechanism to support post-conflict countries'
transition to stability and to sustain international
attention beyond the headline-grabbing conflict
period. The PBC and Peacebuilding Fund (PBF) have
made essential progress in filling that gap, with critical
support from the Peacebuilding Support Office. Since
the PBC was established, in 2005, peacebuilding
efforts have evolved considerably. The PBC report
(S/2014/67) we are discussing today includes success
stories in which country-specific configurations have
demonstrated their value. We have seen the transition
out of the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding
Office in Sierra Leone in Sierra Leone, in which the
PBC and PBF have played a bridging role in sustaining
international attention and ameliorating the so-called
financing cliff.

Liberia is similarly making progress in its
transition, supported by the PBC configuration. But we
have also seen a relapse in the Central African Republic
and South Sudan, which has caused extreme suffering,
erased development gains and threatened regional
stability. We encourage the PBC to continue to work
with the Security Council during the stand-up of the
United Nations Integrated Peacekeeping Mission in the
Central African Republic.

We have seen the emergence of the G7+ and the New
Deal for Engagement in Fragile States, which champion
national ownership and leadership of the country's own
path towards the sustainable development agenda in
a very practical way. We commend the leadership of
Timor-Leste and its partners on that important agenda.

We have also just held the first annual session
of the PBC, at which the Deputy Secretary-General
highlighted that the best way to assist post-conflict
countries was to help them to build their own futures.
We share his View that countries' capacity to raise
their own revenues, including through taxation, and to
fight illegal flows by supporting action on corruption,
bribery and transparency of tax information, for
example, is critical to peacebuilding efforts. Such
transformative assistance should be a core element of
the peacebuilding function, and we very much welcome
the focus on that aspect at the first annual PBC session.

The Peacebuilding Fund has developed into an
effective mechanism to deliver fast, flexible funding,
while taking risks and filling Vital gaps. We welcome
the increased involvement of the Peacebuilding Fund
to support post-conflict peacebuilding - in Papua
New Guinea, for example. With the referendum om
Bougainville's future political status to take place
between 2015 and 2020, the next few years there will
be critical to consolidating the peacebuilding process.

We are pleased that gender and women's
empowerment is the focus of the Peacebuilding Fund
business plan for 2014-2016, although we are still a
long way from the target of 15 per cent of funding for
projects focused on gender equality. We need to do
better on that.

We welcome the fact that there are now more players
in the peacebuilding field. The World Bank and other
international financial institutions are strongly focused
on post-conflict issues, as are regional and subregional
organizations. That brings to bear a valuable range of
experience and analysis.

The 2015 review of the peacebuilding architecture,
which is mandated to be comprehensive, should
therefore take into account all of those developments.
It should take as its starting point the original purpose
of the peacebuilding architecture - namely, the gaping
hole - because clearly important gaps still exist.

We should also look at the full range of actors
involved in peacebuilding, including United Nations
funds and programmes, to ensure we are fostering
coherence and coordination across the United Nations
system. We must avoid artificial divides between
the peacebuilding and development architecture
of the United Nations. The review should provide
recommendations for the United Nations development
system that can be taken up in the next quadrennial
comprehensive policy review, in 2016, to allow the
system to fully deliver on the post-2015 development
agenda.

A fundamental question for the Security Council is
the nature of the relationship between the Council and
the peacebuilding architecture. The review provides
an opportunity for us to articulate clearly how the
PBC can most effectively complement the Council's
work. Australia has been a consistent advocate for
deepening that relationship with more frequent,
formal and informal interaction. We must promote
effective engagement between the two. The PBC can
act as an early-warning mechanism and a key source
of advice. We agree with the Chair of the PBC that the
Council should draw on that advice in a considered and
meaningful way.

The Burundi configuration provides a good case
study of the value added that the PBC can bring to the
Council at a delicate time in Burundi's peacebuilding
process. The configuration's cooperation with the
Council has been important. We hope that will continue
and that Burundi will take the actions necessary to
maintain stability and hold free and fair elections in
2015.

In conclusion, we need to remember that
peacebuilding is a complex process and that, as others
have said this morning, is very context-specific. It is
about building citizens' confidence in their Government
and renewing that trust. The PBC must ensure that the
United Nations has the most effective architecture
possible to help ensure that the 1.5 billion people living
in States affected by violence and conflict are spared
from the devastating impact of relapse, and have an
opportunity to live their lives in a stable and secure
environment. We look forward to the December report
from the Secretary-General on peacebuilding in the
aftermath of conflict and to an opportunity to debate
what more the Council can do to promote effective and
coherent United Nations peacebuilding.

