Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): The
humanitarain situation, which Mr. Stephen O'Brien
eloquently described, remains tragic and very worrying
in several ways. I will highlight at least five of them.

First of all, the violation of the prohibion of the
use of chemical weapons - which should have been
absolute - continues to outrage our conscience. On
26 April, France sent to the Security Council its analysis
of the circumstances surrounding the use of chemical
weapons on 4 April in Khan Shaykhun. This analysis
was carried out by our experts and is irrefutable. It
estalishes without at doubt the invovlement of the
Syrian armed and security forces.

Secondly, the violence persists on the ground,
despite the fact the signing of the 4 May agreement.
The general high level has gone down in recent weeks,
but the incidents that took place, particularly in the
areas of Hama, Ghouta and Dar'a, show how precarious
this seeming reduction in violence is. The guarantors
of the truce undertook their responsibility to oversee its
implementation. We therefore call upon the guarantor
States of the Astana process, in particular Russia and
Iran, to effectively impose the full cessation ofhostilities
on the Syrian regime. Improving the situation on the
ground is essential to the success of the negotiations
with a view to political transition in Geneva under the
aegis of the United Nations.

The third matter of concern is the humanitarian
situation, which is far from improving. The regime
continues to block the access of humanitarian convoys
and to besiege opposition-held settlements. More than
620,000 people still live in besieged areas. France
reiterates its call for the immediate lifting of these
sieges. Assistance must go to all the people in need,
wherever they are in the Syrian territory, in accordance
with humanitarian principles.

Fourthly, the implementation of local evacuation
agreements concluded by the regime, after having
starved and besieged civilians for many years, is
generally carried out without international supervision
and leads to large-scale forced displacements of the
population. As the Secretary-General underscored in
his report, such displacements could constitute war
crimes or even crimes against humanity. We therefore
demand that these agreements, which are imposed
by force, cease; that evacuations be carried out in
accordance with international humanitarian law; that
civilians be treated with dignity; and, finally, that the
ceasefire be fully respected.

Fifthly, the situation of the detainees is of particular
concern. The Caesar files discuss it. According
to reliable information, 500,000 people have been
imprisoned by the Bashar Al-Assad regime since
2011. The reported information on the possible use by
Damascus of a crematorium to conceal the extent of the
summary executions perpetrated at the Sednaya prison
must be considered with utmost attention .

We are constantly repeating in this Chamber that
the Damascus regime must respect its international
obligations and allow full, safe, unconditional and
unhindered access for the United Nations and its
humanitarian partners to people in need throughout the
Syrian territory. Its supporters must put pressure on the
regime in that regard.

The Syrian regime continued refusal to issue
facilitation letters for the loading of convoys is
wholly unjustifiable. That responsibility lies squarely
on Damascus, which continues to deny access to
humanitarian actors and has used starvation as a war
strategy. We demand that the Syrian regime authorize
the humanitarian convoys to reach people in need.
Attacks on hospitals, medical facilities and humanitarian
convoys, as well as school buildings and homes persist.
The Secretary-General has reiterated his appeal to refer
the case to the International Criminal Court. We must
shed all possible light on those innumerable violations
of human rights and international humanitarian law.

In the face of that tragic assessment, it is more
urgent than ever to usher in a political transition in the
framework of the Geneva negotiations. France fully
supports the negotiation process in Geneva under the
auspices of the Special Envoy, - in accordance with
resolution 2354 (2017) and the Geneva communique
(S/2012/522, annex) - as the only way to put an end to
the suffering of the Syrian people and the humanitarian
tragedy unfolding before our eyes. More than ever, we
reiterate the urgency of reaching a political solution
that will culminate in a genuine transition in Syria.

