Mr. Dhanapala: It gives me great pleasure to
address the Security Council today at this open debate,
to introduce the report of the Secretary-General on
small arms, document S/2002/ 1053. The importance of
the Security Council's consideration of the question of
small arms cannot be overstated, for these have been
the weapons of choice in most recent conflicts,
particularly those under Security Council
consideration. The illicit sale and excessive stockpiling
of such weapons pose complex and multifaceted
challenges to international peace and stability. Failure
of the world community to rise to these challenges
would jeopardize many of the most fundamental goals
of the Charter, in particular those relating to security,
humanitarian affairs and development.

While it is true that small arms per se do not
provoke conflicts, it is also undeniable that the
unrestrained supply of such weapons renders conflicts
much more protracted and deadly, and promotes a
culture of violence and impunity. There is growing
evidence of close links between illicit small arms and
light weapons and both terrorism and drug trafficking.
The latest estimates of human casualties resulting from
the misuse of small arms are staggering: at least
300,000 deaths every year are caused by armed
conflicts in the developing world; 200,000 deaths are
linked to homicide and suicide in the industrialized
world; while millions more suffer non-fatal injuries and
crippling disabilities.

There are other costs, however, that are difficult
to quantify. As we have witnessed over the past decade,
civil conflicts have caused the economic and social
devastation of many societies. Even in non-conflict
situations where small arms proliferate, human security
stands threatened to a degree that compromises public
safety and social stability.
Over the last few years, the United Nations has
played a critical role in placing the issue of small arms
and light weapons on the international agenda,
initiating the preparatory process for the July 2001
Small Arms Conference, which adopted the
Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and
Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light
Weapons in All Its Aspects. The Security Council has
contributed significantly to this effort by addressing the
small arms issue in situations under its consideration,
and by promoting global efforts to combat illicit small
arms and light weapons, within the framework
provided by the Programme of Action.

The report of the Secretary-General provides a
brief overview of the Council's initiatives regarding
small arms and light weapons in situations under its
consideration. Rather than giving an exhaustive
description of all actions, the report outlines the latest
developments and presents 12 recommendations that
are considered to be relevant to expand and consolidate
the work of the Security Council in this area. The
recommendations cover the following main topics:
implementation of the Programme of Action adopted
by the United Nations Small Arms Conference,
recommendations 1, 2, 3 and 4; Security Council-
mandated sanctions and arms embargoes,
recommendations 5, 6, 9, 10 and 11; conflict
prevention, peace-building and disarmament,
demobilization and rehabilitation (DDR),
recommendations 7 and 8; and confidence-building
measures, recommendation 12.

Three overriding considerations have guided
those recommendations: first, the importance of
sustained implementation of the Programme of Action
adopted unanimously by the Small Arms Conference in
July 2001; secondly, the acknowledgement of the
distinct mandates of the Security Council and the
General Assembly vis-a-vis the small arms issue; and
thirdly, the need to take into account the views of
Member States on this matter.

Let me now turn to a few key points arising from
the Secretary-General's report. Over the last year,
Member States have engaged in the implementation of
the Programme of Action with great enthusiasm.
Initiatives such as national and regional conferences,
the design and implementation of national action plans,
the establishment and strengthening of national
structures, capacity-building in relevant areas and
collaboration between Governments and non-
governmental organizations, among others, have
yielded encouraging results. They have also placed
added pressure on the limited resources of the United
Nations.

In that regard, the Secretariat intends to establish
a small arms advisory service (SAAS) within the
Department for Disarmament Affairs, on the basis of
extrabudgetary resources. The main purpose of that
unit is to enhance the effectiveness of the Coordinating
Action on Small Arms (CASA) mechanism and thereby
to enhance the United Nations ability to assist Member
States in the implementation of the Programme of
Action. Operating as a permanent secretariat of CASA,
the SAAS will optimize the mechanism's performance
as both an inter-agency coordinating body and a
service provider to Member States and the general
public. I hope that the Council will find it appropriate
to offer its political support to that initiative.

The role of arms embargoes in controlling the
proliferation of small arms and light weapons in
conflict situations under its consideration has been
enhanced by the Council's decisions to establish
specific monitoring mechanisms. Further
improvements in that regard would require the
imposition of arms embargoes on countries and regions
that are both emerging from and threatened by armed
conflict. In addition, it is important for Member States
to enforce the implementation of arms embargoes and
bring their own relevant legislation into compliance
with the Charter. Coercive measures should be
considered against those States that deliberately violate
arms embargoes decided by the Security Council.

While arms embargoes reduce and prevent arms
flows to the targeted regions and entities, they do little
to control weapons already existing in conflict areas.
For that reason, post-conflict activities such as DDR
ought to be carried out as thoroughly as possible, and
consideration should be given to restricting the supply
of ammunition.

Consistent with the Secretary-General's report on
"Strengthening of the United Nations: an agenda for
further change" (A/57/387), we have attempted to
produce a short, sharp and concise document with
realistic and achievable recommendations. In that
connection, the views of Member States on ways and
means in which the Council can contribute to dealing
with the question of small arms and light weapons in
situations under its consideration were not attached to
the report. However, the Secretariat will make copies
of such documents available to Member States upon
request.

I am sure that today's discussion will assist the
Council in defining the most appropriate ways to
address the various recommendations contained in this
report.

