Mr. Henze (Germany): Like Poland, Germany, of
course, fully supports the statement that was made by the
representative of Italy on behalf of the European Union.

With the draft resolution on Eastern Slavonia before
the Council, the members of the Security Council will
today take an important decision. Their affirmative vote sets
in motion a process that has one clear and unequivocal
objective: the peaceful reintegration of Eastern Slavonia,
Baranja and Western Sirmium into the Republic of Croatia.

This is a national priority of the Government and
people of the Republic of Croatia, which the German side
fully understands and supports. We are ready to
acknowledge that Croatia's patience has been tested
severely over a long time in this regard. The events of
Vukovar and the establishment of Serb control over Eastern
Slavonia, which took place in 1991 with the decisive
assistance of the former Yugoslav army, must not be
forgotten. It is something that no country would have
accepted.

The full implementation of the Basic Agreement offers
the best chance we have had in a long time to avoid further
war. It is, in our View, also the best chance to begin a
process that can and - we hope - will lead to a better
future of peaceful coexistence of Serbs and Croats in the
Republic of Croatia. That is why my country fully supports
the establishment of a United Nations peace-keeping
operation for the region of Eastern Slavonia, with both
military and civilian components, under the name of
UNTAES - United Nations Transitional Administration
for Eastern Slavonia, Baranja and Western Sirmium. Like
the Basic Agreement itself, this operation must be guided
by two important principles: on the one hand, the gradual
re-establishment of the sovereignty of Croatia with regard
to Eastern Slavonia; and on the other, the indispensable
necessity to ensure full protection for, and guarantees for
the rights of, the local Serb population.

We are under no illusions; we understand that the
implementation of the Basic Agreement will be a
particularly difficult operation, fraught with numerous
risks and difficulties appearing even in areas where one
would not expect them to appear. It is therefore of the
utmost importance that both sides cooperate fully, and
that the Croatian side and the local Serb side show
maximum restraint and moderation during all phases of
the operation. The Croatian side in particular must show
the necessary patience and restraint, so that the
Transitional Administration can work under conditions
conducive to gradual confidence-building with the local
Serb population.

There can be no doubt that the process of
demilitarization, as provided for in the Basic Agreement,
will be a very crucial phase. The aim is a complete
demilitarization of the region within 30 days after the
assessment of the Transitional Administrator that the
military component of UNTAES has been deployed and
is ready to undertake its mission. We will support all
efforts by the Transitional Administrator and UNTAES to
achieve demilitarization without incidents and as smoothly
as possible.

In this connection, let me express our appreciation
to the United States of America for its readiness to offer
General Jacques Klein as Transitional Administrator. The
mandate of UNTAES described in the draft resolution
leaves no doubt that he will have a challenging and
manifold task indeed: the Transitional Administrator will
have overall authority over the civilian and military
components of UNTAES. On the civilian side, there will
be the establishment of a temporary police force, of
structures for civil administration and public services; the
facilitation of the return of refugees; and the organization
of elections. We also thank those countries willing to
provide civilian, police and military personnel for these
far-reaching and complex tasks.

 

While we welcome the fact that our American partners
have put their weight and support behind General Klein and
UNTAES, we, on the German side, will also do what we
can to assist UNTAES. We encourage the Government of
the Republic of Croatia to contribute in all possible ways to
the success of UNTAES. This, in our view, is a logical
consequence of the fact that UNTAES serves the purpose
of the peaceful reintegration of Eastern Slavonia into the
Republic of Croatia. Financial means to alleviate the burden
of UNTAES in specific areas will be an investment in a
united Croatia.

The Basic Agreement on Eastern Slavonia became
possible on the basis of the understanding reached by
President Tudjman and President Milosevic in Dayton. The
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia continues to bear a major
responsibility for the situation in Eastern Slavonia.
Consequently, the leadership in Belgrade must help actively
to make the implementation of the Basic Agreement
succeed. We will follow closely and continuously the
attitude of the FRY authorities in this regard.

My delegation also supports the draft resolution on the
Prevlaka peninsula. Our interest is that security and stability
prevail in this area. The demilitarization of the Prevlaka
peninsula has made a positive contribution to this end. With
this draft resolution, the Council reaffirms once again its
commitment to the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
the Republic of Croatia. We hope that the Republic of
Croatia and the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia will soon
achieve a practical arrangement that would peacefully
resolve their differences in this context and thus foster
good-neighbourly relations in the area.

With regard to the conflicts in the former Yugoslavia,
much has been achieved in recent months. This progress
was made possible by an enormous effort on the part of the
international community, with the United States of America
playing a prominent role. We are also observing hopeful
signs of an improving relationship between the Republic of
Croatia and the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. We hope
that mutual recognition will come soon. We also hope that
the day will come when Croats and Serbs can again shake
hands and live together in peace, be it in the Republic of
Croatia, in Eastern Slavonia or in the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia.

It is in this spirit that we shall vote in favour of the
draft resolutions before the Council.

