Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank you, Mr. President, for organizing
today's meeting. We have found the briefing by the
Assistant Secretary-General, Ms. Bintou Keita, to
be quite useful. We welcome the efforts made by
the Secretary-General in the area of increasing the
effectiveness of training and the capacity-building
of peacekeepers.

The United Nations is currently undergoing a
period of large-scale transformations. One of the key
areas for reform is the peace and security architecture,
which is the precise context for addressing the issue of
United Nations peacekeeping operations. The ultimate
goal of this process is to increase the effectiveness of
peacekeeping by making sure that the Blue Helmets
are adequately equipped, trained and prepared for the
implementation of Security Council mandates. What
is important here is not just the qualifications and
professional training of the personnel, but also the
possibility of the timely deployment of missions and
their mobility in the field within the framework of
their mandate.

Unfortunately, members of the Council have not
had enough time to study the report of the Secretary-
General. Our capitals will continue to consider it
very carefully. At the same time, we observe that the
document correctly notes that the main responsibility
for the issue of training, which the United Nations
cannot decide on its own, lies with the States themselves,
which is not just a question of the countries developing
and providing training programmes but, rather, first
and foremost, it is a question of the countries providing
contingents in the field. Their role cannot be overstated
because without them it is not possible to implement the
stated goals of the Security Council.

We are convinced of the need for close triangular
cooperation and coordination of efforts on the issue
of training and capacity-building among the Security
Council, the troop- and police-contributing countries
and the United Nations Secretariat. However, what is
no less important are the direct contacts between States
that are developing the training programmes and those
that are participating in them. Of course, it is extremely
important to take into account the contemporary
realities and the demand for peacekeepers, understand
what kind of peacekeepers we need today and determine
the most relevant areas for training.

In this regard, we need to mention language
training - an aspect that the Secretary-General has
singled out as an issue in his report. We acknowledge
that 48 per cent of peacekeepers work in French-
speaking environments, and perhaps we need to bear this
in mind. However, the troop- and police-contributing
countries and the host countries must together carefully
weigh whether it is a priority issue. The opinions and
concerns of contingent providers need to be taken into
account because their troops and police officers know
more than anyone what tasks are required in the field
and what kind of skills are necessary to complete them.

In that context, we cannot help but notice that the
Secretary-General's report makes mention of forums
whose initiators, starting in 2015, were individual
Member States. Our opinion is that those issues -which
are of principal importance for peacekeeping, for the
United Nations system, for all Member States and for the
contingent contributing countries in particular - need
to be discussed at intergovernmental forums within the
United Nations system. However, creating alternative
forums is no guarantee of real improvements in practice.
For example, despite the efforts undertaken outside
the United Nations to staff the mission in Mali, which
have been ongoing over a number of years, the police
component has reached only 88 per cent of the force
ceiling, and the military component has only reached
the even lower level of 85 per cent. We believe that
work in the area of peacekeeping should be conducted
on the basis of discussions and decisions reached in the
Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations, which
comprises more than 150 States members.

The recommendations contained in the report of
the Secretary-General, as far as we understand, lay out
proposals for the organization within the Secretariat of
two mechanisms designed to enhance the effectiveness
of States' interactions on training and capacity-
building issues. We will carefully consider these
initiatives. Generally speaking, we hope that linking
intra-State cooperation with the Secretariat will not
create additional obstacles or provoke unnecessary
competition between States that are providing training
programmes. We hope that this will improve the
awareness of troop- and police-contributing countries
about the programmes available to them.

Russian peacekeepers - men and women - are
serving in 10 peacekeeping operations. We support
greater participation of women in United Nations
peacekeeping. Indeed, women already represent 23 per
cent of our peacekeeping units. The number of women
among military observers is also increasing. Our
country has gained significant experience in training
peacekeepers. Russian centres train not only our
peacekeepers, but also foreign peacekeepers - both
police and formed units, as well as military observers.
We have designed a training system, which includes
both general and specialized training, that peacekeepers
undergo just before their deployment.

Language training is also being adapted to existing
needs. Work is under way to create additional centres
to educate and train peacekeepers. In order to broaden
our contribution to the training of foreign experts for
United Nations missions, we are also considering the
possibility of using our General Staff Academy of
the Russian Federation's Armed Forces in the city of
Naro-Fominsk. We stand ready to continue offering
all possible assistance needed to strengthen the
peacekeeping capacity ofthe United Nations as a whole.

