Mr. Mufioz (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): We
welcome the report of the Secretary-General on
Guinea-Bissau (S/2003/621). Its introduction today was
very timely, given the imminent departure of the
Security Council's mission to Western Africa.

We regret the import of the report insofar as it
relates the deterioration of the political and economic
situation in the country. As early as the beginning of
this year, the Security Council had been warned of
several disturbing signs and of the need for the political
leadership to take additional steps to prevent the
country from slipping back into a dynamic of conflict.
Such a situation would be highly regrettable, given the
tragic examples of other countries of the region that
have today sunken into civil war.
The additional necessary steps, as we know, are
the final promulgation of the new constitution, the
establishment of conditions for holding genuinely
democratic elections and unconditional respect for
human rights and civil liberties. Those steps have not
yet taken place. That naturally concerns us, who
ourselves suffered the costs of the violation of human
rights in our country's now fortunately distant past.
However, we have to recognize that the reopening and
operation of Radio Bombolom constitutes a positive
step.

Conspiring against the desired stability of the
political situation is the grave economic and social
situation in which thousands of citizens of Guinea-
Bissau are struggling. Also serious is the State's
inability to pay the salaries of civil servants. On past
occasions, we have seen the result of the destructive
combination of political instability, the grave
deterioration of economic conditions and the erosion of
State authority. The result is quite simply the outbreak
of greater conflict, which would inevitably have
disastrous consequences for the innocent civilian
population.

On previous occasions, we have underlined the
importance of attending to the social and economic
needs of countries such as Guinea-Bissau in order to
defuse conflicts before they occur; their resolution at a
later stage is too costly in human terms. We reiterate
our appeal to the donor community and the
international financial institutions not to abandon
Guinea-Bissau to its fate but to continue to explore
creative formulas that would allow us to maintain our
hope.

However, we insist that all the efforts of the
international community will be useless without the
firm resolve of, in particular, the Government, the
political parties, civil organizations and all relevant
national actors to commit themselves unreservedly to
the cause of peace, development and well-being of
their own people. On this occasion, we firmly reiterate
the appeal to all parties to shoulder their
responsibilities.

Finally, the case of Guinea-Bissau is of special
importance because it could constitute a model of
coordinated effort between the Security Council and
other United Nations organs such as the Economic and
Social Council to deal with the problems of countries
in pre-conflict and post-conflict situations. As we have
noted in various forums and debates on conflicts in
Africa, such situations require a multidisciplinary
approach. The strategy for social and economic
recovery prepared by the Economic and Social Council
with the agreement of the Government of Guinea-
Bissau belongs to that approach. We express our hope
that the Security Council mission will have a
constructive and fruitful dialogue with President Yala
and that this will, in turn, lead to tangible progress
preventing a deterioration that would be damaging to
the country and, even more importantly, damaging to
its people.

For all the aforementioned reasons, we support
the presidential statement, coordinated by the
delegation of France, on the situation in Guinea-
Bissau.

