Mr. Haroon (Pakistan): Thank you, Madam
President, for convening today's meeting.
As I begin my speech, on behalf of my country, I
should like to recall the tremendous contributions of
Ambassador Holbrooke. We offer our condolences to
his family and to the people and Government of the
United States.

I would like to thank Staffan de Mistura for his
immense work and contributions to the Secretary-
General's quarterly report (S/ 20 l O/ 63 0) on
Afghanistan, which is a credible compendium of
political and security developments in that country.
There were some important milestones in December in
Afghanistan's march on the road towards peace and
security. The report also provides useful insights into
the international community's efforts. I believe that the
report is factual and substantive.

The report rightly underscores the importance of
the need for effective follow-up to the Kabul
Conference in terms of transition to full Afghan
leadership. Before I continue, I should like to
recognize that two important regional players - India
and Iran - have made much the same point. I also
believe that the report has emphasized that strong
partnership between the Afghan Government and the
international community is the keystone to a successful
transition, which must have tangible benefits for the
Afghan people. Accordingly, no matter what else we
say, our collective support to the Afghan Government
should be unwavering and tailored to its indigenous
needs.

The Secretary General's report has documented a
66 per cent increase in security-related incidents in
Afghanistan during reporting period, as compared to
the same period in 2009. That cannot be overlooked. It
is a matter of grave import, as it threatens
Afghanistan's stability, and requires dispassionate
political analysis.

The security problem in Afghanistan has vexed us
during three decades of war. The capacity of Afghan
security agencies, political dispensation, issues of
governance and the exploitation of all those factors by
criminals and drug traffickers have been part of a
continuing refrain. The problem of security cannot be
simplified by just externalizing it.

The Secretary-General had rightly noted the
importance of the Afghan Government's peace and
reintegration programme in the context of security. The
London and Kabul Conferences also emphasized that
point. A reconciled Afghanistan at peace with itself is
the best guarantor of its own security. But in the
process, I fear, it has tended to overlook the important
aspect of democracy.

Elections to the Wolesi Jirga were recently held,
with some strange results. In the completely Pashtun
province of Ghazni, 11 members elected were Hazara
tribesmen. Let me tell the Council, that is a very rare
occurrence for Afghanistan. If any members of the
Council have read The Kite Runner, they will know
that is an impossibility in terms of racial pride. I think
we will have to rise above this and be a little more
integrated. I say this because it reflects upon the
capacity of the Afghan nation to rule and defend itself
and its sovereignty. We must not forget that democracy
is an essential aspect. When it all began in Athens, the

democrats were those who fought voluntarily without
pay for the defence of their nation. The founding of
democracy in Athens was based upon the military
needs of that society. That is something that cannot be
overlooked in Afghanistan. If the democracy is correct,
it will bring people forward who will take their
sovereignty and defence into their own hands. That is
what needs to happen in Afghanistan.

Pakistan supports an Afghan-led and inclusive
reconciliation process, with a view to bringing the
opposition groups into the political mainstream. We
have welcomed the establishment of the High Peace
Council in Afghanistan, as well as the initial reaching
out of important regional countries, such as Saudi
Arabia, towards that process.

The sustained engagement of the Peace Council
with the United Nations and the Organization of the
Islamic Conference for support to and facilitation of
the reconciliation process will be important. We
support that engagement. The Security Council should
also be a willing partner of the Afghan people in that
important and delicate process.

Pakistan wants durable peace and stability in
Afghanistan. Stability and development in Afghanistan
is in our national interest. In that regard, I would like
to highlight three areas of vital significance that we
feel must be pointed out.

First, the safe return of over 1.5 million
registered Afghan refugees living in Pakistan is
possible, I believe, only in a peaceful and stable
Afghanistan. We have paid an enormous economic,
social and security cost in housing refugees for three
decades. The prospect of housing them indefinitely
owing to a prolonged conflict in Afghanistan creates a
severe burden upon us, and no amount of international
help really takes the burden off our back.

Secondly, the stability and security of
Afghanistan is indispensable for us after the recently
concluded Afghanistan-Pakistan transit and trade
agreement. Our commercial and industrial sectors
suffered previously, owing to the smuggling of goods
from Afghanistan into Pakistan and vice versa, despite
the transit trade agreement of 1963. As state
institutions in Afghanistan regressed in the 1980s and
1990s, smuggling increased greatly. We therefore need
a peaceful Afghanistan, with a strong customs and
border security apparatus, to partner with us in
ensuring smooth implementation.
Thirdly, a stable Afghanistan can guarantee the
successful completion of important energy projects that
benefit not just Pakistan but the entire region.
Preliminary work on some of those projects has already
started. We greatly value such progress. Those trans-
regional economic projects are conceivable only in a
secure and stable Afghanistan, which explains our
position on the matter.

The quest for peace and stability in Afghanistan
is driving our bilateral relations into a long-term
cooperative partnership, which is highly desired. We
are committed to strengthening ties in all areas. The
recent visit of our Prime Minister to Afghanistan and
the visit of President Karzai to Pakistan in September
have reaffirmed and cemented our commitments.

We have pledged to continue with the ongoing
assistance programmes in Afghanistan, and, in the
framework of those projects, Pakistan will construct
another 50 schools and basic health units across
Afghanistan, despite the fact that, as the Council well
knows, we need them desperately ourselves.

Pakistan is also ready to assist in the capacity-
building of the Afghan National Security Forces. We are
also engaged in security and intelligence cooperation
with Afghanistan, including through the Tripartite
Commission, which includes the United States and the
International Security Assistance Force. We do not want
Afghanistan to become a theatre for proxy wars.

Pakistan greatly values the positive contributions
of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA), under the dynamic leadership
of Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Staffan de Mistura. We cannot praise that leadership
enough. It is just the right sort of leadership. In March
2011, the Council will consider the Mission's mandate.
We align ourselves with the objectives of UNAMA and
call upon the Security Council to provide it with the
necessary resources to meet the challenges if faces.

I avail myself of this opportunity to thank
Ambassador Apakan of Turkey and his delegation for
his able guidance of the Council's work on Afghanistan
this year.

I also wish to compliment all the outgoing
members of the Council for their important work
during the past two years and congratulate all the
incoming members on the assumption of their
membership next month.
