Ithank Judge Carmel Agius, President of the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals, and Mr. Serge Brammertz, Prosecutor of the Mechanism, for presenting their seventeenth reports. I take this opportunity to congratulate the President and the Prosecutor on their reappointment by the Secretary-General and the Security Council, respectively. I also congratulate Mr. Abubacarr Tambadou on his appointment as the Registrar of the Mechanism. I welcome the representatives of Serbia, Rwanda, Croatia and Bosnia and Herzegovina to today's meeting. We take note of the progress made in the judicial activities of the Mechanism during the reporting period, especially as compared with the previous one. Most notably, under the leadership of Judge Agius, the Mechanism was able to resume in-court hearings and implemented rigorous measures to maintain the health and safety of its staff, witnesses and detainees and other persons under the supervision of the Mechanism. The case of Mr. Felicien Kabuga was added to its docket following his arrest, sending a strong message that those who are alleged to have committed grave crimes cannot evade justice. The launching of the Mechanism's unified judicial database to bring together all public records of the ad hoc Tribunals, and the Mechanism is expected to facilitate public access to their jurisprudence and aid research, study and greater transparency. We welcome the President's determination and priorities to implement resolution 2529 (2020), including by providing a clear projection of timelines for the completion of its judicial activities and other residual functions, strengthening close collaboration among the main organs of the Mechanism and fostering high staff morale and performance. Looking forward, we encourage the Mechanism to continue implementing meaningful steps to adhere to its schedule of completion, realizing the Security Council's vision of the Mechanism as a "small, temporary and efficient structure, whose functions and size will diminish over time". We cannot overemphasize the importance of a strong relationship and cooperation between the Mechanism and concerned States. We take note of the close cooperation between the Mechanism and enforcement States in monitoring the situation of the coronavirus disease that might affect prisoners serving sentences. We encourage considerations to give enforcing States greater responsibility in supervising the enforcement of sentences after the Mechanism ceases to exist. It is the State that bears the primary responsibility for fighting and preventing heinous crimes. Further efforts should be made in building national capacity and assisting States to exercise their responsibility. We therefore welcome the assistance provided by the Office of the Prosecutor to national authorities with regard to the cases that are referred to them. We acknowledge the challenges that the Mechanism faces with regard to the search for remaining fugitives and the relocation of acquitted and released persons. Forging stronger direct communication with the relevant States to identify challenges that might hinder cooperation and to work out durable solutions must be a high priority for the Mechanism. We encourage the relevant States to show their support for the Mechanism by stepping up cooperation and assisting the Mechanism where needed. In conclusion, Viet Nam reiterates its firm commitment to the work of the Security Council in upholding the Charter of the United Nations and international law in the maintenance of international peace and security.
