Mr. Arias (Panama) (spoke in Spanish):
Mr. President, first and foremost, I would like to thank
you for your presence today in the Security Council
and, in turn, would like to thank the Deputy Secretary-
General and the Secretary of State of the United States,
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Russian
Federation, the Secretary of State for Foreign and
Commonwealth Affairs of the United Kingdom, and
the Vice Minister for Foreign Affairs of China.

Panama welcomes the convening of this meeting
to consider the joint United States-Russian Federation
initiative of submitting for the consideration of this
Council a draft resolution on the situation in the
Middle East. Two days from now, the Security Council
will hold an open debate on this same subject.
Therefore, on this occasion, we shall limit ourselves to
commenting on the draft resolution before the Council.

At first glance, the text under consideration
appears lacking in substance. However, a closer
reading of the text shows that it sets forth with
sufficient accuracy the various issues that are part of
this conflict. The references to previous Security
Council resolutions on the subject, to the obligation of
the parties to comply with the provisions of the Road
Map, to the importance of the Arab Peace Initiative and
to the ongoing bilateral negotiations process between
Israelis and Palestinians that began in Annapolis are a
reflection of this Council's support for the peace
process in the Middle East, as well as for the objectives
of the Council that must be met, namely an end to
Israeli occupation of all Arab territories held since
1967, including the Syrian Golan, and the
establishment of a sovereign, independent and viable
Palestinian State, living in peace and security with its
neighbours, and in particular with Israel.

For Panama, the principal objective of this draft
resolution is to provide an impetus for the peace
process in the Middle East. Our delegation is of the
view that the text under consideration meets that
objective. Therefore, we shall be voting in favour of
this text.

