Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
My delegation would like to thank Ambassador Ne'stor
Osorio for his presentation of the 90-day report on the
work of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006). Now, at the end of
his mandate, I congratulate him and his team for having
chaired the Committee so ably over the past two years.

During the period under review, the Committee
continued to diligently carry out the tasks with which
it was charged. It did so with transparency, impartiality
and objectivity, without undermining its mandate. We
believe that it should continue to do so in the future.

In addition, we recognize the importance of
the assistance and cooperation that the Committee
provides to Member States. We welcome the work of
the Committee, which continued to consider national
reports, requests and complaints regarding alleged
violations on the part of Member States.

Concerning the work of the Panel of Experts, we
take note of its midterm report, which was issued in
November 2011. We appreciate the work that the Panel
has been doing, including its information and awareness-
raising activities, and we call on it to continue to work
in strict compliance with the relevant resolutions of the
Security Council.

With respect to the Iranian nuclear programme,
allow us to briefly highlight three points.

First, Guatemala has always supported the right of
all States to use nuclear energy for peaceful purposes,
in accordance with the relevant international treaties.
Iran must fully cooperate with the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA) in order to restore confidence
in the exclusively peaceful nature of its nuclear
programme.

Secondly, the Security Council has received the
most recent report of the Director General of the IAEA,
in which he once again states that Iran has continued to

accelerate its nuclear programme. This situation remains
a source of great concern for us. We endorse the call by
the Agency, and we urge Iran, in accordance with the
requirements in the relevant resolutions of the Security
Council and of the IAEA Board of Governors, to adopt
measures for the full implementation of the safeguards
agreement and other obligations and commitments
under the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons and, above all, to submit to inspections. In
that connection, we note with satisfaction that United
Nations inspectors arrived today in Tehran for a round
of negotiations, the first since August.

Thirdly, we are encouraged by the recent
conversations between the E3+3 Governments and
Iran. At their third round in Moscow, held last June, the
parties agreed to continue dialogue, and we therefore
encourage all those participating in that process to
work diligently for progress and a positive result, which
is what the rest ofthe international community expects.
We believe it is important to continue to seek a peaceful
and negotiated solution to the Iranian nuclear question,
in accordance with the dual-track strategy.

Lastly, Guatemala will continue to actively
participate in the Committee for the purpose of
contributing to a sustainable solution.

