Mr. Belle (Belgium) (spoke in French):
Mr. President, I would like to thank you for organizing
this informational meeting on a region in the heart of
Africa that is dear to Belgium. I would also like to
5
thank Mr. Fall, the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, for the briefing he has just given us.

Last December, the Security Council had an
opportunity to congratulate the countries of the Great
Lakes region for having brought to a positive
conclusion the second summit of the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region, held in Nairobi
on 15 December 2006. The Council also congratulated
the countries for having signed the Pact on Security,
Stability and Development for the Great Lakes Region
on that occasion.

The adoption of this Pact was preceded by, and
was made possible by, particularly positive
developments in the region. In August 2005, Burundi
entered a new era. On 6 December 2006, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo placed President
Kabila in office following elections that put an end to a
lengthy transitional period. In Uganda, discussions
with the Lord's Resistance Army are under way. And,
finally, we have seen considerable progress in Rwanda
in recent years.

These developments are, first of all, the result of
the efforts and the tenacity shown by the people of the
region themselves, supported in these efforts by the
international community. It is now crucial for the
commitments undertaken to be truly implemented.

In the first place, we need to ensure that the
regional follow-up mechanism - a secretariat headed
by Ms. Liberata Mulamula, Executive Secretary -
becomes fully operational. Setting up the secretariat in
Bujumbura will make it possible for the United Nations
and the African Union (AU) to hand this task over to
the member countries of the Conference. For the
secretariat to be truly operational, it is important for
the countries of the region to provide it solid
assistance, supported in that by donors. Belgium, for
its part, is prepared to consider support.

Secondly, the Pact on Security, Stability and
Development must be ratified in all countries of the
region. Mr. Fall has just reminded us of how important
that ratification is. In this respect, my delegation
welcomes the holding of the regional parliamentary
meeting on the International Conference on the Great
Lakes Region. That meeting, held from 26 to
28 February in Kinshasa was co-organized by the
Association of European Parliamentarians for Africa
(AWEPA) and co-financed by my country. Belgium
6
hopes that this meeting will help speed up the
ratification process to which I have just referred.

Finally, it is important for the Special Fund for
Reconstruction and Development that the
implementation of the Pact become fully operational so
that this Fund may fulfil its role. Each of the 11
member States must comply with their commitments
and provide funding. For its part, Belgium is prepared
to consider contributions to specific financing
mechanisms for projects and contributions as well to
the Special Fund for Reconstruction and Development,
once the Fund has been declared operational by the
African Development Bank. For my country, the
programme of action for peace and stability and the
confidence-building measures are particularly
important, as is the protocol to combat the illegal
exportation of natural resources.

I would also like to underline the importance of
greater regional integration among the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Rwanda and Burundi. We
believe that the Economic Community of the Great
Lakes Countries (ECGLC) has an important role to
play in this regard through establishing greater regional
integration among countries that have had to deal with
dire situations but that are now called upon to work
together to accelerate the economic and social progress
that their people expect.

The relaunch of ECGLC will provide support for
the Pact on Security, Stability and Development in the
Great Lakes Region agreed at the International
Conference, which provides for cross-border security
and development in eastern Congo, Rwanda and
Burundi. The ECGLC will also provide support for
other integration efforts already under way in the
region, in particular the East African Community and
the Economic Community of Central African States.
Finally, it can provide a framework for cooperation in
the areas of energy, regional development and
agriculture. Belgium hopes that a ministerial meeting
of ECGLC will take place in April in Bujumbura,
thereby re-launching that important instrument.

I could not conclude without expressing warm
thanks to Mr. Ibrahima Fall for his tireless efforts in
support of the International Conference on the Great
Lakes Region throughout his mandate.

