Mr. Kodama (Japan): Allow me at the outset to
express heartfelt sympathies and condolences on behalf
of the people and the Government of Japan to the
people and the Government of Turkey for the
tremendous losses and damage caused by the
earthquake. Japan is ready to extend as much
assistance as possible for the recovery and
reconstruction of Turkey, in cooperation with the
international community.

I would also like to convey the deepest
condolences of the people and the Government of
Japan to the people and the Government of Saudi
Arabia on the sad demise of His Royal Highness the
Crown Prince of Saudi Arabia.

Japan fully understands the earnest aspiration of
Palestinians to build their own State and strongly
supports a two-State solution under which Israel and a
Palestinian State would live side by side in peace,
security and mutual recognition. Japan supports the
vision that under a two-State solution the borders
should be defined through negotiations, based on the
1967 lines, with mutually agreed swaps, in a way that
will achieve the peaceful coexistence of a viable
Palestinian State and Israel with secure and recognized
borders.

Through a two-State solution, the Palestinian
people will exercise their right to establish an
independent State; Israel will enjoy a greatly enhanced
security environment; and both parties will be able to
launch full-fledged efforts at cooperation for their
mutual prosperity.

A two-State solution can be achieved only
through sincere negotiations between the parties
concerned. Japan has consistently encouraged both
sides to resume direct negotiations, in cooperation with
the efforts of the international community. In this
connection, Japan strongly supports the Quartet's
23 September statement, including the timetable it sets
out, and pays respect to the vigorous endeavours of the
members of the Quartet. Japan welcomes the
announcement that separate meetings will take place
between Quartet members and the respective parties on
26 October in Jerusalem. We strongly expect that these
meetings will be a step forward towards the resumption
of direct negotiations.

Japan has been closely watching the discussions
in the Council's Committee on the Admission of New
Members.

Japan welcomes the recent agreement between
Israel and Hamas for the release of Gilad Shalit and of
the Palestinian prisoners held by Israel. We hope that
this agreement will contribute to the building of
confidence between the parties and lead to the early
resumption of direct negotiations between them.

Japan does not recognize any measures that
prejudge the outcome of final status negotiations and
associates itself with the Quartet in calling on both
sides to refrain from any provocative actions. Both
parties must abide by their obligations under previous
agreements, most importantly the Road Map.

Japan reiterates its strong call to Israel to fully
freeze its settlement activities in the West Bank and in
East Jerusalem. In this connection, Japan deeply
deplores the recent series of announcements by the
Israeli Government of plans for construction of new
housing units in East Jerusalem. At the same time, we
call upon the Palestinian Authority to continue its
efforts to improve security and fulfil its commitments
to cease violence and work against incitement.

Japan has been supporting the efforts of the
Palestinian Authority to establish statehood and is
committed to continuously providing assistance in that
regard. Japan is also keenly following Palestinian
efforts to establish a unified Government.

