Ms. Mueller: In eight years of conflict, Syrians
have lived through a litany of horrors. Hundreds of
thousands of people have been killed, many more
maimed physically and psychologically, and Syrians in
the north-east and north-west remain in constant fear of
yet another humanitarian catastrophe unfolding. Today,
more than eight in ten people live below the poverty
line and nearly 12 million people in Syria continue to
depend on humanitarian assistance.

I would like to highlight three key areas of concern.

First, on Idlib, where an escalation of hostilities
since February is reportedly causing civilian deaths
and injuries, as well as significant destruction of
civilian infrastructure. Since February, well over 200
civilians have reportedly been killed as a direct result
of increased military clashes and attacks, with many
more injured. Fighting has also caused more than
120,000 people to flee to areas closer to the Turkish
border. Civilian structures - particularly schools and
hospitals - continue to be hit. There were 11 attacks on
schools in February and March alone, and we have heard
reports that, on Monday, two schools were impacted by
air strikes, resulting in three children being killed. In
addition, many schools in the area have been shuttered
indefinitely due to the hostilities.

We count on all parties, especially Turkey and the
Russian Federation, as guarantors of the de-escalation
agreement, to rein in the current escalation and
press all parties to the full implementation of the
17 September 2018 memorandum of understanding. In
addition, it is as critical as ever for all parties to respect
international humanitarian law and take all feasible
precautions to avoid and minimize civilian harm. As
the Secretary-General has said many times before, any
large-scale military offensive in Idlib would come at
an unacceptable cost in terms of loss of human lives
and suffering.

Across north-western Syria, an estimated
2.7 million people remain in need of humanitarian
assistance, including more than 1 million children.
This includes 1.7 million internally displaced persons,
many of whom have been displaced multiple times
and have been living in camps for years. Some 40 per
cent of children are out of school. Two million people
rely on water trucking for most of their clean water.
Humanitarian partners continue to respond to evolving
needs, with thousands of those most recently displaced
receiving food and other assistance. Each month, some
1.7 million Syrians are reached with critical assistance
through cross-border operations out of Turkey. Ensuring
this sustained humanitarian access is critical.

Secondly, I would like to highlight the situation in
Al-Hol camp. We have frequently reported to the Council
about the plight of those tens of thousands of civilians
at the Al-Hol camp, 92 per cent of whom are women
and children. Most have been exposed to violence and
trauma under the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant.
They are now living in extremely difficult conditions
in which they face a range of protection challenges
and an uncertain and disconcerting fate. This includes
the risk of being denied repatriation, rehabilitation
and re-integration or a fair trial, or even the risk of
becoming stateless, despite having citizenship or a
claim to citizenship. It also includes family separation

and not knowing the whereabouts of family members,
given the notable absence of adult males and adolescent
boys over the age of 15 in the camp.
All children, including those suspected of being
associated with armed groups or terrorist groups,
are entitled to special care and protection under
international humanitarian law and international
human rights law, including the Convention on the
Rights of the Child. They must be treated first and
foremost as victims. Solutions for foreign nationals
need to be urgently found, and we call on all Member
States to take all measures necessary to ensure that their
nationals are repatriated for the purposes of prosecution,
rehabilitation and/or reintegration, as appropriate, and
in line with international law and standards.

The camp at Al-Hol currently hosts more than
73,000 civilians. Almost two-thirds of them - two-
thirds - are children under the age of 12. Approximately
43 per cent of the camp population are Syrians, 42 per
cent are Iraqis and 15 per cent are foreign nationals.
There are 458 unaccompanied and separated children,
including 121 who remain in interim care centres
awaiting family tracing and reunification. The
humanitarian community in Syria is ensuring that
all those in need at the camp receive humanitarian
assistance, without discrimination and in accordance
with humanitarian principles. This includes assistance
to the foreign nationals in the annex part of the camp.
However, access to the annex remains constrained,
particularly for health, nutrition and protection
partners, who require a permanent presence inside the
annex in order to provide continued care and services.

The United Nations also continues to advocate
with the Syrian authorities for the deployment of surge
staff from Damascus to support the teams operating in
north-eastern Syria, who have now been responding
uninterruptedly to successive crises for the past
many months.

Further south, in Deir ez-Zor governorate, an
estimated 150,000 people along seven villages between
Hajin and AI-Susah, east of the Euphrates river, are
in dire need of humanitarian assistance. The Syrian
authorities recently approved the deployment of an
inter-agency convoy to the area to bring assistance
for up to 50,000 people as a first step. Aside from the
Syrian Arab Red Crescent convoy deployed earlier in
the year, this would be the first inter-agency convoy
to reach the area. Preparations are ongoing to conduct
the necessary assessments, obtain relevant security
assurances and finalize logistical arrangements for the
convoy to proceed in the coming period.

My third and final point will be on Rukban. As
Council members may know, over 7,000 people have
left the site in recent weeks, including nearly 2,000 just
yesterday. Those who have already left organized their
own transportation to the 55-kilometre border area,
from where they have been transported to four collective
shelters in Homs governorate through a combination of
private and Government vehicles. Many are quickly
leaving the shelters to stay with relatives in towns in
eastern Homs governorate. Some people - mostly
men - remain in the shelters for a longer period while
they settle their status with the authorities.

Colleagues in Damascus have reiterated the United
Nations willingness to be directly involved to ensure
that core protection standards are met and movements
are conducted in a voluntary, safe, well-informed
and dignified manner. Today, our teams accessed
the shelters for the first time. The United Nations is
ready to engage further, but we must be fully engaged,
from start to finish. We continue to advocate for full,
unimpeded and sustained access to shelters, as well as
areas oforigin and destination, and to people en route, in
order to be able to adequately support the humanitarian
needs of those leaving Rukban.

While efforts to pursue durable solutions - guided
by the needs, rights, security and dignity of the people
in Rukban and based on their informed and voluntary
choice - are under way, additional and sustained
assistance for those who remain in Rukban is just
as necessary. Food, medicines and other life-saving
supplies delivered in February are running out.
The United Nations has requested access to provide
life-saving assistance, but on Monday was informed by
the authorities that such a convoy would not be possible.
People are exhausted. The number of children who
have reportedly died at the settlement from preventable
causes since January now stands at more than a dozen.
The deployment of a third humanitarian convoy to
Rukban remains urgent if we are to avoid the deaths of
more innocent children.

As I said at the beginning of my statement, the
Syrian people have suffered a litany of horrors. Among
those people who have suffered the most - and are
still suffering today - are those with disabilities.
Those disabled before the start of the crisis often
face heightened challenges, and many more who
have become disabled as civilians have been heavily
impacted through years of conflict, including those
injured due to explosive remnants of war.

In these settings, persons with disabilities are often
excluded and highly vulnerable. Many lack access to
health care and education, and experience difficulties
in meeting their basic needs. They also face specific
protection and psychosocial challenges, including
heightened risk of violence and abuse. We must do our
utmost to support and protect persons with disabilities
and to ensure that their specific and diverse needs are
addressed, including by ensuring the accessibility of
activities and services, the training of staff and the
collection of disaggregated data.

We - and I include the important role of the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
in this - must do more to include persons with

disabilities in our work, making sure that they, and
their representative organizations, take an active part at
every step of planning and decision-making processes.
Nujeen Mustapha, whom I had the pleasure of meeting
yesterday, will speak in just a moment. She is an
incredible advocate not just for those with disabilities
in Syria, but for all those with disabilities in conflict
settings, for women and for young people. She is an
advocate for inclusive humanitarian action, and she is
carrying with her an important message that we will all
benefit from hearing.

