Ms. Zerrougui (spoke in French): Allow me at the
outset to offer my condolences to the representative
of France; the French people; the representative of
Lebanon, who is here with us today; the Lebanese
people; and all those who are the victims of extreme
violence. The recent horrific attacks that took place in
Paris and Beirut remind us in the most tragic fashion
that we all are vulnerable to violent extremism. Today
more than ever we must join forces and work together
to find solutions to the extended conflicts that fuel such
acts of terrorism.

(spoke in English)

I would like to thank the United Kingdom,
during its presidency of the Security Council, and the
Secretary of State for International Development for
this opportunity to brief the Council on the situation of
children affected by armed conflict in Syria.
The conflict in Syria continues to have disastrous
humanitarian consequences for children, and I think
that Stephen already highlighted some of what is
happening. After five years of intensifying hostilities,
and in the absence of a political solution, the
fundamental principles of international humanitarian
and human rights law continue to be violated daily.
The increasing outflow of refugees and internal
displacement demonstrate the deteriorating situation.
Half of the Syrian population is now displaced, and half
of the displaced are children.

Children are paying a high price for the ongoing
conflict. They continue to be killed, maimed, recruited
and used, abducted and exploited by parties to conflict.
Their futures are jeopardized by attacks on schools.
Drawing upon information documented through the
Monitoring and Reporting Mechanism in 2015, my
briefing will focus on three of the six grave violations,
namely the killing and maiming of children, the
recruitment and use of children, and attacks on schools.
It will complement briefings by my colleagues.

Mr. O'Brien has already briefed the Council on
the civilian casualties of the conflict. The cumulative
death toll of children was estimated at 10,000 in 2014
and is expected to have increased significantly in 2015.
The majority of those children were killed or injured
as a result of indiscriminate attacks on civilian areas
perpetrated by all parties to the conflict, in violation of
international humanitarian law.

Aerial bombardments of civilian areas by Syrian
Government forces, including the use of barrel bombs
and successive airstrikes, have continued to cause a
significant proportion of verified child casualties in
2015. For example, in May a barrel bomb attack on a
school in Aleppo killed six children and injured 20.
The indiscriminate shelling of densely populated areas,
including mortar and rocket attacks, is another major
cause of child casualties.

For example, on 15 September, 19 children were
killed and another 85 injured by more than 100 rockets
and mortars fired by armed opposition groups into the
Salah al-Din area of Aleppo. On 26 September, another
19 children were killed and 21 injured by a mortar fired
from a Government position into a park in Homs.

The Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) has
committed brutal atrocities against children. While it
has been difficult to verify cases of grave violations
occurring in ISIL-controlled areas, the killing and
maiming of children by this group continue to be
reported. That includes recent horrific video footage
allegedly portraying the mass execution of200 children.
It has also been reported that children recruited by ISIL
have been executed for trying to escape.

With the growing number of parties involved in the
conflict, the risk of grave violations against children
increases. It is reported that children have been killed
and maimed in air strikes conducted by international
forces. I reiterate that all the parties to the conflict
must abide by their obligations under international
humanitarian law, and especially the principles of
distinction, proportionality and precaution. The
ongoing use of methods and means of warfare that fail
to distinguish between civilians and combatants and
the use of indiscriminate weapons in populated areas
are a clear violation of those obligations.

A continuing feature of the conflict in Syria is
the widespread recruitment and use of children by
all non-State armed groups, including the Kurdish
People's Protection Units, the Free Syrian Army and
Government-affiliated groups. ISIL and the Al-Nusra
Front have also recruited and used children to perpetrate
acts of extreme violence. Reports have been received
of armed groups targeting children as young as seven
years of age and forcibly recruiting children through
the coercion of families and abductions. ISIL allegedly
recruited up to 400 children in the first quarter of 2015,
and the United Nations has verified cases of the use by
ISIL of foreign children.

Indoctrination and military training play an
important role in the recruitment and use of children
by ISIL and the Al-Nusra Front. Children have received
military training in three ISIL centres: in Aleppo,
Deir ez-Zor and Raqqah. In addition, ISIL has opened
kindergartens for boys in Raqqah, and the Al-Nusra
Front has instructed communities in Idlib to send
boys aged from 8 to 12 to its education camps. Syrian
Government forces have arrested and detained children
for alleged association with armed groups. There are
verified cases of children who were subjected to torture
during detention and of children who died in custody.
I reiterate that children recruited and used by armed
groups are victims and should be treated as such.

At the end of September, over a quarter of all the
schools in Syria, about 6,000, were fully or partially
destroyed. The United Nations has verified attacks
on schools by Syrian government forces, ISIL, the
Al-Nusra Front and other non-State armed groups in
2015. In addition, the military use of schools by Syrian
government forces in Idlib has led to their targeting by
armed opposition groups.

Prior to the conflict, primary school enrolment was
almost universal in Syria. Now, the right to education
has been compromised by hostilities, displacement and
restrictions in ISIL-held areas. An estimated 2 million
internally displaced children and 700,000 refugee
children are not attending school. We are witnessing
a generation at risk of not receiving an education, with
serious long-term consequences for the future of those
children. We can mitigate those consequences if the
international community makes significant investments
in protecting education and in providing education in
emergencies.

Five years of conflict in Syria have taken an
immeasurable toll on the lives of children. I urge all
parties to respect their obligations under international
law, end grave violations against children and pursue
accountability for violations. To that end, it is critical
that every Member State with influence on the parties
to the conflict play a constructive role.

Since my first visit to Syria in 2012, I have
repeatedly stated that there is no military solution to
the conflict in Syria. Finally, there is now a broader
consensus that a political solution must be reached. The
acknowledgement of the linkage between a ceasefire
and a parallel political process by the International Syria
Support Group, meeting in Vienna this past weekend,
and the willingness of participants to encourage
confidence-building measures that contribute to a
viable political process and a nationwide ceasefire
are important and constructive developments. In that
context, I underscore that the issue of children has
proved to be a positive entry point in a number ofpeace
processes, and strengthening the protection of children
must be at the centre of any peace talks.

It is our collective responsibility to support a
political solution to the conflict, accompanied by
concrete commitments and actions to bring an end to
the conflict and suffering. I call on all of you to be
voices for the children in Syria and to take collective
action to allow them to live a life free from fear and
violence.

