Mr. Cockayne: For most people, struggling to
make ends meet, a debate on the working methods of
the Security Council may seem an almost theologically
abstract affair. It is far removed from the pressing
demands of routine daily life. That does not mean
that these working methods are unimportant. On
the contrary, the effective work of the Council has
contributed to a long period of relative calm in
international affairs. Threats to the effectiveness and
legitimacy of its working methods must be considered
very carefully.

Today, it is my humble role to share early warning
of a fairly clear risk to that effectiveness and that
legitimacy, in an area of particular significance for
the Council. These are targeted sanctions. Hardly a
day goes by without evidence of the role that targeted
sanctions play in efforts to maintain international peace
and security, from the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea to the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Ten
years ago, due process concerns around the working
methods used to take sanctions listing decisions in the
counter-terrorism context led the Council to adapt those
working methods. The Council created the Office ofthe
Ombudsperson to strengthen due process protections in
that context, and the focal point arrangements for other
sanctions contexts.

Today, a new wave of due process litigation is
successfully challenging listing decisions relating to
those other contexts, already including the Central
African Republic, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Iran, Iraq and Libya. And so today, the Security
Council may once again wish to consider adapting its
sanctions committees' working methods to strengthen
due process protections and maintain control over
this central tool for maintaining international peace
and security.

The good news is that there are numerous practical
options available for the Council to explore. The
extension of the Ombudsperson arrangements is one
option, but, as I shall explain, not the only one and not
necessarily the best one for all sanctions contexts.

It is my great honour to brief the Council today.
Unusually, as Director of the Centre for Policy Research
at United Nations University, I am both a United
Nations staff member and an academic researcher.
The University is an autonomous organ of the General
Assembly, afforded academic freedom by the Members
of the United Nations. Our Charter mandates us to
conduct "research into the pressing global problems
that are the concern of the United Nations".

My remarks today draw on a research study, Fairly
Clear Risks Protecting UN sanctions' legitimacy and
eflectiveness through fair and clear procedures, that I
conducted with two colleagues, Ms. Rebecca Brubaker,
who is here with me today, and Ms. Nadeshda J ayakody.
The study was commissioned by the Federal Department
of Foreign Affairs of Switzerland. It involved a review
of over 47 due process legal challenges to Security
Council imposed sanctions over 15 years. That litigation
took place in Belgium, Canada, the European Court of
Human Rights, the European Court of Justice, Italy, the
Netherlands, Pakistan, Switzerland, Turkey, the United
Kingdom, the United Nations treaty bodies and the
United States of America.

The first part of the study identifies three separate
waves of due process litigation testing sanctions
committee working methods.

The first wave of litigation, running from roughly
2002 to 2011, challenged the sanctions regime under
resolution 1267 (1999) on due process grounds.
Responding creatively, the Security Council adjusted
the working methods of that sanctions committee,
instituting the Ombudsperson system. It also put
in place the focal point arrangements for other
sanctions contexts.

The second wave of litigation, running from around
2012 to 2016, saw courts grappling with those changes
to working methods. Courts increasingly recognize the
due process protections offered by the Ombudsperson,
while expressing a more sceptical attitude to the
protections provided by the focal point arrangements.

The third wave of litigation, starting in 2016, takes
aim at those other arrangements, beyond the 1267
regime context. Litigants are harnessing the precedents
developed in the 1267 counter-terrorism context
to contest the working methods of other Security
Council sanctions committees dealing with armed
conflict and counter-proliferation. Precisely because
the Ombudsperson arrangements are not in place in
those regimes, the due process protections are weaker.
Litigants are succeeding.

That presents a fairly clear risk, not only to
those sanctions regimes' legitimacy but also to their
effectiveness. If courts find that the working methods
used to impose and review sanctions listings do not meet
countries' due process obligations, those countries may
prove unable to implement the binding decisions of the
Council under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United
Nations. The Council's control of that crucial sanctions
instrument will be fragmented as domestic courts and,
perhaps in time, parliaments begin to assert themselves
to protect their citizens' due process rights.

To date, that third wave oflitigation has taken place
in Europe, in courts with jurisdiction over one-quarter
of the United Nations membership, including three of
the five permanent members of the Council. Those
countries are at the heart of international finance, trade
and travel, and therefore of implementation of United
Nations sanctions, but it would be wrong to conclude
that the effects are strictly European.
For one thing, the first two waves of litigation
reached beyond Europe, to Canada and the United
States to the west and Pakistan and Turkey to the
east. There is no reason to think that the third wave
will be any different. For another thing, States that
provide the information underpinning listings will
face administrative costs, fielding inquiries from those
States required by their courts to check that due process
was respected when the listing was adopted.

History offers not only warnings but also lessons,
and the lesson here is that those risks can be dealt with,
precisely through the kind of creative adaptation of the
working methods under discussion today. Ten years
ago, litigation on due process grounds posed a fairly
clear risk to the 1267 regime. Today, after the Council
adapted that Committee's working methods, courts
increasingly recognize them as meeting international
due process standards.

With that new wave of litigation targeting other
sanctions regimes, it may be time for the Security
Council to consider adapting its working methods for
those regimes. What might that adaptation look like?
Some legal experts say that the only way to ensure a
completely fair process in sanctions listing and delisting
is through independent judicial review. The Security
Council has been reluctant to accept that argument. It
may not align with the letter or the spirit of the United
Nations Charter, which gives the Council the primary
responsibility for maintaining international peace
and security.

The imposition and removal of targeted sanctions
are not a penal decision, as the Council has stressed,
but a political decision, taken to generate and harness
leverage to fight terrorism, manage armed conflict
and counter proliferation. In fact, the United Nations
University study found that the test in courts is not
whether the working methods used by the Security
Council or those implementing its decisions offer
judicial protection; the test is whether the working
methods offer equivalent protection to that available
if analogous restrictive measures were imposed at the
domestic level.

There are two central components to that test.
First, the working methods must meaningfully protect
the rights of the affected person to be heard. Secondly,
the working methods must offer an impartial review of
the fact base underpinning the sanctions listing. That
is a review not of the final decision to list, but of the
determination that the person was or is eligible to be
listed, according to the criteria set by the sanctions
committee. The final decision on listing is a political
one, for the Council or its sanctions committees.

How those due process protections are afforded
may therefore differ, depending on the sanctions
context. It will depend in particular on how the right
to be heard can be organized practically and how a
reviewer can access relevant information. Thus, what
works for counter-terrorism may not be what works
best for armed conflict or for counter-proliferation.

In the counter-terrorism context, it may not be
feasible to share all listing information with the target,
and it may or may not be feasible for the reviewer of
the fact base to meet in person with the target. The
Monitoring Team and Ombudsperson arrangements
have shown, however, that States will trust individuals
with appropriate law enforcement, intelligence,
national security and judicial experience to undertake
an impartial review of the fact base, realize the right to
be heard and assess eligibility for listing.

In the context of armed conflict, however, impartial
review and the right to be heard may require different
information-gathering modalities and a reviewer of fact
with a different profile. A reviewer of fact might need
the ability to visit conflict theatres and engage directly
with conflict parties, while maintaining independence
and neutrality. That could suggest a different set-up
than the Office of the Ombudsperson, perhaps closer
to the modalities used by mediators or commissions of
inquiry, rather than by judges.

Thirdly, in the counter-proliferation context, where
the vital national security interests of the great Powers
are squarely in play, special arrangements may be
needed to ensure that the reviewer is both trusted by
all parties and has the requisite technical expertise.
That may suggest a profile like that of a senior official
of the International Atomic Energy Agency or the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons.
It might require special information-gathering, sharing
and handling arrangements.

The simple extension of the Ombudsperson
arrangements to all the other sanctions regimes may
not be the only, or necessarily even the best, answer.
Careful further reflection by the Security Council may
in time identify other better ways to operationalize
the Council's stated commitment to human rights and
the rule of law through an adjustment to the working
methods of different types of sanctions committees.

Finally and very briefly, our study also identifies
five specific ways in which the Council might
strengthen due process protections by adapting the
existing working methods of sanctions committees.

First, in order to lock in the growing judicial
recognition that the Ombudsperson offers due
process protections in the counter-terrorism context,
adjustments could be made to the contractual
arrangements of the Office of the Ombudsperson and the
workflow for interaction between the Ombudsperson
and Council members.

Secondly, the provision of detailed reasons letters
for refusals to delist would help protect those decisions
against due process legal challenges in all sanctions
regimes. The same is true for the denial of requests
for humanitarian exemptions, which are increasingly
coming under judicial scrutiny.

Thirdly, greater use of open source material in
listing decisions will protect against due process
challenges, because it makes it easier to provide reasons
for delisting decisions and refusals.

Fourthly, automated periodic reviews of sanctions
regimes and lists would ensure that they do not become
outdated and more vulnerable to due process challenges.

Fifthly, there may be easy wins from developing
publicly available guidance on the fair and clear
procedures during investigations to be used by groups
and panels of experts, with training in those procedures
provided to the experts.

Most people, like me, are simply observers of the
Council's deliberations, although our lives are affected
by its choices. We can only hope that, faced by that
new risk to its control of the sanctions instrument,
which has proven so crucial in the Security Council's
maintenance of international peace and security,
that the members of the Council will once again find
creative ways to adapt the working methods of sanctions
committees to forestall that risk. It happened once,
10 years ago, with the adoption of the Ombudsperson
arrangements. Perhaps it is not too much to hope that it

will happen again.

