Mr. Mahugu (Kenya): My delegation welcomes the
present report of the Secretary-General on the situation in
Angola, which paints a relatively hopeful picture of the
progress towards lasting peace and stability in that
country. The ongoing contacts between President dos
Santos and Mr. Jonas Savimbi are encouraging.

We also welcome the recent agreement, reached
earlier this month by the parties at the meeting of the
Joint Commission, on a new timetable of tasks to be
implemented. These are steps in the right direction. We
commend the parties for these bold undertakings.
Normalization of State administration in over 100
localities remains to be done. The transformation of Radio
Vorgan into a non-partisan "Radio Despertar" has to be
completed, along with the complete transformation of
UNITA into a political party. UN ITA leadership is yet to
be installed in Luanda, and a host of other important tasks
remain to be completed. These tasks are a long way from
fulfilment, but we can already see some light at the end
of the tunnel if continued pressure on the parties is
maintained.

I wish to take this opportunity to call on the parties
to remain steadfastly committed to fulfilling their
obligations. We believe that genuine political will is an
important element in the peace process and should be
carefully cultivated.

We concur with the Secretary-General in his
observation that these tasks remain as vital to the peace
process as they have ever been, and we agree that the
presence of the United Nations in Angola is greatly
needed to continue to help the parties undertake their full
implementation.

 

The United Nations Observer Mission in Angola
(MONUA) continues to play a key role in the progress
towards the full implementation of the parties' undertakings.
It remains the only focal point in consolidating the efforts
of the international community as we seek to assist the
parties on this very difficult path towards reconciliation.

It is in this regard that my delegation is in favour of
the draft resolution before us, and we will vote in its favour
in order to extend the mandate of MONUA for another
three months, until 30 April 1998. Furthermore, the present
draft resolution contains an important element which in our
View seeks to encourage the parties to remain especially
committed to the implementation of the remaining tasks
without further delay. It is our hope that when we next
meet to discuss the situation in Angola, in March, the
parties will have taken full advantage of the presence of
MONUA to complete the obligation they have agreed upon
in the new timetable.

Finally, may I take this opportunity to express our
appreciation to all those actively involved in the peace
process in Angola, especially the troika of observer States,
the Secretary-General's Special Representative, Maitre
Blondin Beye, and the men and women who are serving in
the United Nations mission in Angola. Without their tireless
efforts the peace process would be in jeopardy, and I take
this opportunity to encourage them all to continue.

