Mr. Nobilo (Croatia): Allow me to congratulate you,
Sir, on your assumption of the responsible duties of
presidency of the Security Council for the month of July
and to wish you success in your endeavours.

The Croatian Government is extremely worried by
the latest development in the six Security Council-
declared safe areas in Bosnia and Herzegovina and
extremely disturbed by the developments in Srebrenica.
The decision by the Bosnian Serb leadership, with the
assistance of the Belgrade authorities, to renew their
advances in the safe areas and the lack of an appropriate
response by the international community pose serious
risks for Croatia and the Bosnian Croat federation.

The likely exodus of tens of thousands, maybe
hundreds of thousands, of Bosnian Muslim refugees from
Srebrenica and the other safe areas could create serious
problems for the delicate political and economic balance
in the already-impoverished federation's territory. The
Republic of Croatia, which already cares for close to
200,000 refugees from Bosnia and Herzegovina - more
than any other Member State - and where every
eleventh person is a displaced person or a refugee, is also
seriously concerned about its ability to care for additional
refugees from Bosnia and Herzegovina.

In this light, Croatia is especially concerned about
the situation in the safe area of Bihac, which is home to
more than 60,000 people. The Republic of Croatia would
consider the displacement of this population to be a
serious threat to its internal security and therefore its
citizens, and may be compelled to undertake measures to
secure the status of Bihac as a safe area, if that status
ever becomes threatened.

The Government and the citizens of Croatia will
most certainly also have to draw additional conclusions in
respect of the developments in Srebrenica and the lack of
response from the international community regarding the

 

United Nations mandate in Croatia and the ability and
willingness of the United Nations Confidence Restoration
Operation in Croatia (UNCRO) to achieve its objectives,
the control of Croatia's relevant international borders in
particular.

The Croatian Government is of the firm View that the
latest developments in Bosnia and Herzegovina are also a
consequence of the international community's turning a
blind eye to the serious increase in Serbia's interference in
the occupied territories of Croatia and in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. This development must be reconsidered with
the utmost seriousness and urgency lest the whole peace
process in the region come to a tragic end.
