Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): First
and foremost, I would like to express our sincere
condolences to the Government and people of the
brotherly nation of Somalia with respect to the victims
of the terrorist attacks in Mogadishu last Friday.

The States in the Horn of Africa have seen
significant positive political developments in recent
times. That enabled the Governments and the peoples
of the region to override their differences and to turn a
page in the painful history of many generations. That
has generated hope to achieving security and stability to
which the region aspires. We commend the efforts made
by the leaders of Ethiopia, Eritrea, Somalia and Djibouti
which led to a historic achievement at the Horn of Africa
summit with the signing of the Jeddah Agreement on
Peace, Friendship and Comprehensive Cooperation.

We welcome today's adoption of resolution 2444
(2018) for which Kuwait voted in favour. That came out
of Kuwait's established and firm position to achieve a
just and lasting peace by peaceful means. We believe
in taking the opportunity of the historic reconciliation
in the Horn of Africa region in order to achieve the
desired peace. We also hope to reach a consensual
formula which leads to the best interests of the peoples
in the region and takes into consideration the rights of
the States that they belong to.

Based on that, Kuwait supported the decision of
the Security Council to lift sanctions against Eritrea
in order to let it play a fruitful role in establishing
stability in the region along with its neighbours, and
especially in resolving its pending differences with
Djibouti. In that regard, we look forward to achieving
tangible developments by 15 February 2019, the date of
submitting the next report of the Secretary-General on
this matter.

We should not forget also to lift the sanctions
against Somalia, which is one of the main objectives
of our joint efforts in order to help and support that
country to confront the challenges it is facing. On
top of those challenges is the serious threat posed by
Al-Shabaab.

Sanctions are an important tool in the hands of
the Security Council. Lifting the sanctions represents
a message sent to the international community that
they are not imposed for ever. They are not a tool to
punish States and peoples. The message also is that the
Council responds to positive developments and lifts
the sanctions when the reasons for which they were
imposed do not exist anymore. In such cases, there
would be no justification for the Security Council which
maintains international peace and security, pursuant to
the Charter, to keep the sanctions imposed.

In conclusion, we would like to thank the delegation
of the United Kingdom which is the penholder for its
transparent work during the negotiations.

