Mr. De Ruyt (Belgium) (Spoke in French): I have
the honour to speak on behalf of the European Union.
The countries of Central and Eastern Europe associated
with the European Union - Bulgaria, the Czech
Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland,
Romania, Slovakia and Slovenia - the associated
countries of Cyprus, Malta and Turkey, and the
European Free Trade Association countries belonging
to the European Economic Area Iceland and
Liechtenstein align themselves with this statement.

I would like at the outset to welcome Mr. Sergio
Vieira de Mello and Mr. Jose Ramos-Horta. Through
them, I would like to commend the institutions they
represent for the considerable progress they have
achieved over the past few months towards the
implementation of resolutions 1272 (1999) and 1338
(2001). We have come a long way since the United
Nations Transitional Administration in East Timor
(UNTAET) received its broad mandate in the autumn
of 1999 to assume overall responsibility for the
transitional administration of a greatly devastated
territory.

Now, less than two years later, the people of East
Timor are firmly on their way to full independence.
The elections to take place on 30 August will constitute
the next step in building a sustainable nation. The
European Union attaches great importance to the
holding of free, fair and orderly elections and in that
connection is sending a team of election observers to
East Timor. In our view the elections are a milestone in
the process of Timorization: of giving the people of
East Timor ownership of their future. It goes without
saying that we are counting on broad participation by
the population. To that end it is essential that the civic
and voter education process continue.

We are encouraged by the signing by most
political parties of a pact of national unity, which
commits them to respect the principles of democracy,
tolerance and respect for minorities, as well as the
outcome of the elections. The European Union would
like to see those same principles enshrined in the
constitution. Indeed, elections will also promote the
process towards the adoption of a constitution for East
Timor, which will be the blueprint of the future East
Timorese nation. Its importance must not be
underestimated.

The economic situation in East Timor remains
difficult. Growth still seems largely dependent on the
foreign presence and on agricultural subsidies. More
must be done to create conditions for sustainable
economic development. We agree with the Secretary-
General's observation that property laws and a
framework for commercial activity are needed to
stimulate the private sector.

The initialling by Australian and East Timorese
cabinet ministers of the Timor Sea Arrangement was a
big step in the right direction. We hope that, once
signed and ratified, this and future agreements will
contribute to long-term economic growth in an
independent East Timor. For that to happen, it is also
necessary that further efforts be made to develop the
agricultural sector.

Last week we noted with satisfaction the
democratic and peaceful transfer of power in
Indonesia. It is our profound hope that the new
Government there will continue to implement the
provisions of resolution 1319 (2000). In the past we
have strongly insisted that Indonesia meet its
obligations. The record so far has been uneven.

Registration of refugees in West Timor recently
took place. The initial results of the registration and
balloting will surely reflect the refugees' choice at that
point. Still, questions remain over the long-term
intentions of refugees who have opted for now to stay
on Indonesian territory. We hope that the doubts will be
resolved, and we believe that those who eventually
wish to return to East Timor will be able to do so in
safety and security.

We call upon the Indonesian authorities to
cooperate with UNTAET and with the future East
Timorese authorities in prosecuting crimes against
humanity and humanitarian law perpetrated in East
Timor prior to and after the 1999 popular consultation,
including through the establishment of an ad hoc court
in Indonesia. We further expect the Jakarta
Government to carry forward the appeals procedure in
the case of the murder last year in Atambua of three
workers from the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees.

In resolution 1338 (2001), the Council
unanimously stressed the need for a substantial
international presence in East Timor after
independence. In his report, the Secretary-General
offers some specific recommendations, and further
recommendations will be made in October. We agree
that there is room for an overall reduction in the
international presence. But such a reduction should
take account of real needs on the ground and should
take place in close consultation with the Timorese
population. In that regard, we encourage efforts to
identify areas where ongoing support is needed. We
acknowledge the important role played so far by United
Nations agencies, the international financial
institutions and regional organizations, and we hope
that their involvement will increase in the future.

The militias in West Timor remain a potential
threat to East Timor, particularly in the border areas.
We need to be particularly vigilant during the election
period. In other areas the East Timor society is
confronted with problems of public order. In that
respect, we encourage the development and training of
the East Timor Police Service, which should play an
increasing role in ensuring public security. Also, we
should give full attention to the setting up of a strong
judicial system.

Great progress has been achieved towards the
realization of an independent East Timor. The East
Timorese people and the international community have
invested a great deal in this process. These efforts must
not have been made in vain. The international
community has committed itself to maintain a presence
in East Timor. We stress the need to carefully design
that presence and reiterate that re-evaluations of such
plans should take into account the security situation,
the needs on the ground and the wishes of the
population. We await with interest the new
recommendations that the Secretary-General will make
in this regard.

