Mr. Jessen-Petersen: Let me begin, Sir, by
congratulating you as the President of the Council. You
will appreciate my particular pleasure in seeing
Denmark in the chair today. I also want to thank you
personally for honouring us with your presence in the
Chamber today.

The three-month period since my last appearance
before the Security Council has been a challenging
one. The progress made - and let there be no doubt
that there has been progress - must be seen in the
context of the challenges that Kosovo has faced.

In particular, March 2005 saw some very difficult
moments. The Government that was formed in
December 2004 made good progress through its first
100 days, and the momentum was considerable.
However, in early March, a few days after my last
report to this Council, that Government came to an end
when Prime Minister Haradinaj resigned following
notification of an imminent indictment from the
International Criminal Tribunal for the former
Yugoslavia (ICTY). Within 24 hours following his
indictment, and after appealing for calm and for a
continuation of progress in building a democratic
society in Kosovo, Mr. Haradinaj proceeded
voluntarily to The Hague.

During those days, Kosovo showed the region
and the world commendable respect for the judicial
process. Democracy was respected, and a new
Government, continuing the coalition of the two
parties- the Democratic League of Kosovo (LDK)
and the Alliance for the Future of Kosovo (AAK) -
and under the leadership of Bajram Kosumi as Prime
Minister, was formed within three weeks. Throughout
those difficult days and weeks, the political leaders and
citizens of Kosovo managed a highly unusual situation
with maturity and without any disorder or instability.

In particular, standards implementation stayed on
track. The brief delay around the time of the formation
of the Government was quickly overcome. The new
Government showed the same commitment to moving
forward on standards and made continued progress on
its programme during the months of April and May.

As in most new democracies - and let us
remember that democracy in Kosovo is only a few
years old - there is political tension. For the first time
in its recent history, Kosovo has a strong opposition,
under the leadership of Hashim Thaci and Veton
Surroi, which, as everywhere, is critical of the work of
the Government, while in agreement on the overall
goals for Kosovo.

In order to manage any tensions more
constructively, and in view of the critical period ahead
for Kosovo and the significant political issues coming
up, I decided to propose bringing political party leaders
and the President of Kosovo together in a forum. The
purpose of this forum is to enhance constructive
dialogue and ensure maximum possible consensus on
critical and crucial issues, without substituting for
constitutional forums. My proposal was met with
agreement, and I will convene the first meeting of the
Kosovo Forum next week.

I am glad to report some positive developments
on dialogue between Pristina and Belgrade. The first
direct dialogue meetings since March 2004 resumed
one year later, beginning with the Working Group on
Missing Persons on 16 March.

That was followed by meetings in April and May
on the key issues of energy and returns of displaced
persons. These Working Group meetings will take
place on a regular basis in Belgrade and Pristina, and
they are supported by intermediate technical meetings
to work on substantive issues. This dialogue not only
serves to make progress on the specific issues, which
range from humanitarian to economic, but it is also an
important sign of building confidence, which is crucial
as we move closer towards status discussions.

We need to continue encouraging political
dialogue. I welcome the fact that Pristina and Belgrade
have now expressed their readiness to engage in high-
level political dialogue. It is vital that political leaders
begin to talk with each other sooner rather than later.
Pristina and Belgrade have every mutual interest in
coexisting and interacting peacefully and
constructively.

Over the past months we have witnessed greater
engagement and dialogue with the Serbian Orthodox
Church. The Church and the Provisional Institutions of
Self-Government in Kosovo signed a memorandum of
understanding on 25 March to allow for the
reconstruction of Serbian Orthodox religious sites.
That followed a lengthy delay due to talks within the
Church on how to proceed. The Provisional Institutions
had already allocated €4.2 million last year and are
now actively considering earmarking an additional
€l.5 million for reconstruction of Serbian Orthodox
religious sites that were damaged during the March
2004 violence.

It is obvious that long-term preservation of
cultural heritage in Kosovo, which includes Serbian
Orthodox, Ottoman/Islamic, Catholic and vernacular
sites, must become an increasing priority in the coming
months. In this context, I would like to mention the
successful international donors conference for the
protection and preservation of cultural heritage of all
communities in Kosovo, held two weeks ago in the
UNESCO headquarters in Paris with the support of that
organization, the European Union, the Council of
Europe and others. Participants pledged some €lO
million and technical assistance in a clear expression of
support for the cultural heritage in Kosovo. A technical
mission to restore a church in Prizren, supported by
UNESCO, took place just a few weeks ago, and more
will now follow.

However, the news is not all good. Despite recent
encouraging developments on dialogue between
Pristina and Belgrade, I am concerned that, after more
than 15 months, there is still no clear signal from
Belgrade to the Kosovo Serbs to participate in the
institutions. Dialogue between Pristina and Belgrade,
although welcome and important, cannot substitute for
the direct involvement of the Kosovo Serbs in shaping
their own future in an internal dialogue in Kosovo.

Progress in Kosovo will continue even without
the meaningful participation of the Kosovo Serbs, but
progress in establishing a fully multi-ethnic Kosovo
and integrating all communities will remain limited as
long as one ethnic group is pressured to stay outside
the political, economic and social processes. The fault
for this obstacle to progress does not lie with Pristina.
The victims, however, are the Kosovo Serbs who are
eager to participate at this crucial moment. Those who
oppose progress can always find some reason to defer
allowing participation, but recent trends have proven
that bolder engagement can actually foster real
progress for the benefit of all. In my view, Belgrade
would help the Kosovo Serb community and itself by
moving from reticence and delay to commitment and
engagement in that area.

Standards implementation remains the road map
for the short term but also for the long term. It is a way
of building and strengthening democracy and a multi-
ethnic society, and it is also a way for Kosovo to move
progressively towards European integration.

We have seen a continued strong commitment by
the Provisional Institutions of Self-Government during
the reporting period. The structures working on
standards implementation have shown themselves to be
solid and durable. While we recognize that there is still
much to do, the trends in a number of areas have been
positive, and that is reflected in my technical
assessment (S/2005/335, annex I). We feel that the
authorities, and increasingly the citizens, have
understood the need to implement standards and have
made efforts to reach out to the minorities.

Let me say a few words on some specific issues.

Decentralization, or local government reform, is
not a standard as such, but it is an important process.
Decentralization will benefit the population as a whole.
It will bring services closer to the citizens, and it will
also help meet minority concerns.

After some hesitation following its formation, the
Government has acted. A steering board and five
working groups have been established and are
convening, including two meetings held this week, on
legislation and on pilot projects which are to be
established shortly. The Kosovo Serbs were invited to,
and participated in, those meetings, and thus had the
opportunity to shape the process. I would also add that
Belgrade was invited to join the Kosovo Serb
delegation and that we were, of course, flexible on the
modalities. But Belgrade again failed to respond.
Regrettably, the post of Deputy Minister for Local
Government Administration, reserved for a Kosovo
Serb, still remains vacant.

As we push for further progress on
decentralization, I believe that the recent Contact
Group agreement on the principle of "no partition of
Kosovo" sends a clear signal that the majority
community has no reason to fear that meaningful
decentralization would be a cover for the division of
Kosovo. On the contrary, if well conceived and
implemented, it should eventually promote coexistence
around the efficient sharing of local capacities and
resources.

I would add that we are currently looking at a
number of initiatives that could be carried out prior to
full-scale decentralization and that could empower
municipalities, for example, in the field of policing and
the administration of justice.

Security has further improved, and this is key as
it is a basis for progress in all areas. I want to pay
tribute again to the Commander of the Kosovo Force
(KFOR) and his forces, whose excellent work and
close coordination with the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) and the
Kosovo Police Service (KPS) is playing a key role in
maintaining a safe and secure environment in Kosovo.

The environment has indeed been generally calm
during the reporting period, with only a few incidents
of note. In particular, very little occurred in the way of
inter-ethnic incidents. Unfortunately, the Commander
of KFOR and I are concerned - and we have
repeatedly said so - that, partly due to deliberate
misinformation, the perception of security remains a
problem and leads to mainly self-imposed limits on
freedom of movement. There is a tendency in some
media to generalize and misrepresent every incident
involving Kosovo Serbs. Before a police investigation
has even begun, some journalists, and some politicians,
pronounce an event to be ethnically motivated, thus
feeding the fears of the Kosovo Serb community,
including internally displaced persons. In most cases
we find after thorough professional investigations that
such assertions have no foundation.

There are also assertions that perpetrators are not
sentenced. That, too, is simply misinformation. As a
recent example, six Kosovo Albanians were found
guilty of the murder of two Kosovo Serbs in March
2004 and were sentenced to a total of 38 years by the
anilane District Court just last week. It is also worth
noting that in recent meetings with senior UNMIK
officials, Serbian cabinet ministers have indicated that
the Kosovo Serb population's trust in the Kosovo
Police Service has indeed increased. As the Council
may be aware, the KPS has a minority component of
approximately 16 per cent, and Kosovo Serbs make up
approximately 10 per cent of the KPS. I might add
another example of progress: of 29 lay judges sworn in
at the end of April, 16 were minority community
members, of which 13 were Kosovo Serbs.
There are signs, and evidence, of increased
freedom of movement by Kosovo Serbs, although there
are still too many who do not feel free to move. A sign
of the improving environment is the reduction of
escorts and of the military and police presence at
specific sites and locations. To give a recent example,
at the beginning of this month, the first Serbian play to
be performed since the end of the conflict was
presented at Kosovo's main theatre in Pristina; it was
prepared and performed by Serbs, with a large Serb
attendance.

The number of returns of displaced persons is
still disappointingly low. The Provisional Institutions
of Self-Government, UNMIK and the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR) continue to work hard on improving
conditions for returns so that displaced persons can
return to Kosovo if they so choose. I recently met with
displaced persons in Serbia and with returnees in
Kosovo, and I can report to the Council that their main
concern is no longer primarily security. Rather, they
are concerned about property issues and the lack of
economic prospects.

There has been some qualitative progress in
returns. For example, we have the first urban return to
the town of Klina. My visits to returnees in several
areas, including Bablyak and Brestovik, have
convinced me that conditions exist to allow tomorrow's
returns to take place and that positive encouragement
by responsible politicians, in both Pristina and
Belgrade, can convince more displaced persons to
return to Kosovo.

There have been increased efforts on returns on
the part of the Kosovo Government. That includes
personal appeals by the Prime Minister to potential
returnees and visits to Podgorica and to Skopje by the
Minister of Returns - himself a Serb - and the
Minister of Local Government Administration. Those
visits have resulted in better understanding and
improved regional cooperation, as well as in
agreements with regional partners, as for example a
recent protocol on returns with Montenegro. The
Working Group on Returns, held on 12 May between
Pristina and Belgrade under the chairmanship of
UNHCR, was a successful first meeting and will
continue. In a very positive development, the
respective heads of delegations from Pristina and
Belgrade met in Pristina to discuss issues of substance
in a productive bilateral working meeting just a couple
of days ago.

As regards functioning democratic institutions, I
can report that the rapid formation of the new
Government in March showed continued evidence of a
stable political situation. The Assembly of Kosovo has
lately shown itself to be a more transparent and
democratic place for debate according to the
established rules. The recent debate on
decentralization, held five or six days ago, was clearly
a step forward. I and colleagues from the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe will continue
to provide assistance and advice to the Assembly
presidency to ensure that that key institution functions
democratically, as I trust it will.

We are rigorously stressing the need for local
ownership, and the policy of transfer of competences to
the Provisional Institutions of Self-Government has
continued. We are at this point carefully looking at
transfer in police and justice areas, where we can
transfer competencies short of sovereignty in order to
ensure that the local authorities assume maximum
responsibility and accountability, also in the area of
security.

We have continued to support the efforts of the
Provisional Institutions of Self-Government to
coordinate and strengthen institutional capacity-
building. The Prime Minister has given full political
backing to an initiative of the Provisional Institutions,
supported by UNMIK and the international community,
to draw up a strategic plan in order to guide assistance
and help focus on priorities. It is expected that the
strategic plan will be developed by the summer and
will serve as a basis for better targeting and
coordinating donor efforts, so that we can build up the
institutions that Kosovo needs. It is clear that
considerable donor assistance will be necessary in a
number of sectors over the coming months and years.

On accountability, the policy we developed has
served as an incitement to the Provisional Institutions
of Self-Government to address accountability problems
and take corrective measures where necessary. UNMIK
is prepared to take action if and when appropriate, but
counts on the Provisional Institutions to assume their
responsibilities directly.

There have been some significant developments
on economic issues that have helped, to some extent, to
improve the investment climate, including in the areas
of privatization, access to loans from the European
Investment Bank, and long-term lease possibilities for
investors. However, I must stress that the extremely
problematic economic conditions could at any moment
lead to social instability, as they would in any society
with high unemployment and continued stagnation. In
spite of our efforts to make the investment climate
more attractive and to stimulate the economy, it is clear
that there will be no real progress until the status issue
is resolved.

In conclusion, let me stress again that, according
to realistic and fact-based criteria, Kosovo has seen
steady further improvement during the reporting
period. At the same time, the Provisional Institutions of
Self-Government know that much still needs to be
done in key standards areas, and we are pursuing the
shortcomings on a daily basis.

We must, however, recognize that the pace of
further progress on standards implementation is reliant
on several factors. First, it depends on the willingness
of the majority community to continue to make efforts
to create a multi-ethnic and democratic Kosovo. That
willingness does exist, despite the recent painful
conflict, and we must and will continue to support
those who display that willingness. Secondly, the
degree of Kosovo Serb participation will influence the
extent to which their interests are reflected in the
ongoing standards implementation. Here, as we have
urged repeatedly, Belgrade must give a clear, positive
signal. Thirdly, status resolution and the ensuing
certainty will mean that we can make faster and more
substantial progress on a range of issues.

I want to be very frank: with a resolution of the
status issue, and therefore an end to the uncertainty, I
am confident that we will see much more significant
results on issues such as returns, freedom of movement
and the economy. Status resolution will also have clear
regional benefits, including for regional dialogue and
trade. There are clearly limits to the results on regional
integration that can be achieved without having
certainty on status. Leaving it pending will delay
regional integration and adversely affect the interests
of all, including Belgrade, Podgorica, Skopje and
Tirana. In my meetings with regional partners, the
interest in seeing status resolution is strong.

We are all working towards the same ultimate
goal: stabilizing the region and the pursuit of the
European perspective. European integration is vital for
Kosovo and for the region. It will serve, as it has
elsewhere, to break down borders and ensure greater
prosperity for everybody.

As Council members will have seen in his report,
the Secretary-General believes that a comprehensive
review of standards should be initiated this summer.
That comprehensive review can, inter alia, draw on
existing structures and working groups in Pristina to
support its work on reviewing the standards, and all
interested parties will no doubt have a chance to make
their voices heard.

I am confident that progress will continue in the
interest of all communities in Kosovo, based on a
forward-looking, constructive and honest approach by
all concerned. The role of the Security Council in
moving Kosovo from a holding operation to a
sustainable and lasting solution is crucial, and I thank
its members for their support.

