Ihave the honour to deliver this statement on behalf of the three African States members of the Security Council, namely, the Niger, Tunisia and South Africa, as well as Saint Vincent and the Grenadines (A3+1). I would like to thank you, Sir, for convening this timely meeting. I would also like to thank the Secretary-General for his comprehensive report (S/2020/202) on the continued activities of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) for the maintenance of peace in Darfur. We commend the efforts of the United Nations working jointly with the African Union (AU) over the past 12 years. I would also like to thank our briefers today, Ms. DiCarlo and Mr. Lacroix, for their comprehensive briefings, and for their continued collaboration with African Union Commissioner for Peace and Security Chergui and the AU Commission. The collaboration and cooperation between the AU and the United Nations have contributed immensely to the stabilization of the security situation in Darfur, thus resulting in our consideration of the withdrawal of UNAMID and subsequent transformation of the peacekeeping mission into a political and peacebuilding support mission despite the fact that Darfur continues to face residual protection challenges. We would like to express our full support for the current transitional process under way in the Sudan, including the role of Prime Minister Hamdok. We also wish to express our strongest condemnation of the attack on Prime Minister Hamdok in the Sudan on 9 March. Attacks of this nature highlight continued risks that could considerably undermine the existing momentum towards restoring stability, development and prosperity in the Sudan. We have reached a critical juncture with regard to UNAMID, and it is vital that we safeguard the gains that have been made in the past decade, while also continuing to place the needs of Sudanese civilians before all else. The current environment and challenges presented by the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) require us to adopt a pragmatic and contextualized approach to any further reconfiguration of UNAMID. The pandemic has significantly affected the Sudan peace talks in Juba as well as the operations of UNAMID. In this respect, we reiterate the call made by the African Union Peace and Security Council on the Government of the Sudan, working in collaboration with the AU and the United Nations, to agree on a comprehensive UNAMID withdrawal road map to ensure that the process is carefully managed and sequenced, based on conditions and aligned with the priorities and timelines of the Government of the Sudan, in order to safeguard the gains made to date and to maintain the current momentum in the Darfur peace process. We would like to raise the following key issues. On the political transition, we support the transition in the Sudan under the leadership of Prime Minister Hamdok and call on all stakeholders to continue working for the success and respect of the transition period through the implementation of the provisions of the military-civilian transition agreement signed in Doha in July 2019, which should lead to the establishment of a democratically elected civilian Government. Moreover, we urge all parties to remain steadfast in their engagement in the Sudan peace talks in Juba, and to find resolve through continued political dialogue. Furthermore, we urge Sudan Liberation Army leader Abdel Wahid Al-Nur to join the 17/26 18/26 Juba talks to ensure the process is inclusive and the political dialogue a success. Only through the inclusion of Darfur and its relevant actors will we have the baseline for sustainable and comprehensive peace and a real opportunity to address prevailing security and protection threats and risks, especially in the Greater Jebel Marra area. We also applaud the efforts by South Sudan in facilitating the ongoing peace talks and encourage its leaders to continue their constructive role in mediating the process. On the economic situation, we recognize the dire economic and financial situation with which the country continues to grapple. This situation risks collapsing the good progress made on the political front. We therefore reiterate the call of the African Union Peace and Security Council for the lifting of all forms of sanctions imposed against the Sudan, including its delisting as a State sponsor of terrorism, in order to boost the existing momentum of the transition process and to create conditions conducive to economic recovery, growth and stability in the country. In this regard, we urge the international community and financial institutions to assist in addressing these challenges, particularly as the COVID-19 pandemic exacerbates the economic situation for the Sudan and neighbouring countries. On the security situation, we remain concerned about the ongoing challenges in Jebel Marra as well as other hotspots such as Kalma and more recently El Geneina, which have displaced over 50,000 people within and beyond the Sudan. We are particularly concerned regarding the status of and security threats faced by internally displaced persons as well as the intercommunal violence highlighted in the Secretary-General's report. In addition, we are disturbed by reports of grave violations against groups that have been put in the most vulnerable of conditions, including women and children. We welcome the signing of the Framework of Cooperation to Prevent and Respond to Conflict-related Sexual Violence between the Government of the Sudan and the United Nations in response to the high levels of violence against women, girls and boys in internally displaced person camps, in particular, and the use of rape at increasingly high levels in the fight against pastoralists and farmers for land in Darfur. We renew our call to strengthen institutions, guarantee the safety of the most vulnerable groups and prosecute the perpetrators. We are also concerned about the deteriorating humanitarian situation prevailing in Darfur. This grave situation is driven by a number of factors, including the hazards related to climate change, such as flooding and drought, as well as intercommunal conflicts. These factors cause internal and external displacement and serve to exacerbate an already challenging situation, especially during the COVID-19 pandemic. We urge the mission and other United Nations agencies working on the ground to coordinate their actions to support the Government in containing and minimizing the impact of the disease in Darfur, as well as in continuing to combat the desert locusts, which constitute a genuine threat to food security in the Sudan. On the drawdown and the post- UNAMID mechanism, we are pleased that the Government of the Sudan has highlighted the needs on the ground, and we support Prime Minister Hamdok's call for a mission, following UNAMID's withdrawal, mandated under Chapter VI of the Charter of the United Nations. It is therefore imperative that a follow-up mission be fully aligned with the priorities and objectives of the Government to ensure the efforts of the international and regional communities have a meaningful impact. Moreover, as noted by Prime Minister Hamdok in his letter as well as by the Secretary-General and the Chairperson of the AU Commission in their report, the role of the African Union should continue during the transition period. Therefore, there remains a need to ensure that the AU and the United Nations build on their excellent collaboration and continue working in unison. As we deliberate a post- UNAMID mission, and given the current uncertain times due to the pandemic, there are some key questions we would like to raise. First, given the changed circumstances, including the impact of COVID-19, the halt in UNAMID's operations and the effects of the rainy season, what is the feasibility of extending the mission's deadlines? Is UNAMID's exit viable at this stage? Secondly, if the United Nations were to maintain a police presence in Darfur and the security situation there deteriorates, to what extent would the United Nations have the requisite capacity to respond? Would the limited police presence create false expectations and potentially undermine the Organization's credibility? Thirdly, with regard to the protection-of-civilians mandate in particular, does the security situation in the entire Darfur area merit the total withdrawal of UNAMID by October 2020? Fourthly, given that broader political developments in the Sudan require international support to ensure the country's stability and its recovery and economic development, in particular, should the new United Nations mission not specifically focus on political and peacebuilding efforts only, with the support of the African Union and the Intergovernmental Authority on Development? Lastly, we would like to express our gratitude to UNAMID through the invaluable efforts of Mr. Jeremiah Mamabolo, Acting Joint Special Representative for Darfur and Head of the United Nations-African Union Mission in Darfur, and his team, and urge them to continue to spare no effort until lasting peace is restored to the Darfur region. Our continued engagement and collective support will be key in advancing peace and stability in the Sudan. Most important, the Sudan's stability is critical to an already fragile region. Furthermore, we recognize the vital role that the Sudan plays in the political developments in South Sudan despite the former's own significant challenges. The A3+1 agree with Prime Minister Hamdok that the overall security and protection of the Sudanese people is the responsibility of the Sudanese Government and its institutions. The A3+1 also agree that the entire United Nations system, in general, and the Security Council, in particular, have immense responsibility in accompanying and ensuring that the multi-stakeholder transitional Government in the Sudan succeeds in leading its people towards a hopeful future of a peaceful, unified, democratic, open and freer society.
