Mr. Jurica (Croatia): I would like to thank the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Afghanistan, Mr. Kai Eide, for his full and informative
briefing and for his leadership of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) in these
difficult and challenging times. At the same time, we
are pleased to welcome the Permanent Representative
of Afghanistan, Mr. Zahir Tanin, and we thank him for
his statement.

My country, Croatia, is encouraged by hard work
that UNAMA has carried out to date, helping to
coordinate the humanitarian efforts of the international
community in support of the Afghan Government. My
delegation would like to reiterate its full support for
UNAMA's leading role in that regard. As was clearly
stated in the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2008/617), only if an absolute readiness of all
stakeholders to be coordinated is present will UNAMA
be in a position to successfully execute its mandate.

Croatia is seriously concerned about the
worsening of the security situation in Afghanistan. The
insurgency is intensifying and is now negatively
affecting areas that previously were relatively calm. Of
particular concern is the situation in the border region
with Pakistan, where hostile activities have
significantly increased. The change of tactics employed
by insurgent - towards attacks of an asymmetric
nature, often carried out in highly inhabited areas -
has significantly contributed to the rise in civilian
casualties.

In that context, Croatia believes that strict
compliance with international humanitarian and human
rights law and the implementation of adequate
measures to ensure the protection of civilians should be
effected throughout Afghanistan. We especially
welcome the efforts undertaken to date by the
international forces to minimize the risk of civilian
casualties.

Croatia is concerned about the worsening
humanitarian situation, brought on primarily as a result
of the ongoing insurgency and the negative impact of
the conflict on humanitarian access. The current
drought and the high global food prices have only
exacerbated the situation. We therefore welcome the
second joint emergency appeal for relief to address
high food prices and the drought crisis, launched to
help people affected by the current conditions. Highly
aware of the acuteness of the problem, Croatia has just
donated $50,000 through the World Food Programme
to alleviate food shortages in the province of
Badakhshan.
It is a well-known fact that the insurgency in
Afghanistan is fuelled predominantly by the drug trade.
With that in mind, Croatia is encouraged by the new
report of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime (UNODC), according to which there has been a
19 per cent decrease in opium cultivation and a 6 per
cent decline in the production of opium. We welcome
the renewed efforts aimed at curbing that scourge,
undertaken with the approval of the Afghan
Government and consistent with the relevant
resolutions of the Security Council.

Croatia is pleased to see that international efforts
to counter the flow of chemical precursors for illicit
heroin manufacturing, recently strongly supported by
the Security Council through the adoption of resolution
1817 (2008), are already bearing fruit. We commend
the International Narcotics Control Board for its
leading role, and we welcome the greater regional
cooperation on this issue.

Inextricably linked to the problem of opium
cultivation is the problem of the rampant corruption
that plunders Afghanistan. We therefore welcome the
adoption of the law on corruption and the
establishment of the High Office of Oversight to
combat corruption. It is evident that such measures are
necessary not only to demonstrate the seriousness of
the Afghan Government with regard to its
commitments to the international community, but, even
more, to strengthen the trust and confidence of
ordinary Afghans in the present Administration.

Croatia is of the opinion that the upcoming
elections are a key priority and a real test of
Afghanistan's democratic progress. While we regret
that continuing disagreement within the National
Assembly has prevented the adoption of a new
electoral law, we are confident that all necessary
legislation - including legislation on the Independent
Election Commission, the lead coordinating body for
the elections - will be swiftly adopted.

On security and military matters, we welcome the
continuing improvement of the Afghan National Army
and support the Afghan request to raise the Army's
recruitment ceiling to 134,000 by 2010. We especially
welcome the Afghan Government's assumption of
greater responsibility for security in the country, with
the Afghan National Army taking over lead
responsibility for security in Kabul. Croatia is
currently examining arrangements to send to
Afghanistan additional teams to be included in the
training and mentoring of the Afghan National Army,
within an operational framework and with a liaison
team.

We commend all regional efforts aimed at the
stabilization and the further development of

Afghanistan. The country's neighbours have an
important role to play in supporting the Afghan
Government's effort to secure its borders, but also in
acquiring joint opportunities afforded by trade, energy
market integration and infrastructure construction. We
welcome the recent international agreements entered
into by Afghanistan and its neighbours and express our
full support for the efforts already put in place by the
Special Representative aimed at underscoring the
potential of regional economic development and
cooperation.

We are also fully aware that there is no purely
military solution to the situation in Afghanistan. In
order for the Afghan Government and the international
community to succeed, they need to apply a
comprehensive approach, uniting military, political,
humanitarian and development activities. Supporting a
comprehensive approach also means supporting
Afghan efforts to bring disaffected Afghans into the
mainstream of society and cause them to renounce
violence and accept Afghanistan's constitution and the
relevant Security Council resolutions. We share the
view that UNAMA has an important role to play in
supporting Afghan-led reconciliation activities in
whatever ways the Government of Afghanistan
considers appropriate. Furthermore, the crisis in
Afghanistan is not only a national and regional, but
also a global problem. The fight against terrorism can
be won only through the concerted efforts of the
relevant international actors.

Croatia would like affirm its strong determination
expressed at the Conference held in June in Paris to
work closely under the Afghan leadership in support of
the Afghanistan National Development Strategy, based
on the Afghanistan Compact of 2006. Similarly, let me
reiterate our support for the assessment of the Special
Representative that the priorities identified at the Paris
Conference are sufficiently covered by UNAMA's
mandate, as laid out in resolution 1806 (2008). In that
context, we welcome the changes announced by
President Karzai to his cabinet, which we see as a clear
sign of the Afghan determination to rigorously
implement the Paris agenda.
We fully concur with the assessment of the
Secretary-General that greater human, administrative
and security resources need to be mobilized in order
for UNAMA to fulfil its mandate and achieve the
established priorities. In that regard, we commend
UNAMA's decision to open new provincial offices,
thus further strengthening its outreach capability,
which is crucial for the implementation of its mandate.
A sense of urgency is clearly present.

Finally, throughout this year Croatia has raised
the level of its military contribution to the International
Security Assistance Force (ISAF) by approximately
30 per cent. Additionally, we have initiated
development projects in the province of Badakhshan in
the sectors of health and education, in accordance with
the priorities of the Afghan Government. That is all to
confirm our forceful commitment to the efforts of the
entire international community to rebuild a free, safe
and stable Afghanistan, as well as our strong support
for the Government and the people of Afghanistan.

