Mr. Akram (Pakistan): I join my colleagues in
welcoming the Secretary-General at this important
meeting.

Pakistan is happy that the Security Council was
able to act unanimously on the resolution, and we
commend the flexibility demonstrated by all Council
members. Pakistan voted in favour of the resolution,
and I would like to say a few words to explain our
position.

Pakistan's position, both before and after the war
in Iraq early this year, has been guided by our concern
for the welfare of the fraternal people of Iraq and for
their country. Pakistan did not support the war. In its
aftermath, our concern has been to ensure the provision
of humanitarian assistance to the suffering Iraqi people,
to restore the security and stability of their country and
to ensure the earliest restoration of its sovereignty and
political independence.

The resolutions adopted by the Security Council
since the war - resolutions 1472 (2003), 1476 (2003),
1483 (2003) and 1500 (2003) - were, in our view,
designed to take the first steps towards realizing those
objectives. Several steps have been taken towards those
objectives in Iraq, including the organization of
humanitarian assistance, the revival of administrative
structures and the establishment of a Governing
Council which was considered by the Security Council
to be broadly representative.

Unfortunately, the situation in Iraq has evolved in
ways that have aroused regional and international
concern. In particular, the security environment has not
improved. Attacks have occurred on the foreign
military and civilian presence in the country.
Tragically, even the United Nations, present in Iraq to
assist the Iraqi people, was targeted in the devastating
attack of 19 August, costing the lives of 22 United
Nations personnel, including the head of the United
Nations Mission, Sergio Vieira de Mello. Since then,
guerrilla and terrorist attacks have occurred with
numbing regularity, as listed in the fifth preambular
paragraph and operative paragraph 18 of the resolution.

We viewed the initiation of the resolution as an
opportunity to address those concerns and to create a
structure that could lead to the early restoration of
Iraq's sovereignty and political independence. We
supported the resolution because, despite the
complexity and contradictions of parts of the text, we
believe that its fundamental objectives are the
restoration of sovereignty and the transfer of authority
to the people of Iraq, the improvement of the security
environment, the promotion of economic
reconstruction and the expeditious provision of relief.

The resolution would have gained considerably in
clarity and credibility if it had clearly stipulated the
principles which should guide the political transition
and the maintenance of security and reconstruction in
Iraq: respect for Iraq's political independence, unity
and territorial integrity; the right of the Iraqi people to
choose their own political destiny and form of
Government; permanent sovereignty and control over
their natural resources; and non-intervention and non-
interference in their internal affairs.

We would also have liked a clearer process for
the early restoration of Iraq's sovereignty and the quick
transfer of power and authority to the Iraqi people to
enable them to control their political future and their
economic resources. That is an inalienable right of the
people of Iraq, and, like other peoples, they are entitled
to exercise that right without unnecessary delay.

Nevertheless, we have noted that the text
reaffirms the temporary nature of the exercise by the
Coalition Provisional Authority of its specific
responsibilities and obligations under international law.
We hope that the timetable that has been indicated in
the text will be accelerated with a view to ending
occupation expeditiously and that the Iraqi interim
authority will be quickly constituted through a broad
and inclusive political process incorporating political
elements which at present remain outside the
Governing Council.

The political process for the restoration of full
Iraqi sovereignty would have gained in credibility and
acceptability within Iraq and internationally if it had
been conducted under the authority and auspices of the
United Nations. We understand the concerns and
constraints of the Secretary-General, which prevent the
presence of United Nations international staff on the
ground in Iraq. The security environment must improve
in order to enable the United Nations and other
international organizations to play a full and impartial
role in Iraq's transition to political independence. Yet
the supervision of that process by the United Nations
can itself contribute to creating the confidence among
the Iraqi people that is essential to promoting a climate
of security. We therefore trust that the circumstances
referred to in the resolution which would enable the
Secretary-General to play an active role in Iraq's
political process will arrive as soon as possible.

Pakistan is confident that despite the tragedy of
19 August, the United Nations will not be prepared to
abdicate its responsibilities to the Iraqi people. We
welcome the Secretary-General's statement this
morning in that context. A United Nations role in
overseeing and assisting the political transition in Iraq
can be discharged, in our view, without incurring
unacceptable risks to United Nations personnel.

The deployment of credible military capabilities
in Iraq is no doubt essential at present to create an
environment of security within which the political
process and Iraq's reconstruction can be implemented.
However, the forces deployed must be acceptable to the
Iraqi people and must evoke their full cooperation.
Otherwise, they will be unable to impose security. On
the contrary, their presence might intensify insecurity.

It is for that reason that, during our consultations
on the draft resolution, Pakistan consistently advocated
that the multinational force which was to be created
should have a identity separate and distinct from the
occupation forces and that its deployment should be the
result of an invitation from the Iraqi people and should
take place with the concurrence of the other States of
the region. Unfortunately, those considerations could
not be reflected in the resolution we have just adopted.
Under these circumstances, Pakistan will not be able to
contribute troops to the multinational force in Iraq.

There are widespread concerns that the security
situation in Iraq may deteriorate. To prevent that, the
coalition Powers and those assisting them must be able
to win the confidence of the Iraqi people and to
convince them that they are working to promote their
interests. Unless that aspect of the situation is fully
addressed, there will continue to be resistance from
those in Iraq who feel excluded from the political
process - apart from the additional dimension of
terrorism, which has emerged with greater frequency in
Iraq.

We are all agreed that this resolution is not the
last word on Iraq. Pakistan continues to believe that the
international community would do well to open a
process of broad consultations which would involve the
Iraqi people and the Arab and Islamic countries in
order to evolve a consensus on how best to restore
Iraq's sovereignty and political independence, improve
its security environment and promote its
reconstruction. Pakistan stands ready to contribute to
such a process. We are deeply committed to ensuring
the welfare of the Iraqi people, restoring their
sovereignty and political independence, ensuring Iraq's
unity and territorial integrity and promoting peace and
stability in the entire region.

Pakistan shares strong bonds of faith, culture and
history with the Iraqi people and with other States in
the region. We fully support their aspirations. We will
extend all possible cooperation in ways and means
acceptable to them to realize those aspirations.

