Mr. Adamia (Georgia): Today's meeting has a
special significance for my country as this is the first
time that we have spoken in the Security Council since
we joined the global anti-terrorist coalition. In this
connection, I would like to commend the members of
the Security Council for mobilizing the coordinated
efforts of the international community against
international terrorism.

I would like to express our support for and
appreciation of the central role played by the Counter-
Terrorism Committee (CTC) and its Chairman,
Ambassador Sir Jeremy Greenstock. We fully share the
aims and objectives outlined by the Chairman for the
next working period.

The work of the Committee inspired a process of
review of domestic legislation in my country to bring it
into line with our obligations both under the
conventions against terrorism and under resolution
1373 (2001). The Government of Georgia recently
approved a draft law on amendments to the criminal
code of Georgia, and submitted it to the parliament for
adoption. Domestic legislation on charitable and
humanitarian organizations is also being reviewed to
prevent money-laundering and any subsequent
financing of terrorist acts.

We are particularly pleased that the CTC remains
focused on the timely provision of assistance to States
and on capacity-building in order to address the threat
of terrorism within the framework of resolution 1373
(2001). In this respect, we note the importance of
dispatching an assessment mission to Georgia.

The objective of resolution 1373 (2001) is to set
out a legal and political framework for the undertaking
by States of cooperative efforts in the process of
fighting international terrorism. It is both a means- and
goal-oriented resolution, and any attempt to expand its
scope to manipulate it to one's own liking would
undermine the very cornerstone of current international
law and the Charter-based international system.

Let me be candid. What is the real value of our
deliberations and the commitments made in this
Chamber given that Russia, a permanent member of the
Security Council, itself subjects my country to daily
terror, intimidation and the threat of aggression. The
flames of anti-Georgia hysteria that Russia's mass
media continuously fan are fuelled by accusations that
Georgia is not only not fighting the terrorists but,
worse still, condoning them.

I beg your pardon, Mr. President, but I have to
say that sometimes it appears that whole sections of the
United Nations Charter that set out the functions of the
Security Council are completely missing from the
memory of the Russian decision makers.

In order to provide an objective picture of events
and to dispel any doubts, I will resort only to the facts.
In line with our obligations to suppress and prevent
terrorist acts under anti-terrorist conventions and
resolution 1373 (2001), we launched and completed an
anti-terrorist and anti-criminal operation in Georgia's
Pankisi Gorge. The operation, which has been praised
by the State Department of the United States and by the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe,
would never have been possible without the decisive
assistance of the United States. We have already re-
established full control over the territory, and we are
able to report that there are no Chechen fighters,
terrorist suspects or mercenaries in the gorge. Forty-
one persons have been detained, and 2 boeviks were
killed during the operation.

We fulfilled our commitment. As the President of
Georgia stated, the Pankisi problem no longer exists.
We have already invited international monitors to
verify the situation and we are ready to receive
representatives and groups from any interested State,
international body or organization to ensure maximum
transparency with regard to the situation there. The
first step in that direction has been taken: members of
the North Atlantic Treaty Organization Parliamentary
Assembly recently visited the Pankisi Gorge and
verified that it has been cleared of armed personnel and
that the Government has full control of the region.

We are still being accused of being in breach of
our obligations. Allegedly, we released Chechen
boeviks who were later engaged by Russian forces 150
kilometres from the Pankisi Gorge, deep within
Russian territory. The blame placed on Georgia for
those events is ill-founded. As everyone is aware, the
Georgians alone are unable to guard the Georgian-
Russian border. Thus, it would have been reasonable to
ask Russia's border guards and military personnel how
it happened that the armed group moved unhindered
through Russian territory towards Chechnya and were
intercepted only at the last moment. Georgia's Pankisi
Gorge is a strip of territory populated by peaceful
civilians. We would never allow the use of excessive
force in Pankisi, as happened in Chechnya; that would
mean the spillover of the conflict into Georgia. That is
why it took time. But I must reiterate that there are no
armed personnel in the Gorge.

Let me be clear: Chechens are Russian citizens,
and the conflict in Chechnya is Russia's internal affair.
Indeed, President Shevardnadze was the first to support
Russia's territorial integrity. In 1999, the deliberate
push of Chechen fighters into Georgia was regarded as
a Russian military success. Now that those Russian
citizens have returned to their country, we are blamed
for violating international norms. Where is the logic in
that? What has changed since then? Should terrorism
be defined differently on every occasion according to
Russia's liking? Does that define Russia's modus
operandi as a member of the global anti-terrorism
coalition?

I must cite one more example of such
extraordinary logic: the case of one of the most
notorious international terrorists, Igor Giorgadze -
wanted for several assassination attempts against
President Shevardnadze - which could serve as a
litmus test with regard to Russia's commitments. Igor
Giorgadze has been taking refuge in Russia for seven
years. Numerous requests by both Georgia and Interpol
for his extradition have been turned down on the
grounds that the Russian law enforcement agencies
were unable to establish his whereabouts. The appeal
made in 1999 by the United States Congress to the
Russian Federation authorities to extradite the terrorist
to Georgia was also in vain. Meanwhile, Giorgadze is
frequently seen in the company of members of the
Russian intelligence and security services and of high-
ranking military officers, and he has even become a
semi-permanent feature in the Russian media.
Giorgadze has been allowed to brazenly use Russian
television and print media outlets to actually call for
the overthrow of the democratically elected Georgian
Government. This repeated use of the Russian media
by a wanted international criminal and terrorist is
unprecedented in the post-Soviet world. Only two days
ago, he was again featured on Russian State television.
To what extent can one tolerate double standards on the
part of a country that is a permanent member of the
Security Council and whose rich history and culture
deserve only admiration?

Here, I must draw the Council's attention to the
most painful issue of Georgian-Russian relations: the
conflict in Abkhazia, Georgia. It is well known that
Abkhazia achieved de facto independence only by
virtue of the massive involvement and assistance
provided by the Russian military and special services.
What is the situation here? All the members of the
group of Friends of the Secretary-General on Georgia
are aware that the paper on the distribution of
constitutional competencies between Tbilisi and
Sokhumi - which the group studied for the past two
years and only recently agreed upon - has still not
been presented to the parties. In fact, the paper has
again been delayed and will not be presented at
tomorrow's meeting of the Group with the
representatives of the Abkhaz separatist leadership. We
cannot fail to express our disappointment in that
regard.

With regard to the Kodory valley part of
Abkhazia, we can state with full authority that Georgia
has shouldered all its responsibilities. Moreover, we
call for full transparency in the valley, and we invite all
interested parties - both international organizations
and others - to visit the valley for the purpose of
verification. Here, I must emphasize that the most
dangerous developments are taking place right now in
the valley area, where, according to our confirmed
reports, the Abkhaz military, together with Russian
mercenaries, are concentrating in preparation for an
attack against the Georgian-controlled territory. The
recent failure of the United Nations Observer Mission
in Georgia to conduct patrols in the valley, which was
the result of obstruction by the Russian peacekeeping
forces and by the Abkhaz side, only confirms our worst
fear that any minute now - and I do not exaggerate -
those forces may unleash a provocation that could lead
to the resumption of hostilities.

I wish I could stop here. But I must voice our
concern at the fact that almost 80 per cent of the
population of separatist Abkhazia has been granted
Russian Federation citizenship. That development has
finally brought about a unique situation in which
Russia has multiple capacities: facilitator of the peace
process and sole peacekeeper in the separatist region,
the overwhelming majority of whose population
consists of Russian citizens. On whose side is the
conflict, then? Surely, it is no longer on the Abkhaz
side.

The Abkhazia and Tskhinvali - the former South
Ossetia - regions of Georgia have degenerated into
areas of lawlessness where grave violations of human
rights and acts of terrorism have become the normal
pattern of life. The Abkhaz separatist regime has
tarnished itself by carrying out the ethnic cleansing of
the predominantly Georgian population, expelling
300,000 people from their places of permanent
residence. The data that we possess clearly indicate
that the situation in those regions has created a
breeding ground for terrorism, drug trafficking and
illicit arms smuggling.

Yet we cherish the hope that goodwill will
prevail. We are proud of the heritage of friendly
relations between the Georgian and the Russian
peoples. We still strive towards a friendship with the
great Russian people that is rooted in equality and
mutual respect, not in intimidation and continuous
deceit. Therefore, we appeal to the Russian authorities
to desist from carrying out terrorism against a friendly
neighbouring State, against its people and against its
President. Any military action against my country will
have catastrophic repercussions on the entire Caucasus
region. We appeal to the Security Council not to allow
that to happen.

