We would like to begin by thanking His Excellency President Ramaphosa for presiding over this important meeting, and his country for its stewardship of the presidency of the Security Council for the month of December. We also thank the Secretary-General and the Chairperson of the African Union Commission for their briefings today. The Dominican Republic recognizes the strong collaboration between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations, in particular with the African Union (AU), during a difficult time for all countries owing to the devastating social and economic effects of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. Cooperation between the United Nations and the African Union is more pertinent than ever, with its primary objective of effectively addressing conflicts on the continent and seeking systematic and coherent solutions. In that regard, we welcome the joint meeting held between the Security Council and the African Union Peace and Security Council in September, aimed at enhancing collaboration between the two Councils in the pursuit of peace and security in Africa. Both Councils should redouble their efforts to adopt standardized procedures, especially in the area of conflict prevention, including joint field visits where appropriate. In that context, we reiterate that conflict prevention requires greater investment. Focusing on the root causes is essential in order to prevent conflicts from occurring in the first place and defuse crisis situations before they escalate. The United Nations and the African Union have worked together successfully on conflict resolution, concrete examples of which include the peacebuilding processes in Cete d'Ivoire and Guinea-Bissau and peacekeeping through the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel and the Multinational Joint Task Force. Despite those advances, issues such as violent extremism, terrorism, corruption and impunity continue to be major factors for instability in some countries in the region. Combined with the adverse effects of climate change, they constitute a real threat to political stability. In addition, the increase in the number of internally displaced persons and refugees helps to aggravate the humanitarian situation in a large number of countries in the region. Similarly, there continue to be difficulties in meeting the demands of populations, ranging from effective arms control to combating impunity and establishing a common regional security framework to create the conditions for integration and development across the entire continent. We therefore believe that cooperation between the United Nations and the African Union should be stepped up in order to provide assistance in all relevant areas through the exchange of experiences and good practices. Strengthening coordination while investing in capacity-building should be at the heart of our efforts. Using the comparative advantages of each organization could lead to better use of resources, less overlap and greater efficiency. In order to achieve that, strong cooperation is essential. While the United Nations should continue to strengthen its support for the AU-United Nations Framework for the Implementation of Agenda 2063 and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, as well as the Silencing the Guns initiative, its collaboration should also extend to greater coordination with Africa's regional cooperation mechanisms. The meaningful participation of women and young people is critical in that regard and requires joint action. Finally, Africa faces multiple challenges that have been exacerbated by the social and economic impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. Strengthening multilateral cooperation is the answer. Let us unite our efforts to achieve a peaceful and stable Africa.
