Mr. Natalegawa (Indonesia): Let me join others
in thanking Mr. Lamberto Zannier, Special

Representative of the Secretary-General, for his
briefing on the current situation in Kosovo and in
congratulating him on his new assignment. I wish also
to thank the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2008/458). We welcome Mr. Vuk Jeremie, Minister
for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Serbia, and
thank him for his statement. We also welcome
Mr. Hyseni to the Council.

While taking into account the evolving situation
on the ground in Kosovo, which surrounds the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) and affects its role in the interest of
maintaining peace and stability, we urge all parties on
the ground to continue to work with and cooperate with
UNMIK. Resolution 1244 (1999) continues to provide
the necessary political and legal framework for
UNMIK to discharge its mandate, including the
implementation of standards. UNMIK's operational
reconfiguration, we understand, is status-neutral. We
acknowledge the importance of the Secretary-General's
instruction to UNMIK to cooperate with the European
Union (EU) in the area of the rule of law, under the
overall authority of the United Nations and consistent
with the operational framework established under
resolution 1244 (1999). For that reason, we want to put
emphasis on the establishment of clear links between
the EU and the International Civilian Office (ICO) and
the Office of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General.

It is our understanding that resolution 1244
(1999) still governs Kosovo; thus, any entity working
within the region has to fall with the framework of that
resolution. In that regard, the Council needs to keep
abreast of the activities of the EU and the ICO on the
ground, through regular briefings by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and through
written reports by the Secretary-General.

We support the continuation of dialogue with
Belgrade on issues of mutual concern which we regard
as being of crucial importance for the efforts of the
United Nations in Kosovo. We are pleased that the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General stands
ready to engage in discussion and negotiation in an
open, transparent and balanced manner in order to
develop a dialogue with Belgrade with a view to
implementing practical arrangements. However, it is
also particularly crucial that such a dialogue also
encompass the wider issue of status. Without that, it is
difficult to foresee the possibility of the normalization
of the situation on the ground.

It has been Indonesia's position that dialogue and
negotiation remain essential to resolving the question
of final status, and we welcome the steadfast position
taken by Serbia in committing itself to resolving the
final status of Kosovo through political and legal
means only. By the same token, we call on the parties
in Kosovo to embrace the position taken by Serbia.
That position will ensure that the region reaps the
peace dividend. We believe that the Secretary-General
should continue to engage all parties in the region in
order to find a mutually acceptable solution in line
with resolution 1244 (1999).

We wish to conclude by thanking the Secretary-
General and his team for their tireless efforts and all
the personnel of UNMIK for their continued dedication
in pursuit of peace and security, in line with resolution
1244 (1999).

