Mr. Berger (Germany): I would like to thank the
Presidents and Prosecutors of the International
Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) for
introducing their reports (S/2011/3l6 and S/2011/317).
I also take this opportunity to thank Judge Byron for
his work as President of the ICTR and to congratulate
Judge Khalida Rachid Khan on her election as
President of the ICTR.

Germany welcomes the arrest of Ratko Mladie on
26 May and his swift transfer to the Tribunal in The
Hague. We congratulate the Serbian authorities on this
success. It will bring Serbia closer to its European
perspective. It also demonstrates once more that there
will be no impunity for the perpetrators of the gravest
crimes against international humanitarian law.

By adopting resolution 1966 (2010), the Council
decided, on 22 December 2010, to establish the
Residual Mechanism for the ICTY and the ICTR to
finish their remaining tasks. This was a landmark
decision that, on the one hand, will allow the
prosecution of the remaining fugitives and, on the other
hand, encourage both Tribunals to ensure the
completion of their work by 2014, while respecting due
process standards. That will fulfil the mandate of the
Tribunals and also safeguard their legacy. The
jurisprudence and the successful completion of the
work of the Tribunals have and will set a precedent for
international criminal justice.

The Council also requested both Tribunals to take
all possible measures to complete all their remaining
work no later than 31 December 2014, and decided that
the Mechanism would continue their jurisdiction,
rights, obligations and essential functions. It is in that
context that we urge the Tribunals to take all measures
to complete their work expeditiously. Germany is
aware of the fact that additional resources might be
needed following the arrest of Mladic'. We are also
aware of the ongoing problems of staff retention for
both Tribunals. Germany is ready to find pragmatic
solutions to those challenges so that the Tribunals will
be able to keep their timetables and so that no further
delays occur.

The arrest of the remaining 10 fugitives,
including Goran Hadzic' and Felicien Kabuga, remains
a top priority for the completion of the Tribunals'
work. Cooperation from States is crucial to that
endeavour. We call on all States to fully cooperate with
the Tribunals.

With regard to the ICTY, we call on Serbia to
intensify its efforts to arrest the last remaining fugitive,
Goran Hadzie. We also welcome President Tadie's
commitment to the continuing search for him. That
should remain a key priority for the Serbian
Government. We will continue to follow those efforts
closely.

Turning to the ICTR, Germany welcomes the
recent arrest of Bernard Munyagishari in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo but nevertheless
regrets that nine fugitives are still at large. We call on
all States in the region, especially Zimbabwe, to render
all the necessary assistance to the ICTR in order to
locate and arrest those fugitives. The arrest of Fe'licien
Kabuga should be a priority also for the Kenyan
authorities.

