Mr. Valle (Brazil): Given the tragic background of
inter-ethnic violence in the recent history of the Balkans,
the international community has not been unjustified in
reacting with disquiet to the recent events in the Kosovo
region of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. I do not wish
to minimize the complex threats to internal security posed
by clandestine terrorist activity, but the fact remains that the
repressive measures taken against civilians in Kosovo by
Serbian police forces have provoked indignation throughout
the world.

Significantly, the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of the
countries of South-Eastern Europe, meeting in Sofia on
March 10, circulated a declaration expressing their

"concern with the deteriorating situation in Kosovo
and with the grave consequences of an inter-ethnic
conflict and its possible spillover in the region."

In addition to the Sofia meeting, there have been a
number of important encounters and declarations dealing
with these new episodes of Balkan instability, which have
all seemed to converge towards the need for the
international community to avoid the mistakes of the past
by articulating a quick and effective response which will
help stem the violence and create the conditions for
improved dialogue and cooperation between the parties.

We have welcomed the many joint and individual
diplomatic initiatives taken by those who would be
potentially most affected by a new wave of unrest in the
Balkans, and have remained attentive to their strategies for
dealing with what might best be described as a very
delicate situation. It is from this intense diplomatic
mobilization that a decision has seemed to emerge in favour
of an arms embargo, as a measure capable of putting
pressure on the parties to negotiate while placing a limit on
the presence of weapons in an already heavily armed and
volatile region.

As a matter of principle, it has seemed important for
my delegation to emphasize the need for clear provisions
regarding the conditions for lifting the sanctions in the draft
before us. We note that paragraph 16 addresses this
problem in a manner which we consider satisfactory,
although we would stress the need for the Secretary-
General to base the assessments he is to make under that
paragraph on as wide a spectrum of information as
possible, and in close cooperation with the region, the
countries which meet as the Contact Group - France,
Germany, Italy, the Russian Federation, the United
Kingdom and the United States - the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe and the European
Union.

While concurring with the imposition of an embargo,
we cannot fail to stress that these measures will not yield
the desired effect if they are not accompanied by parallel
diplomatic efforts aimed at the promotion of a safer and
more harmonious environment for those who have been
most directly affected by the unrest.
Furthermore, if there is movement in a positive
direction, the Security Council should acknowledge it
promptly. The declaration by the President of the
Republic of Serbia on the political process in Kosovo has
been received by the international community as an
auspicious sign. In the face of further and sustained
progress, there should be no reason to doubt that the
Security Council will respond accordingly. At this stage
we should confine ourselves to the measures contained in
the draft, in the expectation that developments will render
needless the consideration of additional restrictions.

Although the Charter enshrines the principle of non-
intervention in matters which are essentially within the
domestic jurisdiction of any State, we are all aware that
this principle does not prejudice the application of
enforcement measures under Chapter VII, in accordance
with Article 2, paragraph 7. Perhaps it is not by
coincidence that the proliferation of decisions authorized
by the Security Council under Chapter VII since the end
of the cold war, and of sanctions in particular, has come
about in a world where conflict has often seemed to break
out within the internal borders of States. Some observers
have gone as far as to suggest that there may have been
a tendency to frame emergencies under Chapter VII in
recent years so as to circumvent the non-intervention
principle. If this were indeed the case, we would be
witnessing a distortion in the waiver provided by Article
2, paragraph 7, which would seem to be incompatible
with its original purpose.

On the other hand, as stated in General Assembly
resolution 51/242, annex II, on the question of sanctions

 

imposed by the United Nations, sanctions are a matter of
the utmost seriousness and concern. That text, adopted by
consensus, declares in paragraph 1 that

"Sanctions should be resorted to only with the utmost
caution, when other peaceful options provided by the
Charter are inadequate."

By concluding my statement with these references to
an important General Assembly resolution and to the United
Nations Charter, I wish to emphasize my delegation's
commitment to the pacific settlement of disputes within a
context of respect for sovereignty and territorial integrity.
We believe that by exercising caution in resorting to
coercive measures we are actually strengthening the
authority of the Security Council in the face of serious and
otherwise intractable situations.

