Mr. Diallo (Senegal): I have the honour to deliver
the following statement on behalf of the Group of
African States. I congratulate India on its assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council for the month
of November, and I thank it for including this very
important aspect of Security Council reform in the
Council's programme of work.

We welcome the concept note (S/2012/853, annex)
circulated in a letter by the Permanent Representatives
of India and Portugal, and take note of the efforts made
by the Council towards improving its working methods.

We welcome the improvement we have seen in the
working methods of the Council, including the use of
informal interactive dialogue to interact informally
with individual Member States, the Peacebuilding
Council and subregional and regional organizations,
and to address such issues as penholders, chairs of
subsidiary bodies, preparation of the annual report and
monthly assessments, all of which are, in our view,
modest but meaningful steps towards improving the
work of the Council.

We urge the Council to continue building on the
important advances made through further improvement
of the working methods. However, we remain convinced
that cosmetic changes to the working methods do not
respond to the fundamental need for reform of the
Security Council and an expansion of its membership
in both the permanent and non-permanent categories.
Those values continue to be inconsistent with having a
Security Council in which Africa remains unrepresented
in the permanent category and underrepresented in the
non-permanent category.

Our participation in today's debate is firmly rooted
in our commitment to the African Common Position
articulated in the Ezulwini Consensus and the Sirte
Declaration on the reform of the United Nations. We
remain convinced of the need for a comprehensive
reform of the United Nations system that takes into
account the principles, objectives and ideals of the
United Nations Charter for a fairer world based on
universalism, equity and regional balance. We are
convinced that the reform of the United Nations should
be all-inclusive, encompassing all components of the
United Nations system, including the General Assembly
and the Security Council. In that regard, we continue to
call for a comprehensive reform of the Council as called
for in General Assembly decision 62/557, and in that
regard we continue to stress the interconnectedness of
the five clusters of Security Council reform.

On the question of the two clusters related to the
relationship between the Security Council and the
General Assembly and to the working methods, we have
at all times maintained a principled position on those two
issues, underscoring the need to uphold the primacy of
and full respect for the provisions of the United Nations
Charter appertaining to the powers and functions of the
General Assembly. The two clusters are inextricably
interrelated, and there has been some emerging
convergence among general views as the key elements
have not given rise to any controversy - except among
the permanent five, which maintain that reforming the
working methods of the Council is a responsibility of
the Council itself. Notwithstanding that point, several
concrete proposals on how to improve the transparency
of and access to the Council, including adopting set
rules of procedure, remain actively on the table.

Our proposal on those two clusters, transmitted
in our letter dated 23 December 2009, is reflected in
the compilation text. In that regard, we maintain that
the two organs must work closely together within their
respective spheres in seeking solutions to the plethora
of challenges confronting the international community,
with the Security Council focusing on issues mandated
under the Charter in order to foster harmonious
interaction, ensure a cooperative relationship between
the Council and the General Assembly without
encroaching on each other's mandates spelled out in
the Charter, and find the correct constitutional balance
between them.

The relationship between the Council and the
General Assembly remains a matter of paramount
importance on the reform agenda, in fulfilment of
what was agreed in the World Summit Outcome
(resolution 60/1), which called for the full and speedy
implementation of measures adopted by the General
Assembly with a view to strengthening its role and
authority and the leadership role of the President of
the General Assembly. It also called for strengthening
the relationship between the General Assembly and the
other principal organs to ensure better coordination on
current issues requiring coordinated United Nations
action pursuant to their respective mandates.

It is essential to maintain a balance among the
principal organs of the United Nations, and particularly
between the Security Council and the General
Assembly, in order to enable the Organization to meet
existing and emerging threats and challenges. The
role of the Assembly, including on issues relating to
international peace and security, as provided for in
the relevant Articles of the Charter, must not only be
enhanced but strengthened in order to enable it play its
proper role as the most representative, democratic and
deliberative policymaking body of the United Nations.

Regarding the Council's working methods, Africa
favours a more accessible, democratic, representative,
accountable, transparent and effective Security Council
that is and must be able to respond in a timely manner.

We commend the improved cooperation between
the African Union Peace and Security Council and the
Security Council, which has resulted in more structured
and effective annual consultations between them. We
will continue to urge enhanced coordination between
them, as well as more predictable and sustained
sources of funding for African Union peacekeeping
operations and to support post-conflict reconstruction
and development in Africa. Sustained cooperation
between the Council and regional organizations will
unquestionably be immensely helpful in addressing
current and future challenges to international peace
and security. Despite such positive developments, we
remain concerned about inconsistency in the Council's
decisions, as demonstrated by its growing selectivity
in addressing issues of grave concern to regional
organizations.

In conclusion, improving the working methods of
the Security Council is an integral part of the reform
process. The fact that the Council itself has been
seized of the review of its working methods and that
its rules of procedure have been provisional for the past
63 years or so is a clear indication of how imperative
it is to address this issue. We note that the main thrust
of all the various groups' and stakeholders' positions
is that we should ensure that the Security Council is
transparent, inclusive, accountable and accessible in its
working methods.

In that regard, the Council continues to fall short of
the African Common Position on its working methods,
and we stress that more is expected of those methods
in terms of inclusivity, transparency and accountability
if the Council's decisions are to be seen as legitimate
and effective. We should therefore like to reiterate
Africa's readiness to work with all interested groups
and Member States to achieve decisive progress in this
area, but in the context of a comprehensive package
within the reform process, not in isolation from other
clusters, since the issue of improving working methods
is also very much tied to that of the expansion of the
Council.

