Mr. Kodama (Japan): At the outset, I would like to
express my appreciation for the work of Mr. Jose Filipe
Moraes Cabral, Permanent Representative of Portugal,
for his contribution in his capacity as Chair of the
Informal Working Group on Documentation and Other
Procedural Questions.

Under Article 25 of the Charter, we, the Member
States, accept decisions of the Security Council as
binding on all Member States. That does not mean,
however, that the legitimacy of decisions of the
Security Council can be taken for granted. Let us
recall that our leaders at the World Summit in 2005
agreed and adopted by consensus General Assembly
resolution 60/1, in which the Assembly recommended
that the Security Council enhance its accountability
to the membership and increase the transparency of
its work. In a nutshell, we should remind ourselves of
the fundamental structure provided for in the Charter,
in which improving the Council's working methods
is indispensable for enhancing the legitimacy of the
decisions of the Security Council.

From that perspective, Japan attaches great
importance to the efforts to improve the Council's
working methods. In its capacity as then Chair of the
Working Group, Japan took the initiative of compiling
the presidential note on the subject in 2006 (S/2006/507),
updating it in 2010 (S/2010/507). As duly reflected in
the revised note of 2010, significant progress has been
made so far. For example, the Council engages more
frequently than before in interactions with non-Council
members through various formats. Informal interactive
dialogues have been utilized this year in relation to
some regional and thematic issues. Furthermore,
the presidency briefs non-Council members on the
Council's programme of work at the beginning of each
month, and that information is made readily available
on the Council website. We would like to commend
Portugal's chairmanship of the Informal Working
Group this year, under which the Group realized a
notable achievement by issuing a presidential note in
June (S/2012/402) concerning conference resources
and interactivity. Since then, we understand that the
Working Group has been actively addressing other
issues, such as penholders in the drafting of resolutions
and chairpersons of subsidiary organs, inter alia. We
look forward to seeing the results of such discussions
adopted by the Council in due course so that the wider
membership can better understand how the Council
intends to conduct its work in the future.

While acknowledging the progress made to date,
it is essential to further enhance the transparency of
the Council by steadily implementing note 507. The
efforts and cooperation ofthe Council, especially of the
permanent members, are indispensable for achieving
real progress in that area. Of course, periodic review of
the progress is necessary.

We all recall that last May, the group of five small
nations presented a draft resolution that had a direct
bearing on the improvement of the working methods of
the Security Council, but in the end the group withdrew
the draft resolution. The Permanent Representative of
Switzerland, Mr. Paul Seger, stated,

"We have listened carefully to the statements of the
permanent members of the Security Council that
they are ready to consider our recommendations
seriously, and we hold them to their promise,
with the Assembly as witness... If we see some
real substantive progress starting within the next
months, our efforts will not have been in vain"
(A/66/PV108, p. 6).

Now we would like to know whether any tangible
progress has been made since then.

The participation of many non-Council members
in today's meeting further testifies to the fact that the
working methods remain a critical issue. Recognizing
the importance of that issue, we look forward to seeing
the Council - including its newly elected members
for the next term - achieve greater progress in that
regard. I would like to reiterate Japan's determination
to continue to actively contribute to promoting
improvement in the working methods.

