Mr. Djani (Indonesia): I would first like to
thank Kuwait for its excellent presidency of the
Security Council in June and I look forward to Peru's
presidency. I would also like to welcome our dear
colleague Ambassador Nicolas de Riviere to this family
of the Security Council. I also thank the briefers for
their insightful and informative briefings. I would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for putting this very
important issue forward. Like you, we are Chair of the
Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989
(2011) concerning Al-Qaida and associated individuals
and entities, the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1988 (2011) and Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), which all deal with
the issue of terrorists, and the linkage is significant.
I am quite sure that no State Member of the United
Nations is immune to criminality or terrorist activities.
Discussing this important issue is therefore timely.

As we have heard from many members of the
Council today, the security challenges posed by the
linkages between transnational organized crime and
terrorism have continued to evolve and can affect
peace, security and stability whenever and wherever
such activities occur. While transnational organized
crime and terrorism often have a different motivation
and are subject to different legal regimes, they should
not be approached in isolation from each other. It is
also crucial to note that transnational organized crime
has unique characteristics in each region of the world.
Therefore, the discussion and measures to address
the issue should be tailored to the specificity of the
region and in accordance with the applicable rules of
international law. In our region, for instance, linkages
often lie in the financing part - recruitment, cross-
border activities, smuggling, inter alia. Against this
backdrop, I wish to make three pertinent points.

First, strengthening legal measures should be one of
the priorities. Strong national legislation to criminalize
terrorism and transnational organized crime is an
effective tool for closing possible legal gaps that may be
misused by both terrorist and organized-crime groups.
It is important to close possible gaps by harmonizing
existing national legal frameworks with such relevant
international legal instruments as the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime,
the International Convention for the Suppression of the
Financing of Terrorism and relevant resolutions of the
Security Council.

Secondly, international cooperation is central. The
reality today is that we live in a world where there is
no region or country that remains untouched by the
effects and negative influence of cross-border crime or
terrorism, hence the need to work together. This requires
increased information- and intelligence-sharing,
expanding awareness of and capacity-building in law
enforcement and coordinated actions among competent
agencies, including monitoring and enforcement. We
need to explore options to enable efficient and effective
coordination among local, regional and international
efforts. We need to intensify our collective efforts with
all existing mechanisms, in particular those within the
United Nations framework. In this regard, Indonesia
is pleased to host the visit of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate on 15 to 17 July 2019.

That leads to my third and last point, which
concerns the importance of sharing of experience
and best practices. We need to learn from each
other's experiences and best practices, identify what
works and what does not work, and analyse current
developments on these linkages. I would like to thank
Tamara Makarenko for her briefing, which contributed
to an enhanced understanding of the linkages vis-a-vis
recruitment, hybrid organizations and the sophistication
of linkages.

I do believe that we are now looking at the new breed
of what I call a terro-criminal, which I think is another
issue that we need to go into more deeply. We therefore
need to facilitate collaboration so as to strengthen our
shared capacity to address these challenges. We need
to advance regional dialogue and cooperation. An
example of such cooperation from our region is the Bali
Process mechanism, which with its 49 members and
with Indonesia and Australia as Chairs, has discussed
the consequences of people-smuggling, trafficking in
persons and related transnational crimes. In dealing
with people-smuggling and trafficking in persons,
we adhere to the principle of burden-sharing, where
responsibilities are shared among the countries of
origin, transit and destination of irregular migrants. We
believe that this approach can be replicated elsewhere
to counter the continuously evolving challenges.
Neighbours can learn from each other.

The issue of linkages between international
terrorism and organized crime have been on the agenda
of the Security Council for many years. Now what
must be done is to accept reality and the fact that both
represent scourges to humankind. We must take action
in a holistic, comprehensive, multidisciplinary manner
and with absolute conviction and commitment. We
need to clean up our act without delay because terro-
criminals work in real time.

In conclusion, since I am the last speaker at the
horseshoe-table to take the floor, I would be remiss if
I did not thank our comrade, Ambassador Ma Zhaoxu,
for his friendship, collaboration and service to the
promotion of multilateralism and United Nations values
in an honourable and distinguished manner. We have an
old saying in Indonesia: "Old Ambassador-Permanent
Representatives never die; they just fade away and are
promoted to higher places". We wish him all the best
and bon voyage.

