Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in French): I should like to thank all the briefers for
their contributions. I should also like to join other
speakers in expressing our condolences to the family of
Ms. Almaas Elman, who worked tirelessly for peace in
Somalia. In her honour, we must redouble our efforts to
make her dream a reality.

I should like to make a few remarks on the political
situation, security issues and the humanitarian situation
in Somalia. First of all, Belgium welcomes the progress
made by Somalia and the political will of its President.
We are all aware of the challenges. To overcome them,
political decisions require consultation between the
Federal Government of Somalia and the federal member
states. It is therefore imperative that relations between
these levels of power be relaunched.

The time has also come for progress in preparing
for the universal suffrage elections in 2020 and
2021. It is good news that Parliament has resumed its
work. We call on the federal authorities to redouble
their efforts to respect the established timetable by
reaching an agreement with the federal member
states that incorporates key electoral issues and by
promptly adopting the electoral law with the necessary
amendments. The law on political parties also requires
amendment. The National Electoral Security Task
Force must get to work quickly.

Secondly, in the security sector, the transition plan
must remain the common thread of the Government's
actions. The operations of the Somali National Army are
an encouraging Sign of the way national capacities are
developing. These capacities must now help establish
the conditions for the handover of responsibilities from
the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM).
In this regard, I would recall the support provided to
Somalia by the European Union, including through
its financing of AMISOM. and the missions of the
European Union Training Mission for Somalia, the
European Union capacity-building mission and the
counter-maritime-piracy force, Operation Atalanta.

The report of the Secretary-General (S/2019/884)
confirms once again that Al-Shabaab is the leading
threat to security and stability in Somalia. Terrorist
attacks have continued bring mourning to Somalia,
and we strongly condemn them. Indeed, the Security
Council has just renewed the sanctions regime that
aims precisely to degrade Al-Shabaab's capacities.

Finally, in the humanitarian areas, the fate of the
Somali population remains at the heart of our concerns.
The figures we have heard illustrate the extent to which
Somalia is vulnerable to climate shocks, manifesting as
ever-more frequent droughts. Against this challenging
backdrop, which is exacerbated by the insecurity and
violence generated by Al-Shabaab and Da'esh as well
as by other tensions and conflicts between communities
or between federal member states, it is the most
vulnerable - women and children - whom we have a
particular duty to protect.

