Mr. Chaouachi (Tunisia) (spoke in French): At
the outset, I wish to thank you, Sir, and your country,
friendly Colombia, for having organized this open
debate of the Security Council on the question of small
arms. We also thank you for the very useful working
document prepared by your delegation on this issue.

We also thank the Secretary-General for his
important statement today.

Through its prerogatives in the maintenance of
international peace and security, the Security Council is
directly concerned with the question of small arms and
light weapons. Clearly, this is the case each time the
Council acts on a situation of conflict or tension in the
context of peacekeeping operations.

Today's meeting is particularly timely given the
seriousness of the problem and the conflict situations
prevailing in several regions of the world. The
convening of this meeting, two years after that held by
the Security Council on 24 September 1999, reflects
the international community's growing awareness of
this serious threat. Indeed, the problem of the
proliferation of small arms and light weapons, which
are easily transported and inexpensive, has for several
years been at the heart of the concerns of States
Members of the United Nations, several other
international, regional and subregional organizations
and the international community as a whole.

The United Nations Conference on the Illicit
Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its
Aspects, recently held in New York from 9 to 20 July,
falls within that context. The adoption at the
Conference of an important document, its Programme
of Action, represents the first stage of a lengthy
process that we must support in order to end the threat
of small arms. In order to be fully achieved, this
Programme requires us all to work together.

New hotbeds of tension emerge and are
sometimes transformed into armed conflicts that are
internal or fought between neighbouring countries,
with tragic consequences for innocent civilian
populations. The circulation and illicit trade in small
arms and light weapons contributes to increasing the
intensity and length of these conflicts and to
exacerbating them. Coordinated and urgent action on
the part of the international community is therefore
necessary in order to assume closer control and better
management of this highly complex problem.

In this respect, we believe that the most effective
way to prevent a conflict is to address the root causes
that may unleash it, such as poverty and economic,
ethnic and cultural problems, among others. Hence, the
international community must act on all levels:
subregional, regional and international; in all areas:
disarmament, the maintenance of peace and post-
conflict peace-building; and, simultaneously, at the
level of prevention and combating the underlying
causes of conflicts.

In conflict situations, the problem should be
considered as a whole within the context of the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of ex-
combatants. The Security Council has had a certain
interest in this aspect, in particular in the course of
recent years. The Council should maintain that interest
by dedicating itself to further honing its action in this
sphere in order to improve its efficiency. In that
context, we feel that the elements suggested in
sectionE of the working paper prepared by the
presidency are worthy of the Council's interest and
consideration.

My delegation believes that the accumulation of
weapons cannot in and of itself be described as
excessive or destabilizing, since large quantities of
arms under the strict and effective control of a stable
State do not necessarily lead to violence. Contrarily, a
small quantity of arms can be a factor of destabilization
in other situations. This requires us to take into account
the specific nature of the situation in each country as
we search for a solution.

In that context, my delegation would stress the
importance to developing countries particularly
affected by these problems of strengthening their
national legislation in the area of small arms and light
weapons. They must, however, be further assisted by
the international community in the implementation of
programmes of national control, disarmament and
rehabilitation. The producing countries, for their part,
must ban the export of such weapons to conflict zones.

The Bamako Declaration, adopted at the
ministerial meeting held in Mali from 30 November to
1 December 2000, reflects the commitment and
determination of Africa to combat the illicit
proliferation, circulation and trade in small arms and
light weapons. This Declaration defines the vision of
the African countries on how to eradicate this scourge
through the adoption of a realistic approach and
applicable measures that, if supported by the
international community, cannot fail to help eradicate
the trade in small arms.

Thus, our efforts must focus on the goal of
strengthening regional and international cooperation,
for this problem transcends the capacities of certain
countries. That does not absolve those countries of
their responsibilities. On the contrary, the initial efforts
to find solutions appropriate to their specific realities
must be made by Governments themselves. In this
respect, we welcome the various initiatives undertaken
at the national and regional levels, in particular those
carried out on the continental level in Africa. In this
framework, it is important to emphasize the initiatives
undertaken by the United Nations Development
Programme, the United Nations Children's Fund, the
World Bank and the Economic and Social Council,
through the Commission on Crime Prevention and
Criminal Justice, and to perfect programmes to address
this scourge.

It goes without saying that any action designed to
cope with the problems of small arms and light
weapons must take into account the legitimate right of
self-defence of States, in accordance with Article 51 of
the Charter, and the right of peoples to self-
determination.

In supporting the efforts being made at the
international level to solve the problem of small arms,
we believe that this should in no way distract our
attention from the essential issue of nuclear
disarmament, which is far from resolved and remains
the greatest threat to all mankind. Attention to the issue
of small arms and light weapons must be accompanied
by the necessary efforts of the international community
to achieve nuclear disarmament.

