First of all, I would like to join previous speakers in thanking the Niger for organizing today's open debate. I would also like to thank the Secretary-General of the International Organization of la Francophonie (OIF), Ms. Louise Mushikiwabo, for her briefing on cooperation between the OIF and the United Nations. I would also like to thank the Assistant Secretary-General Bintou Keita, and the representatives of civil society who are virtually with us today, for their ideas and recommendations. This is a very special year for the OIF, as it marks the fiftieth anniversary of its creation. Over these 50 years, the OIF has grown considerably - from 21 to 88 full member States, associate members and observers - and with a presence on the five continents. The OIF represents more than a third of the members of the General Assembly and promotes multilateral cooperation in areas of common interest. As an observer country of the OIF, Ukraine fully shares in the organization's activities aimed at meeting global challenges, ensuring sustainable development and defending democracy and human rights in the world. We fully support the OIF's activities to promote the French language, to ensure peace, democracy and solidarity and to face the coronavirus disease pandemic, which is at the heart of the concerns of millions of people around the world today. We encourage the OIF to continue to strive to protect human rights and ensure gender equality, empower women, girls and young people, and support their more active participation in the life of society, because they are our future. We are convinced that the activities of la Francophonie through diplomatic channels and direct contacts, such as what we are doing today, contribute significantly to the promotion of the principles of democracy and the strengthening of the rule of law, peace and security. Cooperation between the United Nations and regional organizations is highly indispensable in promoting the purposes and principles of the United Nations. The OIF's action has also become an important framework for multilateral cooperation. According to its Charter, the OIF's objectives include assisting in the prevention, management and resolution of conflicts, and the promotion of the rule of law and human rights. These objectives are the Security Council's principal areas of interest. Since the founding of the United Nations, the fundamental norms of its Charter have been violated on numerous occasions. Any infringement of the provisions of the United Nations Charter, any arbitrary or selective interpretation of its Articles, any measure likely to impair the Organization's authority or incite a breach of the letter and spirit of the principles enshrined in the Charter clearly constitutes a threat to international peace, with grave consequences for the well-being of all peoples. The events currently provoked by the Russian occupation of the Crimea and the city of Sevastopol and certain regions of Donbas clearly demonstrate that the violation of the fundamental principles of international law by a permanent member of the Security Council constitutes a serious threat to peace and security in Europe and the world as a whole. I would like to draw the Council's attention to the fact that the Russian-Ukrainian war has been described by the United Nations as one of the deadliest in Europe since the Second World War. I would like to take this opportunity to thank the OIF, and in particular its Secretary-General, for supporting the territorial integrity, sovereignty and political independence of Ukraine, upholding a policy of condemning Russia's attempt to annex the Autonomous Republic of Crimea and the city of Sevastopol and of refusing to recognize the legitimacy of this annexation. This OIF policy is fully in line with the purposes and principles set forth in the Charter of the United Nations and its own Charter. The OIF Secretary-General should know that we in Ukraine appreciate it very much. The success of OIF action in favour of peace and democracy depends above all on our solidarity. On behalf of my country, I would like to confirm Ukraine's irrevocable commitment to promoting these values and assure the OIF Secretary- General that she can always count on Ukraine in this regard. In conclusion, I would like to emphasize that the role of regional organizations depends on close cooperation with the United Nations - a cooperation that will make the world more peaceful and sustainable, more resistant to conflicts and pandemics, and more open and united.
