Mr. Manongi (United Republic of Tanzania): It
is with special regard that we welcome Ambassador
Mwakawago to the Security Council and thank him for
having presented the report of the Secretary-General.
We are particularly pleased to receive the most recent
report of the United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone
(UNAMSIL) given its significance, namely that it
shows the progress that Sierra Leone and its people
have made, with the help of the United Nations and the
international community, especially that of your
country, Mr. President - the United Kingdom.

It is obvious that UNAMSIL's initial setbacks
brought into question the Viability of United Nations
peacekeeping efforts worldwide. The Secretary-
General's most recent report is clear testimony that
Sierra Leone is one of the United Nations success
stories in peacekeeping operations. We note with
satisfaction that the country is now peaceful and that
the political situation has remained calm and stable
since the last report, in September.

We are especially pleased to note that the overall
security situation in the country remains stable and that
the national security agencies have continued to
operate satisfactorily since UNAMSIL transferred
security responsibility to them last year.

We are glad that the drawdown of UNAMSIL in
all categories is on schedule and that administrative
preparations for the establishment of the United
Nations Integrated Office in Sierra Leone (UNIOSIL)
are in the final stages.
It is true that the country is still faced with
potential threats to its security and political stability,
including unemployment among young people,
corruption, weaknesses in the judicial system, and
resource constraints. These are problems that Sierra
Leone must now seek to confront with renewed
dedication. Despite the fact that Sierra Leone still faces
those challenges, it is important to appreciate how far
it has come.

Socio-economic recovery remains one of the
country's crucial prerequisites for its political and
security stability. We are therefore pleased to note that
the Government is continuing to implement measures
to reassert its control over the country's natural
resources. It is important that the international
community continue to render its assistance to Sierra
Leone so as to help the country face up to its future
political, security and socio-economic challenges.

Finally, we join the Secretary-General in
expressing our gratitude to Ambassador Mwakawago
and to all the staff of UNAMSIL for the successes
achieved by the Mission.

