The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received a letter from the representatives of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia, Egypt, Malaysia and
Turkey in which they request to be invited to participate in
the discussion of the item on the Council's agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives to
participate in the discussion without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and
rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Sacirbey
(Bosnia and Herzegovina) took a place at the Council
table; Mr. Nobilo (Croatia), Mr. Awaad (Egypt), Mr.
Thanarajasingam (Malaysia) and Mr. Guven (Turkey)
took the places reserved for them at the side of the
Council Chamber.

The President: The Security Council will now begin
its consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached in its
prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the report
of the Secretary-General pursuant to Security Council
resolutions 982 (1995) and 987 (1995), document
S/ 1995/444, and a letter dated 9 June 1995 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President of the Security
Council, documents 5/1995/470 and Addendum 1.

Members of the Council also have before them
document S/ 1995/478, which contains the text of a draft
resolution submitted by the Czech Republic, France,
Germany, Honduras, Netherlands, Oman and the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland. I should
like to draw the attention of the members of the Council
to the following revision to be made to the text of the
draft resolution contained in document S/ 1995/478 in its
provisional form. The following should be added at the
end of paragraph 10:

", the modalities of financing to be determined
later".

Paragraph 10 will then read:

"Decides accordingly to authorize an increase
in UNPF/UNPROFOR personnel, acting under the
present mandate and on the terms set out in the
above-mentioned letter, by up to 12,500 additional
troops, the modalities of financing to be determined
later;".

I should like to draw the attention of the members of
the Council to the following other documents:
S/ 1995/477, identical letters dated 12 June 1995 from the
Charge d'Affaires ad interim of the Permanent Mission of
Morocco to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General and to the President of the Security
Council; S/ 1995/480, letter dated 12 June 1995 from the
Permanent Representative of Kazakstan to the United
Nations addressed to the Secretary-General; and
S/l995/483, letter dated 14 June l995 from the Charge
d'Affaires ad interim of the Permanent Mission of Bosnia
and Herzegovina to the United Nations addressed to the
President of the Security Council, transmitting the text of
a letter of the same date from the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Bosnia and Herzegovina addressed to the
President of the Security Council.

The first speaker is the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Bosnia and Herzegovina, His Excellency Mr.
Muhamed Sacirbey, whom I welcome and whom I invite
to make his statement.


