Mrs. Rodriguez Camejo (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish): Cuba aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the representative of Venezuela on behalf
of the Non-Aligned Movement.

Our country reiterates its unwavering willingness
to combat terrorism and expresses its categorical
rejection and condemnation of all terrorist acts, methods
and practices in all their forms and manifestations,
irrespective of motivations, including State-sponsored
terrorism. Cuba, in compliance with the 18 international
conventions pertaining to terrorism to which it is a State
party, has carried out relevant legal measures, such as
law 93 on acts of terrorism. The Cuban people bear the
scars of terrorist acts organized, financed and executed
from abroad which have resulted in a toll of 3,478 dead
and 2,099 disabled.

The Cuban Government has never allowed, nor will
it ever allow, the use of its national territory to carry
out, plan, support, conceal or finance acts of terrorism
targeting any other State, without exception. Our
country supports the adoption of a general convention on
terrorism and favours the convening of an international
conference, under the auspices of the United Nations,
that would allow us to reach a multilaterally agreed
response to terrorism. We reject and condemn the
double standards and selectivity in the treatment of
this issue. Combatting terrorism cannot be used as a
pretext for interference, interventionism, aggression or
violations of international and human rights law.

We call for an end to the financing, equipping,
training of, supplying of arms and support of any kind
to terrorist groups in all their forms. In the light of
the militarization of cyberspace and the proliferation
of cybercrime and cyberterrorism, it is increasingly
urgent for States to ensure that information and
communication technology, the Internet, television,
radio and other parts of their critical infrastructure are
not used by terrorist groups.

As a result of growing interconnectivity, critical
information infrastructure is now exposed to an
increasing and more varied number of threats and
weaknesses, which pose new security challenges. The
use by State and non-State actors of new information
and communication technologies for purposes
incompatible with international peace and security is
a serious problem, which requires efforts by all States.
The undercover and illegal use by individuals,
organizations and States of the information systems
of other nations in order to attack third countries has
the potential to trigger serious conflicts. The only way
to prevent and address these threats is through joint
cooperation among all States to ensure cybersecurity
and to protect critical infrastructure by supporting
national efforts aimed at strengthening human capacity,
creating more learning and employment opportunities,
and improving public services and the quality of life
of the population. We must achieve a legally binding
international instrument, within the United Nations
system, that regulates the use of information and
communications technology and ensures that it is
only used in accordance with international law and in
particular with the Charter of the United Nations.

