Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): We voted in
favour of resolution 2440 (2018) and we thank the
United States, as penholder, for the facilitation of the
resolution. The fact that the resolution could not count
on the unanimous support of the Council should not, in
our opinion, distract us from what we believe is truly
important, namely, the relaunching of the political
process. That is something that - having listened to
my colleagues who have already spoken - I believe
all of us on the Council strongly support, because the
relaunching of the political process is in the interests of
the people, the parties involved and the wider region.

Our common ambition must therefore be to arrive
at a just, lasting and mutually acceptable political
solution that will provide for the self-determination
of the people of Western Sahara in the context of
arrangements that are consistent with the principles and
purposes of the Charter of the United Nations. In that
regard, we reiterate our full support and appreciation
for the efforts of the Personal Envoy of the Secretary-
General for Western Sahara and former President of
Germany, Mr. Horst Kohler.
Significant steps have been taken since the last
renewal of the mandate of the United Nations Mission
for the Referendum in Western Sahara (MINURSO)
in April. In that regard, we welcome the Personal
Envoy's initiative to host a round table in Geneva in
December. We commend Morocco, the Frente Popular
para la Liberacion de Saguia el-Hamra y de Rio de
Oro, Algeria and Mauritania for their positive and
prompt responses. We stress the importance of their
continued constructive engagement with the Personal
Envoy with the aim of resuming direct negotiations in
good faith and without preconditions. We must now
capitalize on the existing momentum to relaunch the
political process, for which the continued engagement
of the Council is indispensable. We also recognize the
importance of the work of MINURSO in maintaining
stability on the ground and creating the conditions for
political progress to take place. We express our full
support for the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Western Sahara, Mr. Colin Stewart, and for
the women and men serving in MINURSO under very
challenging conditions.

