Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank the representative of the Secretary-
General and Head of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo, Mr. Zahir Tanin,
and his team for their work and objective assessment of
the situation in Kosovo. The Mission continues to play
an important role in the province. We also acknowledge
Mr. Tanin's personal efforts. We also welcome the
First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Serbia, Mr. Ivica Daeic', to today's meeting.
We agree with the Minister as he expressed serious
concerns about the situation in the province. We also
support the determination of Serbia's leaders to resolve
all issues through civilized dialogue. We listened very
carefully to Ms. Citaku's statement.

According to our assessment, the situation in
Kosovo is not only not stabilizing; on the contrary, it is
deteriorating. Negative factors continue to accumulate.
The situation requires constructive diplomatic efforts
and strict international control, primarily through the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK), in particular since we understand
that the European Union Rule of Law Mission in
Kosovo (EULEX) has plans to leave the province.

No progress has been made to date in the
investigation into the murder of a well-known Kosovo-
Serb politician, Oliver Ivanovie. Much time has elapsed
since 16 January, the date on which the crime was
committed. However, thus far we have heard no credible
information about the results of the investigation.
We are therefore left with the impression that the
authorities in Pristina, after they tried and failed to put
the blame on Serbia, decided to simply forget about the
investigation. But the truth must be determined as soon
as possible, and the Security Council must be apprised
of it.

In addition to that tragedy, on 26 March there
was another egregious incident in Kosovo and
Metohija - the brutal, humiliating and violent arrest
of the Director of the Serbian Government's Kosovo
office, Mr. Marko Durie. As a result of that staged
and cruel provocative act, scores of people were
beaten. That kind of unprovoked violence on the part
of the Pristina's special forces calls into question the
already fragile peace in the province. Bloodshed was
prevented only because the Serbs behaved responsibly.
Such lawlessness against Serbs in Kosovo illustrates a
deplorable situation with respect to law enforcement
and human rights. It is drastically different from the
rosy, but virtual, picture painted by those advocating
the independence of the province. In that regard, we
are puzzled about the blatant permissiveness on the
part of the international presence - the Kosovo Force
(KFOR) and the EULEX. They stood idly by, observed
from the sidelines and refused to act to ensure to public
order and safety.

We believe that that kind of intimidation
against Serbs in Kosovo and the suppression of their
determination to protect their legitimate interests is
very dangerous and can lead to the resurgence of armed
clashes in Kosovo. It could also destabilize the Balkans
as a whole. The line chosen by Pristina serves only to
inflame the situation and undermines the long-lasting
efforts of the international community in the area of
post-conflict settlement. We would like to address
and call upon those with influence over Pristina to put
pressure on those they support to de-escalate tensions.

Regrettably, we are witnessing exactly the opposite.
Pristina believes it can act with impunity, with full
permission to do so. Contrary to resolution 1244
(1999), it continues to prepare for the transformation
of Kosovo's current security forces into a full-fledged
army. It is being assisted by certain NATO contingents
in KFOR, which by doing so go beyong the United
Nations mandate. The closed Bondsteel base is being
used for those purposes in particular. Kosovo-Albanian
fighters are being prepared for active combat. We
would like to warn the Council that, in the interest of
peace and security in the Balkans, it is important to
halt the creation of a force that hot-headed entities will
employ against Serbs in the province.

We also have questions about the complete closure
ofthe Bondsteel base. Its establishment was based on the
importance of ensuring an international presence under
the United Nations mandate, within the framework of
resolution 1244 (1999). The international community
has the right to information about the kind of military
activity conducted at the base. Who is being trained
there and for what purposes? What kind of exercises
are being conducted? We believe it would be logical to

include that kind of information in the quarterly reports
about the United Nations Mission in Kosovo.

We are also concerned about the information
we received some time ago from NATO with regard
to the fact that the KFOR command will halt contact
with Russian representatives. What is being hidden
from a permanent member of the Security Council by
an international entity that is in Kosovo on the basis
of the United Nations mandate? We hope that reason
will prevail and that that erroneous decision will
be reviewed.

The Russian position on Kosovo remains unchanged
and is based on the international legal frameworks that
are reflected in resolution 1244 (1999), which remains
the cornerstone of the Kosovo settlement. We are of the
view that the Kosovo issue can be settled only through
politics, on the basis of negotiations between parties in
the spirit of goodwill and international law. Regrettably,
we must acknowledge that dialogue between Belgrade
and Pristina has been discredited.

More than five years have elapsed since the Brussels
Agreement was signed but the key obligation contained
therein, which was reached under the auspices of the
European Union, namely, the establishment of the
community of Serb-majority municipalities in Kosovo,
has still not been implemented. We bear witness to laxity
on the part of the European Union, the international
mediator. It did not compel the Kosovo Albanians
to implement agreements achieved under their own
auspices. As a result, Pristina openly undermines the
implementation of its own commitments and refuses to
abandon its own unrealistic demands. In contrast, we
witness a constructive approach by Belgrade to tackle
the Kosovo issue in the statement made by President
Vucie citing his readiness to reach a compromise.
At the same time, we are therefore concerned about
increased pressure on the Serbian leadership and
attempts to compel Belgrade to acknowledge the de
facto independence of Kosovo. We hope that a Brussels
dialogue will be spared such pressure and ultimatums.
Failing that, we cannot expect to have success in the
form of a long-term solution acceptable to all.

We believe it is untimely to push forward and link
the so-called full and comprehensive normalization
of relations between Belgrade and Pristina to an
artificial timeline. First, we must fully implement
earlier agreements, without which the already weak
trust among the members of the negotiating process
could disappear altogether. The implementation of
the agreement concerning the establishment of the
community of Serb-majority municipalities is at the
centre of our attention.

We must note that no practical moves have been
made with regard to Specialist Chambers in The
Hague to investigate crimes committed by the Kosovo
Liberation Army. Eight years have passed since the
publication of the Marty report on the issue. That is
another serious problem. We believe that it is not
constructive to delay the start of the work of that body
under artificial pretexts. We expect that the Specialist
Chambers will start its work in the very near future and
be as transparent as possible. All those who committed
terrible crimes, including trafficking in human organs,
must face justice and be justly punished, regardless of
their current positions. To replace Mr. Shwendiman,
who retired on 7 May, American lawyer, Mr. Smith, has
been appointed to the position of Prosecutor. We hope
that he will quickly assume his post and finally produce
tangible results in the form of specific indictments.

The rate of refugees and internally displaced persons
to the region is also unsatisfactory. As indicated in the
report ofthe Secretary-General (S/2018/407), only three
people returned to Kosovo during the reporting period.
For some that truth is unpleasant, but it is still the truth.

Attacks on homes and property of Kosovo Serbs,
arson, physical trespass and acts ofvandalism continue.
We must pay particular attention to ensuring proper
protection for the Orthodox sites in Kosovo - churches
and monasteries. We must also put an end to the
destructive practice of denigrating sensibilities and
humiliating Serbs and other minorities in Kosovo.
We should not turn a blind eye to acute issues and
problems, such as in the area of counter-terrorism and
combating corruption and crime, but we must actually
address them. The situation with regard to those issues
is very worrisome.

In the current situation, the international
community, with the leading role played by the United
Nations and represented by the Security Council
and the United Nations Mission in Kosovo, should
pay more attention to the situation in Kosovo and
actively contribute to the maintenance stability and
security in the region. Given those and other current
circumstances, we consider the calls to reduce the
frequency of reviewing the situation in Kosovo at
the Secutiry Council to be completely inappropriate.
Allow me to remind those who ignore this fact that
UNMIK was created by the Security Council, and only
the Security Council has the authority to make relevant
decisions in that regard. Unilateral statements are null
and void.

In conclusion, I would like to point out that the
Western Balkans, with its rich history and potential,
can, and should, become a region for cooperation and
interaction, rather than tension and hostility. However,
in order to achieve that, we must abandon the logic of
confrontation and the practice of presenting countries
in the region with the false choice of: Are you with or
against us? As in many other parts of the world, what
we need there is collective work on the basis of mutual
respect. The Russian Federation stands ready for that.

