Mr. Ahmed (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank the delegation of Poland
for organizing this debate to discuss the challenges to
peace and security in the Middle East. We thank you,
Madam President, for inviting the countries of the
region to participate in this important discussion.

The Middle East is suffering from many challenges
that for decades have prevented the peoples of the
region from meeting their aspirations and enjoying
peace, security and stability. Those challenges include
political, security and economic ones. The region has
also faced many wars since the middle of last century,
and that has depleted the capacity and resources of its
peoples.

The Arab-Israeli conflict, and at its core the
Palestinian question, is one of the oldest and most
notable crises in the region during last century. It has
been passed down through generations within the region
while preventing our peoples from enjoying security
and stability. That is happening despite the inherent
right of the Palestinian people to self-determination
and the establishment of their independent State
within the 1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its
capital, in accordance with the relevant resolutions of
international legitimacy.

Double standards and the absence of justice
continue to plague the Palestinian question to this day.
That is one of the reasons underlying the absence of
security and stability in the region, while at the same
time the Palestinian people continue to suffer from the
exploitation of others so that they can achieve their
narrow self-interests. They also help to spread extremist
thinking and terrorism. Despite numerous initiatives
and rounds of negotiations to achieve comprehensive
and lasting peace in the region, we believe that it is
necessary to relaunch the Arab Peace Initiative and
its principles to achieve peace in the region, thereby
guaranteeing the rights of all parties and addressing
their concerns for a better future for generations
to come.

The Middle East has also suffered for years from
challenges that threaten the concept of a national
State and the intentions of some to promote sectarian,
racial and religious divisions to destroy the principle
of citizenship and national sovereignty. They have
also attempted to demolish other firm principles of
international law and the Charter of the United Nations,
which has increased the suffering of the people in the
region and led to the spread of armed conflicts, terrorist
groups and illegal armed groups.

In that regard, I will mention several characteristics
and root causes that are common to conflicts in the
region despite the specific nature of every individual
case. We are committed to meeting the legitimate
aspirations of the peoples of those countries to achieve
decent lives, peace, security and social justice. We
reaffirm, however, that the only way to achieve that
goal is to reform and maintain a national State, not by
destroying it and creating chaos under any pretence.

Achieving security and stability in the Middle
East will be achieved only by sincerely adhering to the
principles of the Charter of the United Nations, ensuring
the security in the region, ending foreign interference,
respecting the principles of good-neighbourliness,
non-interference in the internal affairs of countries and
halting the provocation of sectarian tensions that could
lead to further tensions and unrest at a time when the
region is in desperate need of security and stability.

As we address the goal of achieving security and
stability in the region, I can only reiterate the need
to take a serious stand against countries that provide
financing to terrorism and training and safe haven to
terrorists, and that use terrorists as a tool to interfere
in the countries of the region in order to achieve their
own ends, which only increases the suffering of, and
bloodshed among, innocent victims. That threatens
security and runs counter to international conventions.
It is difficult to imagine success of international efforts
to combat terrorism without standing firmly against
those countries.

One of the pillars of achieving stability in the
region is the implementation of the 1995 resolution
on the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone
in the Middle East, adopted by the 1995 Review and
Extension Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, and resolutions
487 (1981) and 687 (1991). In that regard, we look
forward to the support of all parties concerned for the
holding ofthe conference to establish a Middle East free
of weapons of mass destruction, which will meet for the
first session in November under the chairmanship of the
Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan. We urge the countries
invited to the conference to participate in good faith so
that we can begin to create a stable security system that
addresses the security concerns of all the countries in
the Middle East, leading to common security for all.

Egypt looks forward to making serious efforts to
enable the Security Council and the United Nations
to carry out their responsibilities in order to achieve
lasting security and peace in the Middle East and reach
political settlements of dangerous chronic and emerging
crises that plague our region, in accordance with
resolutions of international legitimacy, the principles
of the Charter and international law. Egypt reaffirms
its full readiness to spare no effort to achieve that goal.

