Mr. Al Bayati (Iraq): Allow me at the outset to
congratulate you on your assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council for this month. I would like
also to extend my appreciation to the delegation of the
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya for its successful presidency
of the Council last month. I wish further to welcome
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Children and Armed Conflict, Ms. Coomaraswamy, and
to thank her for her constructive efforts to fulfil her
mandate in following the situation of children and
armed conflict. I also would like to thank Ms. Ann
Veneman, Executive Director of the United Nations
Children's Fund, for her briefing.

My delegation took note of the report of the
Secretary-General on children and armed conflict
(S/2007/757) and would like to make the following
comments on the situation concerning Iraq. The Iraqi
children went through tremendously difficult
circumstances during the last three decades due to the
irresponsible policies of Saddam's regime. They were
among the first victims of chemical weapons used by
the former dictator in Halabja and other areas and
cities of Iraq. They were victims of forced
displacement and mass executions committed by the
previous regime as a systematic policy to punish the
Iraqi people. The innocent children of Iraq paid a
heavy price because of international sanctions and the
embargo imposed on Iraq due to the invasion of
Kuwait by the dictatorship. The Iraqi regime used the
suffering of the Iraqi people, including children, during
13 years of sanctions to pressure the international
community and to avoid fulfilling its international
obligation.

After the fall of the dictatorship in 2003, Iraqi
children were the victims of terrorist acts and sectarian
violence in Iraq. Many of them were subjected to daily
threats to their lives because of the suicide bombings
and the roadside bombs which led to the killing and
maiming of several children. We agree with most of the
facts outlined in the report concerning the suffering of
the Iraqi children due to the terrorist acts of Al-Qaida
and other armed groups who target civilians, foremost
amongst which are children.

The most recent terrorist act, which took place on
1 February 2008, was a dual bombing in the pet market
in Baghdad. It led to casualties and loss of life for
dozens of innocent children and women. This is another
example of the ruthlessness of this terrorist enemy.

The report has noted that there are indications of
children being recruited as combatants by non-State
armed groups, Al-Qaida and Al-Qaida-affiliated
groups. In this regard, we would like to refer to what
has recently been reported by the international media
regarding documentaries prepared by Al-Qaida which
show clearly the recruitment of children at the age
around 11 to carry out suicide operations, kidnappings,
armed robberies and the planting of explosive devices.
Despite the difficult circumstances, Iraq has witnessed
in 2007 positive progress in the situation of children,
due to the decrease in the number of terrorist
operations and the implementation of the Baghdad law
enforcement plan.

The Iraqi Government has been keen to take all
possible executive and legislative measures to

minimize the suffering of children, to provide them
with a decent life and to compensate them for the years
of deprivation and suffering they have gone through.
The Government has established an inter-ministerial
committee - the National Committee for Children -
to consider means of improving the situation of
children in Iraq. The Iraqi Government has also
completed the executive and legislative steps needed to
ratify the two Optional Protocols to the Convention on
the Rights of the Child of 1994: the Optional Protocol
on the Sale of Children, Child Prostitution and Child
Pornography and the Optional Protocol on the
Involvement of Children in Armed Conflict, both of
which entered into force in 2002.

The Iraqi Government is keen to start constructive
and positive cooperation with the United Nations to
improve the situation of children in Iraq and has
extended a formal invitation to Ms. Coomaraswamy, the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict, to visit Iraq and to
examine the situation of children and the efforts of the
Iraqi Government to alleviate their suffering. The Iraqi
authorities, through the Permanent Mission of Iraq in
New York, are conducting close consultations and
coordination with the Office of Ms. Coomaraswamy on
this important visit, planned for next month.

The Iraqi authorities have started to implement
their plan to train nursery staff and to include nurseries
in nutrition programmes. They have also opened nine
new nurseries, following approval by Ministry of
Health authorities. The Ministry of Labour and Social
Affairs has started a special programme for children
with mental disabilities. They have also computerized
the centres for those with physical disabilities, in
addition to starting advanced classes at those
institutions. The ministry has also introduced intensive
training courses for the teaching staff. The Ministry of
Labour and Social Affairs is focusing on families with
children and provides them with salaries, under the
social protection network. The number of beneficiary
families has reached 93,553. The number of visually
impaired children included in this programme has
reached 20,416, and a further 24,350 paralysed
children are included in the programme.
The authorities in Iraq are keen to organize
children's festivals, theatres, art exhibitions, photo
galleries and various other types of art events for
children. They have also organized several workshops,
symposiums and conferences focusing on violence
against children and the means to combat it. The date
13 July has been set as Iraqi Child Day, which is
celebrated officially by the Iraqi Government. A
governmental committee was recently established to
draft the Iraqi Child Law to be approved by the Iraqi
Government and subsequently by the Iraqi parliament.

The Iraqi Government has been keen to operate
with United Nations agencies, among them UNICEF, to
invest donor contributions, which amounted to
$40 million in 2007, in order to deliver critical health
care, safe water and sanitation, education and other
essential services to millions of children and their
families. These funds have enabled the Iraqi health
workers to conduct house-to-house immunization
campaigns protecting over 4 million children against
polio and more than 3 million against measles and
mumps, in close partnership with the World Health
Organization and UNICEF. As a result of these
campaigns, Iraq remains polio-free, and measles cases
are dramatically down, from 9,181 in 2004 to just 156
in 2007, as of November.

It is to be recognized that 4.7 million Iraqi
primary school children have benefited from the
investment in education, including the distribution of
critical school materials, the rebuilding and restoring
of schools, the addition of extra classrooms for
displaced children and the provision of accelerated
learning opportunities. A Government-supported
assessment of school attendance rates in 2007 is now
under way.

The Prime Minister of Iraq, His Excellency
Mr. Nuri al-Maliki, has called for a national enquiry
into the conditions of children in orphanages and is
urging the Iraqi Government to make possible a rapid
assessment of all the country's orphanages and juvenile
centres as soon as possible. An open monitoring system
for the assessment of children's institutions is a top
priority, as is improving the skills of care-givers and
accelerating community-based child care alternatives.

It is also important to highlight the major role of
the partnerships that have made these achievements
possible, most notably those with the European
Commission, Japan, Italy, Canada and other friendly
countries, in addition to other United Nations agencies
and non-governmental organizations.

The Government and the people of Iraq would
like on this important occasion to express their sincere
appreciation and gratitude to all countries, international

organizations and United Nations agencies, foremost
among them UNICEF and the World Health
Organization, for their continued tremendous efforts to
help Iraqi children. We hope for their continued
support to improve the situation of Iraqi children and
to put an end to their suffering.

Finally, I would like to express my appreciation
to the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Ms. Coomaraswamy, for her efforts in preparing the
report. We are looking forward to her visit to Iraq, and
we affirm the commitment of the Iraqi Government to
cooperate constructively with her to help the children
of Iraq.

