Mr. Mansour (Palestine): On behalf of the State of
Palestine, I wish to congratulate the Russian Federation
on its successful presidency of the Security Council in
the month of June and express appreciation to Sweden
for its able leadership of the Council's important agenda
for this month. We also thank Special Coordinator and
Personal Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Nikolay Mladenov, for his briefing and efforts.

This month, the United States of America and the
French Republic proudly celebrated the anniversaries
of their independence. The United States Declaration
of Independence states:
"We hold these truths to be self-evident, that all
men are created equal, that they are endowed by
their Creator with certain unalienable Rights,
that among these are Life, Liberty and the pursuit
of Happiness."

The French Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the
Citizen states that all men are born and remain free and
equal in rights. Those truths and rights are universal
and inalienable and must be recognized for every nation
in the world, with no exception. But during this same
month, Israel, the occupying Power, chose to continue
its oppression of the Palestinian people - children,
youth, women and men - further entrenching its illegal
and belligerent military occupation and committing
more crimes and human rights violations.

For seven decades, the Palestinian people have
borne witness to decisions made under the pretext of
security and religious edicts denigrating their rights
and national aspirations and dismissing international
law and global consensus. They continue to endure
colonization, forced displacement, arbitrary detention,
unlawful killing and injury on a daily basis, regardless
of what they do or do not do.

In the occupied besieged Gaza Strip, the
Palestinian people continue to endure an ever-
worsening humanitarian crisis and a rapid decline in
the socioeconomic situation as a devastating effect
of Israel's ongoing occupation, illegal and inhumane
blockade and repeated military aggressions. That dire
humanitarian situation has put explosive pressure on
the infrastructure in the Gaza Strip and caused loss
of livelihood for the entire population. Their coping
capacities have been severely depleted, as have the
hopes and dreams of an entire generation of young
people, who have been peacefully protesting the
unbearable conditions they have been facing.

However, Israel persists with its wilful killing
of Palestinian civilians and its disregard of human
life. It is therefore imperative that the international
community act urgently to prevent further assaults
against Palestinian civilians and cause Israel to lift its
more-than-a-decade-long blockade. It is also imperative
to mobilize international efforts to ensure sufficient
and sustainable funding for United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East,
given its vital role in Gaza and beyond.

In the West Bank, including East Jerusalem, our
people have had to endure the cruelty and violence of
the Israeli occupation, including its persistent policy
of forced displacement and transfer and demolition
of homes and destruction of livelihood, as Israel's
illegal settlement campaign persists unabated. Most
recently, Israel has advanced its plans to forcibly
transfer the Bedouin communities of Abu Nuwar and
Khan Al-Ahmar. The known purpose of such plans is
to facilitate the expansion of illegal Israeli settlements
in the area, in grave breach of international law and
numerous United Nations resolutions, including
resolution 2334 (2016).

When hundreds of thousands of Palestinians were
forced into exile in 1948, the first thing they built
beside their tents was schools, to preserve hope and
to arm future generations with knowledge. This year,
school opened early in Khan Al-Ahmar to prevent the
looming threat of demolition of yet another community
of refugees that faces the prospect of being forcibly
displaced yet again. One generation after another, our
people, despite their resilience and steadfastness, are
confronted with the same fate, and we have repeatedly
appealed to the international community to address this
critical matter. Regrettably, in the absence of concrete
international action, the occupying Power remains
undeterred, persisting unabated with its crimes in full
view of the world, without any fear of consequences.

Those violations are further additional evidence,
if any was needed, of the imperative of providing
international protection to the Palestinian civilian
population. We look forward to the Secretary-General's
report and his recommendations on ways and means
to provide international protection for the Palestinian
people, including through an international protection
mechanism, pursuant to General Assembly resolution
ES-10/20. We expect this report to be released on
13 August 2018.

Israel's occupation of our land is not the temporary
control exerted over a territory as a result of a conflict;
it is an effort orchestrated over decades to seize
Palestinian land in violation of two cardinal principles
of the Charter of the United Nations: the right of a
people - in this case, the Palestinian people - to self-
determination, and the inadmissibility ofthe acquisition
of land by force. It is not even a hidden plan; it is
articulated every day by Israeli leaders and openly
conducted in defiance of international law and United
Nations resolutions.
Israel, the occupying Power, has been enacting one
law after another to consolidate that regime instead of
dismantling it. We have just celebrated the centenary
of the birth of the universal symbol of freedom, South
African anti-apartheid leader and former President
of that country, Nelson Mandela. We honoured his
legacy and struggle against oppression and injustice,
and pledged that the struggle for freedom, equality,
dignity and justice continues. That is the time Israel
chose to adopt its Jewish nation-State law, which has
transformed a situation of de facto apartheid into a
situation of apartheid de jure - that is, by law.

That calls to memory the notion of "separate but
equal", which was the basis of racial segregation in
the United States of America, instituted in 1898 in
the infamous case, Plessy v. Ferguson. That was an
infamous, dark chapter in the history ofhumankind, and
as we witness it again, it will be "separate and unequal".
In that regard, I must say that the representative of the
State of Israel has another title added to his name: the
representative of Jim Crow Israel and its laws.

Israel's ultimate goal is not to achieve peace or a
two-State solution. Fourteen years ago, the International
Court of Justice considered that the construction of the
wall and its associated regime create a fait accompli on
the ground that could well become permanent, in which
case, and notwithstanding the formal characterization
of the wall by Israel, it would be tantamount to de
facto annexation.

Is there any doubt left that that is what Israel is
pursuing - annexation at the expense of our State and
of peace? In the words of a United States peace envoy,
Frank Lowenstein, instead of transferring power to
the Palestinian side, Israel has transferred it to Israeli
settlers. That is the very definition of colonialism.
Many countries represented here have experienced it.
Their solidarity with the Palestinian people stems from
their own history and struggle. The Israeli Government
is a Government of settlers, for settlers and by settlers.
Israeli officials would proudly recognize it as such.
Why can the rest of the world not acknowledge it and
act accordingly?

Some may think that the Palestinian tragedy is
not grave enough to deserve such attention, and they
illustrate their argument by examining each single
event in isolation from the others. My advice to them is
to look at the bigger picture. This is about the denial of
the rights of an entire nation and the mass displacement
and replacement of a people, coupled with a policy of
confinement for Palestinians and expansion for Jewish
Israeli settlers. Is such a policy not grave enough to
warrant international attention? We believe that it
is grave enough to merit long-overdue international
action. The only question that remains is when will
the world's patience, which has been tested repeatedly,
finally be exhausted, and will it be before it is too late
to salvage peace?

Some say that old ways no longer work. They state
that the path we took to achieve peace was flawed,
and therefore they want to bring plans that ignore the
terms of reference of the peace process and its declared
objectives. We agree that old ways no longer work,
but let us determine what else does not work. Interim
solutions do not work. Postponing the consideration of
core issues does not work. Ignoring international law
does not work. The lack of accountability for violations
does not work. The lack of a binding time frame does
not work. The absence of international guarantees does
not work.

What works is apeace plan centred on the established
international terms of reference for a peaceful solution,
in line with the relevant United Nations resolutions,
the Madrid principles, the Arab Peace Initiative and
the Quartet road map, advanced through a collective
process that secures international mobilization
and holds the parties accountable. The Palestinian
leadership pledges its commitment to peace, its
commitment to international law, its commitment to the
two-State solution and its commitment to non-violence.
We also reaffirm our readiness to cooperate with all
international and regional efforts to advance a just
peace, as called for by resolution 2334 (2016).

The reunification of our people, land and political
system is among our highest national priorities. We
will spare no effort to achieve unity. We reaffirm our
gratitude to Egypt for its efforts to achieve that aim,
and we hope that we will see progress on that front in
the coming days.

The Security Council has repeatedly affirmed, as a
general principle, that ending impunity is indispensable
to achieving peace. By contrast, we are living proof
of how accurate that statement is, especially when
the Council does not adopt the necessary measures to
ensure the implementation of its own resolutions.

Every single State has the power and the duty to help
advance peace by upholding its own responsibilities.
We call on all States to respect and ensure respect for
international law. We commend the Irish Parliament
on its decision to ban settlement products that come
from stolen Palestinian land and resources. Peace is not
for the parties alone to achieve, nor can the freedom
of the oppressed be subject to the good will of the
oppressor. Peace requires that each and every one of
us do our part. We want peace and look forward to a
collective process that can yield peace. We stand ready
to be held accountable for our words and actions on the
basis of international law. Can the other side commit to
the same?

