The President (spoke in Chinese): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of China.

The Counciljust adopted resolution 2285 (2016), on
extending the mandate of the United Nations Mission
for the Referendum in Western Sahara (MINURSO), in
which it decides to do so for one year and emphasizes
the urgent need for the Mission to return to full
functionality expeditiously. It also reflects the will and
resolve of the Security Council to push for a political
solution to the question of Western Sahara and maintain
MINURSO's mandate.

China supports the extension of MINURSO to
allow it to resume its full capacity to implement the
Council's resolution at the earliest. It is our hope that
the Mission will continue to play an important role in
the implementation of the Council's resolutions and in
stabilizing the situation in Western Sahara.

China has maintained a consistent position on the
question of Western Sahara. We will continue to uphold
a fair and objective position on the matter and support
the United Nations in its efforts to push for a political
solution to the question. We encourage both parties,
based on the relevant Council resolutions, to seek a fair,
long-lasting solution which is acceptable to both sides
through negotiations.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

There are no more names inscribed on the list
of speakers. Before adjourning the meeting, as this
is the last scheduled meeting of the Council for the
month of April, I would like to express the sincere
appreciation of the delegation of China to the members
of the Council, especially my colleagues the Permanent
Representatives, their respective staff and to the
secretariat of the Council for all the support they have
given to us.
It has been a busy month and one in which we have
reached consensus on several important issues within
our purview. We could not have done it alone and without
the hard work, support and positive contributions
of every delegation and the representatives of the
Secretariat, as well as all of the relevant conference
service officers. As we end our presidency, I know I
speak on behalf of the Council in wishing the Egyptian
delegation good luck in the month of May.

The meeting rose at 12.25 p.m.
