Mr. Omaish (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): The
Palestinian people has aspired for decades to enjoy the
same political, economic and social rights enjoyed by
the rest of the world, foremost among which is the
right to sovereignty over their own national territory,
freedom and dignity. They have a basic, universally
recognized right to an independent State, with East
Jerusalem as its capital, living side by side with Israel
within the borders of 4 June 1967.

Jordan warns against the outbreak of conflict, war
and anarchy due to Israeli intransigence in addressing
the Palestinian question. Israel continues to
procrastinate and to squander opportunities to establish
peace. It must return to a pragmatic, practical and
enlightened vision free from ideological paradoxes that
can only negatively impact the situation and have
adverse repercussions on international peace and
security. It takes courage to make difficult decisions.
Jordan therefore calls for a swift return to direct
negotiations towards a final solution to the Palestinian
question.

However, Jordan believes that negotiations will
be in vain so long as settlements continue to be built.
Israel must also define a clear and precise position vis-
a-vis the peace process. Jordan is deeply concerned
over Israel's ongoing violations in the occupied Arab
territories and its attempts to Judaize them, which will
have a negative impact on the holy places of East
Jerusalem. On the basis of our active role in the
maintenance of the holy Christian and Islamic places in
the occupied territories, we call for international
intervention to put an end to these violations and the
Judaization process. We also call for an end to the
ongoing suffering of Palestinian prisoners and
detainees languishing in Israeli prisons.

We welcome the recent signing of the Palestinian
national reconciliation agreement. It is a step in the
right direction on the path towards Palestinian
reunification, and will fulfil the hopes of the
Palestinian people for unified, responsible leadership
that can meet the aspirations of the Palestinian people
to establish their independent State. Jordan calls on the
international community to work towards the lifting of
the illegal embargo and blockade of the Gaza Strip. An
international community that insists on the enjoyment
of human rights, freedom and dignity cannot remain
silent about the collective punishment of an entire
nation.

