Mr. Syihab (Indonesia): At the outset, let me
extend our sincere thanks to both Under-Secretary-
General Mark Lowcock and Ms. Susannah Sirkin for
their very clear and comprehensive briefings.

In the north-west of Syria, as Under-Secretary-
General Lowcock has reported, the escalation is
ongoing. And sadly, more lives have been lost, more
people have been injured and there is a bigger wave of
displacement - not to mention the extensive damage
done to civilian infrastructure. As a result of hostilities
in the area since late April, more than 450 people
have been killed. That is indeed horrifying and must
stop immediately. We have said that time and again.
All parties need to seriously and strongly respect
international humanitarian law and prioritize the safety
and security of civilians. My delegation wishes to
highlight three pertinent points.

First, the suffering ofpeople in north-western Syria
must end. Indonesia once again appeals to all parties to
refrain from conducting provocative actions and, most
importantly, to cease the ongoing violence. Words in
the Chamber are not sufficient to describe the severity
of the impact of hostilities on civilians, in particular
women and children, who make up 76 per cent of the
total population of north-western Syria. Data from Save
the Children show that more children in the north-west
were killed in the past two weeks alone than in all of
2018. My delegation therefore reiterates its call on all
parties to stop all attacks and violence against civilians
and ensure that access to emergency humanitarian
assistance is fully granted.

Secondly, it is beyond frustrating, if not
unacceptable, to learn that although a hospital's
coordinates had been shared through the de-confliction
mechanism, it was still targeted. What should we do
when medical facilities are not even safe for people
on the ground? What should we do next? Medical
infrastructure must not be subjected to direct attacks
for military purposes. The destruction of civilian
infrastructure that is key to the survival of the people
adds to the suffering of already traumatized men,
women and children. While we consider that the existing
de-confliction has already been established with good
intentions, we see the merit in exploring the possibility
of improving the effectiveness of the mechanism.

Thirdly, my delegation also wishes to highlight the
humanitarian situation in the Al-Hol and Rukban camps
as priorities for the delivery of critical humanitarian
responses. Tension remains high in Al-Hol due to
uncertainty about the future of more than 70,000
people in the camp. Meanwhile in Rukban, access for
the delivery of humanitarian aid is still needed. While
approximately 17,000 people have left Rukban, the
situation remains dire for more than 24,000 people in
the camp.

At this crucial time, particularly within the context
of the ongoing escalation in north-western Syria,
Indonesia believes that unity in the Council is needed
now more than ever. We may have different views
on some issues. However, it is vital to be united in
protecting people's lives. At the same time, it is also
important not to politicize the issue and to genuinely
uphold dialogue and coordination among Council
members and relevant parties.

Let me end my remarks by paying tribute to all
humanitarian workers on the ground who courageously
risk their own lives to save others.

