I am honoured to speak on behalf of the 120 States members of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries (NAM). At the outset, we would like to congratulate the Dominican Republic on assuming the presidency of the Security Council. The Non-Aligned Movement seizes this opportunity to reaffirm its abiding solidarity with the Palestinian people, its unwavering support for their inalienable rights, including to self-determination, and its commitment to the alleviation of their plight until a just solution is achieved. The Movement also continues to appeal for and support all efforts to achieve a just, lasting and peaceful solution to the question of Palestine in line with international law, the Charter of the United Nations and relevant United Nations resolutions. Regrettably, the situation in the occupied Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem, continues to deteriorate and become more unstable, while the Security Council remains paralysed on the matter. That organ must uphold its Charter duties and act to ensure the implementation of its own resolutions. Those resolutions not only constitute the foundation of a peaceful solution to the conflict, they are also legally binding on all United Nations Member States. We are deeply concerned that the Council has for too long been unable to fulfil its mandate on this important question. At this critical moment, immediate action is required to hold Israel, the occupying Power, accountable for its violations. It is patently clear that the absence of justice, across decades in this case, only fosters greater impunity, further compounds the conflict and the human suffering it is causing and further destabilizes the situation on the ground, severely diminishing the prospects for peace. The situation in the occupied Palestinian territory, including the East Jerusalem, has been critical for years, but the human rights violations and crimes perpetrated by Israel, the occupying Power, amid the current global crisis caused by the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic are unprecedented. Israel is blatantly exploiting the state of emergency and lockdown to accelerate its illegal settlement policy, for instance through the continued demolition of Palestinian homes and properties, including water and sanitation infrastructure and humanitarian assistance, and through daily military raids and settler attacks on Palestinian civilians. Those illegal actions severely undermine the Palestinian efforts to combat the pandemic, particularly in the Gaza Strip, which is already facing dire humanitarian and socioeconomic conditions under the weight of Israel's 13-year illegal blockade. The Movement's member States deplore the ongoing Israeli intransigence and illegal policies and measures that greatly undermine the realization of a peaceful solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. NAM reiterates its call for an end to the illegal Israeli occupation and for the restoration of justice and rights to the Palestinian people, including their right to self-determination. Those are fundamental pillars for the achievement of a peaceful solution. The Non-Aligned Movement continues to believe that resolution 2334 (2016) provides the most viable path to peace, and we call for its full and effective implementation. The resolution sets forth the essential requirements and parameters for the achievement of the two-State solution along the pre-1967 borders in accordance with the long-standing terms of reference for peace endorsed by the international community and with the relevant United Nations resolutions, the Madrid principles, including the principle of land for peace, the Arab Peace Initiative and the Quartet road map. 39/99 40/99 Israel must be compelled to cease immediately and completely all illegal settlement activities in the occupied Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem; the demolition of Palestinian homes and properties and forced displacement of Palestinian civilians; all acts of violence, provocation and incitement against Palestinian civilians; and other human rights violations, many of which may amount to war crimes, including the massive collective punishment of 2 million Palestinians in the Gaza Strip. The illegal and inhumane blockade of Gaza must be completely lifted. As the occupying Power, Israel must fully comply with its duties and responsibilities under international law, including its legal obligations under the Fourth Geneva Convention, without exceptions. It must immediately cease all policies and measures aimed at altering the demography, character, identity and legal status of the occupied territories. The Non-Aligned Movement also demands once again that Israel abide by resolution 497 (1981) and withdraw fully from the occupied Syrian Golan to the borders of 4 June 1967, in implementation of resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973). Moreover, the Movement's member States urge Israel to cease its violation of Lebanon's territorial integrity and sovereignty, in accordance with the relevant United Nations resolutions, particularly Security Council resolution 1701 (2006). In the absence of a just solution, the Movement's member States reiterate their call for the continued provision of the necessary humanitarian and socioeconomic assistance to the Palestinian people, including Palestine refugees. The Movement expresses its deep appreciation for the invaluable work done by the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees and its provision of assistance, such as education, health care - including essential emergency assistance to help Palestine refugees confront the coronavirus disease pandemic - and vital relief and social services, to the Palestine refugees. We urge once again that the Agency be provided with sufficient predictable funding to enable it to continue its operations, in line with its General Assembly mandate, pending a just solution. In conclusion, the Non-Aligned Movement reaffirms its abiding solidarity with the Palestinian people, as well as its unwavering support for their just cause, and renews its commitment to further strengthening and coordinating the international efforts to achieve a just, lasting, comprehensive and peaceful solution to the question of Palestine in all its aspects, including the plight of the Palestine refugees, based on General Assembly resolution 194 (III). We express our sincere hopes that this year will witness tangible progress in the heroic quest of the Palestinian people to attain justice and fulfil their inalienable rights and legitimate national aspirations, including their right to self-determination, freedom and independence in their sovereign and independent State of Palestine, with East Jerusalem as its capital. That will most certainly open a new chapter for regional, as well as global, peace and stability - a goal strongly supported by our Movement.
