Mr. Li Baodong (China) (spoke in Chinese): This
year marks the fifteenth anniversary of the Dayton
Peace Agreement. The current situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina is generally calm. We welcome the
smooth holding of the general elections in Bosnia and
Herzegovina in October and the progress made in
security sector reform and the rule of law, as well as
the steady economic improvements.

We also note, however, that Bosnia and
Herzegovina continues to face complex situations and
difficulties on its path towards stability and
development. China respects the independence,
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Bosnia and
Herzegovina and all its ethnic communities in their
independent choice of paths to development. The
future of Bosnia and Herzegovina is in the hands of its
peoples. The international community should respect
their ownership and leadership.

We hope that all the ethnic communities of
Bosnia and Herzegovina will focus their attention on
the long-term interests of their State, effectively
implement the Dayton Peace Agreement, actively
pursue dialogue, enhance political trust, and promote
national reconciliation. We look forward to the timely
formation of the new Government of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, the completion of constitutional reform,
economic recovery, the establishment of the rule of law
and social development.

The maintenance of lasting peace and stability in
Bosnia and Herzegovina and the Balkans is in the
interests of all parties, and sustained dialogue and
cooperation are the fundamental means to that end. We
support the efforts of the international community to
facilitate high-level political dialogue among the
various actors in Bosnia and Herzegovina. We are
pleased to note that the High Representative for Bosnia
and Herzegovina, pursuant to his mandate under the
Dayton Peace Agreement, has pursued his contacts
with all political parties with a view to promoting unity
and cooperation among all the communities of that
country.

China welcomes the positive role played by the
European Union in the framework of the Dayton Peace
Agreement and supports the work of the Special
Representative and the European Union Force in
Bosnia and Herzegovina (EUFOR). We hope that
EUFOR will increase its support for the capacity-
building of the Bosnia and Herzegovina armed forces
so that the country will be able to assume
responsibility for maintaining its own State sovereignty,
security and stability as soon as possible.

We welcome the help provided by the
International Monetary Fund to Bosnia and
Herzegovina to help maintain the country's financial
and economic stability. China is ready to work together
with the international community in continuing to
provide Bosnia and Herzegovina with support to ensure
lasting peace, stability and development.

