Mr. Cherif (Chad) (spoke in French): Allow me to
thank the Chilean presidency of the Security Council
for convening this open debate on the situation in the
Middle East, including the Palestinian question. Let
me also thank Mr. Jens Anders Toyberg-Frandzen,
Assistant Secretary General ad interim for Political
Affairs, for his briefing.

In order, I will address the Palestinian question, the
situation in Syria and, lastly, the situation in Lebanon.

In a regional context that is deeply troubled and
destabilized by a number of conflicts and tensions, the
Palestinian question presents itself with even greater
drama, especially since the peace process is currently
deadlocked. Do we need to continue the pattern of
ongoing negotiations that produce no results, or do
we need to explore other ways and means to find
appropriate solutions to the crisis? The status quo has
become increasingly untenable, both for Palestinians
and for most of the international community. The
international community as a whole, particularly the
Security Council, needs to assume its responsibilities
in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations
in order to propose prospects for a viable peace, putting
an end to the conflict, enabling Palestinians to have an
independent sovereign State, with East Jerusalem as its
capital, and a just, appropriate settlement of the refugee
issue, based on the General Assembly resolution 194
(III), of December 1948.

The ongoing failure to settle the Israeli-Palestinian
question affects the credibility of the international
system and poses increasingly serious threats to
international peace and security. The Security
Council's rejection of the draft resolution (S/2014/9l6),
which in our consideration was reasonable, submitted
on 30 December by Jordan on behalf of the Group of
Arab States, included a deadline for the end of Israel's
occupation of the Palestinian territories. That rejection
should not undermine the initiative on which it was
based. The initiative was supported by a majority ofthe
international community and remains an alternative to
the current stalemate. It is henceforth crucial for the
Council to become even more involved, together with
other international partners, as it explores avenues
for solutions that could end the negotiation cycle that
merely allows the occupation to continue and maintains
the current situation. The Security Council needs to
become further involved to salvage the solution of
two States, living side by side, based on the relevant
Security Council resolutions, the Madrid principles,
notably the exchange of land for peace, the road map,
the previously established agreements between the
parties and the Arab Peace Initiative. The two-State
solution should not be challenged under any pretext,
for it is fully in keeping with the legitimate aspirations
of the Palestinian people and takes into account the
security concerns of Israel.

With respect to Syria, we are deeply concerned by
the increasingly violent actions that the conflict has
assumed and the ongoing suffering of the Syrian people
within and outside the country, especially during this
period when there is a serious cold wave and snow
enveloping the region, which has even led to several
deaths, including those of women and children. We call
on the international community to step up its efforts
to provide considerable assistance to humanitarian
agencies of the United Nations so that they can ease the
plight of the Syrian people who are subject to cold, the
horrors of war and difficulties in terms of the climate.
We believe that it is time to act to find a solution to
the Syrian crisis by focusing on a political solution.
From that perspective, we support the proposal of the
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General, Mr. Staffan
de Mistura, aimed at ending hostilities in Aleppo,
providing humanitarian assistance and opening a
brief hiatus that would make it possible to create the
conditions necessary for a political dialogue between
the belligerents. We encourage them to pursue this with
the stakeholders and countries of the region in order to
work out a consensus on a strategy aimed at ending the
cr1s1s.

Lebanon continues to deal with numerous
challenges and has been fully affected by humanitarian
and security fallout from the Syrian crisis. More than
1 million refugees have entered Lebanon, which largely
exceeds Lebanon's ability to host them. Lebanon has
shown exemplary generosity in that regard. We call on
the international community to work to help Lebanon
deal with the tremendous burden and to deal with the
collateral effects of the Syrian crisis. We urge the
Lebanese leaders to continue dialogue and to reach
the necessary compromises so that the election of the
country's President will take place without further
delay. Lebanese stakeholders need to deal with the
current situation and overcome their own difficulties
in order to avoid a constitutional vacuum that would
further weaken the country and worsen its security
situation.

Lastly, we firmly condemn the attack perpetrated
by Jabhat Al-Nusra north of Tripoli on 10 January,
which claimed several lives and caused many to be
wounded. We express our solidarity with Lebanon in
its fight against terrorist movements.

