Mr. Joyandet (France) (spoke in French): Before
turning to Cote d'Ivoire, I would like to share with the
Security Council France's outrage following the events
in Conakry, Guinea, where members of the military
fired on a peaceful crowd, killing and wounding many
dozens of people. The situation in that country is
especially worrisome.

With regard to the situation in C6te d'Ivoire, I
would first like to thank you, Madam President, for
having organized this ministerial-level meeting. I
should also like to thank the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Burkina Faso for his statement and his
decisive efforts alongside President Compaore to
facilitate the peace process in that country. The period
ahead will be decisive for the proper holding of
presidential elections - the date of which,
29 November 2009, was set by Ivorians themselves.

Both the people of Cote d'Ivoire and the entire
international community look forward to those
3

elections, as underscored in resolution 1880 (2009),
which was adopted on 30 July. The statement just read
out by the President, along with today's meeting itself,
provide us an opportunity to recall the importance that
all of us attach to the holding of the elections in the
most democratic and secure manner possible. This is
also an opportunity to assure Cote d'Ivoire of the
attention, support and mobilization of the entire
international community, and of France in particular, to
that end.

Progress has been made that gives rise to
optimism with regard to the desire of the parties in
Cote d'Ivoire to close the chapter on the crisis by
preparing for the holding of elections. I see at least
three reasons for that hope. First, registration
operations were concluded on 30 June, while the
identification process is under way.

Secondly, the period for the submission of
candidacies to the Independent Electoral Commission
began on 26 August. Many candidacies have already
been submitted. Following my visit on the ground, I
should like to confirm that there is indeed an
atmosphere of election campaigning in the country.

Lastly, statements by various political and
technical protagonists setting out their determination
and commitment to the elections should be
commended. I note that President Gbagbo indicated to
the General Assembly on 25 September that the
process has entered an irreversible phase.

The commitments of the various Ivorian actors
must now lead to new, decisive progress in the
electoral process on the ground within the timeline
identified. That will involve, first and foremost, the
publication of the provisional electoral list, which was
originally scheduled for 29 August but has already
been postponed twice, first until mid-September and
then to early October. The decrees of 25 August
provide for the possible publication of both the
provisional and the final electoral lists by 31 October
and 15 November, respectively.

The delay in the publication of the provisional list
would not be a problem in itself if the quality of the list
should enable us to save time at later stages. It is
worrisome, however, because it constitutes an
impediment to the electoral timeline and a risk factor
for the entire process. The electoral process must not
be slowed down, but move forward resolutely in full
respect for procedure. I therefore invite all technical
and political actors to spare no effort in publishing a
credible, high-quality electoral list as soon as possible
and, obviously, without shortcuts that might impute the
fairness of the elections. An electoral list accepted by
all is essential to the success of the elections.

Moreover, providing security for the elections is
critical to the successful conduct of a free, transparent
and democratic ballot. Although progress has been
made recently and the first deployment of mixed units
under integrated command has begun, it is important
that the Ivorian parties find concrete solutions and
make further progress on this issue by 29 November.
The presidential elections are indeed the first priority,
although we must not lost sight of the main long-term
objectives, which are the effective restoration of State
authority and the redeployment of the administration
throughout the territory of cote d'Ivoire.

Ivorians do not stand alone in their efforts.
They can rely on the support of the international
community - including, of course, of France - the
Secretariat and, in Abidjan, the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for cote d'Ivoire, Mr. Choi, to
whom we reiterate our gratitude and support. His role
in certifying the electoral process is critical to
guaranteeing the fairness of the elections. I recall that
the Security Council has provided for Mr. Choi's
explicit certification of the electoral list. The United
Nations Operation in Cote d'Ivoire, under his
leadership, is providing strengthened security and
logistical assistance to the Ivorian authorities as the
elections approach.

France also reiterates its support for the
facilitator, President Blaise Compaore of Burkina Faso,
whose role is essential to encouraging the Ivorian
parties to transcend existing obstacles. President
Compaore's recent visit to C6te d'Ivoire also
reaffirmed the links of friendship between the two
countries, which we welcome, and the broad
convergence of views regarding the need to advance in
the preparations for the elections. France, as always,
remains steadfast at Cote d'Ivoire's side during this
key period for the future of the country. The earliest
possible convening of incontestable elections is an
essential condition for overcoming the crisis and
restoring lasting peace and stability in the country and
throughout the subregion.

The logistical and technical obstacles are
numerous. That is no surprise, given the many years of
09-53141
crisis. However, those obstacles will be overcome only
through the political resolve of the Ivorian parties
themselves. The United Nations is firmly committed to
Cote d'Ivoire, but the Security Council cannot
indefinitely support the process to end the crisis unless
elections are held and the more than 8,000 military and
civilian staff are maintained. The presidential election
of 2009 will thus be a genuine test of credibility in the
eyes of the Security Council and of the international
09-53141
community as a whole. I stress in that regard that Cote
d'Ivoire has the capacity to meet these challenges and
to turn a very painful page in its history.

