Mr. Leon Gonzalez (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
Cuba aligns itself with the statement delivered by the
representative of Iran on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement. In our national capacity, we wish to
highlight some important aspects of the subject we are
discussing today.
Time and again, the Security Council convenes
these debates on the Middle East without making any
progress. It is deplorable that the situation in the region
in general and the occupied Palestinian territories,
including Jerusalem, in particular remains unresolved.
The region continues to be marked by instability and
insecurity. The principal political problem of the
Middle East is the systematic aggression of Israel, the
occupying Power, against Palestine. It is urgent that
the Security Council assume its designated role as a
defender of international peace and security and take
concrete, practical steps to make Israel end its abuses
against the Palestinian people.

Israel's behaviour deliberately contravenes
United Nations resolutions, poses a threat to regional
and international peace and security, and violates
the human rights of an entire people. Israel's illegal
occupation of Palestinian and other Arab territories
remains the main obstacle to attaining a just, durable
and comprehensive peaceful solution in the Middle
East. As long as these acts of aggression continue and
unless the legitimate rights of the Palestinian people
are taken into consideration, there can be no peace in
the Middle East.

The General Assembly took an unprecedented step
when it granted Palestine non-member observer status
at the United Nations. In keeping with its historic stance
of supporting the cause of the Palestinian people to
uphold their rights, Cuba supported that decision. The
Cuban delegation reiterates its support for admitting
Palestine as a fully-fledged State Member of the United
Nations. The Security Council must consider and
promptly approve the request submitted by Palestine in
2011 for the United Nations to recognize it as a Member
State.

The current situation in the region is tense and
explosive. Reports indicate the deterioration of the
humanitarian situation in the Gaza Strip, further
complicating the living conditions of its inhabitants
following the tightened blockade in that area. The
Palestinian people are suffering more as a result of
the growing number of illegal Israeli settlements,
the difficulties and pain experienced by Palestinian
prisoners, and the closing of access to goods,
humanitarian aid and fuel to the Gaza Strip. Only the
end of the settlement policy, the release of Palestinian
prisoners and the lifting of the blockade on the Gaza
Strip would make it possible to embark on a significant
political process that could lead to peace throughout the
region.
Cuba will continue to support the Palestinian
people in their legitimate and just struggle for self-
determination and the establishment of an independent
Palestinian State, with East Jerusalem as its capital. It
insists that Israel comply with international law and
withdraw from all Arab territories it occupies. Once
again, Cuba reiterates its support for a just and lasting
peace among all the people of the Middle East.

Cuba continues to follow closely the situation in
Syria and its international repercussions. It remains
alarmed that those who seek regime change are calling
for the use of force and violence instead of encouraging
dialogue and negotiation. It is the duty of this organ to
strengthen peace, not violence; to prevent instability,
not to contribute to financing, arming or training those
who want to destabilize the country; and to protect
innocent people, not to use or manipulate them for
geopolitical purposes. That is also the responsibility of
the Organization as a whole.

Cuba is opposed to NATO's manoeuvring to obtain
the approval of the Security Council to attack Syria. It
also rejects the media's habitual complicity in distorting
reality and failing to answer for the consequences of
its actions. A civil war in Syria or the intervention
of foreign forces would have dire consequences for
international peace and security and in particular for
the volatile Middle East.

Cuba is concerned about the loss of innocent
lives in Syria and everywhere else in the world. It
condemns all acts ofviolence against innocent civilians
perpetrated by those engaged in this and all others
conflicts. It rejects the need to protect human lives
being used as a pretext for foreign intervention, be it
direct or through irregular armed groups, including
mercenaries, who only sow destruction and death. We
reaffirm the right of the people of Syria to exercise full
self-determination and sovereignty, free from foreign
interference or intervention.

