Mr. Puente (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): I would
like to begin by welcoming Prime Minister Jean-Max
Bellerive and thanking him for his leadership and his
statement here today. I reaffirm my country's solidarity
with his country and Government, following the
tragedy that occurred at the beginning of this year. I
would also like to thank Mr. Edmond Mulet, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Haiti, for
introducing the Secretary-General's report
(S/2010/200) and for his wonderful work. We are all
aware of his commitment and professionalism in the
work that he is carrying out.

As Mr. Mulet has suggested, any challenge
involves opportunities. We therefore acknowledge that
the unparalleled tragedy that befell the people of Haiti
provides an historic opportunity for the United Nations
to review its comprehensive strategy to help the people
of Haiti not just to tackle their country's reconstruction
making use of their own capacities and resources, but
also to overcome structural problems concerning
economic and social development and institutional
issues.

We should provide Haiti with a renewed and
decisive impetus for its long-term development. That
will be the great challenge that United Nations and the
international community will have to face in the
coming months. While the Haitian people and their
institutions have demonstrated an admirable capacity
to recover, it is nevertheless a fact that the earthquake
has given rise to new needs and affected the State's
capacity to address them.

Fortunately, we are able to count on the support
of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH) in assisting the Haitian Government and
people in creating political, security, protection and
recovery opportunities to allow the country to move
towards an environment conducive to its reconstruction
and development. MINUSTAH has a mandate that is
well balanced among its peacekeeping, peacebuilding

and development responsibilities. It also has the
necessary experience and capacity to meet the needs
associated with the humanitarian emergency,
maintaining public order and the current reconstruction
phase.

Immediately after the earthquake occurred, my
country pointed to the need to review MINUSTAH's
mandate and made a proposal to that end, so as to
adapt the Mission to the needs on the ground in the
areas of humanitarian assistance and maintaining the
country's stability and security, among others. We
therefore welcome the review carried out by the
Secretary-General, which the Security Council is now
considering. We support overall the Secretary-
General's recommendations for the Mission's future
activities.

My delegation recognizes the need to maintain
social and political stability in order to make it possible
to rebuild and to ensure the democratic transition of
power in early 2011. My country reiterates its
readiness to work with Haiti on elections once the
Haitian Government has set out priorities, timelines
and areas in which it may need such assistance. We
support the Secretary-General's proposal to strengthen
MINUSTAH's electoral assistance so that it can take
on the main role in coordinating international electoral
assistance and in preventing the duplication of effort.
There is no doubt that the Mission's assistance to
Haitian electoral officials in the areas of planning and
technical, logistical and security assistance - along
with the support of the United Nations Development
Programme, the Organization of American States and
other relevant stakeholders - will be crucial in
holding timely, free and fair elections.

We believe that providing ongoing emergency
assistance continues to have priority at this stage, given
the scope and complexity of the crisis on the ground
and the need to provide housing, food and basic
services to the more than 1 million displaced persons
who urgently need help in the face of the coming rainy
season. In that connection, we commend the Secretary-
General's recommendation that the Mission act as
facilitator in closely coordinating and planning
humanitarian assistance with the Haitian Government
and the national and international humanitarian actors
on the ground.

It is a fact that there is today a need for an
effective and capable Haitian police to address the
protection needs of displaced persons, women, children
and disabled people, and to serve as a preventive force
to deal with the potential emergence of disturbances to
public order and violence by gangs made up of
prisoners who escaped from jails following the
earthquake. We therefore also support the Secretary-
General's proposal to strengthen MINUSTAH with
additional police officers.

MINUSTAH has both the mandate and the
capacity to help the Haitian Government to achieve the
goals that have been set out in its new policy in the
areas of decentralization, the strengthening of
institutions and regional development. Nevertheless,
we recognize the need to strengthen the Mission's
advisory function vis-a-vis the police, the Ministry of
Justice and Public Security and the main judicial and
penal institutions, as proposed by the Secretary-
General. Were the Haitian Government to request it, we
could consider the Secretary-General's proposal to
temporarily provide Haitian institutions with technical
assistance from MINUSTAH experts.

In conclusion, I should like to refer to the issue of
social development, which we believe to be a priority,
as others have noted. My country believes that we
should consider the recommendation of the Secretary-
General that the United Nations further focus its efforts
on social protection in order to help the Haitian people
themselves to overcome such historical problems as
poverty, unemployment and social and economic
inequality. Those are structural elements that are often
causes of violence and conflict, as well as obstacles to
achieving sustainable development.

