Mr. Ipo (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French):
My delegation thanks Mr. Mark Lowcock, Under-
Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Emergency Relief Coordinator; Major General Alexey
Bakin, Head of the Russian Reconciliation Centre;
and Mr. David Lillie, Executive Director of the Syrian
American Medical Society for their concise briefings
on the humanitarian situation in Syria.

It is undeniable that the intensification of clashes
over the past several weeks, particularly in Idlib
governorate, is contributing to the worsening of an
already very worrying humanitarian situation. This
eight-year conflict has resulted in thousands of deaths
and the destruction of hospital and school infrastructure,
thereby depriving many people, mainly children, of
access to basic social services.

The Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs estimates that more than 250 people have died
and that 350,000 others have left Idlib governorate to
seek refuge in border areas of Turkey since 29 April.
The Al-Hol camp has seen its population increase
from 10,000 in 2018 to 73,000 at present. With regard
to the Rukban camp, it has yet to receive any further
humanitarian convoys since the most recent one arrived
in February, which helped meet the needs of more than
40,000 displaced persons.

In that context, Cote d'Ivoire reiterates its call
on all parties to comply with the provisions of the
17 September 2018 memorandum on the stabilization
of the situation in the Idlib de-escalation zone. Indeed,
respect for the ceasefire, which the memorandum
establishes, should enable the warring parties to create
the necessary conditions for safe, rapid, unhindered and
sustainable access to humanitarian aid for the affected
populations. In that regard, my delegation welcomes
the cross-border deliveries of humanitarian aid, in
accordance with resolution 2449 (2018). Such deliveries
allowed for the provision of aid to approximately
915,000 people per month from February to March.

My country notes with regret that, in addition
to the disastrous humanitarian consequences, the
military escalation in the north-western part of Syria is
dangerously compromising the tireless efforts of Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General Geir Pedersen to revive
the political process. cote d'Ivoire therefore calls on
all Syrian parties, as well as regional and international
actors, to support his efforts to find a political solution,
in accordance with resolution 2254 (2015).

In conclusion, my country reaffirms its conviction
that achieving peace in Syria will be possible if the
protagonists commit to dialogue as a means of settling
their differences so as to end the conflict and the
suffering of the Syrian people.

