Mr. Tenya (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We appreciate
the convening of this meeting. We thank Mr. Mark
Lowcock, Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs; Ms. Jeanine Bandu Bahati, Coordinator of the
Encadrement des Femmes Indigenes et des Menages
Vulnerables, and Abbe Nshole, Secretary-General of
the Conference Episcopale Nationale du Congo, for
their briefings on the tragic humanitarian situation in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

Peru follows with particular concern the serious
situation in which millions of Congolese people and
refugees from neighbouring countries find themselves.
Violence, food insecurity and budgetary limitations for
humanitarian assistance have led to the largest number
of displaced people in the world today. Women, girls
and boys are particularly vulnerable.

We welcome the steps taken by the Congolese
Government to establish a legal framework for the
protection of internally displaced persons, including by
completing the internal process for the ratification of
the African Union Convention for the Protection and
Assistance of Internally Displaced Persons in Africa.
We therefore encourage that it be promptly deposited
with the African Union Commission. We hope that
that will be reflected in the necessary respect for
international humanitarian law and the protection of
the human rights of millions of people. In addition, we
encourage the holding of fair, transparent and credible
elections.

Attention should also be paid to the situation of the
Congolese displaced to neighbouring countries, such
as Burundi, Tanzania and Uganda, who are forced to
flee and to seek refuge due to the increasing violence
in the eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. Those people must be guaranteed safe passage
and access to humanitarian assistance.

Peru believes that it is essential that the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo continue to support
the various humanitarian actors through logistical
assistance and access to difficult areas in order for
them to be able to carry out their work and for a greater
number of people to have access to humanitarian aid.

We are particularly concerned about the increased
vulnerability of7 million Congolese women and girls in
need of urgent protection and humanitarian assistance.
We regret that that number has increased by 50 per
cent over the past year. Child sex work and human
trafficking must be rejected and addressed. We are
also concerned about food insecurity. The violence has
caused the abandonment of agricultural lands and the
loss of harvests, exposing girls and boys to malnutrition.
The economic situation of the country is unstable. We
therefore deplore the reduction of financial support
from the international community for such necessary
humanitarian assistance.

We believe that it is imperative that the United
Nations, through its agencies and in cooperation with the
Government, the African Union and other humanitarian
agencies and sources of cooperation, work on a long-
term strategy that addresses the root causes of the crisis
and envisages the possibility of a sustainable peace.
Among other measures for sustainable development,
that includes improving governance in agriculture
and supporting development and rural employment.
In that regard, we welcome the convening of a high-
level humanitarian conference at the initiative of
the United Nations Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, the Kingdom of the Netherlands,
the United Arab Emirates and the Directorate-General
for European Civil Protection and Humanitarian Aid
Operations of the European Commission.

