Mr. Jiirgenson (Estonia): At the outset, I would like to commend the initiative of Germany in convening today's important meeting on the issue of non-proliferation. The fiftieth anniversary of the entry into force of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) presents the Council with an opportunity to express support for the Treaty and to assume collective responsibility for its future. I would also like to thank Mrs. Nakamitsu and Mr. Zlauvinen for their informative briefings. For 50 years, the NPT has been a key multilateral instrument of the global effort to pursue nuclear disarmament, non-proliferation and the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. With 190 member States, the NPT is the agreement of greatest adherence in the field of arms control. The Treaty has significantly helped to contain the spread of nuclear weapons and reduce the number of stockpiled nuclear weapons from their Cold War peak. It has also provided a framework for the safe sharing of civil nuclear technology, such as for energy, medical and agricultural uses. We can all agree the NPT has made, and continues to make, the world safer and more stable. There is no credible alternative to the Treaty. However, we should not assume that the Treaty will maintain its accomplishments and positive role without active support for its implementation and compliance. The tenth Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons this year is being convened in a complicated security environment, with increasing international strain on the non-proliferation and disarmament architecture. Further progress of the implementation of the Treaty remains a challenge. Non-compliance and the risk of proliferation are causing the most serious concerns. The flagrant violations of Security Council resolutions by the Democratic People's Republic of Korea cannot be tolerated. Our objective must remain to ensure that the Democratic People's Republic of Korea returns to full and verifiable compliance with all its NPT obligations. Until then, sanctions must be enforced by all States. Estonia is deeply concerned that Iran has taken steps that are inconsistent with its commitments under the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA). We urge Iran to continue to abide strictly by all its nuclear- related commitments and return without delay to full compliance with the JCPOA. In that regard, we welcome the efforts of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) to monitor and verify Iran's commitments. Estonia shares the ultimate goal of a world without nuclear weapons and continues to advocate for a progressive approach to be pursued in a realistic and responsible way, in accordance with article VI of the NPT. That approach takes account of the international security environment, without ignoring the concerns of the risks posed by nuclear weapons. In that connection, the entry into force of the Comprehensive Nuclear- Test-Ban Treaty remains crucial for constraining new weapons development and the improvement of existing ones. We urge all States, in particular the annex 2 countries, to sign and ratify the Treaty without further delay. Equally important practical measures include the immediate commencement of the negotiations in the Conference on Disarmament of a treaty banning the production of fissile material for nuclear weapons; work on risk reduction; dialogue on nuclear doctrines; and the reaffirmation of existing negative security assurances. While we are conscious of the difficult and unpredictable security environment, we need to move forward on building trust and strengthening nuclear disarmament verification mechanisms and transparency on nuclear arsenals with a view to providing a pathway to further reductions of nuclear-weapon stockpiles. To that end, we encourage the NPT nuclear-weapon States to continue their work on all the issues mentioned above and increase their efforts to deliver outcomes. Finally, the value of the third pillar of the NPT and the role of the I[AEA's system in promoting theresponsible development of peaceful applications of nuclear technology should not be underestimated. To ensure the safe use of nuclear energy, it is important for all NPT States parties to follow the highest safety and security standards. Estonia is committed to support the IAEA Nuclear Security Fund and its Technical Cooperation Programme. The NPT is the foundation of the global disarmament and non-proliferation regime. We have to do our utmost to uphold and strengthen that major multilateral Treaty of international security and stability. We hope that all States Parties will engage constructively and in good faith in identifying common ground that will enable us to achieve a successful outcome at the 2020 Review Conference and to celebrate the fiftieth anniversary of the NPT. There is more that unites than divides us. We have a collective responsibility to find that common ground.
