Mr. Valle (Brazil): My delegation wishes to
express its shock and indignation at the tragic attack
perpetrated in Moscow and conveys its deep and
sincere condolences to the Government and to the
people of the Russian Federation through our fellow
representatives in this Chamber.

First of all, Sir, I would like to congratulate you
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for the current month. We are fully assured
that, under your guidance, our work will be conducted
with great efficiency. We also take this opportunity to
extend thanks to your predecessor, Ambassador
Heraldo Mufioz, for the competence with which he
presided over the Council during the month of January.

I would like to express appreciation to Special
Representative Harry Holkeri for his comprehensive
briefing and for the important work he has been
carrying out as head of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK). My
delegation welcomes also the presence of the Assistant
Foreign Minister of Serbia and Montenegro, Mr. Zeljko
Perovic, at this meeting of the Security Council.

At the outset, I would like to begin by reaffirming
Brazil's continuing commitment to a stable,
democratic, peaceful and multi-ethnic Kosovo. As a
member of the Council in 1999, Brazil took part in the
negotiations on resolution 1244 (1999) aiming at the
promotion of reconciliation, stability and peace in that
war-torn province. The same ideals move us today.

The latest report of the Secretary-General shows
a mixed picture. A number of challenges remain on the
ground, and much has yet to be achieved. However, our
goals seem to be well defined and the path ahead - how
to move forward 7 is becoming increasingly clear.

In that connection, major developments are the
establishment of a mechanism to review the progress of
the Provisional Institutions towards meeting the
benchmarks in the standards before status policy and
the launching of the "Standards for Kosovo" document.

As Mr. Holkeri pointed out in his statement of 16
December last, those standards describe a normal
society; they are goals to be pursued by all - the
Government, political leaders, and, above all, the
people of Kosovo. Based on them, Kosovo will show
that it is ready to discuss its future status.

Our delegation deems of utmost importance the
full adherence of all individuals and groups to that
initiative. A truly all-inclusive, multi-ethnic Kosovo
can be built only by the people's decisive involvement
and participation, taking advantage of every
opportunity to do so. That certainly can prove difficult,
but, as stated by the Secretary-General, lack of
participation in the Provisional Institutions and a
disengagement from the political process can only
hamper real progress.

We are now looking forward to the standards
implementation work plan. We expect representatives
of all minorities - especially Kosovo Serb
representatives - to take part in the working groups
already set up.

The issue of relations between the authorities in
Pristina and Belgrade is a crucial one at this stage.
Both sides can certainly do more in order to provide
the political process with effective momentum. The
Provisional Institutions must not remain unwilling to
engage in direct dialogue with Belgrade on practical
issues of mutual interest. That reluctance amounts to
obstruction, as it fails to foment trust and confidence
between the parties. We call upon the Kosovo
Government to appoint, as soon as possible, its multi-
ethnic delegations for each of the four working groups,
so as to provide proper follow-up to the Vienna
meeting of 14 October last.

Belgrade, in turn, should be willing to
compromise in its positions regarding the "Standards
for Kosovo" document, and the Kosovo Serb
representatives should take part in the discussions
about their implementation.

Authorities in Belgrade can play a positive role
on the issue of Serbian-run parallel structures. The
existence of those structures, despite the establishment
of official institutions in the same areas, is clearly
detrimental to the effective rule of law throughout the
province and to intercommunal relations.

We welcome the reports of a renewed atmosphere
of cooperation between UNMIK and the Kosovo
Government, and commend the completion, at the end
of 2003, of the transfer of responsibilities, under
chapter 5 of the Constitutional Framework, from
UNMIK to the Provisional Institutions.

The work of the Government and of the
Assembly shows the rising level of maturity of those
institutions in the last months. This is reflected in the
adoption of the 2004 budget, which was promulgated
by Mr. Holkeri last December. It should be
acknowledged that that budget is the first to be
prepared and managed by the Kosovo Minister of
Finance and Economy.

Yet the Assembly has also reverted to the practice
of adopting declarations and decisions in areas beyond
its responsibilities. That trend should be firmly
avoided. Municipalities' capacities also seem to be
improving; yet that evolution stands to be questioned
as long as their decisions fail, as they often do, to
reflect the views of civil society and minorities. We
encourage them to adopt a more transparent attitude
and porous relations towards their constituencies.

As concerns the Assembly elections scheduled for
this year, we welcome the establishment of the Central
Election Commission secretariat, as well as the support
being given to the process by the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE). We
expect UNMIK to present shortly the regulatory
framework for the elections, based on the
recommendations formulated by the Elections Working
Group.

Ethnically motivated crimes and other acts of
coercion and discrimination regarding minorities in
Kosovo are still a matter of concern for my delegation,
despite the stabilizing trend in the crime situation since
1999, as stated in the report. The means necessary to
counter such incidents are clear and have been
reiterated many times to the Kosovar central and local
authorities by the Council, the Secretary-General and
the UNMIK leadership itself. First, firm determination
should be shown in investigating responsibilities and
combating impunity; and, secondly, an official policy
of tolerance and coexistence towards minority groups
should be promoted that not only encompasses their
greater participation in decision-making processes and
fairer access to civil service positions, including the
judicial system and police, but also supports mixed-
ethnicity institutions, especially schools. Only
affirmative steps designed to bring people together
rather than alienating them can overcome the hatreds of
the past. Improvements such as those can certainly give
a significant impulse to the return of minorities to
Kosovo. It is disquieting that the return rate remains
very slow, with less than 4,000 people having returned
in 2003.

In parallel, we commend UNMIK for pursuing a
regional approach to combating organized crime,
involving Montenegro, Albania and the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia. Furthermore,
cooperation between Serbian police and UNMIK seems
to be improving, thereby allowing enforced action
against criminals. Our delegation welcomes the efforts
to root out Kosovo Protection Corps (KPC) members
with links to extremist organizations and organized
crime. The work of the KPC as a civil emergency
agency continues to improve. It intervenes 30 times a
month on average in various emergencies, including
forest fires and floods. These are encouraging
developments.

Kosovo remains one of the poorest economies in
the region. Although the projected rate of annual
growth is around 4.5 per cent, that rate is lower than
that of previous years, mainly due to the withdrawal of
international donors, according to the Secretary-
General's report. Therefore, we would stress the
centrality of foreign assistance in maintaining
Kosovo's current growth and welfare levels. We call
upon the international donor community to keep
supporting the province.

Sustainable development, however, will depend
on the capacity of Kosovars themselves to improve
conditions for investment. In that connection, we
expect the Provisional Institutions to shoulder their
responsibilities. Incentives include even such basic
features as a transparent, fair and effective Government
and a society in which every individual is respected.
Economic reform depends not only on regulatory laws,
which are important, but also on an effective change of
mentality.

Finally, I would like to commend the work of
UNMIK, as well as of its partners - the European
Union and the OSCE - and to endorse the Secretary-
General's appeal for financial and other assistance in
the many valuable tasks being carried out on the
ground. My country is committed to the full
implementation of resolution 1244 (1999) and the
"standards before status" policy as the only reasonable
choice for a multi-ethnic, democratic and peaceful
Kosovo.

