Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): I would like
to thank Mr. Keating, Ambassador Madeira and
Executive Director Mlambo-Ngcuka of UN-Women
for their briefings. Their briefings clearly affirmed
that Somalia remains volatile and that many challenges
persist for its people, in particular for women and girls.
I was especially touched by the information provided
by UN-Women on that score.

To address the challenges faced by women and girls
in Somalia, we need greater representation of women in
political structures and processes. We feel very strongly
that Somalia now has a clear window of opportunity
to advance gender equality in the reform agenda, the
constitutional review process and the preparations for
the elections in 2020.

We welcome the progress made by the Federal
Government of Somalia on economic, political and
security sector reforms, but, according to the briefers,
many risks remain. That includes violent extremism,
armed conflicts, political instability and the possibility
of further humanitarian crises. In that line, let me
focus on three issues: first, the implementation of the
transition plan; secondly, the need to address root
causes; and thirdly, the protection of civilians.

On my first point, we urge the Federal Government
and the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM)
to accelerate the implementation of the transition
plan. The next months will be key; success depends
on the efforts and cooperation of all stakeholders
involved - the efforts first and foremost of the Somali's
themselves and AMISOM, but also of the international
community in providing support. In that light, we
welcome the winds of change in the Horn of Africa.
We applaud the recent joint commitment of Eritrea and
Somalia to restoring diplomatic relations.

That brings me to my second point. It is essential
that the root causes of the conflict be addressed if we
are to achieve sustainable peace. A stronger rule oflaw
is key to addressing such root causes as corruption and
impunity. Reforming the Somali security forces, on the
one hand, is essential for the eventual phasing out of
AMISOM; on the other, it will be effective only within
a strong justice framework. The Federal Government
of Somalia should show real progress. That includes
implementing the agreements concluded earlier on the
constitutional review, federalization and the reform of
the justice chain.

We remain concerned about the impact of climate
change and ecological changes on the stability of
Somalia. We underline the point just made by our
Swedish colleague. In resolution 2408 (2018), the
Security Council emphasized the need for risk
assessments and strategies relating to these factors. We
call on the United Nations and the Federal Government
of Somalia to make progress on this, and we look
forward to the new report of the Secretary-General,
which should include reporting on those issues.

That brings me to my third point, concerning the
protection of civilians. We are truly concerned about
the heavy toll that the conflict continues to exact on
civilians. We remain concerned about the scale of
sexual abuse and assaults on women and young girls.
Gender-based violence remains a key protection
concern, especially for internally displaced persons,
who are already extremely vulnerable.

We want to express our great appreciation to the
national and international troops in Somalia. At the
same time, we call on the Government of Somalia and
its international partners to do everything possible
to prevent civilian casualties during operations.
In addition, it is crucial to ensure that the Federal
Government of Somalia holds perpetrators of sexual
violence accountable. In that connection, we welcome
the approval of the sexual offences bill and hope that it
will soon be enacted at the federal level. Let me stress
that accountability is key to a stable political future.

In conclusion, we commend the Federal Government
of Somalia for promoting a positive reform agenda.
Although progress is being made, the scale of the
challenges facing Somalia remains daunting. Failure to
address any of them may have a knock-on effect on the
others, and it is therefore crucial that all stakeholders
work together in a coordinated way. The Kingdom of
the Netherlands will continue to support Somalia on the
road to stability.

Finally, let me reiterate our appreciation to Special
Representative Keating, who will pass the torch at the
end of the month. We want to thank him for his tireless
commitment, persistence and leadership. We admire
his courage, especially in these difficult conditions. We
wish him all the best in his future endeavours, and we

welcome the appointment of Nicholas Haysom as the
new Special Representative.

