Mr. Wang Guangya (China) (spoke in Chinese):
At the outset, I congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month. I also thank Ambassador De La Sabliere
and the French mission for their outstanding work
during their presidency last month.

I thank Under-Secretary-General Guehenno and
you for your briefings on the Berlin conference on
Afghanistan. The conference was undoubtedly very
important and achieved highly significant and
commendable results. The Berlin declaration and its
annexes, adopted at the conference, embody the firm
commitment of the Afghan transitional Government
and the Afghan people to making their country into one
of peace, stability and development. The declaration
also solidified the commitment of the international
community to supporting the reconstruction of
Afghanistan and will surely have a very profound
impact on the future of that country.

In the two years since the signing of the Bonn
Agreement, the peace process in Afghanistan has made
positive progress evident to all. The process is
currently at a crucial stage. We welcome the intention
of the transitional Government of Afghanistan to hold
presidential and legislative elections this September. It
is our hope that, through free and fair elections, a
broad-based, representative Government capable of
addressing all ethnic interests can be established. That
will have a significant impact on the achievement of
the goals set out in the Bonn Agreement.

We support the ongoing adoption by the
Afghanistan Government of measures aimed at
improving the security situation, accelerating security
reform, promoting disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration, and strengthening the legal system. We
sincerely hope that all the ethnic groups and factions in
Afghanistan can continue to give priority to the overall
interests of the nation and to strengthening the unity
and the joint efforts to build an attractive future for
Afghanistan.

Peace and development cannot be achieved in
Afghanistan without the support and help of the
international community. We appreciate and support
the important roles of the United Nations, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan. In order to
promote the ongoing development of the Afghan peace
process, and especially to ensure the successful
conduct of general elections in Afghanistan, we believe
that the international community should carry out the
commitments it made at the Berlin conference as soon
as possible. First, it should strengthen assistance to
security in Afghanistan. In that context, we hope that
the International Security Assistance Force can expand
the scope of its deployment as soon as possible and
establish new provincial reconstruction teams.
Secondly, donors should earnestly and promptly
provide the relevant economic and financial assistance.
Thirdly, the international community should further
support and cooperate with the counter-narcotics
efforts the Afghan Government is making.

China, as a friendly neighbour of Afghanistan,
has always supported and attached importance to the
peace process in Afghanistan. In 2002, the Chinese
Government pledged $150 million in assistance to
Afghanistan over 5 years. So far, $47 million has been
provided. At the Berlin conference, Foreign Minister Li
Zhaoxing announced that China would provide $15
million in assistance to Afghanistan this year, provide
$1 million in emergency material assistance for the
Afghan general elections and cancel all loans to the
Afghan Government that are now due. China would
like to cooperate with Afghanistan in the fields of
infrastructure, trade, investment, human resources and
police training. At the conference, China, along with
six other countries of our region, signed the Berlin
Declaration on Counter-Narcotics, within the
framework of the Kabul Declaration on Good-
neighbourly Relations.

China will join the international community in
the ongoing active efforts to achieve long-term order
and stability in Afghanistan.

