Mr. Apakan (Turkey): Let me first congratulate
Bosnia and Herzegovina for assuming the presidency
of the Security Council.

The Council is once again deliberating on the
situation in the Middle East, and once again the
outlook is bleak. We are not even remotely close to a
negotiated comprehensive settlement, and recent
developments in various parts of the region are fuelling
uncertainty and instability. The continuing state of flux
is not at all conducive to addressing the many
intertwined issues facing us in the Middle East. That is
why it is crucial to actively and aggressively engage
with all actors with a View to putting the relevant
process back on track.

Turkey continues to believe that there is no
alternative to a negotiated two-State solution. The
parameters are well known and remain on the table. We
reject violence of any kind perpetrated by any party.
We also recognize that an impasse in which one side
continuously undermines any and all efforts at even
direct talks is not tenable.

At the moment, on the Israeli-Palestinian track
there are ongoing talks on whether there can be talks
towards addressing core issues. However, slowly but
surely, and in blatant disregard for international law or
morality, Israel is imposing its will on the Palestinians,
through accelerated and aggressive settlement activity,
tightening measures of occupation, demolitions and
evictions.

The latest developments in East Jerusalem are
deplorable. How can the Palestinian side be expected
to negotiate in good faith while Israel continues to
advocate and implement such unilateral policies? That
is the major dilemma at the moment, and that is why it
is high time for the Security Council to make a strong
statement on such unilateral Israeli practices. The
Council must not shy away from that responsibility.

Meanwhile, the Palestinian side cannot be
expected to remain a prisoner of Israel's will forever.
Indeed, with the ongoing help of the international
community, the Palestinians are successfully building
their national institutions, and at the current pace and
performance they are well positioned for the
establishment of their State at any point in the near
future. That process cannot be reversed, as evidenced
by the recent increase in the number of States that
recognize Palestine. Based on the will of the
international community, that process will ultimately
culminate in the creation of the State of Palestine,
based on the 1967 borders.

On the other hand, it has been two years since
Security Council resolution 1860 (2009) was adopted.
The sad truth is that since then there has been no
significant change on the ground. Despite all the public
diplomacy to the contrary, the circumstances of the
1.5 million prisoners in Gaza remain appalling. An
unjust, inhumane and unlawful blockade continues to
be imposed from land and sea. Homes, schools and
basic infrastructure cannot be built. Markets are full of

goods no one can afford. Indeed, resolution 1860
(2009), which called for the unimpeded provision of
humanitarian aid and the elevation of the humanitarian
and economic situation in Gaza, has become, for all
intents and purposes, meaningless. The plight of the
Palestinians of Gaza is an embarrassment for the
international community.

Meanwhile, an international humanitarian aid
convoy attempting to deliver much-needed material to
Gaza was attacked by Israel in international waters
more than six months ago. A panel of inquiry was
established to investigate that incident, with the
participation of Israel. However, it is January 2011, and
Israel has yet to submit its report.

Turkey is concerned about the recent turn of
events in Lebanon. We fully support Lebanon's
sovereignty, territorial integrity and political
independence. The democratic process, the rule of law
and constitutional order must not be undermined.
Achieving lasting national reconciliation is in the
interest of all Lebanese people and factions. Turkey
will continue to actively promote and support all
efforts to foster peaceful political dialogue in Lebanon
and the region.

