We are all aware that climate change is a global, multidimensional and cross- cutting reality and a threat of existential proportions. Drought, desertification, erratic rainfall, sea-level rise, flooding, hurricanes and other climatic hazards endanger lives and livelihoods, increasing displacement and competition over scarce resources. The impact on countries is already evident, and will only worsen if we do not address this crisis. We need leadership and the political will to drastically change our planet's trajectory and to address the climate and security challenges already in existence. To that end, it is clear that the Security Council must work within its mandate to address the grave consequences of the climate crisis for international peace and security. We hope that today's meeting will serve as another step in the right direction, and we commend Germany for convening us to discuss this common threat. We are delighted to be a co-sponsor of this meeting. We also thank the briefers for their insightful remarks, which have served to underscore the insidious impacts of climate change. Saint Vincent and the Grenadines is committed to addressing this existential threat both within and outside the Security Council. A number of situations on the Security Council's agenda, from Haiti and Afghanistan to West Africa and the Sahel region, provide clear evidence that the increasing frequency and severity of extreme weather events already have a tangible impact on security and contribute to many challenges. The Security Council has acknowledged this issue in an increasing number of situations but, due to a lack of collective political will, we have unfortunately not been able to include climate and security considerations in numerous resolutions emanating from the Council. This means that the necessary climate-sensitive assessments and expertise are often not incorporated into the key actions of many peacekeeping and special political missions. Saint Vincent and the Grenadines believes that the Security Council must be enabled to further increase its awareness, understanding and ability to assess and respond to the security implications of the effects of climate change in an evidence- based manner. There are no neat boundaries between the interplay of issues resulting from human-induced climate change. But we must all work within our respective mandates to address the far-reaching impact of climate change. The United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change remains the primary body for addressing climate change, and United Nations organs such as the General Assembly and the Economic and Social Council continue to play important roles. At the same time, it is vitally important that climate perspectives be comprehensively incorporated into the peace and security pillar of the United Nations. What is therefore needed is a complementary, synergistic approach that makes best use of the expertise of all relevant organs and actors. At this critical moment, we need adequate data from country- and region- specific situations, with consideration of the differential and gendered impacts of climate-related risks, in order to improve the Security Council's capacity to maintain international peace and security. We therefore encourage the integration of such climate-security assessments in all mandated reports of situations on the Security Council's agenda. We also advocate for the appointment of a special representative on climate and security to coordinate response efforts across all pillars of the United Nations system, as well as to strengthen the cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations to promote comprehensive action. We wholeheartedly agree with you, Mr. President - we cannot negotiate with nature. It demands institutional and behavioural change. As the death toll and destruction continue to rise globally, the root causes must be addressed. A part of the solution therefore necessitates accountability for major and historical emitters - super emitters, if you will - to commit to the terms of the Paris Agreement and to take the actions needed to keep temperature rise to 1.5°C above pre-industrial levels. Additionally, we call on developed countries to honour climate-finance pledges as a floor and not a ceiling. Climate finance is crucial to the urgent adaptation and mitigation needs of affected countries before the window of opportunity for decisive action is gone and the hard-won security gains are erased. Yes, action is all that counts now.
