Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
We would like to thank the presidency of Luxembourg
for convening this open debate on a topic so close
to Luxembourg's work in the Council. The personal
presence of Deputy Prime Minister Asselborn only
underscores that. In that vein, we also express our special
appreciation to Luxembourg for its chairmanship of the
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict, as well
as for the concept note (S/2014/144, annex) prepared
for this debate. We also thank the Secretary-General,
Ms. Leila Zerrougui and Mr. Anthony Lake for their
respective briefings on the item under discussion. We
also express our appreciation to Mr. Alhaji Babah
Sawaneh for sharing his painful experience with us and
for encouraging us to continue working to find a better
life for all children.

Guatemala continues to give the highest priority to
addressing the situation of children caught up in armed
conflict, as well as to strengthening the provisions
for the protection of boys and girls in all the relevant
mandates of the United Nations peacekeeping and
peacebuilding missions, including the deployment of
child protection advisers.

Since the adoption of resolution 1261 (1999),
in 1999, the links that have developed among
Governments, the United Nations, the international
community as a whole and civil society have been
invaluable for the effective release of child soldiers,
as well as for gathering evidence on serious violations
against children set out in resolution 1612 (2005) and
required by the monitoring and reporting mechanism.

We believe that the field visits of the Working Group
on Children and Armed Conflict are very illustrative.
Our delegation had the privilege of participating in the
visit to Myanmar in December 2013, which allowed
us to consider the Government's political will to end
the recruitment of children into the armed forces as a
first step that must be reinforced subsequently through
the implementation of mechanisms to verify age at
recruitment centres, which requires having a universal

registry of birth certificates, especially in remote rural
areas.

We therefore believe it is necessary to strengthen
national capacities and support the reforms of the
justice and security sectors, as well as the creation
of specialized tribunals and mixed courts to combat
mpunity for those who commit serious violations against
children's rights, especially persistent perpetrators,
who should not be given any amnesty or hold office in
their respective Governments or armed forces.

We attach importance to the complementarity
of international justice to national mechanisms, such
as the International Criminal Court, in bringing to
justice those responsible for genocide, crimes against
humanity and war crimes, especially as committed
against children. In addition, our policies must evolve
in accordance with changing circumstances. It is
alarming that schools continue to be used for military
purposes, such as for barracks or weapons caches or as
command, detention and interrogation centres.

That is why we enthusiastically support the
"Children, not soldiers" campaign, launched yesterday
by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Children and Armed Conflict and UNICEF, in
collaboration with other agencies and programmes
of the United Nations system, which seeks to end by
2016 the recruitment and use of children as soldiers for
armed forces on the part of those Government security
forces listed in the annexes to the Secretary-General's
annual reports.

In conclusion, we welcome the adoption this
morning of resolution 2143 (2014), which addresses the
concerns we have expressed earlier, carrying the votes
that enable us to advance in the protection of children
so that they will not be the most vulnerable group in
armed conflicts.

