Mr. Zagaynov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): The situation in Libya remains difficult and we
deplore the fact that people are being killed, including
civilians. We hope that the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Libya, Mr. Ghassan Salame,
will do everything possible within the framework of
the plan he has presented to further develop a broadly
representative intra-Libyan dialogue under the auspices
of the United Nations. The United Nations will require
assistance and consolidated international support,
including from regional stakeholders. That assistance
must be based on respect for Libyan sovereignty, with
no hidden agendas. There is no alternative to achieving
reunification of the country and its State institutions
as quickly as possible, on conditions determined by
Libyans themselves, and the efforts to implement
international justice and prevent impunity must also
promote the achievement of those aims.

We have taken note of the fourteenth report of the

Prosecutor ofthe International Criminal Court (ICC) on
the investigation of the situation in Libya. Going on the
report's information, there have been no breakthroughs
on the main topics over the past six months. The ICC
continues to act selectively. In the past six years, not a
single case has been initiated dealing with the alleged
crimes committed by insurgents. The Prosecutor has
recused herself from the investigation of the civilian
casualties resulting from NATO strikes.

As before, there is still no information in the report
on the Court's intentions with regard to the atrocities
perpetrated by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL). For example, the reports of terrorist attacks on
4 October on the court building in Misrata have merely
been noted, despite the fact that the Court should
be well aware of how important the United Nations
considers the work of bringing the ISIL terrorists to
justice. While the Court has expressed its concern
about the army's actions in recent months in the Derna
area, it has made no attempt to bring charges against the
mujahidin, who for all practical purposes are holding
the local population hostage.

We have noted that the ICC has taken an interest
in the alleged crimes against refugees and migrants in
Libya, claiming that under certain circumstances some
of those crimes may fall within its jurisdiction. It is
clear that Libyan groups operating in the shadows and
the criminal networks in the Mediterranean region are
all involved in the black market of illegal migration. We
await information on the Court's work in that regard.

With regard to the report's attempts to once again
portray the Libyan dossier as a burden imposed by
the Security Council on the Court, our position is
unchanged. My delegation's general conclusions with
respect to the Council's referral of cases to the ICC,
which we have expressed in previous briefings by the
Prosecutor, remain the same.

