Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank the Permanent Representative
of Spain for the briefing on his work as the Security
Council facilitator for the implementation of resolution
2231 (2015), as well as the Head ofthe Delegation of the
European Union, who spoke about the Working Group on
transfers. We also listened closely to Mr. Feltman, who
presented the Secretary-General's report (S/2016/589)
on the implementation of resolution 2231 (2015).

In July 2015, the Joint Comprehensive Plan of
Action (JCPOA) on the Iranian nuclear programme
was concluded. It was a triumph for multilateral
diplomacy, which has allowed us to resolve one of the
most difficult questions of international relations, and
to do so through peaceful means. However, that success
must be anchored by the conscientious fulfilment of the
JCPOA by all of the parties to the agreement. We think
that, on the whole, the implementation of the JCPOA
is going rather well. At this stage, all of those involved
in the process need to concentrate on unswerving
implementation of the provisions of resolution 2231
(2015) and of the JCPOA, which stipulates all the
necessary mechanisms to be confident that Iran is
keeping to its commitments.

I will be direct. The Secretary-General's report
comes from outside the usual, necessary working
methods. The document has a politically biased
character and goes beyond the factual outlining of
the course of the implementation of resolution 2231
(2015). Furthermore, it contains a number of pieces of
information that are not really relevant in that regard. I
would like to remind the Council that when resolution
2231 (2015) was agreed it was decided that we would not
set up a group of experts similar to that of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1737 (2006). Unfortunately, this document looks like
a hapless relapse into the activities of that Group of
Experts. In its current form, the report will not just
facilitate the sustainable fulfilment of the JCPOA, but
it also may undermine the agreements reached so far.
Advocating a compact, technical and factual document,
we assumed first and foremost it would work from the
politically sensitive nature of the question and the
fragility of the compromises reflected in the JCPOA
and resolution 2231 (2015). We offerred corrections in
the course of the preliminary discussions, and we hoped
to avoid public criticism of the Secretary-General.
However, our comments and our proposals were not
heard. I will outline some of our main reservations.

Let us begin with the fact that the document
contains simple factual errors, such as, for example,
that JCPOA was never signed, as is stated in the report.
According to the methodology of the selection and use
of information, we think it unacceptable to include any
unchecked data, which is simply being picked up by the
media or received from isolated countries. In particular
in those cases, when the question being considered
has not yet been finished, the Secretariat should work
solely on the basis of officially provided information
and verified facts.

In the sections on so-called Violations, they
should be limited to an outline of the issue and official
comments from the affected parties and references
to the fact that information in these statements have
yet to be checked and that the question is still under
consideration. Their analysis has not yet been completed
with the exclusion of missile launches. Any conclusions
or recommendations on that basis are hasty, and with
the absence of verified information, simply impossible.
We assume that the question of including data in the
report should be reviewed as part of the preparation for
the next Secretary-General's report, which will come
out in six months.

In the course of these discussions, we have seen
interesting methodologies being used. Individual
countries are making statements when references
are being included in the Secretary-General's report.
But why are those countries referring to a report as
documentary evidence of what they have asserted? All
of this would simply be funny if we were not talking
about such an important issue as the implementation of
the JCPOA.

Some provisions of the Secretary-General's report
have no relation to his mandate nor to the terms of
reference of resolution 2231 (2015) or the JCPOA. In
our view, if the Secretary-General wants to outline his
own point of view, then he or Mr. Feltman could always
do that in the course of today's oral presentation of
the report in the Security Council. May I remind the
Council that, in accordance with point 7 of the Chair's
notes of 16 January, recommendations, encouragements
and views of the Secretary-General should be in
strict conformity with his authorities and should be
addressed first and foremost to the Security Council.
That is a fundamental point. I will give the Council
some examples.

The mention of alleged inscriptions on the Iranian
missiles simply do not coincide with the subject of
the report, nor do the arguments on the impact of the
launch of missiles on the situation in the Middle East.
There are also questions on the recommendation of the
Secretary-General regarding the preferences for some
kind of form for submission of applications for the
supply of materiel of nuclear and dual-use items to Iran.
That is the prerogative of the Joint Committee and the
Procurement Working Group.

The absence in the report of any mention of the
Russian suggestion on coordination within the Security
Council of a standard form for applications of arms
transfers of conventional weapons to Iran under the
seven categories of the United Nations Register of
Conventional Arms arouses genuine bewilderment.
I will explain. That was an initiative of Russia put
forward in the Security Council as part of an official
draft note by the President. It was aimed at ensuring
that States Members of the United Nations had the
possibility to fully realize the potential of resolution
2231 (2015), which includes a regulatory approval
system for such transfers, but does not regulate the
mechanism for submission of relevant applications.
But our proposal fully falls under the scope of the
Secretary-General's report, as outlined by him in
paragraph 3 of the introduction. A similar form for
submitting applications was agreed to for transfers to
Iran of nuclear and dual-use goods and was highly in
demand among potential suppliers.

We regret that some partners in the Council have
refused to look at that proposal - I note, without any
justification for their reluctance to strictly follow the
provisions of resolution 2231 (2015). We note that the
opponents of that initiative have taken a course on
the free interpretation of the resolution for their own
political ends. That is quite contrary to the letter and
spirit of the resolution, and impedes Iran from fully
exercising its rights as a State Member of the United
Nations to self-defence, in accordance with Article 51
of the Charter of the United Nations.

I would like to note that, in the course of our
comments, there was also a recommendation to add to
the report a reference to the possibility of cancelling
of the restrictive measures ahead of schedule if
the Director General of the International Atomic
Energy Agency released a report asserting that all
nuclear material on Iranian territory was being used
for peaceful nuclear activities. That wish was also
ignored, as was the proposal to mention, in paragraph
2 of the introduction of the report, that the beginning
of practical implementation of the Joint Plan in many
ways has been possible thank to the assistance offered
by Russia to Iran in fulfilling the key provision of
the JCPOA, namely, reaching the established limit
for enriched nuclear materials of 300 kilogrammes. I
mention this because the role of European Union and
the United States in the implementation of the JCPOA
is mentioned in every possible way i in section II
of the report, moreover, in an area where the Iranian
party actually has serious claims. Such a deviation is
simply improper. We hope that in the next reports our
comments will be taken into account.

In conclusion, I would like to mention the report of
the Security Council facilitator on the implementation
of resolution 2231 (2015). On the whole, we take a
positive View of the facilitator, as we do of the work of
the Permanent Representative of Spain in that capacity.
Nonetheless, I would like to draw the Council's
attention to a range of provisions in the report that
raises some doubts.

First, the sections on weapons seizures do not
reflect the scepticism ofa number of Council members
towards such assertions. We note with confidence that
they do not set out the facts on the basis of which an
impartial analysis could be conducted. In essence, we
are invited to take at their word those countries that
provided the reports and to share their conclusions.

Secondly, the section on the so-called 2231 list
is far too verbose. We recall that the comprehensive
sanctions against Iran have been repealed. It would
have been possible to limit the number of physical
and legal persons against whom restrictions are being
maintained to a simple statistic. However, we must also
note that, on the whole, the report of the facilitator is
concise, factual, politically neutral and balanced. We
consider that document to be a good handover for the
future for the new Security Council facilitator on the
implementation of resolution 2231 (2015) who will
replace the Spanish delegation next year.

