Mr. Manongi (United Republic of Tanzania): We
join in welcoming the convening of this open debate
on the important topic of the protection of civilians
in armed conflict. We thank your presidency, Sir, for
circulating a concept paper on the topic (S/2013/75, annex) and highlighting the pressing need to strengthen
the regime of civilian protection.

Conflicts, and especially armed conflicts, are an
increasing global phenomenon. The situations in Syria,
Mali and eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo are
chilling reminders of the plight of civilians in armed
conflicts. These conflicts kill, maim and displace
innocent civilians, especially women and children,
who often become the deliberate targets of such
hostilities. It is important therefore that we continue to
devote sufficient attention to this issue in our search
of better ways of reducing such harm. In this regard,
we welcome the report of the Secretary-General on the
protection of civilians in armed conflicts (S/2012/376)
and its recommendations.

The protection of civilians in armed conflict is
our collective responsibility. It is an undertaking
that must be informed and guided by our respect for
and observance of the well-established standards of
international humanitarian and human rights law.
Extrajudicial executions of civilians; attacks on health
facilities, school and infrastructure commonly used by
civilians; and sexual and gender-based violence such
as rape, torture and forced disappearances must not
be tolerated. Where appropriate, the Security Council
should not hesitate to take the required actions, in
accordance with the Charter of the United Nations, to
authorize robust mandates for peacekeeping missions
and to ensure timely intervention to bring such
violations to a halt.

It is said that peacekeepers cannot protext everyone
from everything. That would be an unrealistic
expectation if it were so. But when no one can protect
anyone, peacekeepers who are deployed in a region
must have the robust mandate to act. It is for that reason
that the tragedy in Rwanda still haunts all of us today,
because we all failed.
While proceeding with efforts to protect civilians
in on-going armed conflicts, we must also continue to
invest in the following.

First, we should continue to promote democratic
good-governance and the rule of law at all levels. Most
conflicts arise because citizens are denied their basic
rights and freedoms, including the right to participate
in decision-making processes and the freedoms of
expression and assembly, as well as because ofa lack of
transparency and accountability in managing national
resources.

Secondly, we should invest in pacific settlement
of disputes, and not merely talk about it. The General
Assembly has, in two consecutive sessions, devoted
attention to this theme. The Council should support
these efforts by holding joint consultations with the
Assembly to discuss the challenges and chart the
way forward. When parties to a dispute resolve their
differences peacefully, as was the case recently between
the Sudan and South Sudan, many civilians are spared
from harm.

Thirdly, we should revive the disarmament and
arms control agenda. The protection of civilians in
armed conflict should go hand in hand with the debate
towards the total elimination of weapons of mass
destruction. While a total ban on these weapons awaits,
we should ensure that they do not fall into the hands of
non-State actors, including terrorists. In addition, next
month we should muster the necessary courage to adopt
a robust arms trade treaty to regulate the transfer of
arms.

Finally, we should hold the perpetrators of heinous
crimes to account in a non-selective way. The world
and particularly the victims of those crimes deserve to
see that justice is done. The Council has a special role
to play in that endeavour by referring those culprits to
the International Criminal Court. I should like to say
a final word in that regard. The effectiveness of the
International Criminal Court in fighting impunity
will be enhanced when the Court achieves universal
membership. We reiterate our call on members of the
Council that have not done so to join the Rome Statute.

