No country or community has been spared the devastating impact of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19), and Iraq is no exception. To the contrary, the pandemic has aggravated the deep existing economic, social and political challenges. These are a few salient numbers to illustrate the humanitarian concerns. Poverty has increased by over 10 per cent in recent months. One-third of Iraqis now live below the poverty line, and two out of five suffer multiple deprivations in accessing basic social services and rights. Food consumption is now insufficient for more than 3 million Iraqis due to the reduced purchasing power rather than food scarcity. With regard to education, more than 11 million school and university students across Iraq have seen their studies disrupted. Alarmingly, gender-based violence has doubled amid dwindling options for victims to seek assistance and find shelter. With regard to our response to those challenges, I reiterate my earlier message with regard to humanitarian access on the ground. We need a simplified system that enables currently immobilized humanitarian actors and supplies to rapidly reach people in need. Positive discussions are under way, and we now hope to receive a decision within days. In terms of security, conditions for humanitarian actors are also hazardous in certain areas, as was starkly highlighted today by the explosion of an improvised explosive device that impacted a World Food Programme convoy in Ninawa. Economic difficulties are rarely separate from humanitarian concerns. Iraq is expected to experience a 9.7 per cent decline in its gross domestic product (GDP). Oil revenues, severely affected by a steep crash in oil prices, have nearly halved. The private sector has been particularly impacted by job losses and income reduction. It also remains hindered by a lack of reforms. Non-oil GDP growth is slowing in a country that is in dire need of economic diversification. Lest we forget, corruption remains endemic, and its economic cost untold, as it continues to steal desperately needed resources from the ordinary Iraqi, eroding investor confidence. Crucially, this scourge of corruption also affects many of Iraq's security issues. The Iraqi Government recognizes these challenges and has made economic and financial reform a priority. The Minister of Finance is expected to deliver a detailed economic reform plan to Parliament imminently. But, for important, painful reforms to take root within a historical context of perceived rights and entitlements, the political class must come together as one, prioritizing the country's interest and protecting the vulnerable. So far, however, we have seen too little of that spirit. Nevertheless, let me emphasize that these reforms are of great importance to unlocking a brighter future for all Iraqis, in which the country can move from putting out fires to building sustainable solutions and domestic resilience. As I have said before, an environment that promotes inclusive growth and employment remains the best remedy against unrest, conflict and external interference. The Government of Iraq is undoubtedly operating in the eye of multiple storms at once. Unresolved, long-standing grievances have not disappeared. Iraqis want their voices to be heard. In recent months, social unrest has continued throughout Iraq, albeit somewhat muted by the ongoing pandemic. Of great concern is another spike in the killings and targeting of activists and human rights defenders. The silencing of peaceful voices by exerting pressure on activists and media, by confusing the scene or, even worse, by shedding blood is an affront against basic rights and dignity. Let us also remember those still missing, those in need of medical care and those who had to flee the country, often living in difficult circumstances and unable to return because of grave threats and intimidation. Yet we find reason to be cautiously encouraged by the statements and some early actions of the current Government. Indeed, we are witnessing a move towards greater accountability, more robust support for freedom of expression and assembly and a tangible commitment to justice. These are certainly hopeful signs, but further action is urgently needed to deliver true justice and accountability. Condemning the violence and announcing investigations are only a first step. Those who know and love Iraq recognize how puzzling the Iraqi context is, with too many parties pursuing their own narrow interests, weakening the State from within. Oblivious partisanship and short-sighted zero-sum politics continue to be major obstacles to progress. But, to be clear, no party, person or entity must be allowed to hijack the legitimate demands of the Iraqi people. To my great regret, armed groups continue to recklessly flex their muscles, generally seeking to create an environment of blunt intimidation. This means that, while Iraqi citizens are in desperate need of a stable, safe and secure environment, the sabre-rattling continues. Surely, we all agree that Iraqis can scarcely afford another cycle of escalating violence. It is high time for these militant actors to take a long, hard look in the mirror. Benefiting from internal divisions and exploiting security gaps, Da'esh continues to claim lives. The Government of Iraq also operates in a uniquely challenging geopolitical environment. I would like to salute and encourage Iraqi efforts to emphasize national independence and sovereignty. The Iraqi Government is determined to keep multiple channels of communication and exchange open, opting for State-to-State dialogue and relationship-building first and foremost. I sincerely hope that Iraq will be given further room to focus on its domestic resilience instead of being used as a venue for different power struggles. The recent escalation in the Iraqi-Turkish border areas is also a matter of great concern. We continue to urge both countries to resolve their differences through dialogue and cooperation, with full respect for national sovereignty. A central popular demand has consistently been the holding of early elections, and the date of 6 June 2021 has now been announced. However, Parliament has not yet resolved the crucial questions of seat apportionment and constituency delineation. Technical considerations, not partisanship, must govern their finalization. Equally important, the Independent High Electoral Commission must be strengthened and freed from persistent political pressures, particularly in personnel selection, as well as the development and implementation of electoral procedures. To address electoral challenges and build public confidence in its impartiality and technical capabilities, the Independent High Electoral Commission also needs to adopt workable measures, such as a comprehensive and inclusive voter registry, a transparent, tested and reliable election results system, and a judicious framework to handle electoral complaints and appeals. Of course, UNAMI stands to ready to assist. Restoring public trust is hard work. Within that context, free and fair elections will prove crucial. An electoral reset could open a new and important chapter for Iraq. But for that to happen, the elections must be credible. This is the responsibility not only of the Independent High Electoral Commission and the Government, but also of all Iraqi political actors and electoral stakeholders. Turning to relations between Baghdad and Erbil, as I have said many times, constructive negotiations are the only viable way forward. The Iraqi Constitution was drafted under great time pressure in 2005. General principles were enshrined in the text, with their implementation left to be specified by subsequent supporting legislation. But, 15 years later, that lack of specificity continues to shape the debate between the federal Government and the Kurdistan Regional Government - 15 years without an agreement on the gradual enhancement of the federal system, without a deal on natural resource distribution or disputed territories and without laws enacted to clearly define the rights and obligations of both Baghdad and Erbil. Instead, we are witnessing another instance of ad hoc crisis management. I am certain we can all agree that it is past time for Iraq to become more than the sum of its components. Of course, we cautiously salute the agreement, albeit tenuous, recently reached by Baghdad and Erbil on issues, including the payment of Kurdish public salaries. Earlier this month, we commemorated the sixth anniversary of the horrific Sinjar massacre. I regret to yet again report that a preliminary agreement on a unified administration and stable security structures has failed to materialize. A final agreement can, and must, now be reached without delay. Anything else is intolerable negligence. Furthermore, in my most recent briefing in May (see S/2020/397), I emphasized that, in the Kurdistan region, as elsewhere in Iraq, transparency, fighting corruption, freedom of expression and fundamental reforms are of critical importance. I must repeat that message today. Forceful responses to public criticism or the shutting down of media outlets are surely not the way forward. In confronting complex challenges, Governments must also continue always to defend fundamental rights and freedoms. If I may, I will say a few words about the rate of return for the remaining 1.4 million Iraqi internally displaced persons (IDPs), which is now at a three-year low. Understandably, it is the desire of every Iraqi to live ina country without displacement camps, but these camps will not disappear until durable solutions are found. We have initiated positive discussions with the Government, but I would like to re-emphasize that the wishes of IDPs regarding return or integration must be prioritized. That in turn requires the cooperation of receiving and/or host communities. We now turn to the issue of missing Kuwaiti, third-country nationals and missing Kuwaiti property, including the national archives. UNAMTI is engaging with the International Committee of the Red Cross and the Iraqi and Kuwaiti authorities to repatriate Kuwaiti remains exhumed from a mass grave site in southern Iraq last January. Despite the severe travel restrictions imposed by the pandemic, I am optimistic that the transfer will take place in the near future. Meanwhile, Kuwaiti forensic laboratories continue their complex DNA analysis to identify those Kuwaiti remains already repatriated last year. We look forward to the announcement of their results in due course. In conclusion, I would like to pay tribute to the courage, discipline and sacrifice of Iraqi women and men in confronting their shared hardship. It is essential that we maintain our support to the brave Iraqis, who are not giving up and who continue to push for change. I will end by emphasizing that time is a critical factor and that it is high time for tangible results.
