Mr. Mayr-Harting (Austria): Let me first join
others in thanking Assistant Secretary-General
Fernandez-Taranco for his update on recent
developments in the Middle East. I would also like to
thank Ambassador Meron Reuben and the Permanent
Observer of Palestine for their important contributions
to our discussion here today.

Austria aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the delegation of the European Union on
behalf of the Union.

One of the strongest messages from world leaders
at last month's General Assembly debate was the
appeal to the leaders of Israel and the Palestinian
people to be courageous and move ahead with direct
talks. As Austrian Foreign Minister Michael
Spindelegger underlined in his address in the
framework of the general debate and in his meetings
with Middle East leaders on that occasion, those talks
offer the first concrete prospects for sustainable peace
in the Middle East in many years. An agreement
between Israel and the Palestinians would radically
improve the lives of the peoples concerned and provide
the key to a more stable region.

With the expiration of the partial moratorium on
settlement construction, we again face the risk of
sliding back into a stalemate that would only profit
demagogues and violent spoilers. We therefore call on
the Government of Israel to urgently reconsider its
position. At the same time, we reiterate our call on
Israel to bring all settlement activities to an effective
halt, including in East Jerusalem. In that context, we
specifically call for a halt to the implementation of
recent decisions with regard to the construction of
additional housing units in Ramot and Pisgat Ze'ev.

We call on both sides to realize their enormous
responsibilities towards their peoples and the wider
international community, and to continue to work
towards a negotiated settlement. The absence of peace
for yet another generation is neither a viable nor an
acceptable alternative for either side. We urge Israeli
and Palestinian leaders to look beyond the political
expediency of the day and carve out an environment in
which all core issues can be tackled and resolved
successfully.

We call on both sides to observe calm and
restraint in words and deeds and to demonstrate their
adherence to the obligations they agreed to under the
Road Map. Both sides should take visible and tangible
steps to nurture confidence in the renewed peace
efforts. We strongly encourage both sides to capitalize
on the positive developments that their cooperation has
yielded in recent months, including in the area of
security and economic growth. In particular, decisive
progress in the expansion of freedom of movement and
access in the West Bank and the acceleration of the
recovery of Gaza would contribute to building trust in
the belief that there is an alternative future of peace
and security for the State of Israel and the future State
of Palestine, living side by side in peace as neighbours.

It is important that the efforts of the Palestinian
Authority to build functioning institutions for a future
Palestinian State move forward dynamically. We call
on Palestinian political representatives to seriously
pursue reconciliation efforts and to agree on a political
platform based on non-violence and the quest for
peace, democracy and the rule of law. The current split
between the West Bank and the Gaza Strip jeopardizes
prospects for the successful implementation of the two-
State solution.

With regard to the investigation of the tragic
flotilla incident, we support the ongoing efforts of the
Panel of Inquiry established by the Secretary-General.
We look forward to the continued cooperation of the
parties with the Panel.

With regard to Lebanon, we reiterate our call on
all parties to abide by their obligations under resolution
1701 (2006). While awaiting the results of the
investigation into the incident of 3 September in
Shehabiya, we wish to underscore the importance of
decisive efforts by all parties to ensure that the area
south of the Litani River is kept free of unauthorized
armed personnel, assets and weapons.

Austria is deeply committed to promoting the rule
of law, as this is also a prerequisite for sustainable
peace and development. Preventing impunity for past
crimes is an essential contribution to strengthening
democracy and the rule of law. The Special Tribunal
for Lebanon, like other international criminal courts
and tribunals, is an important instrument to fight
impunity. We firmly believe that respect for its
independence is essential for fulfilling its mandates,
and we thus fully support the statement by the
Secretary-General on 6 October.

In closing, let me reiterate the deep commitment
of Austria, in cooperation with her European Union
partners, to supporting and ensuring the success of
direct negotiations and to opening all tracks for a
comprehensive regional peace. Let me add that we also
hope for the continued support of our Arab partners in
this important endeavour.

