Mr. Nkingiye (Burundi) (spoke in French): It is a
real pleasure for me to see you, Sir, presiding over the
Security Council during the month of February. China,
which you represent, is indeed a sincere friend to
Burundi and to all of Africa. The brief time you have
spent in the presidency suffices to confirm your
unfailing devotion to the cause of the United Nations.
Your outstanding performance is a source of pride for
your country and for us. I should also like to pay a
well-deserved tribute to your predecessor for the
excellent work accomplished last month. In addition, I
want to take this opportunity to thank Mr. Kalomoh for
his excellent introduction of the progress report of the
Secretary-General (S/2004/52).

Thanks to the efforts of the States and the peoples
of Central Africa, supported by the international
community, the destructive wars and the tensions
among neighbours that have characterized the past 10
years are beginning to fade. In their place,
normalization processes are making undeniable
progress, giving fresh hope to populations that have
endured unspeakable violence and suffering, including
genocide.

As pointed out by the Secretary-General's report,
peace in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and in
Burundi, although still fragile, is no longer an
unattainable objective. Since the last Security Council
mission, in June 2003, new institutions have been
established in both countries. They are guiding the
transition - with some difficulties, to be sure, but
also, and above all, with an unfailing determination to
stop the war, to reconcile the populations, to build
democracy and respect for human rights, to rebuild the
nation and, finally, to rebuild regional solidarity on
new foundations of trust, mutual respect and
complementarity.

Here, I should like to elaborate on the steps taken
by my country, Burundi, and on the challenges still to
be met. During its visit in early June 2003, the Security
Council resolved to continue its political support for
the process of negotiation with the armed groups, to
mobilize donors and to contribute to the fight against
impunity.

On the first point, much progress has been made,
since the principal rebel movement - the Conseil
national pour la defense de la democratic-Forces
nationales pour la defense de la democratie (CNDD- FDD) - has signed with the Government a ceasefire
agreement now respected by both parties and has
joined the transitional institutions. Therefore, all that
remains is to canton its combatants and to begin
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration and
repatriation (DDRR) operations. Their cantonment,
together with the formation of a joint protection unit
for the institutions, should begin this very week.

The other movements are also in the process of
gathering their combatants, most of whom are returning
to the Democratic Republic of the Congo with the
support of the United Nations Organization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC).
Only the Parti pour la liberation du peuple hutu-Forces
nationales de liberation (Palipehutu-FNL) movement
remains outside the peace process. But there has been
real hope of bringing it to the negotiating table since
the meeting held from 18 to 21 January 2004 in the
Netherlands between the President of the Republic and
a delegation from that movement. Pressure by the
international community on Mr. Agathon Rwasa, leader
of the movement, is still urgently needed so that the

process can be totally inclusive and can make steady
progress.
Concerning support for the African Mission in
Burundi (AMIB), it is important first of all to stress
that it has done remarkable work since its
deployment- work carried out under very difficult
conditions related to the lack of logistical and financial
resources, a situation that still persists. AMIB had been
deployed initially to protect leaders returning from
exile, to monitor the ceasefire, to assist in the first
demobilization and disarmament activities and thus to
create an environment conducive to the deployment of
a United Nations peacekeeping mission.

Members will recall that the South African
Deputy President, a mediator in the Burundi conflict,
came before the Security Council on 4 December 2003
to advocate the dispatch of a United Nations
peacekeeping mission, given the progress made in the
peace process in my country. The time has come to
meet that request; the Government of Burundi very
much insists on this. We are not asking for the
impossible; we ask only for what the Council provides
to other countries in similar and sometimes even more
complicated situations.

The sending to Burundi of a fact-finding mission
by the Department of Peacekeeping Operations last
weekend, in accordance with the Security Council
presidential statement dated 22 December 2003
(S/PRST/2003/30), is a first step in the right direction.
The Government is sincerely grateful to the Secretary-
General, Mr. Kofi Annan, and to the members of the
Council for that decision, and we trust that it will soon
lead to the deployment of a true peacekeeping mission.
If such a mission does not arrive in the coming weeks,
the situation could swiftly deteriorate, both politically
and in terms of security. Important reforms such as
those of the security services and of the judiciary
would be jeopardized, as would the demobilization and
disarmament operation.

On the ground today, armed rebel movements -
even those in the Government - are moving about in
the country. They constitute a parallel administration
and police force, holding the population hostage and
intimidating supporters of different political
movements. One spark could re-ignite the fire at any
time in a country where civilian populations also bear
weapons. Pre-electoral fever will undoubtedly
accompany the debate on drafting an electoral code, a
body of common law and a post-transition constitution,
which will begin soon and will be followed by local,
legislative, senatorial and presidential elections before
1 November 2004.
As one can see, such a heavy programme for a
country still traumatized by war and by hateful
violence of every sort requires an international
presence that can reassure the population and the
national and international actors. We need such a
mission to truly monitor ceasefire compliance, to
conduct the DDRR operation with the well-known
expertise of the United Nations, to cleanse the
atmosphere for the work of the two Commissions on
judicial inquiry and reconciliation provided for by the
Arusha Peace Agreement, to facilitate the access of
humanitarian workers to disaster victims, to allow for
the return of refugees and internally displaced persons
and to chart the course towards the holding of peaceful,
free and transparent elections.

Clearly, the arrival of a United Nations
peacekeeping mission, provided with an adequate
mandate, is considered urgent and vital to the success
of the Burundi peace process. Furthermore, such a
mission in Burundi will help, in cooperation with
MONUC, to stabilize the Great Lakes region, ensuring
that the Arusha Peace and Reconciliation Agreement
for Burundi and the Lusaka and Sun City accords for
the Democratic Republic of the Congo will eliminate
once and for all the tension at the borders caused by the
transborder movement of rebels, refugees and members
of the former Forces armees rwandaises and
Interahamwe militia. My delegation would have
preferred the report of the Secretary-General to
mention the request made by Deputy President Zuma
on behalf ofthe regional initiative.

I shall not dwell on the paramount importance of
the fight against impunity; my delegation discussed
that point enough in the debate on "Post-conflict
national reconciliation: role ofthe United Nations" (see S/PV.4903). It will suffice for me to recall that the
international judicial commission of inquiry is a pillar
of the peace and reconciliation process and that the
Truth and Reconciliation Commission alone will not be
sufficient unless it is based on a minimum of justice,
on individual and sincere repentance and on the
psychological and physical rehabilitation of the
victims. Here again, we ask that the United Nations
support Burundi, as it has done in other situations of
the same kind.

We are pleased that the Council has already asked
the Secretary-General to dispatch a fact-finding
mission to Burundi with a view to establishing the
international judicial commission of inquiry; we hope
that such a mission will be deployed as soon as
possible. In that way, we will be able to build on a
solid foundation, the possibility for reconciliation will
be genuine and the resources promised in Brussels on
13 and 14 January for the reconstruction of Burundi
will indeed serve that purpose.

The Government of Burundi, through the
President of the Republic, pledged in Brussels to lead
the process to a successful conclusion, and in
partnership with the donors to manage in full
transparency the assistance pledged in support of the
process. Of course, the amounts promised must indeed
be disbursed, and efforts must be made to alleviate the
debt burden.

We sincerely thank the United Nations for having
mobilized the international community to help
Burundi. We are delighted at the role played by the
Economic and Social Council Ad Hoc Advisory Group
on Burundi, and we welcome the cooperation between
the Economic and Social Council and the Security
Council in helping African countries emerging from
conflict.

With regard to the international conference on the
Great Lakes region, Burundi supports the preparatory
process that is under way and hopes that it will be
completed as soon as possible. We believe that this
international conference will undoubtedly help us
attain the desired objectives: stabilization, cooperation
and peaceful coexistence among the signatories of the
declaration of principles on good-neighbourly relations
and cooperation, signed on 25 September 2003, in New
York, under the auspices of Secretary-General Kofi
Annan.

We ask the friends of the Great Lakes region of
Africa to generously provide the resources needed by
the Office of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General to start the preparatory work for the
conference, so that it can be a success for everyone.

