Mr. Mladenov: I thank you, Madam President, for
this opportunity to again address the Council on the
situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian
question. I took note of the presidency's interest this
month in discussing a number of issues pertaining
to the Middle East and North Africa region. I will
therefore highlight some of them in my presentation
and defer to my fellow United Nations envoys who
regularly brief the Council for greater detail on many
of these challenges.

Today, a perfect storm has engulfed the Middle
East and continues to threaten international peace
and security. Millions have been displaced in the
biggest refugee crisis since the Second World War.
In many countries, societies have fractured along
ethnic or religious lines. Non-State actors have taken
control of territory and terror attacks have spread
indiscriminately, striking civilians of all origin and
confession. From the onset, I would like to pay tribute to
the countless victims of these senseless acts of violence
and call on the international community to show its
full and unwavering commitment to defeating terror
and incitement, to supporting the forces of moderation
against extremism, and to untangling the Gordian
knot of political, economic and foreign forces that are
driving the myriad conflicts in the Middle East.

Developments in the Arab-Israeli conflict continue
to resonate across the region. The question of Palestine
remains a potent symbol and rallying cry that is easily
misappropriated and exploited by extremist groups.
Ending the occupation and realizing a two-State solution
will not solve all the region's problems, but as long as
the conflict persists it will continue to feed them.

Sporadic violence has continued in recent weeks,
as five Palestinians and one Israeli were killed in
various acts of violence. Among the fatalities were
two Palestinian teenaged boys, shot by Israeli security
forces outside Ramallah, as well as a British woman
who was murdered by a Palestinian man in Jerusalem.

In March, Israel approved the establishment of a
new settlement and declared some 240 acres as State
land inside the occupied Palestinian territory. These
moves further undermine the territorial contiguity of
a future Palestinian State in the West Bank. Tenders
for close to 2,000 housing units, the vast majority in
major population centres close to the 1967 lines, were
also issued. I take note of recent reports that Israel has
adopted a policy of restraint by which construction will
be advanced "almost exclusively" in the built-up areas
of settlements, but it is too early to determine how this
policy will manifest itself on the ground. Settlement
construction is illegal under international law and I
urge all such activities to cease.

On the Palestinian side, multiple worrying
developments are further cementing the Gaza-West
Bank divide and dangerously increasing the risk of
escalation. In April, the Palestinian Government
reduced payments to thousands of Palestinian Authority
employees in the Gaza Strip. It is important that the
burden of decisions to reduce expenditures be fairly
distributed and made with due consideration to the
harsh conditions under which people in Gaza live.

Four months ago, Palestinians in Gaza went to the
streets when people were left with only a few hours
of electricity per day. The situation was temporarily
resolved with the help of Qatar; however, a more serious
crisis is now unfolding again as electricity is down to
less than six hours per day. The social, economic and
political consequences of these developments should
not be underestimated.

Meanwhile, Hamas continues to tighten its iron
grip over Gaza by forming an administrative committee
that is seen by many to be a direct challenge to the
legitimate Palestinian Government. Following the
assassination of one of its militants, it temporarily put
in place a series of restrictions preventing Palestinians
and internationals from leaving and banning fishing for
two weeks.

On 6 April, three Palestinians were executed
by Hamas in gross violation of international law and
without a fair trial. These actions were condemned by
the Secretary-General, and I am deeply concerned that
further extrajudicial executions are anticipated in Gaza.
On 7 April, nine people were killed in armed clashes
between the newly formed Palestinian joint security
forces and members of Islamist militants with links to
Al-Qaeda in Lebanon's Ein El-Hilweh Palestine refugee
camp. I note that young Palestinians in refugee camps
across the region remain particularly vulnerable to
extremists and religious radicals, as living conditions
in these communities remain extremely harsh. On
17 April, an estimated 1,500 Palestinian prisoners and
detainees began an open-ended hunger strike to protest
their conditions in Israeli prisons. I am also concerned
by today's report of an attempt to smuggle explosive
material from Gaza into Israel via medical material.
Such actions will only exacerbate existing tensions.

Turning to some broader regional dynamics,
several States of the region continue to bear a massive
burden from the flood of Syrian refugees. While
the international community must do more to stand
in solidarity with Syria's neighbours by increasing
assistance and burden-sharing, the underlying causes
of displacement must be addressed through a political
solution to the ongoing conflict.

In Syria, a democracy deficit, systematic repression
and wholesale human rights violations, including by
the Government - which holds the primary obligation
to protect the human rights of all civilians in the
country ~ have combined with a prolonged conflict
to create a fertile ground for sectarian polarization,
radicalism and violent extremism. One of the greatest
contributions we all can make today to the defeat of
listed terrorist organizations such as the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant (ISlL) and the Al-Nusra Front
is to achieve a comprehensive and credible political
settlement to the Syrian conflict and a political transition
that is inclusive, democratic and participatory. Such
an outcome would also help to enable a more unified
international counter-terrorism response.

I would like to briefly touch upon recent reports
of the alleged use of chemical weapons in Syria. If
confirmed, this abhorrent action would amount to
a serious violation of international law and pose a
threat to international peace and security. This is an
area in which the Security Council has the primary
responsibility, and I hope that it can unite to send a
strong collective message that the perpetrators of such
attacks will be held accountable.

In Lebanon, on 12 April President Aoun decided
to adjourn the tenure of the Lebanese Parliament
for one month. It is hoped that this will allow time
for Lebanon's leaders to agree on an election law, in
accordance with the Constitution. The Council will
soon receive the report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of resolution 1559 (2004), which called
for the disbanding and disarmament of all militias.
Recognizing the vital progress achieved in restoring
Lebanon's institutions to their full functioning, it
will be essential for the country to seize the current
momentum to counter the maintenance and alleged
increase of weapons outside the authority of the State.

Libya, as Special Representative Kobler briefed the
Council yesterday (see S/PV.7927), has made important
strides in the fight against ISIL, which no longer
holds territory in that country. However, the stalled
implementation of the Libyan Political Agreement is
contributing to a political and security vacuum, putting
Libya's population and its neighbours at risk of further
destabilization. Armed groups have committed grave
violations and abuses of human rights. It is critical that
the political process be resumed, with the support of the
international community.

Meanwhile in Iraq, the security forces supported
by the international anti-ISIL coalition are making
progress in retaking Mosul. I welcome the efforts of
the Government of Iraq to secure and rebuild destroyed
areas and to advance the national reconciliation process.
That will be essential to depriving ISIL of legitimacy,
access to resources and support.

Across the region, social exclusion and marginalization,
particularly in areas of prolonged and unresolved
conflicts, tend to provide fertile ground for the rise of
violent extremism. Unity across ethnic and religious
lines, reconciliation and a fair sharing of resources help
heal wounds and isolate extremists.

Listed terrorist organizations and other non-State
actors, including armed groups such as Hizbullah,
have thrived in the climate of weak governance and the
failure to protect human rights that pervade the region.
It is estimated that over 30,000 foreign terrorist fighters
from over 100 Member States have travelled to the
Middle East in recent years to join such groups. Their
presence over expanses of territory and accumulation
of resources and weaponry pose an increased threat to
regional and international peace and security. Some
foreign fighters have already returned to their home
countries, spreading violence in their own communities.

The humanitarian and social impact of the
conflicts in the Middle East is catastrophic. In Syria,
hundreds of thousands have been killed since 2011 and
approximately half the population is displaced. Over
5 million refugees are registered with the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, with
nearly 3 million in Turkey, over 1 million in Lebanon
and more than 650,000 in Jordan, putting a huge social,
economic and security strain on those societies.

In Iraq, over 334,000 people are currently displaced
in total as a result of fighting in Mosul. Let me note that
most of them are people who have lived for two years
under the barbaric rule of Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant. Owing to intense efforts by the Government
and humanitarian partners in Iraq, operations have kept
pace with growing needs but capacities are strained.
In Yemen, the poorest country in the Middle East, the
situation continues to deteriorate as 18.8 million Yemenis
are in need of humanitarian assistance, including a
shocking 10.3 million who require immediate help.
More than 2 million are internally displaced and over
2 million children are acutely malnourished.

I urge the Security Council and all stakeholders
to do everything in their power to protect and spare
civilians from the brutal effects of those conflicts and
as required under international law. Regardless of the
causes, whether defence or counter-terrorism, the abuse
of human rights in the conduct of any conflict can never
be justified. It serves only to reinforce the fundamental
drivers of extremism and violence.

The complexity of the region's conflicts means
that political solutions based on justice, dignity and
social cohesion are required to achieve and sustain
peace. Developments on the political front continue. In
Yemen, Special Envoy Mr. Ismail Ould Cheikh Ahmed
is consulting with key regional and international actors
in an effort to build support for the framework of peace
talks, as well as to mitigate the effects on the civilian
population of military hostilities.

On 12 April, the Security Council heard from
Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura, who underscored
that there can only be a political solution to the bloody
conflict in Syria. I reiterate his urgent call for the
Council to unite behind the United Nations-convened
intra-Syrian talks in Geneva on political transition
as per resolution 2254 (2015) and the 2012 Geneva
communique (S/2012/522, annex).

Efforts to revive engagement between Israelis and
Palestinians to achieve a negotiated and sustainable
peace must also be intensified. In that regard, I am
encouraged by ongoing efforts by Egypt, Jordan and
the United States to advance the prospects for peace.
On 29 March, the League of Arab States convened
in Jordan for their 28th annual summit where, once
again, the leaders of 22 countries endorsed the Arab
Peace Initiative.

In closing, let me reiterate the words of Secretary-
General Guterres that the region requires a surge in
diplomacy for peace. Member States, especially through
a united Security Council, will have to assume the
leading role, including by advancing the implementation
of relevant Security Council resolutions. In today's
world, there can be no justification for terrorism, nor
for the glorification ofthose who commit it. But without
justice, dignity and the protection of human rights,
communities will continue to fracture and provide
fertile ground for extremists. To that end, the fragility
of States must be addressed. Governments need to
respond to the legitimate demands of their people and
strengthen social cohesion and reconciliation. That is
the first line of defence against extremism. Efforts to
strengthen the voices of moderation and build religious
tolerance must also be strengthened.

Divisions within the region have opened the door
to outside interference and manipulation, breeding
instability and sectarian strife. Multilateral approaches
and cooperation are necessary to address interlinked
conflicts, cross-border humanitarian impacts and
violent extremism. Let us not forget that behind the
images of savagery, behind the shocking statistics of
human suffering, there are millions fighting every day,
not only for their own survival but, for the true humane
essence of their cultures and societies. They are the
true faces of the Middle East, and we must do all we
can to help them prevail.

