Mr. Natalegawa (Indonesia): There is perhaps no

international issue more important to my country,

Indonesia, and closer to our hearts than the effort to

find a peaceful, just, lasting and comprehensive

settlement to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict and to
bring to an end the occupation that began in 1967.

We have therefore consistently supported efforts
to achieve such a settlement based on all relevant
Security Council resolutions, including resolutions 242
(1967), 338 (1973), 1397 (2002) and 1515 (2003), the
Madrid terms of reference and the principle of land for
peace. Thus, we have lauded the commitment of the
parties under the Annapolis peace process. We have
recognized the vital role that the Quartet has been
playing in the promotion of solutions to the conflict in
the Middle East acceptable to all parties. And not least,
we have been persistent in recognizing the
contributions of countries in the region and of the
League of Arab States to the Middle East peace efforts,
including through the 2002 Arab Peace Initiative.

Unfortunately, the Security Council's recent
record on the issue has been less than sterling.
Notwithstanding the regular monthly meetings on the
issue when the situation on the ground demands it,
time and again, the Council has been unable to
pronounce itself collectively and with a single voice.
The Council's silence on the situation in the Middle
East, including Palestine, has been deafening.

Today provides a welcome change. Our meeting
today provides positive encouragement to all the
parties to continue and redouble their efforts to engage
in vigorous, ongoing and continuous negotiations and
to make every effort to achieve a meaningful and
result-oriented outcome. In this connection, the draft
resolution before the Council today makes clear the
need for the parties to refrain from any steps that could
undermine confidence or prejudice the outcome of
those negotiations. Thus, it is imperative that the
Egyptian-brokered cessation of hostilities in the Gaza
Strip and southern Israel be maintained.

Above all, it is essential that Israel immediately
lift the closure of the Gaza crossings. The civilian
population in the Gaza Strip is enduring hardships and
difficulties that are unacceptable. Their plight must be
urgently addressed. Not least, Israel must immediately
end its illegal settlement activities in the West Bank,
including East Jerusalem. Indeed, the challenge is to
find a way to ensure that there is no gap between the
peace efforts and the situation on the ground. As the
peace efforts consolidate and gather pace, there must
be commensurate positive developments on the ground.
The dividends of peace must be felt.

This perspective is the right one, not only
because there has been too much suffering and
sacrifice, but also because improvements in the
situation on the ground will, in turn, reinforce the
momentum in the negotiations. We need to transform
the all-too-familiar cycle of escalating violence into a
virtuous cycle of dialogue, reconciliation and
cooperation. In this regard, we attach great importance
to international efforts to develop and strengthen
Palestine's national institutions, as is recognized in the
draft resolution before the Council today.

A truly comprehensive and lasting peace in the
Middle East requires a solution not only to the conflict
between Israel and Palestine, but also on the Israel-
Lebanon and Israel-Syria tracks. On the Israel-Lebanon
track, much remains to be done to realize the goals of a
permanent ceasefire and a long-term solution as
envisioned by Security Council resolution 1701 (2006).
Negotiations on the Israel-Syria track have long been
inactive. However, signs of reinvigoration through
indirect talks are discernible. Indonesia wishes to
underscore that a comprehensive peace in the Middle
East requires progress on those tracks based on the
relevant resolutions of the Security Council.

The Council's coming together today could not
be more timely. We believe that this meeting and its
outcome offer the potential to consolidate the peace
process and indeed provide a platform for further
progress. Not least, it signals that the Council, once
again, is shouldering its Charter-mandated
responsibilities. The Security Council must and indeed
can exert a positive influence on the Middle East peace
process.

