The Deputy Secretary-General: I am pleased to
present to the Security Council the Secretary-General's
report on the protection of humanitarian assistance to
refugees and others in conflict situations. This report,
which the Council requested, sets out the challenges and
obstacles which confront humanitarian agencies operating
in violent and dangerous environments. Operating on the
front lines of numerous conflicts, humanitarian agencies
are all too aware that their ability to be effective - to
stanch suffering - is extremely limited when defenceless
civilians are deliberately targeted and access to
humanitarian assistance is denied.

What is happening to civilians in today's war zones
is an abomination. Never before have we seen such
widespread and deliberate attacks against people who are
massacred in their homes, have their villages flattened,
have their schools and crops destroyed, and are essentially
treated as the enemy. Terrorized and traumatized by
armed violence, millions are obliged to flee and abandon
their farms to become refugees or internally displaced. An
unknown number are trapped in war zones, unable to
escape or to be reached by those who could offer
assistance. Notwithstanding the positive achievements in
the ratification of the landmines treaty, these weapons are
still being used, with tragic consequences for civilians.
They are also a direct impediment to the provision of
humanitarian assistance.

This phenomenon of directly targeting civilians, and
the use of "scorched-earth" tactics, is not new, but the
scale of such atrocities, and the horrendous cost in human
suffering, has reached an unprecedented level. In recent
days, the Council had before it the situation in
Afghanistan, in Kosovo and in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, to name just a few of the conflicts where

 

the pitiless slaughter of civilians and the destruction of their
means of survival is commonplace.
When the killing, maiming, and displacement of
civilians is not an incidental element of a political or
military strategy but constitutes its major objective, the
limitations of humanitarian action become all too apparent.

Humanitarian action is not designed or equipped to
stop the slaughter and deliberate displacement of civilians.
As noted by various speakers at the open debate of the
Security Council last year on this issue, there is a dramatic
need to rethink what is meant by "humanitarian action" in
today's war zones and to reformulate our understanding of
what is required to protect and safeguard the well-being of
civilians.

No one will dispute that warfare reflects a breakdown
of political structures. It is the responsibility of the Security
Council to be bold, committed and determined when
confronted by such crises. Unquestionably, securing a
durable peace is the most important role of the Council and
represents the best support it can provide to humanitarian
agencies struggling with the humanitarian consequences of
warfare. There is no substitute for ending conflict, putting
an end to abusive practices and generating the conditions
essential for lasting peace.

It is against this background - the essential role of
the Security Council in addressing the immediate and
underlying causes of conflict - that the report before the
Council has been prepared. The Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees has been
instrumental in the preparation of this report, which also
benefited from consultations with the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, other United Nations
humanitarian agencies, the Department of Political Affairs,
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, the Office of
Legal Affairs and the United Nations Security Coordinator.

This report draws on the experience of humanitarian
agencies operating in conflict situations. They more than
anyone else are aware that one of the most compelling and
problematic challenges confronting humanitarian actors is
the difficulty of operating in hostile environments where
civilians are directly targeted and the work of relief
agencies is deliberately obstructed. The changed nature of
warfare means that every day humanitarian personnel must
deal with the consequences of massive violations of basic
humanitarian norms, as armed groups avoid direct
confrontation and attack unarmed civilians.

Disrespect for basic humanitarian norms implies
added risk for relief workers. As the number of civilian
casualties rises, so too does the number of workers who
have been killed, wounded, kidnapped or assaulted while
trying to carry out their humanitarian task. Lawlessness
and contempt for humanitarian norms imperil
humanitarian personnel and their ability to help people in
need, and further endanger the women and children who
constitute the bulk of the population dependent on
assistance for survival.

As members are no doubt aware, this year has seen
more United Nations civilians and United Nations military
personnel killed in the line of duty. The report before the
Council explains why the changed nature of warfare is so
alarming and what should be done to protect the millions
who are internally displaced or trapped in war zones. It
also sets out specific measures to enhance the protection
of refugees.

Holding perpetrators of crimes against humanity
accountable will not end war, but it will definitely help in
ending some of the most egregious abuses. The
establishment of the International Criminal Court is
central to ending a culture of impunity. Every effort
should be made to accelerate the establishment of the
International Criminal Court.

As recommended by the Secretary-General in his
report on Africa, combatants should be held financially
liable when civilians are made the deliberate target of
aggression. To this end, a trust fund to support reparations
to victims should be established.

The Secretary-General is pleased that the Council is
giving serious attention to this issue. Humanitarian
agencies are equally appreciative of the interest shown by
the Security Council in the enormous hurdle they face in
contemporary war zones. They look to the Council for
concrete action, particularly in situations where civilians
are deliberately targeted.

The need to address the fact that conflicts with
horrendous humanitarian consequences are increasing in
number, duration and severity is now pressing. The
Secretary-General has put forward a number of
recommendations for the Council's consideration and
stands ready to assist with any action which will give
peace a chance and reduce the bulging statistics of human
misery.

 

