Mr. Swe (Myanmar): I wish to thank you, Madam
President, for having convened this event and for the
opportunity to participate in it. I wish also to thank
Mr. Olara Otunnu and Ms. Bellamy for their
presentations.

The last five years have seen significant gains in
the protection of children affected by armed conflict,
with milestone achievements in the area of awareness
and advocacy as well as in the strengthening of
international norms and standards.

Children have now been placed solidly on the
international peace and security agenda. However, the
report also shows that children continue to be the main
victims of conflict.

My delegation has always held the view that the
best way of protecting children in armed conflict lies in
the promotion of conflict prevention and resolution. In
conditions of armed conflict, it is the most vulnerable
in a society that suffer - that is to say, women and
children.
My country, since its independence in 1948, has
suffered from civil insurgency. It is only recently that
the country was able to enjoy the fruits of peace and
stability. Until recently, there were 18 armed insurgent
groups, of which 17 have now come back to the legal
fold. Only one insurgent group - the Karen National
Union (KNU) - remains outside the fold. I am happy
to tell the Council that the Government has been
successfully carrying out confidence-building measures
with this remaining group. Guns have now fallen silent
throughout the Union of Myanmar.

The issue of children and armed conflict is one
that demands the undivided attention of the
international community. It is an issue on which all of
us must cooperate and work together to alleviate the
tragic plight of children everywhere.

During the public meeting last year one Security
Council member stressed the need for verification and
for checking the validity of information before it is
presented to the Security Council, as have many
speakers during today's debate. My delegation also
stated that the issue of the protection of children should
not be politicized. Despite that, I have noted that the
Secretary-General's report has taken as facts
allegations made regarding my country by certain
quarters to put political pressure on Myanmar.

We take the issue of the protection of children
very seriously, and I personally have been in contact
with the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Mr. Olara Otunnu, in this regard. I am
personally thankful to Mr. Otunnu for the useful
interaction with him regarding this issue. I was also
given to understand that the preparation of the report as
far as Myanmar was concerned was very political and
that the discussions were sometimes even acrimonious.
Last year, a number of non-governmental organizations
exerted tremendous pressure to include Myanmar on
the annex list. At that time, the Secretary-General,
guided by resolution 1379 (2001), resisted the attempt.

However, we regret that in preparing this year's
report, although it was prepared under the same
guidelines, a second annex was created, and that
Tatmadaw Kyi - the Myanmar army - was included
in annex II. It must be noted here that Myanmar is not
a country in armed conflict. The report, without
checking or verification, used second-hand information
provided by politically motivated non-governmental
organizations to include Tatmadaw Kyi in the list. The
preposterous allegation of 70,000 child soldiers made
against us is the result of interviewing 20 or so
insurgents and dubious deserters inside a neighbouring
country. No United Nations agency - I repeat: no
United Nations agency - in Myanmar has verified this
allegation. As is widely known, and as is testified to by
the Special Rapporteur on human rights, it is the
practice of insurgent groups to recruit and use child
soldiers.

May I reiterate once again that the Myanmar
armed forces, including Tatmadaw Kyi, is an all-
volunteer army, and those entering military service do
so of their own free will. Under the Myanmar Defence
Services Act and War Office Council instruction 13/73
of 1974, a person cannot enlist in the armed forces
until he has attained the age of 18. There is neither a
draft system nor forced conscription by the
Government of Myanmar. Forced conscription in any
form is strictly prohibited. And in order to ensure the
voluntary nature of recruitment, as well as the
minimum age requirement, the Ministry of Defence has
followed up with periodic instructions. Those who are
found to have contravened those instructions have had
action taken against them under military law. We have
instituted scrutiny and inspection procedures and have
demobilized those military personnel who do not
conform to minimum age requirements or other
qualifications.

To further strengthen effective implementation, a
committee for the prevention of the recruitment of
child soldiers has been recently established, chaired by
the Second Secretary of the State Peace and
Development Council, Lieutenant General Thein Sein.
The committee also decided to set up a task force
comprising representatives from relevant ministries. In
order to more effectively address the issue, the
Committee will also draw up a plan of action.
Necessary procedures to be followed for preventing all
recruitment of under-age children are already in place.

Myanmar shares the view of the rest of the
international community on the need to protect
children, particularly in situations of armed conflict.
We are also of the view that the promotion of all
human rights, including the rights of children, should
be conducted through cooperation. We have therefore
invited the Special Representative, Mr. Olara Otunnu,
to visit Myanmar at a mutually convenient time, and
the Special Representative has indicated his intention
to visit Myanmar in early 2004. We are now waiting for
him to propose the actual dates. We have also indicated
our willingness to cooperate with UNICEF to its
representative in Myanmar.
With the attainment of peace and stability, the
Government has been able to bring considerable
economic and social development to the country, in
particular to the inhabitants of the border areas, which
until recently had been under the control of the
insurgents. Children in those areas are now provided
with the health and education services that are enjoyed
by their brethren in other parts of the country.
Nationally, we will continue to promote the well-being
of children and provide them with a secure and
enabling environment in which they can develop their
full potential. We are also resolved to join hands with
others in the international community to promote the
rights of children the world over.

