Mr. Zinsou (Benin) (spoke in French): Madam
President, thank you for having organized this open
debate on peacebuilding, a topic of great importance
with respect to the goals and purposes of the United
Nations and, in particular, with respect to the Security
Council's primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security.

The question of peacebuilding arises above all in
settling crises and internal conflicts and in preventing
their resurgence. A review of the international
community's contribution to managing post-conflict
situations shows that there has been a true learning
curve. We see three types of intervention:
peacekeeping operations essentially focused on
security issues and on opening up access for
humanitarian assistance; peacekeeping operations that
seek to help establish solid national democratic
institutions; and multidimensional interventions based
on a recognition of the need to attack the underlying
causes of internal conflict, which are often economic
and cultural and thus fall within the development field.
Those three types of operations reflect an evolution in
our Organization's practice, but they are dependent on
structural limits relating to compartmentalization of the
principal organs of the United Nations, which has led
to the perception of interventions as either sequential
or separate - in other words, a series of consecutive
phases, from stabilization, to increased assistance for
reconstruction, to the promotion of sustainable
development.

When we talk about such a sequence, we have to
think about harmonious transitions to avoid any gaps
or relapses. The performance of the international
community in this regard has been spotty, because
there have been numerous cases of relapse, resurgent
violence and renewed conflict. Processes of
normalization have stagnated because of a lack of
adequate support or an inability to get the next phases
under way.

What we clearly see is a lack of harmonious
streamlining among peacekeeping operations,
humanitarian assistance and economic development
assistance. The added value of today's debate, in our
view, resides in our arriving at the appropriate
conclusions about the limits of a sequential approach
and identifying of the challenges posed by an
alternative integrated global approach. Such an
approach would involve simultaneous interventions
and closer cooperation among the principal organs and
institutions of the United Nations.

Another prime requisite is increased coordination
of the activities of external actors that participate in
peacebuilding. The coordinating function can be
legitimately discharged by the United Nations in View
of its universality and the legitimacy it enjoys. The
challenge relates to the Organization's capacity to
mobilize other international actors, in particular the
funds and programmes and the international financial
institutions. These have to be brought to support a
comprehensive integrated strategy and to plan their
contribution on the basis of a rational distribution of
work based on proven comparative advantage. That is a
way of avoiding duplication.

In this connection, the participation of various
external actors in defining strategies would ensure their
support and their genuine contribution to the
implementation of the strategies. The logical
consequence of this approach would be for the
mandates of peacekeeping operations to be based on
such an integrated strategy. The mandates would then
become a reference point for structuring the objectives
over the short, medium and long term. They could also
provide a context of integrated coordination for taking
wise advantage of the potential for synergy arising
from increased cooperation from actors on the ground.

The adequate financing of and meaningful
implementation of disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration (DDR) programmes is an essential
component of peacebuilding. These activities should be
carried out in such a way as to make the programmes a
catalyst for social transformation laying the
foundations for lasting stabilization in countries
emerging from conflict and in their regions. We should
offer ex-combatants, who are often unemployed youth,
child soldiers and women victims of abuse a genuine
economic alternative to war by giving them the
possibility to participate in training programmes, to
adopt a peaceful way of life, to earn a daily wage by
finding well-paying civilian jobs and to acquire a
culture of peace in the service of peace. These
activities should be funded by the regular United
Nations budget.

When it comes to local ownership of the
peacebuilding process, it is important for the activities
of the international community and, in particular, those
of the United Nations, to strengthen capacity. When the
complexity of a conflict is such that trans-border
factors are involved, factoring them in can only help us
achieve our goals. That is the case with the conflicts in
West Africa, where harmful regional phenomena are
exacerbated by the extremely mobile nature of
problems arising out of the process of regional
integration. Such a context urgently requires the
adoption of a regional approach and enhanced
cooperation with regional and subregional
organizations in order to implement actions aimed at
remedying the problems created by conflict.

In conclusion, we reaffirm Benin's resolute
support for the Secretary-General's proposals with
respect to the creation of a Peacebuilding Commission
to fill the structural gap existing in the United Nations
in regard to the coordination of action to promote
international peace and security.

