We thank Special Envoy Martin Griffiths and Under-Secretary-General Mark Lowcock for their briefings. South Africa continues to reiterate its support to the Special Envoy and applauds his efforts to find a peaceful solution to the situation in Yemen during these distressing times amid the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. South Africa joins other members of the Security Council in welcoming the unilateral ceasefire that was announced by the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, on behalf of the Joint Forces Command. This is in line with the Secretary-General's call for a global ceasefire in Yemen, and we trust that all parties can make similar commitments in support of the United Nations peace process. We note and welcome the Government of Yemen's positive response and look forward to the Houthis making a similar commitment. As pointed out, South Africa supports the efforts of the Secretary-General's Special Envoy. We therefore encourage the parties to continue their cooperation with him in order to reach a Yemeni-led and Yemeni-owned, comprehensive and inclusive political settlement that addresses the legitimate concerns of all Yemenis. In that context, we also call for the full and meaningful participation of women in all aspects of an inclusive political process. In the same vein, we emphasize the full implementation of the Al-Hudaydah agreement by all parties, which we believe will direct the path to continued dialogue and a political settlement. Furthermore, we welcome the announcement of the Special Envoy's comprehensive initiative to supplement all diplomatic efforts to end the war in Yemen. South Africa remains concerned at the alarming number of deaths, exceeding 100,000, that have resulted from this war thus far. It has also led to widespread starvation amid the dire humanitarian situation, which continues to worsen owing to the continuing conflict. South Africa strongly urges all parties to resume political negotiations that will result in a lasting peace in Yemen and will allow for the rebuilding of the country. The first case of COVID-19 was confirmed in Yemen on 10 April, in Hadramaut governorate. Yemen remains critically underequipped to bear the burden that this virus will place on its health facilities, bearing in mind that only half of its health-care infrastructure is operational. South Africa welcomes the measures taken by both the Government of National Accord and the Houthis to curb the spread of COVID-19 in Yemen. Those measures highlight the ability of both sides to work together towards a common goal. In the light of the coronavirus pandemic, South Africa calls on the parties to the conflict to fulfil their responsibility to the people of Yemen by ensuring access and the unhindered passage of humanitarian and medical supplies to those in dire need and to stop the spread of the virus. This is certainly the time to lay down arms and take up the fight against the coronavirus, together. South Africa reiterates its call on all parties to the conflict to adhere to their obligations in terms of international human rights and international humanitarian law. In conclusion, this unprecedented humanitarian crisis is a strong indicator of the human toll of continued military action and conflict, which necessitates an urgent commitment to a ceasefire and the pursuit of a negotiated, peaceful and inclusive solution to the crisis. We wish to reiterate that the only sustainable solution to this conflict will be a negotiated, Yemeni-led and Yemeni-owned political settlement that provides a strong economic and political future for all Yemenis.
