Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We welcome the participation in today's
meeting of the First Deputy Prime Minister and
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia, Ivica Dacie, and
we share his sentiments.

We are grateful to Mr. Farid Zarif for the
presentation of the report (S/2015/579) and for his many
years of conscientious work as Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and Head of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo.
We wish him every success in his new and important
posting in Liberia.

Mr. Zarif's briefing and the statements we have
heard have convinced us once again that the situation
in Kosovo is far from stable and should remain under
continuing international review. The statements made
by Mr. Thaci only confirm that there are still very
major problems in the province linked, inter alia, to a
genuine attitude towards reconciliation. The situation in
the western Balkans as a whole remains turbulent. We
have seen how easily ill-advised words and actions can
reopen the long-standing wounds of old conflicts and
also how failure to tackle the root causes are reflected
in the contemporary realities of the region.

The Balkans face a number of serious challenges,
including inter-ethnic and interreligious antagonisms,
the surge in Islamist extremism and mass migration.
In Kosovo, the situation is further complicated
by socioeconomic problems and the increase in
unemployment, which stands at 55 per cent among
young people. That is why we deem it important not
to drop our guard or ignore the consequences of the
conflicts in the territory of the former Yugoslavia.

Many years have gone by, but the difficult
repercussions of this European tragedy continue to rear
their head, first of all with regard to the hundreds of
thousands of internally displaced persons who still have
not been able to return to their homes. This problem
cannot be swept under the carpet.

Secondly, we are troubled by the resurgence in
the activities of militant organizations such as the
Kosovo Liberation Army and armed groups that were
previously demilitarized in line with the universally
adopted decisions of the Security Council. The incident
that took place in Kumanovo in May exposed the
serious shortcomings that exist in terms of control over
cross-border movement by Kosovo criminal groups
into neighbouring countries. This represents a failure,
including on the part of the Kosovo Force.

Thirdly - and this thought was clearly expressed
at today's meeting in the statements made by our
partners - we must continue our efforts to bring to
justice the perpetrators of serious crimes. We must do
so objectively and without any double standards.

After lengthy prevarication by Pristina, a decision
was finally adopted that should pave the way for the
creation of a specialist court to investigate the crimes
committed by members of the Kosovo Liberation
Army, including the trafficking in human organs
that was uncovered in the Marty report. Once again,
the decision was adopted under great international
pressure, and the result was achieved only after many
months of arm-twisting. What does that say about so-
called Kosovo statehood? There is no certainty at all
that the mechanism being created in line with that
will be effective and protected from sabotage tactics.
Moreover, we are also troubled that the signing of the
law to establish the specialist court has been deferred
while the radical opposition attempts to challenge it.
We will keep that under close review.

In any case, the perpetrators of crimes must be
brought to account regardless of the office they now
hold. We trust that the topic will be kept under full
review by the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo, the international community and
Mr. Zahir Tanin when he heads the Mission. Moreover,
we trust that they will draw on the records of Serbian
structures, above all those of the Serbian special
prosecutor on war crimes, in terms of their extensive
evidence on the cases in question. That is a major issue.

Turning to the dialogue between Belgrade and

Pristina under the mediation of the European Union, we
are seriously troubled by the failure to fully address the
main issue, which is the establishment of a community
of Serbian municipalities in Kosovo, in step with the
arrangements the parties agreed in 2013, whereby the
Serb communities would be granted genuine powers
designed to guarantee the survival of the Serb minority.
The plight of the Kosovar Serbs in the province is also
a serious concern. Violations of their rights continue,
including incidents committed on an inter-ethnic basis
and cases of desecration of Serbian Orthodox Church
shrines. Kosovo is riven with corruption. Decisions
taken in Kosovojudicial instances are of an increasingly
political character.

An illustration of that is the situation concerning
the property dispute between the Kosovar Albanian
economic entities, which are supported by the
municipal authorities, and the Visoki Deeani
Monastery. In that case, the court found against the
monastery. The illegitimate nature of the latest judicial
decision was highlighted both by United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo and the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe, a
very reputable decision. The verdict must be reviewed.
It is being politicized and it is urgent that the review of
that verdict take place.

Ensuring the security and protection of Serbian
Orthodox monasteries and churches was and remains
a fundamental obligation, duty and responsibility of
the authorities in Pristina. What is happening with the
monastery in Visoki Deeani, the Church of Saint Petka
and other cathedrals is categorically unacceptable.
Order must be brought to the situation. The situation
must be addressed, including through the assistance
of the international presence. The issue must receive
special attention from the new Special Representative
of the Secretary-General.

We are concerned at Pristina's continuing steps
aimed at transforming the Kosovo security forces into
a full-fledged armed forces. There is no doubt in this
case that we are talking about a blatant violation of
resolution 1244 (1999), which does not provide for the
presence in the provincial territory of any armed groups
other than the Kosovo Force and an agreed number of
Serbian military personnel. The resolution stipulates
clear requirements with regard to the demiliaritization
of all Kosovar Albanian armed groups.

We need to continue our efforts to curb the
participation of Kosovars in conflicts in the Middle
East. Again, this consideration was clearly highlighted
today in most of the statements made by the members
of the Security Council, including mention of their
recruitment by the Islamic State and other radical
organizations. Local authorities acknowledge that, in
terms of numbers fighting in hotspots, Kosovo has
the highest number in Europe of nationals per capita
who are fighting in such groups. However, effectively
combating that problem at an expert legislative level
is something that the authorities have acknowledged
that they are unable to do. We trust that the problem
will stay in the field of vision of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo and of
other international presences, whose activities in the
province must continue.

In conclusion, I want to reaffirm our support to
the activities of the Mission, which remain the main
international presence in the province. Mr. Zarif has
done a great deal to make the Mission perform at the
highest level in implementing its commitments. The
Mission must command all the necessary financial and
personnel resources. We stress the importance of its
neutral status, its conscientiousness and its proactive
implementation of the mandates in the light of resolution
1244 (1999). We are certain that the new Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Zahir
Tanin, will assume his new tasks with his characteristic
sense of responsibility. We wish him every success. We
call on the Kosovar Albanians to fully cooperate with
the new Special Representative.
Russia's position on the issue of Kosovo remains
unchanged. Resolution 1244 (1999) remains fully in
force as the mandatory international legal basis for a
resolution in Kosovo. No one is entitled to amend that
resolution, or any other Security Council decision;
and no one is entitled to ignore them. They must be
mandatatorily implemented by all.

We support the current reporting cycle and
frequency of reporting by the Secretary-General,
because expanding it will not resolve the problems. We
will simply see them pile up further. As seen in today's
Council meeting, it appears that those problems remain
very serious. The Council must regularly continue to
keep under review what is happening in the province.

