My delegation thanks Under-Secretary-General Nakamitsu for her briefing, and takes note of the eighty-third monthly report (S/2020/871, annex) of the Director General of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) on its activities to advance the implementation of resolution 2118 (2013). It is clear that there are diverging views within the Council with regard to the Syrian chemical weapons dossier. However, Indonesia believes that all members of the Council have a common goal - to permanently eliminate the use of chemical weapons. We therefore also believe that the Security Council must continue to support efforts of the OPCW and the Syrian Government in addressing the remaining outstanding issues. In that context, I would like to highlight several points. First, we need enhanced engagement between the OPCW and the Syrian Arab Republic. Continued good-faith dialogue and constructive cooperation are critical. Substantive and results-oriented engagement is indeed essential for this issue to move forward. I think everyone would agree that we cannot conduct business as usual if we want to fully implement resolution 2118 (2013). We welcome the recent technical coordination, via secure video-teleconference, between the OPCW Technical Secretariat and the Syrian authority. We are pleased to note that despite the various measures implemented due to the COVID-19 pandemic, both parties are still able to cooperate. Indonesia appreciates the readiness of both the OPCW and the Syrian National Authority to continue relevant consultations. My delegation also recognizes the Syrian Arab Republic's position of welcoming the visit, once international travel allows, of the Declaration Assessment Team to hold the twenty-third session of consultations. In that regard, we encourage the Syrian Arab Republic to provide the information requested by the OPCW as part of the preparation process for the next round of consultations. Secondly, I stress the importance of comprehensive, impartial and transparent investigations into all alleged chemical weapons incidents. My delegation believes that this element is key to obtaining conclusive evidence and eliminating doubts or misinterpretations. We support the work of the OPCW in that regard, and emphasize that it is crucial not to politicize its technical mandates. Thirdly, the importance of the Council's unity in preventing the recurrence of the use of chemical weapons in Syria cannot be overemphasized. At the end of the day, it is not the format of meetings that matter - whether open or closed, or virtual or in-person - but rather our ability to ensure that our monthly deliberations contribute to clarifying all of the outstanding issues regarding the elimination of the Syrian chemical weapons programme. All efforts to close the issue of the Syrian chemical weapons programme should also consider the political and humanitarian aspects. A political settlement is the only way forward to end the Syrian crisis and mitigate the humanitarian crisis. In conclusion, Indonesia condemns in the strongest possible terms the use of chemical weapons anywhere, at any time, by anyone and under any circumstances, and stresses that the use of chemical weapons is unacceptable and a threat to international peace and security.
