Mr. Elaraby (Egypt) (interpretation from Arabic):
The delegation of Egypt wished to speak before the voting
on the draft resolution (S/ 1997/ 199) before the Council in
order to make the following points.

First, the draft resolution faithfully reflects the
sentiments of grave concern, as expressed by many
delegations in the previous Council meeting on this
subject, over the expansion of Israeli settlement activity
and the recent Israeli Government decision on Jabal Abu
Ghneim.

Secondly, the feelings expressed were
overwhelmingly opposed to the Israeli position and
underlined the fundamental international principle of the
inadmissibility of the acquisition of land by force. More
importantly, as the delegation of Egypt said two days ago,
this settlement activity and expansion is in contravention
of the legal commitments entered into by Israel with the
Palestinian Authority.

Thirdly, we must express our deep appreciation to
the delegations of France, Portugal, Sweden and the
United Kingdom for their initiative in sponsoring the draft
resolution, which expresses in form and in content the
commitment to the provisions of the Charter of the United
Nations and the norms of international law. It also reflects
the support of the European Union for the peace process
in the Middle East, which we believe is the overriding
goal of the Council.

Fourthly, the delegation of Egypt will vote in favour
of the draft resolution, which we believe represents a
reaction of the Council that is commensurate with the
gravity of the Israeli decision. This draft resolution is also
balanced and avoids confrontation. Egypt and the Arab
Group hope that the draft resolution will be adopted by
consensus and that its adoption will be a step towards the
consolidation of the peace process in the Middle East,
especially as operative paragraph 3

"Calls upon all parties to continue, in the
interests of peace and security, their negotiations
within the Middle East Peace Process on its agreed
basis and the timely implementation of the
agreements reached". (5/1997/199, para. 3)

