The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as representative of the United States.

Iam sitting here in a state ofshock. The consequences
of the Russian Federation's and China's vetoes of draft
resolution S/2019/961 will be disastrous. This decision
is reckless, irresponsible and cruel. Right now in Syria,
4 million people depend on the United Nations cross-
border assistance mechanism for medicine, shelter
and food. There is no justification imaginable for any
member of the Security Council leaving vulnerable
Syrian civilians with fewer means of securing vital aid.

Following today's decision, we must not lose
sight of why the Syrian people need this cross-border
mechanism in the first place. The foundation and
undeniable fact of this matter is that Bashar Al-Assad
has chosen to starve his own people for years in order to
force them to submit to his rule. Every day, Damascus
fails to meet any Government's basic responsibilities
to promote and protect the peace, prosperity and health
of its very own citizens. The regime's choices and the
regime's choices alone are why the United Nations,
humanitarian partners and the Security Council have
had to act in 2014 and in every year since to authorize
the United Nations to utilize four crossing points in
Syria for aid delivery to millions and millions in need.

The Security Council's cross-border mechanism is
truly one of the most important issues that the Council
oversees every year because of its immediate and direct
impact. We can see with our very own eyes that the
mechanism saves untold Syrian lives every year. And
every year since the adoption of resolution 2165 (2014),
we have put aside our political differences and voted,
even with a few Russian abstentions, to renew this
life-saving mechanism.

The renewal of resolution 2165 (2014) has been

a testament to our shared values and our collective
commitment to millions of Syrians who rely on the
life-sustaining humanitarian aid delivered by the United
Nations. In providing for the sick and the hungry, we
have all overcome our political differences to show
the world that we are capable of doing the right thing.
Unfortunately, for the fourteenth time, the Russian
Federation has abandoned that commitment. We need to
be clear about the direct consequence of that decision.
The lives of millions of innocent Syrian civilians now
hang in the balance, at the height of winter. Russia's and
China's votes demonstrate a willingness to turn a blind
eye to the brutal conditions that the Al-Assad regime
continues to subject to its own people and signal that,
while professing to support resolution 2254 (2015),
Russia and China are openly facilitating the regime's
pursuit of a military victory.

I now resume my function as President of
the Council.

I shall now put to vote the draft resolution
contained in document S/2019/962, submitted by the
Russian Federation.

A vote was taken by a show ofhands.

In favour:
China, cote d'Ivoire, Equatorial Guinea, Russian
Federation, South Africa

Against:
Dominican Republic, France, Peru, Poland, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America

Abstaining:
Belgium, Germany, Indonesia, Kuwait

The President: The draft resolution received five
votes in favour, six against and four abstentions, The
draft resolution has not been adopted, having failed to
obtain the required number of votes.

I now give the floor to those members of the Council
who wish to make statements after the vote.


