The President (spoke in Arabic): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Cote d'Ivoire, in which he
requests to be invited to participate in the consideration
of the item on the Council's agenda. In conformity
with the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of
the Council, to invite that representative to participate
in the consideration of the item, without the right to
vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President,
Mr. Djangone-Bi (Cote d'Ivoire) took a seat at
the Council table.

The President (spoke in Arabic): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance with
the understanding reached in its prior consultations.
Members of the Council have before them
document S/2006/982, which contains the text of a
draft resolution prepared in the course of the Council's
prior consultations.

I should like to draw the attention of the members
of the Council to document S/2006/964, which
contains a letter dated 8 December 2006 from the
Chairman of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1572 (2004), concerning Cote d'Ivoire,
addressed to the President of the Security Council.

It is my understanding that the Council is ready
to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution
(S/2006/982) before it. Unless I hear any objection, I
shall put the draft resolution to the vote now.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
A vote was taken by show ofhands.

In favour:
Argentina, China, Congo, Denmark, France,
Ghana, Greece, Japan, Peru, Qatar, Russian
Federation, Slovakia, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of
Tanzania, United States of America


The President (spoke in Arabic): There were 15
votes in favour. The draft resolution has been adopted
unanimously as resolution 1727 (2006).

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda. The Council will remain seized of the matter.

The meeting rose at 10.25 am.
06-66334

