Mr. Kafando (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French):
The Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Staffan de Mistura, has just presented the report of
the Secretary-General on Iraq (S/2008/ 19), specifically
on the fulfilment of the responsibilities of the United
Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI),
submitted pursuant to resolution 1770 (2007). We are
grateful to Mr. De Mistura for his comprehensive
overview of the situation in Iraq, on which we
congratulate him; we encourage him to continue his
efforts. He can count on the Council's support as he
works to successfully carry out his mission, which
could hardly be more sensitive.

We take particular note of three major concerns
expressed in the report: the security situation in the
country; the process of political normalization; and the
assistance role of the United Nations.
On the first point, despite the unswerving
determination of the Iraqi Government to limit the
cycle of violence, we note that, unfortunately, the
efforts appear to be at a standstill. Yet we are reassured
to note that this state of affairs is not a result of the
authorities' inability to bring calm to the country, but
of an inability to control certain factors that fall within
the category of internal political management.
Nevertheless, the general assessment is that there has
been a tangible reduction of violence, even though
tribal confrontations, religious clashes, etc., continue.
Such praiseworthy elements - which are undoubtedly
a result of joint action by the Multinational Force and
the civil defence units and of increased cooperation
between the Government and some other countries of
the region on security and respect for the ceasefire -
deserve high tribute.

Turning to the political process, despite recent
difficulties, we welcome the signing of the
memorandum of understanding between the
Government of Iraq, the Patriotic Union of Kurdistan,
the Iraqi Islamic Party and the Kurdistan Democratic
Party, as well as initiatives by the Government to
cooperate with its neighbours on matters of internal
stability, border security and the voluntary return of
refugees. On the ground, the population is offering
increasingly visible support for the Government's
actions, which accounts for the resumption of some
public services in the context of efforts to redeploy the
administration. It almost goes without saying that all of
these achievements are encouraging and augur well for
the revitalization of State institutions, which would be
the best guarantee of optimal stabilization in Iraq.

In terms of the activities of the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq, we feel nothing but
satisfaction at the outcomes achieved under the
auspices of the Special Representative, including the
dialogue with governmental, political, diplomatic and
religious authorities aimed at easing tension in the
political life of the country, and at the good
cooperation with the Iraqi authorities aimed at
establishing an ad hoc support mechanism for the
expanded group of neighbouring States. We also
welcome the facilitation role played by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General with a view,
under article 140 of the Iraqi constitution, to
organizing a referendum leading to a consensus
decision on the status of Kirkuk and on difficulties
relating to internal boundaries. Broadly speaking, we
appreciate UNAMI's efforts to support the Government
in revising the constitution and to help it to organize
future elections.

Finally, in the humanitarian sphere, we note with
great interest and satisfaction the outcomes that have
already been achieved. But we should encourage
UNAMI to do much more, in particular by extending
its operations to other areas of Iraq, such as Basra and
Arbil, in order to help displaced persons, and by
increasing its assistance to vulnerable groups, if
possible with the collaboration of the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and
other international humanitarian organizations.

In conclusion, we reaffirm our solidarity with the
Secretary-General and his Special Representative in
connection with the focus they intend to place on the
issue of Iraq. The Government of Iraq must be
responsive to that concern. It is for that reason that we
urge it to ratify, as soon as possible, the status of
mission agreement, which defines relations between
Iraq and the United Nations.

We are following the question of Iraq's
reconstruction with great interest. We therefore fully
support the International Compact with Iraq.

