Mr. Uanivi (Namibia): We, too, thank the
Secretary-General for his comprehensive report on
Bosnia and Herzegovina and would like to welcome his
Special Representative, Mr. Jacques Klein, and to
thank him for his valuable update on the
implementation of the Peace Agreement in that
country.

My delegation concurs with the Secretary-
General and his Special Representative that without an
effective police force and judicial institutions in place,
all efforts by the international community for durable
peace and self-sustainable development in Bosnia and
Herzegovina will indeed be incomplete.

Notwithstanding the difficulties encountered in
the professionalization and reconstruction of the police
and judiciary system, the United Nations Mission in
Bosnia and Herzegovina (UNMIBH) and the
International Police Task Force (IPTF) have achieved
tangible results, notably, the inauguration of the multi-
ethnic State Border Service and the establishment of
the multi-ethnic Brcko district police force, as well as
many more.

We also take note from the Secretary-General's
report of the new spirit of cooperation in the
Herzegovina-Neretva canton, which for the first time
since the war allowed Bosniacs to work in west Mostar.
We hope that this spirit will be replicated throughout
the country.

On balance, my delegation also has some concern
about the slow progress in the recruitment of minority
police officers and in gender balance in both entities,
about the return of minorities and internally displaced
persons with dignity to their original homes, and about
the issue oftrafficking in human beings.

On the latter, we are glad that progress has been
achieved and we are also looking forward to the report
on that issue. It is the view of my delegation that the
leaders in Bosnia and Herzegovina ought to address
these issues, because the colour and composition of a
future united, multi-ethnic Bosnia and Herzegovina
really depend on the harmonization of these basic
ingredients.

Once again, we thank the Special Representative
for his timely briefing. We encourage him to continue
and we also commend the men and women of
UNMIBH and the Stabilization Force for their valuable
contribution to the maintenance of peace and the
reconstruction of Bosnia and Herzegovina. In this light,
we support the Secretary-General's recommendation to
extend the mandate of UNMIBH for a further 12
months, ending 21 June 2001.

