Mr. Gillerman (Israel): As this is your last day as
President, Sir, may I express to you once again our
appreciation for your very able and fair stewardship
during the month of July.

We have heard a very emotional, very eloquent
and, I am sure, very candid speech by the
representative of Lebanon. I would like to repeat some
of the words he said, which I agree with completely
and which Israel agrees with completely.

He started by saying that he has come here both
in anger and in hope. He continued by saying that we
should not return and there should not be a return to
the status quo ante. He also said that Lebanon is a
country of plurality, diversity and tolerance. He also
stated that Lebanon should not and should never again
be the battleground of others. He reiterated Lebanon's
wish, dream and right to live in dignity, and he
repeated that several times.

I want to state emphatically that I agree with each
and every one of those statements. Israel has no quarrel
with Lebanon. Israel has no battle with Lebanon. Israel
has no war with Lebanon.

The Minister repeatedly cited Israel's previous
actions against Lebanon. He failed to state why those
actions were taken. Israel has never, ever had in its
history any claim over Lebanon, neither over its
sovereignty nor over its territory nor over its right to
exist in our region as a free, vibrant, proud and
prosperous State. Israel has repeatedly been compelled
to act not against Lebanon, but against the forces and
the monstrosity which Lebanon has allowed itself to be
taken hostage by. Lebanon has repeatedly, sadly and
tragically been taken over time and time again by
tyrants in the North - namely, Syria, which still
regards Lebanon as Southern Syria, which has never
marked its border with Lebanon and which has never
even had an embassy in Beirut or allowed Lebanon to
have an embassy in Damascus. Lebanon has allowed
itself to be taken hostage by terrorists of the worst
kind - the Palestine Liberation Organization in the
1980s and Hizbollah in the 1990s.

I ask the Minister in all candidness and in all
fairness: When will Lebanon finally take its fate into
its own hands? A litany of tragedies and misery does
not make for either policy or good politics. Lebanon
had several chances to be sovereign, to exert its
sovereignty, and to take its fate into its own hands, at
least in the past few years. It had one chance over six
years ago, when Israel left it completely - a fact that
has been ratified by this Council, and in terms of
resolution 425 (1978). Lebanon could have made the
choice of returning to being the vibrant, beautiful, fun-
loving, entrepreneurial and cultured country it was, or
of allowing itself to become a hub for terrorism and a
launching pad against Israel. Sadly, and tragically for
Israel, for the region and for the Lebanese, it chose the
latter.

Lebanon had the chance once again after this
Council, dramatically and practically without
precedent, adopted resolution 1559 (2004) and made
the Syrians leave Lebanon, at least partially. Again,
there was a chance for Lebanon to exert its
sovereignty, to deploy its forces and to rid itself of that
monster which it has allowed to take over and to hold it
hostage. Once again, Lebanon did not do it.

Why is Israel in Lebanon today? Why is Israel
acting against Lebanon? Israel left every single inch of
Lebanon. Israel is there only to protect itself against a
blatant act of war, the kidnapping of its soldiers and the
shelling of its cities and its towns by thousands of
rockets, which are only a fraction of the arsenal of
death and destruction that Lebanon has allowed to be
amassed in the southern part of its territory. Is it not
time that Lebanon took its fate into its own hands,
rather than keep crying out to the Security Council and
to the international community? Is it not time that the
Lebanese army, which is there, acted in order to rid
itself of the very beast which is bringing this horror
and this destruction upon its people?

I truly believe that it is time for Lebanon to act, if
for no other reason than at least to prove that it is
untrue that, in Lebanon, there is no future and no
present - only the past, happening over and over and
over again.

