The President (spoke in French): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Montenegro, Rwanda and Serbia in which they request
to be invited to participate in the consideration of the
item on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the
usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the
Council, to invite those representatives to participate in
the consideration of the item, without the right to vote,
in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, the
representatives of the aforementioned countries
took the seats reserved for them at the side of the
Council Chamber.

The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend invitations under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Judge Fausto Pocar,
President of the International Tribunal for the
Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious
Violations of International Humanitarian Law
Committed in the Territory of the Former Yugoslavia
since 1991; Judge Dennis Byron, President of the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Prosecution of
Persons Responsible for Genocide and Other Serious
Violations of International Humanitarian Law
Committed in the Territory of Rwanda and Rwandan
Citizens Responsible for Genocide and Other Such
Violations Committed in the Territory of Neighbouring
States between 1 January and 31 December 1994;
Ms. Carla Del Ponte, Prosecutor of the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia; and Mr. Hassan
Bubacar Jallow, Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda.

It is so decided.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.
Members of the Council have before them documents
S/2007/283, containing a letter dated 15 May 2007
from the President of the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia, and S/2007/323, containing a letter
dated 23 May 2007 from the President of the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda.

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings by the President of the International Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia, the President of the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda and the
Prosecutors of the International Tribunals for the
Former Yugoslavia and Rwanda.

Following those briefings, I will give the floor to
Council members who wish to make comments or ask
questions.

I now give the floor to Judge Fausto Pocar,

President of the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia.


