Mrs. ngu (Nigeria): I would like to welcome
Mr. Kanat Saudabayev, Foreign Minister of
Kazakhstan, to the Council, thank him for his
comprehensive and insightful briefing, and congratulate
him as the new Chairman-in-Office of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE).

It is evident from the briefing that the OSCE has
great responsibilities within the scope of Chapter VIII
of the United Nations Charter, and its leadership has
approached those responsibilities with tremendous
purposefulness. We note the OSCE's continued
commitment to the founding principles of the Helsinki
Final Act and the successful efforts to maintain the link
between the OSCE's 56 member States on the three
core issues: human security, political-military aspects
of security, and economic and environmental matters.

We welcome the consistent efforts to transform
the OSCE into a credible platform for common security
in the Euro-Atlantic and Eurasian regions. We note its
commitment to the non-proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction and to combating terrorism and other
forms of transnational crime. We also note its
contributions to the efforts to resolve protracted
conflicts in the region and its use of mediation and
political mechanisms in the process. We appreciate its
achievements in environmental issues and energy
security, as well as human rights.

Indeed, the effective use of the OSCE to tackle
major challenges serves as a model for other regional
and subregional organizations in their concerted efforts
to enhance their capacities to promote comprehensive
security and respect for fundamental freedoms, and to
increase civil society participation.

We believe that the vision that has just been
outlined assures a promising future for the
organization. Yet, there are several daunting challenges
that require intense engagement and dialogue. There
are still protracted conflicts, border management issues
and trafficking issues that should be addressed. To
achieve its goals, the OSCE must remain steadfast in
its commitment to its all-encompassing concept of
security. It must also continue to generate confidence-
building measures amongst its members and work in
concert to address transnational and other long-
standing threats to peace and security, including
conflicts over energy and water.
The OSCE's desire to continue to strengthen its
conflict-prevention capacity, seek enhanced
cooperation with the Security Council, and always give
equal attention to the three elements in its basket is
indeed very commendable. We believe that within the
context of lessons learned, the OSCE should also

create opportunities for information exchange and
cooperation with other regional organizations in the
fight against transnational crimes.

