Mr. Mayr-Harting (Austria): Let me first
welcome the presence in the Council today of
Mr. Nikola Spiric', Chairman of the Council of
Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina. I would also like
to extend a very warm welcome to my countryman and
my friend of long standing, High Representative
Valentin Inzko. He knows that he can count on
Austria's full and continued support. Furthermore, we
should also pay tribute to his predecessor, Mr. Miroslav
Lajcak, whose activities are covered in much of the
report before us today (see S/2009/246).

Prime Minister Spirie knows that Austria is and
will remain a reliable partner of Bosnia and
Herzegovina on its path towards lasting stability and
European integration. We are convinced that the
stability of Bosnia and Herzegovina is key for the
realization of a broad zone of stability in the Balkans.
The Prime Minister knows that we believe that
membership of the European Union (EU) offers by far
the best medium-term and long-term chance for a
solution to most of the problems that we have heard
about today.

Against this background, Austria hopes that the
reforms necessary for the Euro-Atlantic integration of
Bosnia and Herzegovina will be taken up again and
brought to a successful completion. The political
atmosphere currently prevailing in the country -
nationalistic and divisive rhetoric, attacks that
undermining State institutions and the territorial
integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina and challenges to
the authority of the High Representative - will not
serve that purpose. We appeal to all political leaders in
the country to overcome the past and to give priority to
what is really important for the future of Bosnia and
Herzegovina: its European perspective, which is in the
interests of all the citizens of the country.

Austria attaches great importance to the principle
of Bosnian ownership. Lasting stability can be
achieved only through efforts coming from within the
country. In this respect, we believe that it is the

principal role of the High Representative to support
Bosnians' efforts in addressing their own pending
problems: to help Bosnians help themselves. At the
same time, we are aware that the High Representative
has far-reaching powers at his disposal, and he has our
full support in making use of them if that is warranted
by the circumstances.

Austria fully supports the objective of a transition
from the Office of the High Representative to a
substantially reinforced presence of the European
Union. Preparations for this step are well under way
within the Union. We welcome the progress achieved
so far by Bosnia and Herzegovina in delivering on the
five objectives and the two conditions, including the
recent decision on the Brcko District. The process of
dialogue and compromise launched in Prud last year
has significantly contributed to this progress, and we
hope that increased efforts by all political leaders, but
also a stronger will to find common ground, will make
substantial progress possible. We also hope that the
ongoing disagreements on the inventory working group
for State property will be overcome soon, and that the
group will be able to continue its work.

We welcome the progress achieved in
strengthening the rule of law. The adoption of a war
crimes prosecution strategy and the adoption of a
justice sector reform strategy are important steps, and
we look forward to their full implementation.
Continued cooperation with the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia, effective measures
against those helping the remaining fugitives evade
justice and the strict enforcement of sentences against
convicted war criminals are crucial to promote justice
and the rule of law.

The economic developments in Bosnia and
Herzegovina outlined in the report give rise to concern.
The seriousness of these challenges is further
aggravated by the global economic crisis. These
difficult issues have to be addressed in a concerted
effort by all political actors across entities and ethnic
affiliations.
Bosnia and Herzegovina and the other Western
Balkan countries have the perspective of future
membership of the European Union. Bosnia and
Herzegovina took a major step on its European path
when it signed a comprehensive Stabilization and
Association Agreement with the European Union in
2008; this will enter into force once its ratification
process has been completed. The Agreement
constitutes the legal framework for EU-Bosnia and
Herzegovina relations until future membership.

Bosnia and Herzegovina and its Western Balkan
neighbours are currently engaged in a dialogue with
the European Union in order to achieve visa-free travel
for their citizens in the countries of the Union. For that
to become reality, the countries of the region must
make substantial efforts in areas such as the security of
documents, readmission and the fight against illegal
migration. Austria will continue to strongly support
those efforts. Austria is hopeful that Bosnia and
Herzegovina will soon fulfil the conditions for visa
liberalization, because that would also contribute to
building a sustainable and strong security partnership
with the European Union.

Finally, we share the assessment of the High
Representative that the European Union military
operation in Bosnia and Herzegovina (EUFOR) is still
vital for the maintenance of a safe and secure
environment in Bosnia and Herzegovina and that that
operation continues to be a key reassurance factor in
the country. As a troop contributor to the operation
since its establishment, with some 110 troops currently
serving within EUFOR, Austria is committed to
maintaining that contribution.

