Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): I would first like to congratulate you
personally, Madam President, and all the women
staff members of the United Nations Secretariat and
Permanent Missions accredited to the United Nations,
on International Women's Day. It is in honour of this
wonderful holiday that my colleagues have brought you
flowers, in keeping with Russian tradition.

It is highly symbolic that this holiday is said to have
been born here in New York when women came out to
protest and demand equality with men on 8 March 1857.
For the holiday itself, we probably have to thank our
German colleagues and my friend Christoph Heusgen
personally, whose compatriot Clara Zetkin proposed in
1910 to observe this holiday. From way back we have
always devoted a great deal of attention and care to
women, and we first celebrated this holiday in 1913,
while after the October Revolution of 1917 our country
became a true leader of the women's movement. We
declared 8 March a holiday at the national level in 1965,
after which the countries of the Soviet Union continued
their efforts to improve the situation of women, and in

1975, as we know, International Women's Day began to
be observed at the United Nations.
Since then much has been done both in Russia
and all over the world to achieve gender equality and
expand women's rights and opportunities. Of course, a
great deal remains to be done. Russia will continue its
efforts to improve the situation of women and ensure
that women's rights and opportunities are equal to
men's. At the same time, however, we value women for
their femininity and tenderness, and we do not try to
compete with them in those areas. Russian society is
traditionally built on the harmony of the sexes and their
mutual complementarity.

But I should return to the subject of today's
meeting. We would like to thank David Shearer, the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, and
Ms. Angelina Jial, whom I also wish to congratulate on
International Women's Day, for their briefings on the
situation in South Sudan and the progress of the peace
process there.

Looking back on the past year, we believe that its
most important event was the signing of the Revitalized
Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in the
Republic of South Sudan. It is important that the
South Sudanese parties have shown a willingness to
compromise and a desire to settle their disputes. We
welcome the significant progress that we are seeing in
the implementation of the agreements that have been
reached, and in this connection we note the formation
and launch of the structures and mechanisms provided
for in the Agreement. We are pleased that since the
signing of the Revitalized Agreement there has been
a significant drop in the level of violence as well as in
the number of cases ofhuman rights violations in South
Sudan. A growing number of refugees and internally
displaced persons have expressed the wish to return to
their permanent homes. We believe that all of this is
related to the implementation of confidence-building
measures and interactions among the opposing parties
on the ground. It is significant that thanks to the security
conditions established by the authorities, opposition
politicians are already returning to the capital and
moving around freely. We also note opposition leader
Riek Machar's expressed intention to return to Juba in
the near future.

We join in the appeal to the South Sudanese parties
to finally formalize the arrangements on security issues
and complete the process of amending the Constitution.
We believe that only full and universal compliance by
the parties with the commitments they have undertaken
will make it possible to enhance mutual trust and
prevent any repetition of the mistakes made in the past
during the South Sudan settlement.

We would like to once again pay tribute to the
countries of the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development for their coordination of the mediation
efforts, in which they initiated and assured the
productive negotiation process held in Khartoum
between June and August, as well as the signing of
documents vital to the peace process. We greatly value
the personal contribution of President Omer Al-Bashir
ofthe Sudan to the achievement ofthe peace Agreement.
We note that the regional stakeholders have continued
to maintain their united approach to the settlement in
South Sudan, which is extremely important for the
future of the peace process.

We do not share the view of a number of our
colleagues, who assert that the visible progress in the
settlement has been partly enabled by the increase in
sanctions pressure on the Republic of South Sudan and
the imposition of an arms embargo. The Council should
not take credit for the success of the regional mediators,
who, by the way, were against the imposition of
additional sanctions on the parties in South Sudan. We
urge everyone to face up to the truth, which is that it is
actually the arms embargo that has prevented regional
organizations from providing a flexible response with
the help of their own initiatives in the area of security.

We welcome the desire of the Agreement's
guarantors to help to achieve the peace accords through
the representation of national contingents from the
Sudan, Uganda, Djibouti and Somalia in the Regional
Protection Force. We see this as a practical realization
of the principle of African solutions to African
problems, and an example of the possibility of effective
cooperation between the United Nations, its Security
Council and regional organizations. We are ready to
consider substantive proposals concerning the Regional
Protection Force after the South Sudanese parties have
reached concrete agreements on security issues. The
Russian delegation supports extending the mandate of
the United Nations Mission in South Sudan, and we are
ready to work constructively on the text of the relevant
draft resolution.

