Mr. De Riviere (France) (spoke in French): I thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
West Africa and the Sahel for his briefing, which was
as always very clear.

The situation in West Africa deserves our full
attention today. In this regard, the United Nations
Office for West Africa and the Sahel (UNOWAS)
is a valuable tool in terms of its role in conflict
prevention, peacebuilding and support for various
regional initiatives. Its role is fully in keeping with
the Secretary-General's vision for action across the
peace continuum. We therefore hope that the strategic
review to be announced in the coming months ensures
that UNOWAS has the resources necessary to fulfil its
important mission.

The deterioration of the security and humanitarian
situation in the Sahel poses an unprecedented risk to
the stability of West Africa as a whole. The States
of the Group of Five for the Sahel are the first to be
affected today, but others will soon face the same
challenges if adequate responses are not urgently
provided. It is therefore a real race against the clock
to stabilize the Sahel - an undertaking to which
we are today collectively committed. It involves the
urgent implementation of the Agreement on Peace and
Reconciliation in Mali, a determined fight against the
terrorist groups of the region, good governance and
the creation of sustainable economic prospects for the
population. More must also be done in the Lake Chad
basin to support the continued mobilization of the States
of the Multinational Joint Task Force and to ensure
that its activity is conducted in ways that ensure the
full support of the population. Only an approach that
combines political, security and development efforts is
likely to change the situation in the medium term.

The United Nations has a central role to play in
assisting States in the region to develop adequate
responses in all of those areas. In Burkina Faso, France
fully supports the process initiated by the Secretary-
General to that end. We hope that the United Nations
response will be ambitious and meet the expectations of
the Burkinabe authorities in the fields of humanitarian
aid and development, the training of national security
forces, respect for human rights, promotion of the rule
of law and support for the fight against terrorism.

Beyond our mobilization on those crisis situations, it
is more important than ever to preserve the fundamentals
of regional stability in West Africa and the Sahel. This
means, first of all, holding credible, transparent and
inclusive elections. In Guinea-Bissau, it is essential that
the authorities respect their commitment to organizing
presidential elections in November, in accordance with
procedures recommended by the Economic Community
of West African States and the Security Council. In
other countries, such as Togo, Benin and Guinea, it is
important that all actors continue to work together to
strengthen the inclusiveness and suitability of upcoming
elections. Finally, particular attention must be paid to
strengthening the representation of women in areas of
responsibility, which today is far from satisfactory in
the countries of the region.

Respecting the rights of all and fighting impunity
are also essential factors of stability. The multiple
abuses committed against civilians in the various
conflict zones ofthe region must not be left unanswered,
regardless of who is behind them. Ongoing transitional
justice processes, particularly in Mali and the Gambia,
must be successfully concluded to create conditions
for lasting reconciliation. There must also be full and
complete cooperation with the International Criminal
Court. The protection of children in conflict and
the situation of the increasing number of internally
displaced persons and refugees in the area must receive
our full attention, and UNOWAS has a clear role to play
in addressing these issues.

Stability also goes hand in hand with long-term
support for countries emerging from crisis. The
continued mobilization of the international community
in Liberia, following the closure of the United Nations
Mission in Liberia, is particularly critical to the success
of the remarkable democratic transition that took place
there a year and a half ago.

I will conclude by emphasizing that the link
between climate and security is becoming increasingly
evident in the countries of the Sahel. The effects of
climate change are stoking tensions over resources,
with a direct impact on the population. However, the
sustainable management of these resources, such as
water and farmland, is one of the essential conditions
for the maintenance of stability in an area like the Sahel
that is marked by political and social vulnerability
and major forced population displacement. The
implementation of the Sustainable Development Goals
and the Paris Agreement, as well as the establishment
of a regional dialogue on climate and environmental
issues, is essential in that respect. It is important for
UNOWAS to fully take these considerations into
account in its day-to-day work.

