Mr. Castaneda Solares (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish): As the cornerstone of reconciliation,
Guatemala recognizes the crucial importance of
Chapter VI of the Charter of the United Nations, which
refers to the peaceful settlement of disputes, along with
the provisions of Chapter VII to maintain or restore
international peace and security.

As a country that promotes peace, Guatemala
believes that reconciliation complements good offices
and mediation, which are acknowledged as important
measures for preventing or resolving disputes and
conflicts, in accordance with international law. If
reconciliation processes were launched sufficiently in
advance to address the root causes and dynamics of
conflicts, while taking into consideration the traditions
and sociopolitical idiosyncrasies of the affected
population, conflicts could be prevented in time.
As the Council knows, my country was affected
by a domestic armed conflict that ended with the
signature of firm and lasting peace agreements in
1996. We welcome the efforts made at the time by the
international community and the United Nations to
implement those agreements. Based on our experience,
Guatemala firmly believes that the efforts of the
international community must be guided by national
sociopolitical and historical contexts, so as to ensure
significant ownership. In other words, the parties to
a reconciliation process in a post-conflict society can
address the root causes of their differences to ensure
that reconciliation efforts are not in vain.

Local leadership is an important element in all
national reconciliation processes. It is our view that, to
a large extent, local and community leaders help ensure
that reconciliation processes are effective, with long-
term results. In many cases, the leaders of such elected
authorities as mayors, governors, community leaders,
as well as faith leaders and religious leaders, set the
tone to ensure that existing differences in a specific
reconciliation process can be overcome. Such efforts
can notably contribute to initiatives of the United
Nations and to the work conducted by the special envoys
or special representatives of the Secretary-General and
peacekeeping operations and special political missions.

The Council has at its disposal various tools to
strengthen national reconciliation processes. The
concept of sustaining peace was reaffirmed through
identical resolutions adopted in 2016: Security
Council resolution 2282 (2016) and General Assembly
resolution 70/262. With this concept, the international
community decided to address in any conflict situation
the observance of and respect for human rights, the
furthering of sustainable development, all under a
comprehensive peace and security framework. There
is no conventional practice that can be imposed by
one State on another to obtain an immediate positive
impact for social peace. Reconciliation and reparation
processes take time. However, these efforts must be
revitalized, using as a basis caring for the needs of the
population, which, if not met, could lead to conflict,
including human rights violations, the denial of
opportunities and social exclusion.

Last but not least, we should recall the content of
resolution 1325 (2000), which stresses the importance
of women as essential stakeholders in conflict
resolution. Women are agents of positive change,
efficient administrators and experts on the realities
of their immediate environments. Accordingly, their
involvement in peace and reconciliation processes, as
agents of reconciliation, is essential.

