Mr. Adechi (Benin) (spoke in French): I would
like to echo previous speakers in congratulating
Ambassador Mufioz and all the other members of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1267
(1999) for their excellent work. Ambassador Mufioz's
briefing sums up the efforts of the international
community in confronting the modern-day scourge of
terrorism.

What action should we take to meet the
challenge? We think that vigilance - keeping our
States on permanent alert - is necessary. My
delegation therefore supports the initiatives of the
Committee to increase the effectiveness of sanctions
against individuals, groups of individuals and entities
on the list. The Committee should pursue its efforts to
make the list effective and credible by including data
that would make it easier to identify individuals or
entities on the list. Here, we understand, the
Committee's difficulty with respect to the
interpretation of resolution 1526 (2004), and we invite
it, at the proper time, to propose to the Council ways of
improving it. Increased action is also needed to provide
assistance to States in strengthening national
legislation their institutional capacity to fight
terrorism.

With respect to the reports that Member States,
pursuant to resolution 1455 (2003), must submit on
steps they have taken to implement resolution 1267
(1999), my delegation believes that the delay of certain
States in submitting reports does not mean that they are
uninterested or that they lack the political will. The
Committee needs to establish and maintain dialogue
with those States and work with them to identify any
obstacles and help overcome them. The Committee
must be more attentive to the real material constraints
faced by many States in terms of administrative
capacities, expertise and logistical capacity.

Finally, we call on the 1267 Committee to
continue its cooperation with other Council
committees, in particular the Counter-Terrorism
Committee and the 1540 Committee, as well as with
other organizations involved in combating organized
crime, such as INTERPOL, so as to avoid duplication
and overlap and in order to optimize its activities on
the ground.

