Ms. Navarro (Panama) (spoke in Spanish): Allow
me first of all to commend the initiative of the Italian
presidency of the Security Council to convene this
timely open debate. We also appreciate the initial
contributions of the Secretary-General, the Executive
Director of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime and the Special Rapporteur on trafficking in
persons, especially in women and children, which make
clear the current situation of a scourge that does not
recognize borders and that, regrettably, with its various
faces and manifestations, affects all our countries.

Panama has participated in the past three debates
of the Security Council on this issue because it
understands that collective responsibility is required to
address a global phenomenon, which, together with all
the related factors, jeopardizes the integrity, security,
stability and economic, social and cultural development
of our peoples.

Clearly, resolution 2331 (2016), adopted
unanimously by the Council almost a year ago, further
underscored the intention of States to address any
form of trafficking in human beings in conflict areas,
understanding that that degrading practice constitutes
a violation of the human rights of the victims. It
undermines their human condition for the benefit of
criminal networks.

We have taken due note of the observations and
recommendations contained in the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2017/939) on trafficking in
persons in armed conflict pursuant to resolution 2331
(2016) . We would underscore our clear concern over
the need to focus analysis on the close links between
the trafficking of children in conflict situations and
the serious violations facing them. We therefore
commend the Security Council for taking action in that
regard. Panama echoes the strong condemnation of the
Secretary-General yesterday following news reports
that revealed the existence of slave markets in Libya,
where the degrading auction of migrants and refugees
is a shocking reality.

In the current context, in which conflicts generate
mass migration flows, and as we work towards the
global compact for safe, orderly and regular migration,
international cooperation efforts must address that
serious issue through the holistic and fully unified
approach that it demands ofus by focusing on its causes.

For Panama, preventing and combating trafficking
in persons is a priority of the citizen security
strategy, designed to safeguard the human rights of
all individuals and, at the same time, to protect the
network of services of our country from actions of
organized crime in order to prevent those services
from being used for illicit activities, such as financing
terrorism. In line with the United Nations Global Plan
of Action to Combat Trafficking in Persons, adopted in
2010, Panama has implemented a set of specific actions
to prevent human trafficking, prosecute traffickers,
protect victims and establish partnerships to mobilize
resources for cooperation. In terms of data collection,
our biometric database made it possible to prevent
people with links to criminal networks from entering
the country or avoiding migratory controls.

As a country of transit and destination for migrants,
Panama has acted responsibly by enacting up-to-date
legislation to address the phenomenon and its related
activities, and is committed to the implementation of
the United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime; its Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and
Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially in Women
and Children; its Protocol against the Smuggling
of Migrants by Land, Sea and Air; and the Protocol
of 2014 to the Convention Concerning Forced or
Compulsory Labour.

We are pleased to be a member of the regional
coalition against human trafficking and to hold the
vice-presidency of the Board of Trustees of the United
Nations Voluntary Trust Fund for Victims of Trafficking
in Persons, Especially Women and Children, which is
represented by our Minister of Public Security, as we
confidently rely on regional actions with global reach.

Panama also recognizes the value ofjoint initiatives
with international organizations. That is why the
efforts of our national commission against trafficking
in persons, together with the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) and the International
Organization for Migration, to strengthen mutual legal
assistance mechanisms in the exchange of information
that facilitates the investigation and prosecution of the
crime of trafficking in persons has yielded significant
results. This confirms our belief that action cannot
be undertaken in isolation. We therefore welcome the
agreement that has been signed with UNODC for the
construction in Panama of the first shelter for victims
oftrafficking in the region, which will meet the highest
relevant international standards.

I conclude by once again renewing the strong
commitment of Panama to fighting against this form
of modern slavery, without ignoring the value of the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, as we see
that the link between sustainable development and the
promotion and protection of human rights as a means to
confront the asymmetrical structural factors that fuel
this scourge.

