Mrs. Adnin (Malaysia): I join earlier speakers
in thanking Special Envoy Guebre Sellassie for
her comprehensive briefing on progress towards
implementation of the United Nations Integrated
Strategy for the Sahel and the situation in the Sahel
region.

As highlighted by Ms. Sellassie, the situation in
the Sahel region remains a matter of concern. Since
her last briefing (see S/PV.7335), the region has faced
and continues to face many challenges and conflicts.
Of particular concern is the ongoing threat posed by
terrorism. The attack on the Radisson Blu Hotel in
Bamako last week and the ambush of the presidential
bus in Tunis yesterday are cases in point. I take
this opportunity to extend the solemn and deepest
condolences of my Government to those affected and
wish survivors a speedy recovery.

Malaysia stands in solidarity with countries of the
Sahel and all countries similarly affected by the scourge
of terrorism. We strongly and unequivocally condemn
all acts and practices of terrorism, regardless of their
motivation. We remain unwavering in our commitment
to combating terrorism in accordance with the Charter
of the United Nations and international law.

We are equally concerned by the security situation
resulting from the attacks by Boko Haram in the
region. We are in particular gravely alarmed by the
systematic and widespread abuses of children and
violations of their human rights perpetrated by Boko
Haram and other terrorist groups. In that regard, we
welcome and support the efforts of the countries of the
Lake Chad Basin Commission and Benin to establish
and operationalize the Multinational Joint Task Force.
We are pleased to note that the Task Force has made
steady progress in the fight against Boko Haram, and
encourage the international community to continue
supporting the Task Force. I also take this opportunity
to register our appreciation to the countries that have
contributed their efforts to the fight against Boko
Haram, and to pay tribute to the soldiers who have lost
their lives.

It is appalling that the number of displaced persons
across the region has increased sharply, from 1.6 million
in January 2014 to 4.4 million in 2015. It is particularly
distressing to note that children have been particularly
affected, with an estimated 1.4 million currently
displaced in Nigeria and neighbouring countries. At
the same time, we note that the humanitarian stuation
in the region remains precarious. In that connection,
we urge Ms. Sellassie to continue her intensive work
with the relevant international organizations to find a
solution to the problem.

Against that background, we are encouraged by
the enhanced cooperation between the Office of the
Special Envoy and all relevant regional and subregional
actors, particularly the African Union, the Economic
Community of Western African States and the Group
of Five for the Sahel. It is indeed crucial that relevant
key partners intensify their efforts to address the
challenges that continue to affect the region, including
the proliferation of weapons, radicalism and violent
extremism, food insecurity, trafficking in drugs and
humans, lack of education and youth unemployment.
We are particularly pleased to note that concerted
efforts have been made to align national projects
with the United Nations Integrated Strategy for the
Sahel. These efforts, together with continuous and
comprehensive engagement with the countries of the
region, will enable us to formulate a truly integrated
strategy that will bring sustainable development and
prosperity to the Sahel region.

While effective coordination and cooperation
among multinational partners, regional organizations
and countries of the region are essential, Malaysia
continues to believe in the importance of according
primacy to national and regional initiatives. In that
regard, the role of the Ministerial Coordination
Platform for the Sahel is imperative to the effective and
successful implementation of initiatives and strategies
on the Sahel. We also commend the strong commitment
and support provided by the multitude of international
partners and stakeholders to the Strategy.

Malaysia looks forward to the Secretary-General's
strategic review of the Office of the Special Envoy, to
be conducted in December. We remain hopeful that the
strategic review will provide a realistic assessment,
important insight and constructive recommendations
on ways to further improve the implementation of the
United Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel. We are
aware that the tasks facing the countries of the Sahel are
monumental, and that international support is therefore
crucial. I therefore wish to conclude by reaffirming
Malaysia's commitment to working closely with all
regional and international partners - particularly
the United Nations, the African Union, the Economic
Community of West African States and the countries of
the region - towards the implementation of the United
Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel.

