Mr. Simeon (Haiti) (spoke in French): I wish at
the outset to convey the sincere congratulations of the
Haitian delegation to the Argentine delegation for the
highly effective manner in which it is guiding the
Council's work this month.

I welcome the presence at this special meeting of
Mr. Juan Gabriel Valdes, the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, and thank him for the relevant
and useful information he has just provided on the
situation in Haiti. Naturally, we take note of his
recommendations, because we know that they emerge
from a very clear-sighted understanding of our
problems on the part of a man who, now as in the past,
has always proven to be a sincere friend of Haiti and
demonstrated his solidarity with and understanding of
our people.

I convey to the Council the sincere thanks of the
Haitian delegation for the convening of this special
meeting, which will enable the Council to make a new
assessment of the situation in Haiti. The representation
of several delegations at a very high level clearly
reflects the interest of the international community, and
the United Nations in particular, in the political
stabilization of Haiti.

Allow me to convey to the delegations of the
Governments and peoples, victims of the devastation
caused by the recent tsunami, the sympathies of the
Government and the people of Haiti. Our feelings of
solidarity also go out to the representatives of non-
Asian nations that were also struck by that natural
disaster.

My delegation also congratulates Secretary-
General Kofi Annan, who, in his report contained in
document S/2004/908, has made relevant
recommendations on reconfiguring the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH).

At the Council's meeting on Haiti on 29 November
2004, the Secretary-General recommended in his report
that the international community make a long-term
commitment to Haiti. My delegation believes that the
recommendation was fully justified by the fact that the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration process
already under way is a long-term effort calling for vast
resources far in excess of the capacity of a State like
Haiti, endowed with limited resources.

The Transitional Government of Haiti duly
appreciates the initiatives already undertaken under
resolution 1529 (2004) to promote the establishment of
a stable and secure climate conducive to economic
recovery and preparations for the elections scheduled
for 2005 under the timetable established by the
Provisional Electoral Council.

Unfortunately, the security situation in my
country, and especially in the working-class
neighbourhoods, has deteriorated in recent months. The
personnel shortage of the Haitian National Police and
the delayed deployment of MINUSTAH troops have
complicated efforts to deal with the gangs and to
restore order in dangerous areas. Recent weeks,
however, have seen a clear improvement thanks to the
joint efforts of the National Police and MINUSTAH.

In its desire to establish a stable and secure
environment through the disarmament of armed groups,
the Government has given special attention to the issue
of demobilized military personnel. The commission
charged with the management of that matter has been
reorganized and strengthened in an effort to make it
more effective. We have quickly seen encouraging
results. Consequently, many members of Haiti's armed
forces received the first instalment of their pensions
during the year-end holidays. The process is under
way, and we hope soon to be able to provide all former
military personnel the full amount of the moneys due
them, thereby meeting one of their main demands.

With the assistance of MINUSTAH, the Haitian
National Police has peaceably been able to regain
control of several police stations illegally occupied by
armed groups. All the necessary efforts and resources
are being deployed to neutralize the gangs and
criminals involved in the pernicious undertaking of
destabilization and large-scale terror against the
population.

In the area of human rights, the current situation
represents a wide-ranging legacy of dictatorship whose
political consequences included the disappearance of
democratic institutions. Efforts are under way to end
impunity, guarantee the independence of the justice
system and bring professionalism to the police, thereby
establishing an order in which law prevails over
violence and force. In that regard, the transition team
welcomes the recent release by judicial authorities of a
number of detainees who had been held without
charges of any sort. Others have been granted
provisional release while their cases are investigated.

The provisional President of the Republic and the
Transitional Government are well aware of the
complexity of the challenges facing Haiti. The
interrelated issues of dire poverty, unemployment and
illiteracy provide a very fertile breeding ground for a
vast range of social excesses and political dealing. The
enemies of our country recruit their henchmen and
underlings in the poorest environments, skilfully
utilizing the distress of the people to attain their
sinister political aims. It is therefore vital to thwart
those warmongers by promptly putting in place a
national economic recovery plan and by improving the
living conditions of the people, especially in
marginalized areas.

It is truly painful to see that the lack of resources
to fund development activities is increasingly
compromising the efforts of both the international
community and the Government to protect human
rights and establish democracy. In that regard, the
Transitional Government of Haiti fully supports the
Secretary-General's recommendations aimed at quickly
meeting the obligations made by lenders to finance the
interim cooperation framework. I would therefore like
to avail myself of this opportunity to call for
understanding on the part of our cooperation partners,
which have already demonstrated their determination
to help us succeed in the transition, to translate their
expressions of solidarity into actions. In that
connection, I welcome the initiative of a number of
partners, which have already begun to meet the
commitments they made at the donors conference held
in Washington in July 2004.

The year 2005 will be a crucial one for
democracy in Haiti. We are at an important historical
crossroads, given the commitment that has been
repeatedly voiced by the current governmental team to
restore an elected Government by 7 February 2006 that
both meets the norms set out in Haiti's 1987
Constitution and the democratic values we all share. In
order to do so, the Government is making every effort
to facilitate the work of the Provisional Electoral
Council. With the swearing in of a new representative
from the Catholic Church, the Council has been
working at full strength since last week.

We in Haiti have been very pleased to welcome
the offers of cooperation made by many of our friends
in the international community to ensure that we
succeed in that effort. Nevertheless, the scope of the
needs continues to be in sharp contrast with the
country's limited administrative and financial
capacities. We therefore urgently call for substantial
support from the international community in that
regard. We hope that that support will also include the
deployment of observers to ensure the credibility of the
process, and thereby the impartiality of the results.

After the many years of division and bitterness that
have gravely damaged the fabric of Haitian society -
and given all that entails in terms of social and political
instability and frustration among citizens - national
reconciliation is now an absolute necessity. We in the
Transitional Government are fully aware of that. It is
for that reason that the transition team is making every
effort to promote the inclusive national dialogue that
our fellow citizens and our friends in the international
community are fervently calling for. In his new year's
message to the nation, our head of State called on all
Haitians to set aside their political views and class
affiliation and put an end to age-01d hatreds in order to
take part in that dialogue. We hope that that call will be
echoed among all of the country's social groups in
order that we may win the battle to save the ship of
State. That will necessarily entail success in the
political transition, which follows many years of
hesitation and evasion.

After two centuries of ineffective political and
economic management, the Republic of Haiti is today
at the edge of the abyss. Need and abject poverty have
reached alarming proportions, and the socio-economic
infrastructure is in an advanced state of ruin. We are
very pleased that, under the aegis of the United
Nations, the international community has come
forward to assist us. However, we hope that the
international community's commitment to us will not
be limited to the political transition alone. Although
that is of course a necessary step towards establishing
the rule of law and building a society that respects
democratic values, a lasting solution to the economic
problems facing Haiti entails a more substantial,
longer-term commitment on the part of our friends in
the international community. More than ever, Haiti
needs the support of its bilateral and multilateral
partners to assist it to finally emerge from the rut of
underdevelopment. On behalf of my delegation, of the
Transitional Government of Haiti and of the Haitian
people, I therefore express the hope that a consistent
and long-term programme of financial and technical
assistance will be put in place for Haiti that takes into
account the country's real needs in all social, political
and economic areas.

