Mr. Diarra (Mali) (spoke in French):
Mr. President, my delegation is pleased to see you
presiding over this meeting of the Security Council.
My delegation would like to commend Benin for
holding this open debate on the question of children
and armed conflict. We are also grateful to the
Secretary-General for the excellent report issued as
S/2005/72, of 9 February 2005. We wish to
congratulate the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children in Armed Conflict for
his briefing.

The information provided on compliance with
commitments made shows that despite the
improvements we have seen with regard to the
recruitment of children in situations of armed conflict,
certain armed groups have continued that practice.
However, we are pleased to see that the parties are
proving to be more open to dialogue with United
Nations structures.

On 20 January 2004, speaking on behalf of the
Human Security Network, my delegation stressed the
overall goal of "bridging the gaps" between universal
human rights standards and their implementation and
between the concepts, programmes and systematic
responses in the field. The Human Security Network
has developed a support strategy that identifies a series
of guidelines, including the strengthening of
monitoring and training, and an early warning function
in the case of violation of children's rights.

My delegation is pleased that the Secretary-
General has proposed to the Council an action plan for
the establishment of a monitoring and reporting
mechanism. That action plan, which is the result of
joint efforts by UNICEF and other United Nations
entities, Governments, regional organizations and non-
governmental organizations (NGOs), transforms the
programme of work concerning children in armed
conflict into concrete measures and initiatives. My
delegation hopes this will open the long-awaited
implementation phase.

The four parts of the implementation of the plan,
as identified in the report, should, in the opinion of my
delegation, be completed by a fifth part, one
concerning the imposition of sanctions by responsible
organs for non-compliance with established standards.
The list of grave violations that should be particularly
monitored - six in number - should also include a
reference to the worst forms of child labour, the subject
of Convention No. 182 of the International Labour
Organization.

My delegation agrees with the Secretary-General
that to ensure its credibility, the monitoring and
reporting system must be based on precise and clearly
identified standards, and those standards must be
established in order to make practice uniform. They
will be based on national and international legal
commitments, but they will also be inspired by best
practices observed in the field. The training modules
for the different players will be based on those
standards. The sources of law that the report refers to
will strengthen the national legislation of States in the
area of child protection. Furthermore, parties whose
activities must be monitored are both Governments and
armed groups. The dialogue advocated in the report
must, in principle, influence the conduct of the parties.

However, if there are no conclusive results,
pressure must also be considered. The use of targeted
measures will certainly ensure that parties will respect
their international commitments. The identification, in
the different reports of the Secretary-General, of actors
who abuse those practices is an intermediate step that
should be pursued. Entities in charge of gathering,
verifying and compiling information at the country
level, in particular civil society and NGOs, should be
strengthened. Bodies that have decision-making power
should show more firmness and determination. I am
thinking in particular of the Security Council and the
International Criminal Court, as well as the special
tribunals, because in this area law without coercion
will have only a limited effect.

My delegation is convinced that strengthening
early warning mechanisms could help reduce the
adverse impact of serious violations of children's
rights. However, the best protection for children will
be found in the establishment of an environment that is
conducive to the development of individuals, one
characterized by the primacy of law, where a minimum
of social welfare and social justice could be achieved,
an environment in which all segments of society,
including youth, will play an effective role in the
management of public affairs.

