Mr. Dumitru (Romania): We are very honoured
by your presence, Mr. Minister, and we wish to thank
you and the Algerian presidency for taking the
initiative of holding this very important and timely
meeting on a highly topical matter. We are also grateful
to Under-Secretary-General Jan Egeland for his
thoughtful briefing. I would like also to mention that
Romania associates itself with the statement which is
to be made by the Permanent Representative of the
Netherlands to the United Nations on behalf of the
European Union.

We welcome the performance and progress that
the United Nations and its partners have achieved in
their humanitarian work since the Secretary General's
report of 28 May (S/2004/431). However, it is evident
that the situation remains disturbing in many parts of
the world, since civilians, in particular women,
children and other vulnerable groups, are increasingly
targeted by combatants during armed conflict.

It goes without saying that the Council has
already acted with respect to the protection of civilians
in armed conflict. It has made a considerable number
of commitments and identified certain priorities, which
have been addressed to a significant extent.
Nevertheless, the ever-changing picture of conflict we
witness today forces us to adjust the ways we address
the problem.

Perhaps the most dramatic evidence of the
changing nature of conflict is the fact that civilians are
no longer just incidental victims of armed conflicts, but
have increasingly become targets and even tools of
warfare. Women and children are especially vulnerable
in situations of armed conflict, and there are situations
in which humanitarian workers of the United Nations
and non-governmental organizations have become
direct targets - as a tactical move frequently resorted
to by the factions engaged in conflict.

When moving from conflict to peace or from one
conflict to the next, we are able to ascertain new trends
and become aware of new needs related to the
protection of civilians. We continually identify new
threats to civilian populations, including to the most
vulnerable among them, and foster attempts to come up
with the right answers - often on a case-by-case basis
in order to protect them. Each conflict is a milestone in
that effort and teaches us new lessons. This Council
has the obligation to adjust its responses accordingly.

First, we must strengthen norms and ensure their
proper implementation. The Security Council must
make sure that parties to conflicts are pressured to
comply fully with the provisions of the Charter of the
United Nations and with the rules and principles of
international law, in particular international
humanitarian, human rights and refugee law.

Further, we need to step up efforts to ensure that
all States live up to their commitments to end impunity
and prosecute those responsible for genocide, war
crimes, crimes against humanity and violations of
humanitarian law. Taking into account the special need
for protection of certain categories of civilians, we
must undertake specific measures and design a broad
strategy with the aim of preventing and addressing
cases of sexual and gender-based violence and making
sure that those atrocious violations of human rights do
not go unpunished.

Against that backdrop, Romania considers that
special attention still needs to be given to the
humanitarian crisis in Darfur, as well as to those in
northern Uganda, Cote d'Ivoire and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo - to name only the most tragic
examples of situations in which civilians are suffering
from armed conflicts. We have been actively involved
in encouraging the inter-Sudanese peace process and in
finding solutions for the humanitarian crisis in Darfur.
The Security Council must continue to be active in that
respect; Romania is ready to support the creation of
new instruments designed to appropriately calibrate
our responses in order to protect civilians in armed
conflict in an ever-changing security context.

Prevention is key to protection. In that respect,
we need to adopt a more strategic approach in order to
address the root causes of armed conflict in a
comprehensive manner. The international community
must provide the necessary incentives for parties to
engage in meaningful processes of political
reconciliation. Establishment of democratic
institutions, respect for human rights and ensuring
material conditions for sustainable development in
societies shaken by conflicts are of no less importance.

On the other hand, the regional dimension of
certain armed conflicts has been proven. Romania has
always strongly supported the United Nations
entrusting regional organizations with the mandate to
take up this agenda and bring the tasks associated with
it to fulfilment. In order to better calibrate our response
to the evolving environment of conflicts and to build a
viable system of protection - on issues involving the
processes of disarmament, demobilization,
reintegration and rehabilitation; refugees and internally
displaced persons; or small arms - we must also think
regionally and engage the United Nations in a mutually
beneficial cooperation with regional organizations. The
development of a regional protection strategy should
be one important step in that direction. We welcome
the Secretary-General's recommendation regarding the
establishment of a framework within which the United
Nations could engage with regional organizations in a
more systematic way when addressing humanitarian
aspects of various crises at the regional level.

We are of the opinion that is it essential to
improve the overall capacity of the United Nations
system to provide appropriate responses to crises -
for example, by providing peacekeeping missions with
appropriate mandates and adequate resources, thus
enabling them to better attain their objectives,
including the protection of civilians in situations of
armed conflicts.

It is in this very context that Romania welcomes
the Algerian initiative to conclude this important
meeting with a presidential statement that would also
open the road to further follow-up, including by the
Security Council, of this topical issue.

