Mr. Puri (India): Let me begin by offering you,
Sir, my warmest good wishes on the completion of
your tenure as Permanent Representative of Turkey,
and my congratulations on your completion of an
outstanding career in public service. I wish you the
very best and every success in your future endeavours.
I also thank you, Sir, for scheduling today's debate on
the situation in Afghanistan. This is of immediate and
abiding interest to India, a close neighbour and
civilizational partner of Afghanistan.

India welcomes the positive perspective reflected
in the Secretary-General's report (S/2009/323) and the
briefing by Special Representative Eide regarding the
three interlinked strategic shifts in Afghanistan.

For India, the litmus test of cost-effective
investment in assistance programmes is to ensure that
these are aligned closely with Afghan priorities and
that they contribute to capacity-building. We endorse
the Secretary-General's exhortation to the international
community to maintain its broad and multinational
presence. This is indeed the time not to reduce our
efforts, but to enhance them in a coordinated manner.
That has been our consistent position, even after the
attack on our embassy in Kabul last July.

The Secretary-General's report is a clear riposte
to the voices questioning the utility of our collective
effort. In response, we must stand behind the civilian
surge and the expansion of Afghan capacity, both in
word and deed. That will require strongly supporting
the priority areas identified by our Afghan partners,
including agriculture, energy, private sector development
and capacity-building. Useful decisions in that regard
were taken at the eleventh meeting of the Joint
Coordination and Monitoring Board. We must also
support the financial and administrative expansion of
the United Nations presence, undertaken at our
collective exhortation.

At the same time, organizational difficulties and
political debates notwithstanding, the second nationwide
and presidential elections since 2001 should be more of
a cause for satisfaction, as emphasized by my friend
and colleague the Ambassador of Afghanistan. We
recognize that there are calls to ensure that the
elections are free and fair. Naturally, elections need a
level playing field, but let us recognize that vibrant
political debate is itself a hopeful sign. Energetic
debates do not always imply the unravelling of the
political process. We need also to be mindful that too
much external advice often acts conversely and
undermines domestic institutions.
09-38734

From all these standpoints, the moment has come
for us to more vocally recognize and support growing
Afghan capacities. Too much time has been spent
berating Afghan actors for various failings, instead of
placing their efforts in the correct perspective.
Establishing a modern Government after decades of
war, displacement and privation was never going to be
an easy task. We must no longer continue to miss the
woods for the trees.

On the negative side, the security situation
remains deeply worrying. It does not take much
foresight to predict that the coming six months will be
difficult, most of all for the Afghan people.

Asymmetric warfare and complex terrorist
attacks are being mounted and the wellsprings that
sustain such terror show no signs of being drained. We
need to ponder deeply over how best that can be
achieved. In that context, we continue to have
reservations with regard to the language used in United
Nations reports to describe terrorist attacks. Surely
such operations are not being mounted by anti-
Government elements or insurgents.

We welcome the progress recorded by the Afghan
National Army, especially as the expansion of its
capacity is the only viable guarantee of a successful
conclusion to military engagement in Afghanistan. We
note with appreciation the efforts being made by third
countries to strengthen the capacities of the Afghan
National Army.

That brings me to reconciliation. While that is
often a corollary of military strategies, in Afghanistan
it is a matter that requires great caution. Successive
reports of the Secretary-General and resolutions here
and in the General Assembly have underscored that it
should be an Afghan-led process, within the parameters
of the Constitution of the land. It has also be been
reiterated that it must be pursued from a position of
strength. We must consider whether we are at that
juncture as yet.

Reconciliation requires strategic clarity, unity of
purpose and due recognition of the nature of those with
whom we seek to reconcile. Without consensus among
the relevant parties over key issues - such as
reconciliation, with whom and how - we may well be
dividing ourselves, not those we seek to peel away
from terrorist groups. It is for that reason that we must
go beyond unworkable distinctions between good and
bad Taliban. Equally, we have to be mindful that, in

pursuing those distinctions, we are projecting
impressions of weakness, desperation or even a
defeatist mentality.

I should like to reaffirm our unswerving
commitment to helping our Afghan partners to the
fullest extent of our capabilities. Stabilizing
Afghanistan is not only integrally connected to our
own security; it is also connected to the civilizational
legacy of our friendship. That is why attacks upon our
people and symbols of our friendship only serve to
outrage us and redouble our commitment to
Afghanistan.

Our commitment to Afghanistan has now
exceeded $1.2 billion. It includes the widest range of
activities, from a cold-storage plant in Kandahar to a
power transmission line to Kabul. We are building the
Parliament building while simultaneously targeting
community-based local projects that provide quick
peace dividends, such as schools and hospitals. In all
of that, capacity-building is a core element. It is in
support of that core task that India has expanded the
current allocation of 1,000 seats in our institutions for
capacity-building and scholarship programmes by
35 per cent.

Turning to the regional aspect, the stabilization of
Afghanistan must be a central part of regional
processes if the country is to regain its role as the
crossroads of South, West and Central Asia. That
includes regional economic processes, such as the
South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation and
the Regional Economic Cooperation Conference on
Afghanistan, which benefit the entire region. Hindering
those processes affects Afghanistan as well as the
region. We must expand rather than hinder trade,
transit and transport ties, including overland transit and
trade. That is the best way of bringing the regional
dimension into play in a positive manner.

In conclusion, we note the Secretary-General's
commitment to providing us with benchmarks of
progress in his next report. That will be a good step,
especially if they are results-based rather than timeline-
based. We look forward to participating in the
discussion about the benchmarks, with the full
ownership of the Government of Afghanistan.

