Mr. Tierney (Ireland) (spoke in French): I
thank you, Madam President, for convening today's
important debate.

We align ourselves with the statements delivered
earlier on behalf of the European Union and the Human
Security Network.

(spoke in English)

The facts revealed in the report of the Secretary-
General (S/2018/462) are stark. Over the past 12 months,
tens of thousands of civilians were killed or injured and
millions were forced to flee their homes as a direct
result of armed conflict. Last year, the United Nations
recorded the death or injury of more than 26,000
civilians by deliberate or otherwise indiscriminate
attacks in just six countries. Furthermore, the report
highlights that more than 50 million people are
impacted by conflict in urban warfare today.

International humanitarian law, in particular
the principles of distinction, discrimination and
proportionality, and the obligation to take precautions
in attacks, must be adhered to by all States engaged
in armed conflict. Of particular concern is the use
of explosive weapons having area-wide effects in
urban areas. The use of such weapons, which strike
both military objectives and civilians and civilian
objects without distinction, have long-term negative
humanitarian impacts that far outlast the conflicts in
which they are used. Beyond the immediate injuries and
deaths caused, the destruction of crucial infrastructure,
housing, schools, hospitals and water and sanitation
systems means that civilian populations suffer long
after the conflict has ended.

More than 32,000 civilians were recorded killed
or injured in 2016 by explosive weapons, with Syria,
Iraq, Yemen, Afghanistan and Turkey having the
highest numbers of civilian deaths and injuries. In
total, incidents of explosive violence took place in
70 countries. Explosive weapons also have specific
impacts on women due to damage to homes and
the societal disarray in the aftermath of bombing
and shelling.

We need a renewed political commitment to
the protection of civilians. We require enhanced
compliance through more effective operationalization
of the relevant provisions of international humanitarian
law into military doctrine and practice. Protection and
access to humanitarian assistance must be ensured for
those affected by crisis, including women, children,
persons with injuries, persons with disabilities and
the most vulnerable. We welcome the continued
calls for accountability for violations of international
humanitarian law, which is vital to the protection of
civilians and to achieving sustainable peace.

(spoke in French)

Peacekeeping is an essential tool for the protection
ofcivilians. Ireland supports the Kigali Principles on the
Protection of Civilians and believes that the Principles
can and must underpin the work of peacekeeping
operations on the protection of civilians. As a major
troop-contributing country, Ireland strongly supports
the notion that peace operations be provided with the
necessary means to fulfil their mandates, including the
protection of civilians.

(spoke in English)

Training and leadership are also key. Ireland has
put at the disposal of United Nations partners a range
of courses that will meet a variety ofidentified training
needs. Ireland will also ensure that the Irish personnel
deployed on overseas peacekeeping missions operate to
the highest standards in accordance with international
humanitarian law and human rights law and that our
peacekeepers seek to ensure the security and protection
of civilians in accordance with their mission mandates
and rules of engagement.

We have also adopted a whole-of-government
approach to the institutionalization of the United
Nations voluntary compact on the elimination of
sexual exploitation and abuse. Much has been done on
that appalling issue at the level of the United Nations.
However, it is important to consistently reiterate that
it is impossible to have credibility in discussing the
protection of civilians if civilians are suffering abuse at
the hands of their supposed protectors.

As my colleague from the Human Security Network
so eloquently said earlier, we also share the Secretary-
General's view that, in the long term, the best way to
protect civilians is to address the root causes ofconflicts,
that is, to build sustainable peace, to promote human
rights and the rule of law, to strengthen governance and
democratic institutions and to invest in inclusive and
sustainable development.
