I first wish to join others in thanking the Dominican Republic for organizing this timely meeting. I am grateful to the Secretary-General for briefing us on the youth and peace and security agenda. France supports his recommendations and his call in this regard. I also wish to thank the Secretary-General's Envoy on Youth as well as the young peacebuilders who are with us today virtually for sharing their views and recommendations. Young leaders are already mobilized and active in all parts of the world to address major global issues. They did not wait for us to act. We see it in the unique role they play in strengthening the response to climate change and to the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. Last Friday, I had the opportunity to participate in a lively and substantive exchange of views with seven young Mediterranean peacebuilders from the Young Mediterranean Voices initiative, who shared innovative and dynamic proposals and showed their technological proficiency. The question is not whether but how we in the United Nations, at Headquarters and in the field, can better engage with youth in a mutually enriching manner. As the Secretary-General rightly pointed out, our awareness of young people's role is growing, but challenges remain. Young people continue to be victims of stereotypes and discrimination. The COVID-19 crisis has also exacerbated the vulnerability of young people, especially those least protected. They remain largely excluded from decision-making processes, political institutions and the labour market. Stereotypes are too often used as pretexts to ignore their demands and violate their rights. If their rights are not respected, if civic space is not protected, young people cannot fully express their potential or be actively engaged in the establishment of lasting peace. France has called for, as it will continue to do so, respect for the freedom of expression and the right to peaceful assembly everywhere and for everyone, in particular by supporting young human-rights defenders. Young people need to be involved effectively and meaningfully in the discussions and decisions on today's challenges. In that regard, the European Union's cross-regional networks and initiatives that allow young peacebuilders to influence decision-making are examples of best practices that can inspire others. To strengthen the empowerment of young people, especially young women, France invests in quality education. A total of €200 million have been channelled through the Global Partnership for Education. For young leaders to emerge, we must offer everyone the intellectual and moral tools that only quality education can provide. France will also put youth at the heart of the Generation Equality Forum, organized jointly with Mexico and UN-Women, now scheduled to take place in 2021. This will allow young people - and especially young women - to contribute meaningfully to the discussions. Their voices will be heard. Five years after the landmark resolution 2250 (2015), we must continue to mobilize to guarantee a central place for young people and harness their full potential in restoring peace and security, and building just, peaceful and inclusive societies. France will remain engaged so that young people and young women are involved in our work at the United Nations, including, of course, at the Security Council. We view both agendas - youth and peace and security, and women and peace and security - as essential to the Council's work. You, Sir, can count on France's support to keep this issue on the Security Council's agenda. Following the leadership of the Dominican Republic, we will therefore promote the adoption of a draft resolution on this agenda. I will conclude by expressing our full support for the call just launched by the Secretary-General for massive investment in young people in the wake of the COVID-19 pandemic to make sure we rebuild back better with them.
