Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
High Representative Inzko for his briefing.

China welcomes the achievements made by Bosnia
and Herzegovina in promoting national reconciliation
and economic development and in building the rule of
law. We have also noted that Bosnia and Herzegovina
still faces difficulties and challenges in attaining
stability and development in the country. We hope
that people of all ethnic groups in the country will
focus on the welfare and long-term interests of the
country, take effective measures to build mutual
political confidence, promote national reconciliation,
consolidate the achievements made in the political
process and actively settle differences through dialogue
and comprehensively implement the Dayton Peace
Agreement in order to bring about greater progress in
all areas.

China respects the independence, sovereignty,
national unity and territorial integrity of Bosnia
and Herzegovina. We respect the choice made by its
people regarding their country's future. We support
ethnic groups' living in harmony and seeking common
development. Maintaining peace and stability in Bosnia
and Herzegovina and promoting its economic and social
development are in keeping with the interests of all the
parties concerned.

China supports the international community
in playing a constructive role and calls upon the
international community to continue its support and
assistance to Bosnia and Herzegovina. Meanwhile, the
question of Bosnia and Herzegovina is highly complex
and sensitive, as it involves not only the country itself
but also peace and stability in the entire Balkan region.
The international community should adopt a prudent
attitude on the question and make greater efforts to
hear the views and concerns of the parties involved.

China welcomes the efforts made by Mr. Inzko to
promote the political process in Bosnia and Herzegovina
and hopes that, based on his mandate, he will continue
to play an active and constructive role in promoting
the implementation of the Dayton Peace Agreement.
China is ready to join the international community in
continuing its due contribution to achieving durable
peace, stability and development in Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

