Mr. Aguilar Zinser (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
My country wishes to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council,
and we wish you every success in this difficult month.
Our appreciation goes also to the Ambassador of
Bulgaria for the manner in which he conducted the
work of the Council last month.

My delegation associates itself with the statement
to be made later by the delegation of Costa Rica on
behalf of the Rio Group. Mexico wishes to convey its
very sincere and well-deserved congratulations and its
appreciation to Ambassador Jeremy Greenstock for the
wise and efficient manner in which he has guided the
work of the Counter-Terrorism Committee since its
inception. We hope that we can continue to rely on his
leadership, and my country reaffirms its fullest support
for the work of the Committee.

In the year that has elapsed since its
establishment, the Committee has demonstrated its
dynamism and its importance to the United Nations. I
wish also to note the work of the Vice-Chairmen -
Ambassador Valdivieso, Ambassador Koonjul and
Ambassador Lavrov - who, along with Ambassador
Greenstock, form an excellent team. The team of
officials from the United Kingdom Mission, the
outstanding work done by the Secretariat - and here
Mexico wishes to pay particular tribute to Ms. Sujata
Mehta for her tireless work in the Committee - all of
these factors have contributed to the success of the
Committee's work. It is also important to commend the
work done by the experts and their team of assistants.
They are quite simply the linchpin of the Committee.

The work of the Committee and of its experts in
arranging the provision of technical assistance is, at
this stage, acting as a kind of backbone, inasmuch as it
provides support for cooperation within the Committee,
thereby enabling the States Members of the United
Nations to enhance their capacity to respond to terrorist
acts. The dialogue between Member States and the
experts should be interactive, so that countries can
decide on the type and scope of the assistance that they
wish to receive.

Each and every one of us, as Members of the
United Nations, must make an effort at the national
level to adapt our juridical institutions and our political
and legal instruments to this undertaking, to which the
international community is committed. Mexico has
undertaken these steps in the full understanding of its
responsibilities. Mexico believes that the combat
against terrorism requires concerted action on the part
of authorities at various levels. This commitment on
the part of the Mexican authorities is attested to by the
fact that at this meeting the delegation of Mexico
includes the Governor of the state of Michoacan,
Mr. Lazaro Cardenas Batel, and the Governor of the
state of Oaxaca, Mr. Jose Murat, who are here to
observe the Committee's work.

We believe that one of the main contributions of
the Committee is its compilation of the publicly
available information concerning the practices of States
in the combat against terrorism. This compilation will
definitely facilitate the study of comparative
international law in this field.

Thanks to the work of the Committee, we are
moving towards a process of uniformity and
complementarity among the legal systems and judicial
processes of States, which will enable us to work
together to combat this common enemy.

One of the basic principles underlying the
struggle against terrorism is respect for international
law and for human rights. If this were not so, the
legitimacy and unity of our efforts would be
significantly diminished and undermined. We must
resolutely defend the fundamental principles that
govern our Organization.

Terrorism, in its many forms and its
manifestations, represents an assault on fundamental
human values: understanding, human compassion and
tolerance. Terrorism is sometimes perversely used in
the name of democratic freedoms to attack those very
freedoms. Terrorism exploits those freedoms and
attacks them. Terrorists penetrate open spaces; they
take advantage of the transparency of the information
and communications media; they use the media as a
weapon and financial systems to their advantage; and
they randomly attack innocent victims who are going
about their daily business.

Given their perverse nature, their fanaticism, their
anonymity and their cruelty and brutality in selecting
targets and victims without any consideration for the
lives of women, children and innocent people,
terrorists must be combated by every means available.
But the fight against terrorism presupposes some very
painful decisions for societies: the establishment of
monitoring and surveillance systems that limit our
freedoms, the building of barriers that impede our
freedom of movement, and restrictions on some of our
rights because of the struggle against terrorism.

These measures affect all of us. They are
preventive measures, the purpose of which is to prevent
terrorist acts. But they also represent after-effects and
damage, from which all of us suffer. They harm the
quality of our lives and the ways in which we live
together.
Given this, the international community, and the
United Nations in particular, must be very vigilant. We
must clearly bear in mind the costs of each and every
one of our actions, and we must be certain that the
measures we propose and take are fully justified and
truly effective.

We must scrupulously combine the fight against
terrorism with the defence of our freedoms and of
human and civil rights. We cannot play the game the
terrorists play. However effective we may be in
instituting precautionary and preventive measures,
terrorism will take advantage of every crack. No
security measure will render us immune to terrorism.
We are therefore compelled to make a substantive
response in our fight against terrorism, a fundamental
response that goes to the core and the root of the
impulses that motivate such acts. The best, most
effective weapons will be economic and social
development, the quest for peace through broad-
ranging and sustained efforts, focused attention to
humanitarian issues triggered by conflict, the
promotion of values, education and health care. The
United Nations has a central role to play in all of these
critical tasks.

We are aware that the Committee's mandate does
not include monitoring human rights, because other
bodies exist for that purpose. However, we would
appeal to States to ensure that their domestic
authorities comply with their international obligations
in that regard. Taking note of the contributions that
have been made by the Office of the High
Commissioner for Human Rights, we would underscore
the importance of that Office. We regard its input as
valuable, and we feel it is essential for the Committee
to maintain dialogue with it. We pay tribute to
Mrs. Mary Robinson for her contribution, and we
would like to offer our support to the new High
Commissioner, Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello, as he
begins his work.

My country has begun consultations with other
United Nations Members so that we can produce a
General Assembly resolution on human rights and
terrorism to give States the guidance necessary to
guarantee full respect for human rights in the fight
against terrorism.

Regional cooperation plays a very important role,
since convergences of interest and geographical
proximity make regional organizations a natural front
for action in the fight against terrorism. Here, we
applaud the progress achieved within the Organization
of American States.

I wish to conclude by reaffirming Mexico's
absolute readiness to continue to participate in, adopt
and support practical measures, with a long-term vision
that will make it possible to forge and consolidate a
new concept of international cooperation to combat this
scourge. Such a concept would have as a fundamental
purpose addressing the roots and basic causes of
hatred, frustration and violence.

