Mr. Ishikane (Japan): I would like to welcome you, Mr. President, and congratulate Viet Nam on commencing its term on the Security Council and for assuming the presidency for this month. At the outset, I would like to offer my condolences to the families and friends of the victims of the tragic aeroplane crash in Iran. I hope the circumstances of the event are fully investigated. The Charter of the United Nations continues to provide an indispensable basis for the maintenance of international peace and security. Seventy-five years ago, the founders created a world body to prevent the recurrence of devastating wars and establish a global order for sustainable peace and prosperity based on the principles and rules enshrined in the Charter. Those aspirations remain relevant today, and upholding the rules-based international order continues to be of critical importance. For the rules-based international order to be upheld, the peaceful settlement of disputes, in accordance with the rules, must be promoted and accepted. In that context, Japan is following the recent escalation of tensions in the Middle East with great concern. We urge all parties to make their best efforts to peacefully settle the issues. In coordination with relevant countries, we will continue to pursue diplomatic efforts to ease tensions and stabilize the situation in the Middle East region. All unilateral attempt to change the status quo by force or coercion should not be tolerated. As a State surrounded by ocean, Japan is particularly committed to upholding the rules-based maritime order and the peaceful resolution of disputes in accordance with international law, including the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea. For the rules-based international order to be upheld, agreed rules have to be observed. The States Members of the United Nations confer on the Security Council primary responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and security. The Charter requires that Member States accept and carry out the decisions of the Council. It is therefore deeply regrettable that some Member States fail to comply with Council decisions. For instance, North Korea continues its nuclear and ballistic missile programmes, in violation of many Security Council resolutions. I note that those resolutions impose certain obligations on other Member States as well. Japan calls upon all Member States to fully implement the relevant resolutions. For the rules-based international order to be upheld, the international judicial system should be properly developed and maintained. The Charter established the International Court of Justice as the principal judicial organ of the United Nations. Being a proud advocate of the Court, Japan has had the honour to contribute to it by providing it highly qualified judges, as well as financial support, and will continue to do so. For the rules-based international order to be upheld, due attention has to be paid to the evolution of technology, such as in the cyber domain. In that connection, Japan welcomes General Assembly resolutions that call upon all Member States to be guided by the reports of the Group of Governmental Experts, confirming the applicability of existing international law, including the Charter in its entirety, to this new domain. For the rules-based international order to be upheld, the world governing body must maintain its effectiveness and legitimacy. The world has changed dramatically during the past 75 years, and the United Nations system must keep pace. The Security Council must be reformed to better reflect the realities of the contemporary world, where more Member States have the willingness and capacity to contribute to maintaining and restoring peace. Japan looks forward to tangible progress in the long-overdue reform of the Council and calls for the launch of text-based negotiations during this session. I would also like to recall that certain provisions of the Charter have already been declared as obsolete by the General Assembly and should be removed at the earliest opportunity. For the rules-based international order to be sustainable and effective in face of the increasingly complex challenges of our time, it must reflect our collective faith in the dignity and worth of the human person, as enshrined in the Charter. We need to utilize a human security lens that emphasizes the protection and empowerment of every individual. As a long-standing advocate of the human security concept, Japan renews its determination to promote this approach, with the aim of upholding the values inscribed in the Charter. In conclusion, Japan reaffirms its unwavering commitment to playing an important role in ensuring that the world envisaged in the Charter is achieved and the rule of law is observed.
