Mr. Ouane (Mali) (interpretation from French): I
should like at the outset, on behalf of the Group of
African States, to extend to the families of the victims of
Pan Am Flight 103 and UTA Flight 772 our deepest
sympathy at their sorrow.

I should like also to address to you, Sir, on behalf of
the Group of African States - since I am speaking here
in that capacity - and on my own personal behalf to
express to you our warmest congratulations on your
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
March. This is all the more a pleasure for me as you are
the representative of a fraternal and friendly country,
Gambia. Your own qualities augur well for a wise and
competent presidency. I wish also to extend those
congratulations to your predecessor, Ambassador Denis
Dangue Rewaka of Gabon, for the effectiveness, the
competence and the sense of commitment with which he
discharged his mandate.

Lastly, I should like to express to you, Sir, our
heartfelt thanks and profound appreciation for having
convened this meeting in order to consider the question of
the dispute between the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya on the
one hand and the United States and the United Kingdom
on the other.
Since the publication of the letters dated 20 and 23
December 1991 - documents S/23306, S/23307, S/23308
and S/23317 - accusing two Libyan nationals in the Pan
Am Flight 103 incident over Lockerbie in 1988, Libya
has dealt with this dispute in a way that is consistent with
the norms of international law and Libyan law and with
full respect for international human rights covenants and
instruments, as well as all the commitments that stem
from those texts. Towards that end, Libya has from the
very beginning of the dispute called for the
implementation of the Convention for the Suppression of
Unlawful Acts Against the Safety of Civil Aviation,
signed in Montreal in 1971, and especially its article 14,
which provides that

"Any dispute between two or more Contracting
States concerning the interpretation or application of
this Convention which cannot be settled through
negotiation, shall, at the request of one of them, be
submitted to arbitration. If within six months from
the date of the request for arbitration the Parties are
unable to agree on the organization of the
arbitration, any one of those Parties may refer the
dispute to the International Court of Justice by

 

request in conformity with the Statute of the Court."
[Treaty Series, vol. 974, No. 14118, p. 183]

Libya has resolutely followed that course, as can be
seen from the following initiatives.

First, Libya opened an investigation on these suspects
and proposed to the United States and the United Kingdom
that they cooperate in that investigation by sending
investigators from their own judicial systems, or that they
authorize the Libyan investigators to participate in the
investigation carried out by those States. But these
proposals were not accepted.

Secondly, Libya submitted another proposal inviting
the Secretary-General of the United Nations to establish a
legal commission composed of judges recognized for their
integrity, with a view to conducting an investigation and
confirming, if need be, the accusations against the suspects.

Libya stated its readiness to begin negotiations with
the United States and the United Kingdom under the
auspices of the Secretary-General in order to hold the trial
in a neutral State acceptable to the parties to the conflict
and with all guarantees in order to determine the truth.

The Organization of African Unity (OAU) has made
considerable efforts to promote a peaceful and lasting
solution to the crisis. In this respect, meetings of Ministers
for Foreign Affairs and OAU summits have adopted
resolutions in which these bodies have expressed their
appreciation for the positive efforts and initiatives of Libya
in order to resolve the crisis with respect for its sovereignty
and international legality. These forums have also stressed
their appreciation for Libya's consistent desire to resolve
the dispute by peaceful means. The resolutions of the
Organization of African Unity also invited the Security
Council to review its resolutions 731 (1992), 748 (1992)
and 883 (1993) with a view to lifting the sanctions imposed
on Libya. They also invited all the parties to begin
negotiations with a view to arriving at a negotiated solution
to the dispute, in accordance with Article 33 of the Charter,
which calls for the solution of disputes by negotiation,
mediation and judicial settlement, in accordance with the
norms of international law.

The Declaration adopted at Harare on 4 June 1997 by
the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the
Organization of African Unity reads along those same lines.
In operative paragraph 5 of that Declaration, the Assembly
reaffirms its invitation to the Security Council to examine
in depth its proposals as well as those of the League of
Arab States and of the Organization of the Islamic
Conference, which are supported as well by the States
members of the Non-Aligned Movement.

That paragraph also states that the first option is to
hold the trial of the suspects in a third and neutral country
to be determined by the Security Council. The second
option is to have the suspects tried by Scottish judges at
the seat of the International Court of Justice, at The
Hague, in accordance with Scottish law. The third option
would be to establish a special criminal tribunal at the
Court's headquarters to try the suspects.

The Organization of African Unity has unceasingly
called for the lifting of sanctions on the Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya by the Security Council. In this respect, the
Council of Ministers of the OAU, at its session in Tripoli
from 24-28 February 1997, adopted a communique
emphasizing that the continuation of sanctions on Libya
could inspire African countries to seek ways of avoiding
further suffering for the Libyan people.

Along these same lines, the 67th regular meeting of
the Council of Ministers of the OAU, held at Addis
Ababa from 23-27 February 1998, adopted a resolution
supporting Libya's request to convene a public meeting of
the Security Council, in accordance with Article 31 of the
Charter. That resolution asks the Council to speed the
lifting of sanctions on Libya.

On 27 February 1998, the International Court of
Justice handed down two Judgments on the dispute
between Libya and the United States and the United
Kingdom in order to pave the way for a final settlement
of the Lockerbie incident on a secure legal basis. The
Judgments of the Court confirmed the just African
position calling for a solution to the conflict through
peaceful and legal means based on international law and
the Charter of the United Nations.

With regard to the Judgments of the Court, the
African Group believes that there is no longer any reason
for the Security Council to maintain sanctions against the
Libyan people, for the following reasons.

First, the International Court of Justice rejected by
a majority claims that the Montreal Convention does not
apply to the Lockerbie conflict. The Court stated that it
believed that this dispute fell within the purview of the
interpretation and application of the Montreal Convention,
and that under paragraph 1 of article 14 of that
Convention, it is up to the Court to decide the matter.

 

Secondly, the Court, despite claims to the contrary,
decided also by an overwhelming majority that there was a
dispute between the United States and the United Kingdom,
on the one hand, and Libya on the other with regard to the
Lockerbie incident, and that it was up to the Court itself to
decide on the case.

By rejecting contrary claims, the Court furthermore
decided, by a majority, on the existence of a real conflict
between Libya on the one hand and the United States and
the United Kingdom on the other hand regarding the
interpretation of article 11 of the Montreal Convention on
the Suppression of Unlawful Acts Against the Safety of
Civil Aviation, signed in Montreal in 1971, which states,
inter alia, that:

"Contracting States shall afford one another the
greatest measure of assistance in connection with
criminal proceedings brought in respect of the
offences. The law of the State requested shall apply in
all cases." [ibid]

Similarly, the Court likewise categorically rejected the
claim that the rights of Libya under the Montreal
Convention were suspended following the adoption by the
Security Council of resolutions 748 (1992) and 883 (1993)
imposing sanctions against Libya on the basis of Articles 25
and 103 of the Charter of the United Nations. Indeed,
according to the Court, the rights of Libya under the
Montreal Convention remain in force and in full effect
despite Security Council resolutions 748 (1992) and 883
(1993).
Fourthly, the Court furthermore explicitly rejected the
claims that Security Council resolutions 731 (1992), 748
(1992) and 883 (1993) obliged Libya to extradite its
nationals to the United States or the United Kingdom so
that they could be brought to trial notwithstanding Libya's
rights under the Montreal Convention of 1971. According
to the Court, Libya's rights under the Montreal Convention
remain in force and, in this case also, are in full effect
despite resolutions 748 (1992) and 883 (1993) of the
Security Council.

Fifthly, the International Court of Justice has finally
categorically rejected the claims that the relevant legal
proceedings should be immediately halted on the
presumption that the resolutions of the Security Council
cannot be challenged in the Court.

For the Court, therefore, in sum, the questions
regarding the Lockerbie incident are within its
jurisdiction, and the case was correctly brought by Libya
to the Court.

According to the Judgments rendered by the
International Court of Justice on 27 February 1998, it
seems, inter alia, that the sanctions provided for in
resolutions 748 (1992) and 883 (1993) no longer have any
raison d 'etre.

In conclusion, and in consistency with these
arguments, the Group of African States calls upon the
Security Council to respond favourably to Libya's
requests. Accordingly, our Group believes that there
should be a suspension of the application of the Security
Council resolutions relative to sanctions against Libya -
including the air embargo, reduced diplomatic
representation and the freeze on assets - until the Court
rules on the substance of the matter.

A positive response by the Security Council will,
without a doubt, help strengthen respect for the law and
reinforce the principles of the United Nations and will
certainly be in keeping with the prevailing opinion of the
international community as it has been repeatedly
expressed in various forums. Such a decision will ease the
plight of the Libyans under the embargo and relieve the
countries and the peoples of the region from a tragedy
that has lasted for six years now, causing unbearable
suffering and hardship.

Before I conclude, allow me to welcome, on behalf
of the Group of African States, the presence at this
meeting of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Libya,
Mr. Muntasser.
