Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): I thank the Chairs of
the Committees for their briefings and the experts who
make that work possible, especially in the Analytical
Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team, the Counter-
Terrorism Executive Directorate (CTED) and the Group
of Experts of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004).

While Da'esh has lost territorial control, it remains
a threat to international peace and security and a covert
network capable of continued destruction. As we have
heard, while its core may be regrouping or developing
plans for successor organizations, Al-Qaeda may take
advantage of a perceived lull to perpetrate attacks and
reassert itself. We therefore continue to encourage
States and United Nations colleagues to work on the
implementation of resolution 2396 (2017) to address
returning or relocating foreign terrorist fighters, and
we welcome the launch of the United Nations project
on advanced passenger information and passenger
name records systems to counter terrorist travel. We
continue to endorse the call for a global standard of
passenger names record data, which is a key pillar for
its implementation.

We have witnessed terrorist attacks motivated by

a range of ideologies, including extreme right-wing
terrorism, and we welcome the increased attention that
the Counter-Terrorism Committee has given to that
issue. The United Kingdom will continue to be an active
and global supporter of counter-terrorism sanctions as a

key tool to combat terrorism from Da'esh, Al-Qaida and

their affiliates, within the high legal evidence threshold

set by the United Kingdom's courts. We welcome the

1540 Committee's closer engagement with international

organizations and acknowledge the positive impact

that outreach efforts have on assisting Member States'
capacity to strengthen national measures and meet their
treaty obligations.

Let me make three points on the work of the
Committees and our collective efforts to address
terrorism and the spread of weapons of mass destruction
to non-State actors: on responsiveness, on transparency
and on impact.

Regarding responsiveness, we must ensure that
our efforts can respond to evolving dynamics. We
therefore welcome the efforts of the Committees to
engage Member States to actively strengthen their
counter-terrorism capacities and highlight emerging
trends, such as attacks on soft targets and houses of
worship and emerging technologies. With the adoption
of resolution 2462 (2019) on combating terrorist
financing, we also took note of the concerns regarding
the potential negative impacts of counter-terrorism
on humanitarian action. That is a complex issue but it
remains important to better understand the potential
consequences for humanitarian actors, who are called
on to provide critical assistance in the most difficult
and dangerous places. We look forward to a briefing
on this topic in the Counter-Terrorism Committee later
this week and opportunities to follow up.

The Committees must also respond to new updates
and information. In that vein, we are pleased to hear
about the efforts of the Monitoring Team to gather
updated information on the threat and to continually
refine and update the sanctions list and delisting
activities. It is key that those remain as current as
possible in order to be effective. I would like to
reinforce the United Kingdom's support for the 1540
Committee's preparations to review implementation
ahead of the 2020 comprehensive review and renewal
of the resolution.

With regard to transparency, just as no Member
State can counter terrorism alone, no single United
Nations entity can address the spectrum of challenges
and needs that arise alone. We therefore welcome efforts
to undertake improved delivery of United Nations
counter-terrorism assistance through the United Nations
Global Compact and greater cooperation among the
Committees. However, at the same time, there should
be no confusion about the respective mandates and
roles of each entity.

We have been pleased to see greater alignment of
the activity of the Office of Counter-Terrorism with
CTED recommendations. We encourage continued
cooperation to reduce any duplication, while meeting
Member State needs in a timely manner. Key to that is
the sharing of CTED reports, wherever possible, and
we are pleased to hear that Switzerland has decided to
share its assessment report - the first country to do
so in line with resolution 2395 (2017). We understand
the importance of confidentiality regarding sensitive
information but we welcome the move, which improves
the delivery of United Nations technical assistance and
clarifies the purpose and process for those States that
still remain unclear about the CTED assessments.

Concerning impact, we must ensure that all our
efforts here translate into a concrete impact on the
ground. To that end, we hope that the next time we
gather for this briefing we can learn in some more detail
about the outcomes and impact of several of the visits
and initiative that have been highlighted today and
discuss how Committee members can enhance them.

