The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now
make a brief statement in my national capacity.

At the outset, Madam President, I wish to join in
expressing satisfaction, as other members of the
Council have done, at your presence in our midst as
you address the Council as Africa's first woman head
of State.

After so many years of struggle and tribulation,
we believe that you represent hope for the people of
Liberia, for the region and the international
community, which so ardently desires to see your
country embark on the path of peace and sustainable
development.

We would like to highlight the achievements
registered by your Government over the past two
months. In that context, I would underscore in
particular the efforts made to combat corruption and
the launching of the Truth and Reconciliation
Commission to investigate past human rights abuses.

We also agree with you, Madam President, that
the situation in Liberia is still fragile and that much
remains to be done in order to bring about peace and
security. For that reason, we support the maintenance
of the UNMIL mission as a precautionary measure
until circumstances dictate otherwise.

As you have said, reconciliation cannot be
achieved solely by legislation, nor can it be achieved
merely through institutions. It needs to be driven by the
efforts and commitment of all members of society. We
believe, however, that, on the path to national unity
and reconciliation, justice should not be sacrificed nor
impunity enshrined. The victims of the grave violations
of human rights that took place over so many years in
Liberia deserve justice.

We in the Council welcome the talks that you are
holding with the Government of Nigeria and the
Governments of other neighbouring countries at the
highest level to arrive at a just and exemplary solution
to the issue involving former President Charles Taylor.

We know that your task is a very difficult one.
There is much that you must do, from resolving
economic problems, including the problem of debt -
given the difficult conditions that very often are set by
international credit organizations - to giving a fresh
start to a society divided and impoverished by civil
war. You can count on our support and on our ardent
wishes for success, but, most importantly, you can
count on the support of your people. Your success will
be the success of all Liberians and of Africa as a
whole.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I invite Mrs. Ellen Johnson-Sirleaf, President of
Liberia, to take the floor if she wishes to do so.

