Mr. Shen Guofang (China) (interpretation from Chinese): As a friendly neighbour of Afghanistan, China is
deeply concerned about the latest developments in that
country. The escalation of fighting has brought new
suffering to the people of Afghanistan and has also
jeopardized their national economy and security. We wish
to express our deep sympathy and concern. We call upon
the various factions in Afghanistan to reach a ceasefire
immediately.

Afghanistan is a multi-ethnic country whose ethnic
disputes have deep historical roots. This, in addition to the
involvement of outside forces, has made the situation in
Afghanistan even more complex. We believe that any
military advance is but temporary. Both the history and the
realities of Afghanistan have demonstrated that military
means are not helpful to finding a solution. The resumption
of negotiations among all the factions in Afghanistan, under
United Nations auspices, is the only way to a solution of
the conflict in Afghanistan.

China sincerely hopes that the various factions in
Afghanistan will put their national interests and the
interests of the Afghan people above everything else. We
hope they will put aside their ethnic, religious and
political differences and establish a broadly based,
representative government so as to achieve peace and
stability and rebuild their homes.
The Chinese delegation appreciates the mediation
efforts made by Mr. Brahimi, Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General, and the United Nations Special
Mission to Afghanistan (UNSMA). We support the United
Nations in its continuing to play a central and leading
role. After many years of war, the people of Afghanistan
are longing for peace and stability.

The resolution of the question of Afghanistan, in the
final analysis, rests with the Afghan people themselves.
We hope that the international community will respect the
choice of the people of Afghanistan. Any action by the
Security Council should help push the various factions in
Afghanistan to reopen negotiations and to seek solutions
for achieving peace and stability at an early date.

On the basis of this principled position, the Chinese
delegation participated in the consultations on the draft
resolution before us. We wish to thank the sponsors for
accepting the amendments made by the Chinese
delegation. We will vote in favour of the draft resolution.

We hope that the various factions in Afghanistan
will give a positive response to the appeal of the
international community. At the same time, we also hope
that the international community will make coordinated
efforts to prevent arms and other war materiel from
flowing into the hands of those factions, so as to create
favourable external conditions for putting an end to the
fighting within Afghanistan.

