Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (Spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I express my thanks and gratitude to
Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-General for
Political and Peacebuilding Affairs, and to Mr. Ramesh
Rajasingham, Director of the Coordination Division
of the United Nations Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs.

We align ourselves with the statement delivered
by Ambassador Christoph Heusgen on behalf of
the co-penholders of the Syrian humanitarian
dossier - Germany, Belgium and Kuwait. I would like
to make the following points in my national capacity.

This month has witnessed important milestones and
developments in the Syrian crisis. The most significant
pertains to the fact that the crisis has unfortunately
entered its ninth year. Another year has gone by, while
the bloody conflict continues. It has claimed the lives of
hundreds of thousands of civilians and forced millions
to flee the country. It is a reminder to all that the Security
Council remains unable to carry out its responsibilities,
maintain international peace and security, implement its
resolutions and address the crisis in it various aspects,
especially with regard to the political aspect. We
support the Secretary-General in the implementation of
the four measures he announced as the Syrian crisis
entered its ninth year, namely, first, urging all parties
to respect the ceasefire agreement in Idlib brokered by
Russia and Turkey; secondly, respecting international
humanitarian law and protecting human rights in
all military operations; thirdly, enabling sustainable
access to humanitarian assistance; and, fourthly,
enhancing international support for a political solution
that meets the legitimate aspirations of the Syrian
people, and supporting Special Envoy Geir Pedersen in
the implementation of resolution 2254 (2015) and the
2012 Geneva communique (S/2012/522, annex).

Another important milestone was the holding of
the third Brussels Conference on Supporting the Future
of Syria and the Region. That was the seventh donor
conference aimed at alleviating humanitarian suffering
in Syria, following three conferences held in the State
of Kuwait, one in London and three others in Brussels.
The most recent Brussels Conference reminds us all
that the humanitarian situation in Syria continues to
deteriorate. Approximately 11.7 million people remain
in need of humanitarian assistance. We welcome the
generous pledges made during the latest conference
and call on all countries to honour their obligations.
The State of Kuwait contributed $300 million for the
humanitarian response over the next three years as part
of its efforts to alleviate the suffering of our brothers
in Syria and improve the humanitarian situation in the
country. Kuwait has provided about $1.9 billion since
the conflict began.

We have also closely followed the efforts of Special
Envoy Geir Pedersen this month. We reiterate our full
support for him in his efforts to revitalize the political
process in Syria in order to achieve a fair Syrian-led
and Syrian-owned political settlement facilitated by
the United Nations through the implementation of
resolution 2254 (2015). That resolution sets out the steps
for a political transition process that contains many
milestones, including drafting a constitution and holding
free and fair elections pursuant to that constitution
under the supervision of the United Nations and in
accordance with the highest international standards of
transparency and accountability, with the participation
of all Syrians, including those living abroad.

In his recent briefing to the Security Council, the
Special Envoy spoke about five objectives that he is
trying to implement in the next phase (see S/PV.8475).
We believe that implementing those objectives will give
momentum to the political process in Syria. All parties
must support the Special Envoy so that he can fully
carry out his mandate.

In March we also witnessed another important
milestone in the war against terrorism. The terrorist
group Da'esh lost the territories that were under its
control in Syria. That is truly an important and major
achievement in the war against terrorism and against
that terrorist group, which has launched terrorist and
criminal attacks against many countries, including my
country, Kuwait. We must now work on preserving the
military achievements of the international coalition
against Da'esh and on maintaining the intensive
international efforts to eradicate it and ensure that
it does not return through the joint efforts of the
international community to eliminate the financial,
logistical, military, security and media networks of
Da'esh.

As we mentioned yesterday during the Security

Council meeting on the Middle East (see S/PV.8489), I
would like to point out that Security Council resolutions
on Syria, particularly in their preambles, always
include a paragraph that stresses the commitment of the
Council and the international community to respecting
the sovereignty, independence, unity and territorial
integrity of Syria. We therefore reiterate our regret that
the United States decided to recognize the sovereignty
of Israel over the occupied Syrian Arab Golan.
International resolutions, especially resolution 497
(1981), which was adopted unanimously, stipulate that
the Security Council and the international community
reject the annexation of territories by force and that the
decision of Israel, the occupying Power, to impose its
laws, administration and sovereignty over the occupied
Syrian Golan is null and void and has no international
legal effect. That resolution also emphasized that the
1949 Fourth Geneva Convention is applicable to the
occupied Syrian territories.

