Ms. Lodhi (Pakistan): I would like to begin by
thanking Japan for organizing this debate. I also thank
the Secretary-General for his briefing this morning.

We are living in a remarkably more dangerous
world, in which a wide range of new threats have
emerged even as older ones continue to fester.
Challenges to international peace and security are
intensifying at a time when the foundations of the world
order are fraying.

Conflicts continue to rage across the world, from
Africa to Afghanistan. The civil wars and factional
fighting in Syria, Libya and Yemen are becoming
more vicious and consequential, generating record
levels of human displacement. Efforts to change the
status of Jerusalem threaten to drive an already volatile
Middle East into further turbulence and chaos. As
Secretary-General Antonio Guterres has warned,
we may be sleepwalking into a catastrophe on the
Korean peninsula. At the same time, the long-standing,
internationally recognized disputes of Palestine and
J ammu and Kashmir continue to fester. The Palestinian
and Kashmiri people continue to suffer horrific human
rights violations at the hands of occupying forces, while
the world continues to watch without addressing those
egregious situations. All those situations compound the
challenges of a more turbulent and volatile world.

In order to effectively address such challenges,
we must identify the drivers of international conflict,
which include unresolved, long-standing conflicts and
disputes, foreign military interventions, political and
economic injustice, terrorism and Violent extremism
and the displacement of populations due to persecution,
poverty, climate change and conflict. We have to ask
whether we are preventing and resolving conflicts or
just managing them, and that only partially and in a
rather unedifying manner. After all, the primary
purpose of establishing the United Nations was to save
succeeding generations from the scourge of war.
What we certainly need is a shift from a culture of
reaction to a culture of prevention. Effective preventive
strategies rely on an early reaction to signs of trouble,
efforts to alleviate the factors that trigger Violence and
the resolution of the underlying root causes of violence,
such as foreign occupation, a lack of resources and
social and political systems that lead to injustice and
grievance. There is obviously no one-size-fits-all
solution to conflict prevention and mitigation. Moving
a country towards durable peace begins with a clear
understanding of the sources and nature of conflicts.
Ambitious conflict-prevention strategies should
avoid the pitfalls of either a delayed reaction or an
incorrect reading of the signs of an impending conflict
or catastrophe.

More Blue Helmets are currently deployed than at
any time in history. United Nations peacekeeping has
always been a cost-effective tool for the maintenance
of international peace and security, but peacekeeping
alone is not able to deliver the dividends of peace.
Peacekeeping needs to be strengthened through support
for political solutions, since only by reinforcing the
primacy of politics can we make peace durable and
sustainable. The focus on sustaining peace is therefore
welcome, but in order to sustain peace, we must first
build peace, address the drivers of conflict and create
the enabling conditions that allow peace to flourish.

Let me set out a number of suggestions that we see
as essential to addressing the complex contemporary
challenges to peace and security.

First, while axiomatic, addressing the root causes
of conflict remains the best conflict-prevention and
conflict-resolution strategy. Second, a clear shift
in approach from an emphasis on military action
to negotiation and to finding political solutions is
required. Third, inclusive national ownership and
leadership are essential to driving peace processes
forward. Fourth, the United Nations must better utilize
the tools for maintaining peace and security provided
for in Chapter VI of its Charter: "negotiation, enquiry,
mediation, conciliation, arbitration, judicial settlement,
resort to regional agencies or arrangements, or other
peaceful means".

Fifth, all resolutions of the Security Council
must be implemented, uniformly and non-selectively.
Selective implementation weakens multilateralism
and the credibility of the United Nations, compounds
conflicts and intensifies the suffering of the affected
and afflicted people. Sixth, the form and functions of
United Nations peacekeeping must be shaped by the
situation on the ground, not by the often competing
political interests in New York. Finally, seventh, as
we know, peace and security, development and human
rights are inextricably linked. It is true that a lack
of development and of respect for human rights can
endanger international peace and security, but Without
peace and security, the lack of development and the
violation of human rights are a certainty.

In conclusion, let me say that the proliferation of
conflicts today is a clear Sign of the need for urgent
action. The proposed reform of the peace and security
architecture is necessary but is not sufficient to make
a real difference. Fundamental change in the way in
which we deal with conflicts is really required. Only
then will we be able to succeed in our collective quest
for sustainable and enduring peace and security.

