Mr. Nishida (Japan): Thank you very much, Sir,
for giving us this opportunity to address the situation in
the Middle East. I would also like to thank Mr. Pascoe
for his comprehensive briefing, as well as Ambassador
Mansour and Ambassador Reuben for their respective
statements.

Japan strongly supports a two-State solution and
remains convinced that achieving such a solution
through sincere negotiations is the only way to achieve
durable peace. We believe that at present there is a lack
of mutual trust, which is preventing the resumption of
direct negotiations. We call on both sides to engage
with the United States and the international community
and to take steps that will create an environment
conducive to restarting direct negotiations. We strongly
encourage both parties to restart direct negotiations.

The two parties must abide by their obligations
under previous agreements, most importantly the Road
Map. We call on Israel, as we have done on so many
6

occasions, to freeze its settlement activities in the West
Bank, which includes East Jerusalem. In this
connection, Japan is deeply concerned that the Israeli
authorities continue to approve plans to build more
settlements. Japan does not recognize any unilateral
measures that prejudge the outcome of the final status
negotiations.

At the same time, we call upon the Palestinian
Authority to continue its efforts to improve security
and fulfil its commitments to cease violence and work
against incitement. Japan strongly condemns the
murder that occurred on 12 March in Itamar, in the
north of the West Bank. Only negotiations, not
violence, can bring about a resolution of the issues.

According to the assessment provided by the
World Bank, the International Monetary Fund and the
United Nations at the recent meeting of the Ad Hoc
Liaison Committee, the Palestinian Authority is now
above the threshold for a functioning State in key
sectors. Japan strongly supports the State-building
efforts of the Palestinian Authority and will continue to
provide assistance thereto.

We are seriously concerned about the recent
escalation of violence along the borders between Israel
and the Gaza Strip. We strongly condemn the targeting
of civilians. We continue to call for the full
implementation of resolution 1860 (2009) and call on
Israel and the Palestinians in the Gaza Strip to refrain
from violence and to accept mutual coexistence.

Japan remains concerned about the humanitarian
situation in the Gaza Strip. Japan stresses the
importance of lifting the blockade while preventing the
flow of weapons into the Gaza Strip. We do not agree
with the blockade. We also call on those wishing to
provide aid to the Gaza Strip to coordinate
appropriately with relevant authorities to avoid
unforeseen incidents. We call on both parties to make
the difficult but necessary decisions to advance peace.
Japan will continue to make efforts to realize a just and
comprehensive peace in the region.

