Mr. Faahorg-Andersen (Denmark): Let me join
others in thanking the Secretary-General for his report
on the situation in Afghanistan (S/2006/145), which
focuses on key areas in the remarkable transformation
that the Afghan people and Government are
undertaking with the assistance of the United Nations.
Also, a very warm welcome to Tom Koenigs, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General. We thank him
for his frank and comprehensive assessment of
Afghanistan's successes, the challenges ahead and the
role of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) in facilitating progress in this
very complex environment.

Before proceeding any further, I should like to
fully associate Denmark with the statement to be
delivered later in the debate by the Permanent
Representative of Austria on behalf of the European
Union.

At the outset, I would like to stress that Denmark
fully supports the Afghanistan Compact. In order to
support the implementation of the Compact, Denmark
has made a long-term, fully financed pledge of more
than $100 million for development efforts in
Afghanistan and has decided to substantially increase
the Danish military presence, with the majority of
troops placed in the troubled southern Helmand
province.

At the London Conference, the United Nations
was given a key role in facilitating and monitoring the
implementation of the Afghanistan Compact. We agree
that there is a need to extend UNAMA's mandate for
another 12 months, and we support the broad outline of
UNAMA's main tasks and priorities, set out by the
Secretary-General in his report, as they flow from the
Compact.

I have six comments or questions on the role,
responsibilities and institutional set-up of UNAMA, to
which I would like to turn now.

First, we very much agree that reinforcing the
new and fragile democratic institutions provided
through the Bonn process is a major task for UNAMA.
The scope for failure is abundant, and the need for the
good offices of and concerted action by UNAMA
cannot be overemphasized. We urge the Special
Representative to continue an active dialogue with the
entire political spectrum as well as with the President
and Government in order to keep the positive
development in the political processes on track.

Secondly, promoting human rights should, in our
View, continue to be a high-priority task for UNAMA.
It includes improving the situation of women and
promoting women's rights. This entails UNAMA
support for the Afghan Independent Human Rights
Commission and for the National Action Plan for
Women, and it implies that UNAMA should insist that
the President appoint qualified judges to the Supreme
Court - judges who have the full implementation of
the constitution at heart.

Thirdly, reform of the public sector, including the
justice sector, is indispensable if the Afghans are to
enjoy transparency, accountability and the rule of law.
This is also the only way for the new democratic
institutions to transform their good intentions and
decisions into tangible improvements for the country as
a whole. Add to this that public-sector reform can and
should have a major impact in reducing corruption,
combating drugs and creating an environment
conducive to legal economic activities. UNAMA
should make active use of its leading role in the United
Nations family in Afghanistan to press for concerted
action in this field, in full coordination with the
international donor community.

Fourthly, UNAMA's presence outside Kabul must
be significantly enhanced, as Mr. Koenigs has already
pointed out. From our perspective, to a great extent the
key to the Compact's success rests on progress in the
provinces. A strong UNAMA presence provides
enhanced coordination, information flows, trust and

impetus from all parties - the population, local
authorities, non-governmental organizations, the
international aid community, Governments, etc. - to

the efforts to improve security, governance and
development. The Secretary-General touches upon this
in his report, and I would appreciate it if the Special
Representative would elaborate on his plans in this
regard.

Fifthly, UNAMA has chosen to maintain the split
of its activities into two pillars - Pillar I, dealing with
political affairs, and Pillar II, with relief, recovery and
development, including cross-cutting issues. This split
entails unavoidable overlaps. For example, human
rights are part of Pillar I, while gender - which has
clear rights aspects - is included in Pillar II. We
understand that the split may be necessary from an
institutional point of view. It does, however, give rise
to coordination issues that need to be tackled head-on.

For our sixth and final point, we urge the United
Nations to prioritize timely recruitment of highly
qualified staff for the positions with UNAMA in
Afghanistan, not least in the provinces, where
vacancies at places with only one or two internationals
can have and have had a detrimental effect.

Before concluding, let me turn to the worsening
security situation, which continues to be of great
concern. We urge countries in the region to do their
utmost to assist the Afghan Government in stemming
the tide of insurgents crossing the borders into
Afghanistan, as well as in blocking financial flows to
the Taliban and Al Qaida - flows that are, inter alia,
used to buy the services of poor, illiterate farmers to
kill mullahs, school teachers, Government security
personnel and soldiers from countries assisting in the
stabilization of Afghanistan.

We have seen many successes and have been
through trying times in Afghanistan. But there is no
doubt that the next 12 months will prove to be another
test of our resolve - individually and collectively -
to assist Afghanistan on its path to a stable, just and
prosperous future.

