Mr. Haniff (Malaysia): At the outset, I wish to
extend my sincere congratulations to you, Mr. President,
and to your country, Pakistan, on assuming the
presidency of the Security Council for this month. On a
similar note, I wish to thank Mr. Robert Serry, Special
Coordinator of the Middle East Peace Process, for his
briefing.

My delegation wishes to associates itself with the
statements to be made by the representatives of Iran on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement and of Djibouti
on behalf of the Organization ofIslamic Cooperation.

In November last year, we witnessed the will of the
international community when the General Assembly
granted Palestine non-member observer State status
(resolution 67/ 19). While we rejoice at that development,
we condemn the racist and uncivilized actions of
Israel in relation to that event since then. Israel has
continued its expansionist policy by approving new
illegal settlements in the West Bank and in the E-l
area close to East Jerusalem. On 8 January, Prime
Minister Netanyahu claimed that Israel's construction
and expansion of those illegal settlements do not pose
any threat to the peace process. That is absurd and
preposterous. That move by Israel is clear proof that it
views international law and world opinion with disdain.
What is more apparent is that Israel is not interested in
peace. My delegation believes that the further expansion
ofillegal settlements will scuttle the two-State solution.

Israel continues to illegally alter the reality on the
ground in the occupied Palestinian territory. It seems
adamant in destroying the will of the Palestinians to
govern themselves. Israel's seizure of Palestinian
tax revenues is not only unlawful and shameful, but
is another act of atrocity aimed at weakening and
punishing the Palestinian National Authority. The
world cannot turn a blind eye to those illegal actions
by Israel. Major Powers should prove to the world that
their foreign policy and actions on the issue of Palestine
are decided in their capitals, not in Tel Aviv.

Israel must be made to realize that its future and its
security lie within the principles of the establishment of
a Palestinian State under the two-State solution, based
on the pre-l967 borders and with East Jerusalem as
its capital. Israel must also cease all illegal settlement
activities and the demolition of Palestinian structures,
which are in violation of international law. It must be
forced to respect and restore the inalienable rights of
the Palestinian people. Israel must heed international
calls to lift the illegal blockade on Gaza immediately.
Only then can Israelis and Palestinians live side by side
in peace and security.

The impasse in the Middle East is not impossible
to resolve, but we need pragmatic solutions based on
international principles and norms. It requires all
influential Powers to display strong political leadership
in considering the mutually reinforcing needs of the
peoples and nations in the region. It goes without
saying that the Security Council must play its intended
role by fulfilling its mandate to enforce its resolutions
in pursuit of a sustainable solution to the question
of Palestine, thus restoring its credibility. We must
collectively pledge such efforts in order to rid the world
of insecurity and conflict and to replace them with
sustainable peace and security.

