Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): Our delegation wishes to thank Mr. Tadamichi
Yamamoto, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, for the comprehensive and detailed report
(S/2018/824) on developments in the situation in
Afghanistan and for the valuable information provided
in his briefing here today. We also thank Mr. Ramiz
Bakhtiar, Afghan youth representative, and welcome
his participation in this important debate and his very
constructive statement on the situation in Afghanistan.

First of all, we would like to convey our deepest
condolences to the people and the Government of
Afghanistan following the most recent outrageous
terrorist attacks - yet again, let us recognize them as
acts of cowardice - in Kabul and Nangarhar on 5 and
11 September, respectively.

We are highly dismayed and concerned about the
security situation in Afghanistan. The country has
once again been shaken by a wave of bloody terrorist
attacks that have claimed the lives of approximately
1,692 Afghan civilians, in the short period of only six
months, as reflected in the report under discussion,
from January to June. The increase in suicide
and air attacks - of 38 per cent and 46 per cent,
respectively - as compared to the same period in 2017
is alarming. Indeed, the number of fatalities reported
this year by the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA) has exceeded 5,000. It is
unacceptable and inconceivable to remain indifferent to
such barbaric acts, especially since they have greatest
impact on the most vulnerable sector of the population.

A convergence of factors clearly hinders the
realization of the peace and security the Afghan people
seek. However, as we have discussed at length in this
Chamber, a solution to Afghanistan's conflicts can be
found only through effective, constructive and direct
political negotiations among the relevant parties,
as well as the holding of transparent and inclusive
elections whereby Afghans determine the political and
socioeconomic system most fitting to their customs
and culture and favourable to the interests and well-
being of the Afghan people. Allow me to make some
observations regarding some factors contributing to the
instability and insecurity in Afghanistan.

First, on the political front - and in no way do
I wish to minimize the progress and achievements of
the Afghan Government, the international community
and other regional and international actors with
respect to peace agreements and other accords - we
believe that the status quo in Afghanistan has not been
improved to date because some of the parties involved
in the conflict and their respective partners have put
their interests before those of the Afghan people. All
negotiations must be focused solely and exclusively on
seeking solutions to the real problems that Afghanistan
is facing related to security, stability, the prosperity
of the Afghan people and the promotion of national
reconciliation as a fundamental way of resolving the
problems of the Afghan people.

We must bear in mind that there will always be a
party that does not believe its interests and the interests
of the Afghan people are being met. Therefore, it is
no coincidence that, as the elections on 20 October
approach, we are seeing an increase in attacks and
efforts not only to boycott the elections, but also to
paralyse a democratic political process through the
political mobilization of opposition groups, occupation
and closure of the facilities of the Independent Electoral
Commission in some provinces, among other things.
As they are not practices that are worthy of anyone
wishing to govern the country democratically, we urge
all parties to participate in a meaningful way in the
political process aimed at bringing about lasting peace
and stability for the people of Afghanistan.

The Government of Equatorial Guinea commends
the Afghan Government for the positive progress made
towards holding the elections despite the difficulties
that are arising. We encourage the Government not
to waver in its diligent efforts to conduct successful
elections, which we believe will represent a positive
change for the Afghan people. We also welcome
President Ghani's new call for a ceasefire. We believe
that demonstrates his real commitment to achieving
peace and stability in Afghanistan. We call on all armed
groups, in particular the Taliban, to respond positively
to the appeals of President Ghani and the Government
to refrain from committing violent actions and to come
to the negotiating table.

Secondly, attacks against public facilities, as have
been noted in the most recent attacks, are particularly
alarming. For our delegation, the chilling numbers of
civilians killed and wounded so far in 2018 remain
cause for dismay. Amid those horrifying statistics, the
proportion of children and women killed and wounded
and the ongoing extreme damage inflicted on civilians
by constant suicide bombings and other improvised
explosive device attacks is extremely worrying.
We therefore again urge all parties to the conflict
to take every possible measure to protect civilians,
especially women and children, in accordance with
international humanitarian law and fundamental human
rights standards.
Another factor that we believe is increasing
instability and insecurity among the Afghan people, and
which also concerns us, is the significant increase in
opium production. We are aware of the close relationship
between the cultivation and trafficking of opium and
terrorism. In that context, we commend the counter-
narcotics operations carried out by the Government,
with the support of the international community and
in close cooperation with the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime, which resulted in a high number of
narcotics seizures, the arrest of drug traffickers and the
closure of heroin laboratories, among other successes.

Thirdly, it is very difficult, if not impossible, to
have a debate on the situation in Afghanistan without
addressing the issue of humanitarian assistance. Based
on information from the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs, two thirds of Afghanistan
is suffering from an unusually severe drought, which
has caused more than 100,000 people to leave their
homes in search of water. That situation, together with
the prevalence of diseases such as polio and others,
constitutes a combination of serious consequences, and
we must urgently find the most effective way to provide
humanitarian assistance.

In conclusion, the Republic of Equatorial Guinea
acknowledges and is grateful for the crucial role played
by the UNAMA and all United Nations agencies, as
well as the role that countries of the region are playing
in support of the Afghan people, to foster peace and
reconciliation, monitor and promote human rights and
help enhance the credibility, integrity, inclusiveness
and sustainability of the electoral process, as well as
to ensure better coordination of the assistance of the
international community in Afghanistan.

