Mr. Elaraby (Egypt) (interpretation from Arabic):
Mr. President, I have pleasure at the outset in commending
your wise leadership, which reflects your judgement and
your lengthy diplomatic experience. I am also happy to
extend my thanks to Ambassador Emilio Ca'rdenas for his
excellent leadership last month.

This is not the first time the Security Council has been
seized of the question of Israeli settlement activity in the
occupied territories. On previous occasions the Council has
taken a decisive stand on this issue, which is of vital
importance to, and has a direct impact on, the peace
process in the Middle East. The importance of the issue is
greater now because the new atmosphere in the Middle
East, which heralded the dawn of a new era in the history
of the region, compels the cessation of anything that could
lead to a return to the practices of the past.

The peace process, which began at the Madrid
Conference three years ago, has seen its fruits effectively
ripen. We were able, in the Declaration of Principles
between the PLO and Israel, to arrive at mutual recognition.
This was followed by many agreements and steps by both
parties to implement the Declaration. The peace process
also led to the conclusion of a Peace Treaty between Jordan
and Israel, which put an end to the state of war between the
two States. Regrettably, similar progress has not so far
been made on the Syrian and Lebanese tracks of the
negotiations.

There is no doubt that these positive developments are
merely limited steps, which do not yet lead to a
comprehensive and just peace in the area. Any observer of
the history of the Middle East conflict will no doubt realize
the magnitude of the historic accomplishment that has been
realized since the convening of the Madrid Peace
Conference. The Middle East has undoubtedly entered a
new phase following the signing of the Declaration of
Principles and the historic meeting in Washington in
September 1993, after which the Middle East and the world
at large had a feeling of optimism that the language of
negotiation and respect for international law and
commitments would replace aggression, Violence and
occupation as a basis for relationships in this area, whose
peoples have languished under the burden of wars and

 

conflict. We all expected the practices of expanding
Israeli settlements to be abandoned. These practices
certainly run counter to the new atmosphere obtaining in
the region.

The two parties - the Palestinians and the
Israelis - have agreed on specific steps that represent a
transitional period leading to negotiations for a final
settlement. The first step - which has indeed been
taken - is the withdrawal of Israel from Gaza and
Jericho. Both parties also agreed upon the redeployment
of Israeli forces outside the Arab cities in the occupied
Palestinian territories as a prelude to Palestinian elections
in an atmosphere of freedom, including freedom from the
repression of the military occupation authorities, so that
Palestinian authority might be extended to all occupied
territories.

Egypt has assisted and continues to assist the two
parties to arrive at an agreement in this regard.
Regrettably, however, Israel has so far failed to honour its
pledges. Indeed, the problems that confront the peace
process have become more grave. Israel has
responsibilities as the occupying Power. This status places
upon it duties and limitations based on international
humanitarian law - something that is reaffirmed by
previous categorical and decisive resolutions of the
Security Council and, indeed, by the very pledges of
Israel itself.

Suffice it to mention briefly the provisions of the
Fourth Geneva Convention, resolution 465 (1980) and the
Declaration of Principles, all of which categorically forbid
Israeli settlement activity in the occupied territories as one
of the means of altering the natural political and
demographic situation in those territories.

First, the Fourth Geneva Convention, in article 49,
categorically prohibits the occupying Power from
deporting or transferring any of its civilian population to
the territories under its occupation. Secondly, the Security
Council has adopted a number of resolutions. Here I refer
merely to resolution 465 (1980), which reaffirms

"that Israel's policy and practice of settling parts of
its population and new immigrants in those
territories constitute a flagrant violation of the
Geneva Convention and also constitute a serious
obstruction to achieving a comprehensive, just and
lasting peace in the Middle East". (resolution 465 (1980), para. 5)

 

The resolution

"calls upon Israel to cease the establishment,
construction and planning of settlements in the Arab
territories occupied since 1967, including Jerusalem".
(ibid., para. 6)

In the same paragraph the Security Council strongly
condemns "the continuation and persistence of Israel in
pursuing those policies and practices and calls upon the
Government of Israel to rescind those measures [and] to
dismantle the existing settlements."
Thirdly - and this was mentioned a few minutes ago
by the Ambassador of Israel - Israel, in the Declaration of
Principles, agreed to engage in the final-status negotiations
on the questions of settlements, Jerusalem, boundaries and
refugees. This text applies to the existing settlements. The
objective is very clear - to decide the future of these
settlements.

But the scope of the text cannot in any way be
expanded under the pretext that the wording is flexible and
permits the establishment of new settlements in the
occupied territories. Israel is committed to making no
alterations that would affect these negotiations. This
commitment, which is in keeping with Israel's status as the
occupying Power, will continue so long as the occupation
continues. It cannot be shirked unilaterally by the
occupying Power.

The Israeli Government has declared its policy vis-a-
vis settlement activity. We have all been waiting to hear
about this new policy and have heard that there are many
restrictions. Regrettably, these turned out to be essentially
illusory ones, with wide loopholes. The exclusion of
Jerusalem, from the restrictions, and now that its boundaries
have been extended to cover approximately a quarter of the
West Bank, allows the expansion of existing settlements
and has in practice led to the construction of thousands of
new units. Therefore, Israeli settlement activity has become
one of the main instruments for demolishing the peace
process and constitutes yet another argument for those who
misdoubt its outcome. Indeed, on the Israeli side, the
enemies of peace are exploiting the question of settlements
in order to ensure that they can foil any chance of success
in the peace negotiations.

In confronting the crisis currently facing the peace
efforts, and in View of the lack of a decisive and
comprehensive Israeli commitment to ending settlement
activities, recourse to the Security Council has become

 

necessary in order to secure respect for the provisions of
the Geneva Conventions. This is a collective international
responsibility: all States parties to the Conventions bear
responsibility for verifying their implementation, as is
stated explicitly in article 1 of the Fourth Convention:

"The High Contracting Parties undertake to
respect and to ensure respect for the present
Convention in all circumstances."

Hence, the members of the Security Council,
permanent as well as non-permanent members, as parties
to the Geneva Conventions, bear a joint responsibility,
that is clear and specific, to secure respect for the
provisions of the Conventions.

The question of settlements in the occupied
territories is very important politically and legally: on the
one hand, the policy of establishing settlements is that
contradiction to the concept and philosophy of peace
because it constitutes a rejection in practice of the "land
for peace formula" which is the basis of Security Council
resolution 242 (1967). On the legal side, there is a
consensus in the international community that there exist
preemptory norms of international law better known as
jus cogens. These norms cannot be violated, and one of
them is the Fourth Geneva Convention. Under these
comprehensive and binding rules, no party can argue that
any bilateral agreement, of whatever kind, allows it to
deny the right of the international community to discharge
its fundamental responsibility for guaranteeing the
implementation of these basic rules that have become
firmly established within the international community.

The Security Council is called upon to shoulder its
responsibilities and to take the necessary steps to impose
respect for international Conventions and follow up the
implementation of the relevant resolutions. This means
that the Council must send a clear and unambiguous
message to Israel that Israeli settlement activity is a grave
legal violation that will also abort the peace negotiations.

The Israeli Government should respect its
international commitments and immediately put an end to
all construction and establishment of settlements under
whatever guise and under whatever name.

Egypt has exerted great efforts to prevent the current
crisis from leading to a collapse of the ongoing
negotiations, and so convoked the quadripartite Cairo
summit on 2 February and joined the four-Power meeting
of Foreign Ministers in Washington on 12 February last.

 

Towards the same end and in the same earnest desire to
safeguard the peace process, Egypt supported the appeal to
the Security Council to consider decreeing a halt to Israeli
settlement activity.

The widespread support for the peace process has been
associated in the public mind with increasing hopes for the
restoration of land and rights and for an end to the
shedding of innocent blood, not to mention the initiation of
regional cooperation and arms control and the development
of the economies of the countries of the region with a View
to raising their peoples' standards of living. There can be
no doubt that, with each day that passes without tangible
progress towards fulfilling these aspirations, support for the
anti-peace camps on both sides will only increase.

Israel is being called upon today, more than at any
time in the past, to respect its obligations as the occupying
Power. Israel's responsibilities do not end with the respect
for the principles of international law and international
conventions; it goes beyond that: Israel has responsibility
for preventing the collapse of the peace process and saving
it from certain doom.

The widespread optimism that followed the world-
famous handshake on the White House lawn has begun to
dissipate in light of the deadlock in the negotiations. We
are in a vicious circle of frustration, and this is leading to
extremism and Violence. We must end this tragic cycle: no
peace effort can be successful so long as the practices of
the past are recrudescing the present.

The Security Council must take a decisive step to
reaffirm the need to respect international commitments and
for all parties to implement their commitments to the last
letter. Pious rhetoric alone will not provide a solution; the
path forwards must be paved with actual deeds, not high-
flown words. We hope that the Security Council will
succeed in sounding a warning against these dangers and
will find a way to avert them.

