Mr. Mesdoua (Algeria) (spoke in French):
Mr. President, out of a desire for concision you asked us to
omit the customary congratulations and to refrain from
quoting figures, alarming though they are, as they have
been set out at length and in detail since this morning. But
if I agree to make a sacrifice of these figures, since they
have been mentioned repeatedly, allow me at least to
congratulate you warmly, on behalf of the Organization of
African Unity (OAU) and of Algeria, on your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council and to express to
you our profound gratitude for your interest in our
continent. This interest gives us a great deal of hope.

We would like to believe, as we enter the millennium's
first month - much of which, Mr. President, you wish to
devote to African issues - that the Council will finally be
able to assume its responsibilities vis-a-vis Africa by
moving from the stage of statements of intention to that of
action.
In this respect, the important statement made by the
Vice-President of the United States this morning and the
substantial financial contribution that he announced,
which we welcome, heighten our expectations. Likewise,
the very useful debates held last month - initiated and
led by Ambassador Jeremy Greenstock, whom we
thank - charted courses for us to follow. I would also
like to thank the Secretary-General for his important
contribution at the beginning of the meeting this morning.

For nearly two decades, Africa, which, under the
most adverse conditions, is already facing numerous
challenges and threats, has been suffering from the full
impact of a fearsome pandemic that is attacking what it
holds most dear: its human capital. The pandemic is also
increasingly compromising its chances of recovery and of
regaining its place in the family of nations.

The consequences of this terrible scourge are serious
and numerous, and they affect equally the peoples and the
economies of the countries concerned.

At the human and social levels, the cost is very high.
Women and children are paying the highest price. The
vulnerability of women - and particularly of pregnant
teenagers in the age group 15-19 - is frequently
increased by numerous other factors. Children, for their
part, are either infected by the virus, to the point where in
some countries three quarters of the beds in paediatric
wards are occupied by children with AIDS, or abandoned,
their parents having succumbed to the disease.

Even more serious is the fact that in certain
countries the mortality rate for children under the age of
5 is likely, in the next 10 years, to be three and half times
higher than that it would have been without AIDS.

In economic terms, AIDS is now affecting broad
economic sectors, in some countries up to 10 percent of
the active population. It is thus compromising the
economic and social gains achieved at the cost of great
sacrifices and imposing on already heavily strained
budgets additional costs that they cannot bear.

Thus AIDS, which finds fertile ground in moral and
material poverty, will only expand its empire. It will
continue to do so because people who are poor,
unemployed and uneducated, with no access to basic
health care, are particular targets of the disease.

Lastly, at the political level, because public services
and security are also affected by the disease, and political

 

and social structures are damaged, social equilibrium is
disturbed. Thus the stability and security - the very
foundation - of African States is at risk.

Africa has since the beginning of the 1990s been
aware of the danger of the HIV/AIDS pandemic for its
populations, particularly in its sub-Saharan region. In 1992,
during the OAU summit held at Dakar, Senegal, the
African heads of State or Government adopted the OAU
Declaration on the AIDS Epidemic in Africa. That
Declaration was paired with a six-point Programme of
Action, with targets and quantifiable results. Following on
from this Declaration, the African leaders directed their
efforts at developing a global plan of action aimed at
facilitating and accelerating the implementation of the
Dakar Programme of Action, which led to the adoption in
1993 of the Cairo guidelines on HIV/AIDS.

Aware of the impact of this scourge on children,
African leaders also adopted in 1994 the Tunis Declaration
on AIDS and the Child in Africa, paired with, as in the
case of Dakar, a two-point Plan of Action covering specific
aspects and complementing the Dakar Programme.

All of these measures testify to the awareness of
African leaders of a problem that over the years has daily
become more worrisome. But given the scale of the
resources needed to combat this scourge and the complexity
of actions which it requires, the African leaders quickly
realized that merely mobilizing local means, which are very
limited, along with some external support, also very limited,
was far from sufficient to guarantee even the slightest
tangible progress.

This means that combatting AIDS in Africa requires
coordinated, decisive and long-term action through
combining efforts at both the national and international
level. It is thus in the spirit of the OAU that its summit of
1998, held in Ouagadougou, launched an appeal for
international assistance. It was moved by the same spirit
that the African heads of State at the thirty-fifth summit,
held in Algiers in July 1999, approved the International
Partnership against AIDS in Africa as a new framework for
urgently mobilizing Governments, civil society,
development partners and international assistance bodies so
as to work in a way proportionate to the challenges linked
to the situation of the pandemic in Africa. A plan of action
for combatting AIDS exists. It will be a question of finding
the resources necessary to implement it.

As we see in the broad lines now being prepared at
the level of African Governments and of the bodies
involved, the International Partnership against AIDS in
Africa will depend on the efforts which Africa and
especially the rest of the world invest in the approach to
ensuring that the targets agreed at the international
level - that is, collectively - at the special session of
the General Assembly in June 1999, devoted to the five-
year review of the implementation of the Programme of
Action of the International Conference on Population and
Development in Cairo in 1994 - ICPD+5 - are the
beginning of a genuine long-term battle of the entire
international community.

One of the priorities, from our viewpoint, is to
ensure that by 2005 at least 90 per cent of young people
between the ages of 15 and 24 have access to information
and to the necessary facilities to reduce their HIV
infection and to reduce the incidence of HIV in this age
group by 25 per cent.

It is of the utmost importance that we focus our
efforts on prevention to reduce the spread of this disease.
But at the same time we cannot ignore the fact that
necessary care for current patients must be available to
Africans at a reasonable and affordable price, without
which humanity will have every difficulty in dealing with
this pandemic. This is why the Security Council and the
entire United Nations must make all means available to
cope with the pandemic which is affecting large
populations throughout the continent.

