Mr. Cardi (Italy): Before I start my statement as
facilitator for the implementation of Security Council
resolution 2231 (2016), let me also say goodbye to
Ambassador Samantha Power. In Italian, when we want
to say goodbye, we say arrivederci, which means, "Until
we see each other again". I think that wish is shared by
many around this table and at the United Nations.

I wish to thank you, Mr. President, for convening
this meeting, as well as Under-Secretary-General
Jeffrey Feltman and Ambassador Joao Vale de Almeida
for their briefings.

Today I will touch on three aspects of the report
of the facilitator covering the period 16 July 2016
through 15 January 2017. I will touch first on the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA); secondly, on
the monitoring of the implementation of resolution
2231 (2015); and, thirdly, on the developments in the
procurement channel. The full version of the report has
been circulated to the Council members, and will be
issued shortly under the symbol S/2017/49.

First, with regard to the JCPOA, I, like others, find
it fitting to start with the JCPOA, considering that two
days ago was the first anniversary of Implementation
Day. During the reporting period, in line with paragraph
4 of Security Council resolution 2231 (2015), the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) Director
General submitted two quarterly reports on verification
and monitoring activities. In both reports, the Agency
affirms that Iran has not pursued construction of the
existing Arak heavy-water research reactor based on
its original design, and that Iran has not conducted any
uranium-enrichment or related research and activities
at the Fordow fuel-enrichment plant. In addition, at
the end of the reporting period, the Director General
of the IAEA confirmed that on 15 January the Agency
verified that Iran had removed all excess centrifuges
and infrastructure from the Fordow plant, in line with
its nuclear-related commitments under the JCPOA.

In its quarterly reports, the Agency affirms
that Iran has continued to permit the Agency to use
online enrichment monitors and electronic seals that
communicate the status within the Iranian nuclear
sites to Agency inspectors and facilitate the automatic
collection of measurement recordings by the Agency.
Both reports also affirm Iran's continued cooperation
with the JCPOA-specified monitoring of uranium ore
concentrate in Iran.

Secondly, with regard to the monitoring of the
implementation of resolution 2231 (2015), during
the reporting period the facilitator did not receive
information on alleged actions inconsistent with
resolution 2231 (2015). At the same time, the facilitator
took note of the letter from Israel to the President of
the Security Council (S/2016/987) and the letter of the
Islamic Republic of Iran in reply (S/2016/992). As ofthe
closing date ofmy report, there has been no formal reply
to the facilitator's letters of 17 June and 22 July 2016,
which invited the Iranian Government to comment on
two alleged instances of arms transfers referred to in
the first biannual report of the facilitator. Nonetheless,
during the facilitator's efforts to contact the Iranian
Government so as to seek clarification about those
two cases, the Permanent Mission of Iran rejected the
allegation and reiterated that Iran had never engaged in
the alleged deliveries.

During the reference period, transparency, practical
guidance and outreach remain the priorities, since a
proper understanding of resolution 2231 (2015) by all
is required for its full implementation. The Council
responded to a request for guidance regarding access to
foreign imports by Iranian-flag vessels seeking to load
and unload goods. Moreover, in response to a request
submitted through the facilitator, the Joint Commission
provided guidance on temporary nuclear-related
transfers to Iran.

Thirdly, with regard to developments in the
procurement channel, the Council had received, as of
mid-July 2016, only one proposal, later withdrawn,
to participate in and permit the activities set forth
in paragraph 2 of annex B to resolution 2231 (2015).
During the reporting period, the procurement channel
started working more regularly and processed five
proposals that two Member States had submitted to the
Security Council. Three proposals have already been
approved, while the remaining two are currently under
review by the Joint Commission in Vienna. In order
to enhance information exchange between the Joint
Commission and the representatives of the Security
Council dealing with the implementation of resolution
2231 (2015), I will be organizing a meeting with the
Coordinator of the Procurement Working Group here in
New York in the coming weeks, similar to the meeting
held in February of last year to discuss the functioning
of the procurement channel.

Let me conclude, by underlining that, from 18 July
to 20 December 2016, there were more than 72,000
page views of the resolution 2231 (2015) website, a key
channel of information, for a total of more than 140,000
page views since its creation. Those figures show a
marked interest in the implementation of the resolution,
including in the functioning of the procurement
channel, whose activities are likely to increase in the
coming months.

