Mr. Brammertz: I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for this opportunity to address the Security
Council on the progress towards the completion of our
mandate.

A series of trials at the International Criminal
Tribunal for the formar Yugoslavia (ICTY) is now
approaching completion. By October, when the Hadeic'
trial will begin, only three cases will remain at the
trial-evidence presentation stage. At the same time,
we are working diligently to prepare for the intense
appellate caseload anticipated. Five trial judgements,
involving 14 defendants, are expected by the end of this
year

In this reporting period, further progress has been
reached in two of our most significant cases, namely,
Mladic' and Karadeie. The Mladic' trial commenced on
16 May with the Prosecution's opening statement. That
long-awaited development took place less than one year
from the date of Mladie's arrest. After Mladie's 16-year
run from justice, the start of his trial was a significant
day for the Tribunal and for the many victims of the
alleged crimes.

In Karadeie, the Prosecution completed its evidence
presentation in just under the allocated 300 hours.
The Prosecution tendered more than 6,000 exhibits,
reflecting the magnitude of a case spanning crimes
committed during the 44-month siege of Sarajevo, the
July 1995 atrocities in Srebrenica, crimes across 19
municipalities in Bosnia and Herzegovina and the taking
of United Nations personnel hostage. Coordinating
that volume of evidence, ensuring a seamless flow of
witnesses and keeping to the strict deadlines imposed by
the Trial Chamber was an onerous task. Hearings will be
held in June for the Trial Chamber to determine whether
Karadzic' has a case to answer. If so, Karadzie will begin
presenting his case in October, allowing him a fair time
period to finalize preparations for his defence case.

As we approach the completion of our mandate, it
is increasingly important to use our resources flexibly.
We have overcome a period without regular budget
funds for the Mladie and Hadfie cases, unprecedented
demands on our document search and review capabilities
for defence disclosure purposes, and high rates of staff
departures at critical times. The attrition of staff that
had been forecast has become a reality, and there is
no mechanism in place for reversing the problem. We
cannot expect our staff to remain without appropriate
acknowledgement of their essential role in the Tribunal's
work. Staff with knowledge of ICTY cases and relevant
professional skills will be needed beyond 2014, through
the completion of the last ICTY appeals before the
Residual Mechanism. Strategies must be put in place to
promote their continued availability.

The day-to-day cooperation provided by States of
the former Yugoslavia to the Office of the Prosecutor
fully meets expectations. With no more ICTY fugitives,
we can now largely focus on routine requests concerning
documents and witnesses in ongoing cases. Given our
busy case schedule in the coming months, we will
continue to rely on prompt and effective responses
to our requests from Croatia, Serbia, and Bosnia and
Herzegovina. We look forward to the continuation of
our productive working relationships with regional
counterparts in the next reporting period.

There are two exceptions to the generally
satisfactory level of cooperation with States of the
former Yugoslavia, which are impacting on Tribunal
processes and on its legacy. First, we remain concerned
by Serbia's lack of progress towards investigating and
prosecuting individuals who assisted ICTY fugitives
while at large. We raised that issue repeatedly over the
past few years, but we see little evidence of action. We
expect answers to our questions as to how fugitives like
Karadiie and Mladie were able to evade justice for so
many years, and whether State officials were involved
in aiding them. During my visit to Belgrade on 22 May,
the Serbian prosecutor for war crimes committed
to conducting more in-depth investigations into the
fugitive networks in the coming months. We await the
results as a matter of priority.

The second problematic area in terms of cooperation
with my Office is Bosnia and Herzegovina's slow
progress in processing investigative materials
transferred as part of our completion strategy. Nine of
the 13 files transferred by my Office to the Office ofthe
Prosecutor of Bosnia and Herzegovina are still pending,
and we have not seen concrete evidence of progress
since 2008. Bosnia and Herzegovina must take steps to
resolve that situation.

The successful completion of the ICTY mandate
depends upon a successful transition from our work
to national war crimes prosecutions in the countries
of the former Yugoslavia. We have adopted strategies
for channelling our expertise in Balkans war crimes
prosecutions to national authorities. We have integrated
into our Office liaison prosecutors from Serbia, Croatia,
and Bosnia and Herzegovina, who serve as an interface
between international and national justice. We remain
grateful to the European Union for its continued
financial support for those programmes.

In 2011 alone, liaison prosecutors accessed more
than 150,000 pages from our evidence collection for
use in national proceedings. Regional requests for
assistance are also growing in number. We expect that
trend to continue beyond the closure of the ICTY. The
Residual Mechanism will need strategies to facilitate
those requests. We are working with our prosecution
counterparts at the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda to put effective Residual Mechanism structures
in place for responding to requests from national
authorities.

Even so, we see serious problems in the
implementation of national war crimes strategies,
particularly in Bosnia and Herzegovina, where
thousands of serious crimes still require follow-up.
Unless it is made a top priority and more resources are
allocated, the national war crimes strategy in Bosnia
and Herzegovina will fail.

The successful implementation of national war
crimes strategies also depends on greater regional
cooperation, particularly between Serbia and Bosnia
and Herzegovina. The proposed war crimes cooperation
protocol between prosecution offices in those two
countries has still not been signed, almost one year after
the initial target date for signature. During my meetings
in Sarajevo in May, I received no satisfactory explanation
for the delay. Political support from all sides in Bosnia
and Herzegovina is needed to resolve the problem.

Finally, I want to say that recent comments made
by the newly elected President of Serbia, who denied
that genocide occurred in Srebrenica in July 1995, are
not acceptable. His statements contravene the legal and
factual findings of the ICTY and the International Court
of Justice. Such rhetoric is a backwards step, aggravates
the Victims' suffering and jeopardizes the fragile process
of reconciliation in the former Yugoslavia.

