The Secretary-General: Ithank you, Mr. President,
for the opportunity to brief the members of the Security
Council on the situation in Israel and the Gaza Strip.
I felt that the seriousness of the situation required a
consultation with Council members.

We are now several days into a dangerous escalation
in and around Gaza. Over the past several days, the
Palestinian factions Hamas and Islamic Jihad have
fired a barrage of more than 550 rockets and mortars
from Gaza into Israel, and the Israel Defense Forces
(IDF) have launched more than 500 air strikes on Gaza,
primarily targeting Hamas/Islamic Jihad facilities
and private residences of their members. Eighty-eight
Palestinians, many of them civilians, are reported to
have been killed, and 339 are reported to have been
injured. As of yesterday afternoon, some 150 homes
had been destroyed or severely damaged, with nearly
900 people having been displaced.

Three rockets were reportedly fired at Jerusalem,
with the IDF confirming the impact of one in northern
Jerusalem, Without specifying the exact location.
Rockets were also fired at Tel Aviv, Jerusalem,
Hadera, Ashdod and Be'er Sheva, inter alia. Some
were intercepted by the Iron Dome defence system;
others caused material damage and injured two Israeli
civilians. An attempted infiltration by Palestinian

militants by sea from Gaza into Ashkelon on the night
of 8 July was reportedly foiled by the IDF, which killed
the militants. Attacks on both sides continued today.

The situation leading up to the eruption of the past
few days was already precarious, following the atrocious
kidnapping and murder of four young people - three
Israeli Yeshiva students and one Palestinian teenager.
Those acts shattered a period of relative calm and
were widely condemned by the United Nations and the
international community. Those responsible must be
brought to justice. I would like to take this opportunity
to again express my deepest condolences to the families
and loved ones of the victims of those heinous acts.

Today, we face the risk of an all-out escalation in
Israel and Gaza, with the threat of a ground offensive
still palpable - and preventable only if Hamas stops
the rocket firing. Prime Minister Netanyahu of Israel
has announced that the Israeli Cabinet and security
establishment remain unified in their decision to
intensify operations aimed at targeting terrorist cells
and protecting the security of Israelis. President Abbas
continues to appeal for an end to this crisis and has
reached out to President Sisi of Egypt, seeking Egypt's
facilitation in the brokering of a ceasefire on the basis
of the Cairo-brokered November 2012 ceasefire of
which I was part.

The rhetoric has been equally unrelenting. The
Hamas leadership, in public statements issued by
Khaled Meshaal and Moussa Abu Marzouk, has called
for continued resistance despite earlier indications by
both Israel and Hamas that they were not interested
in a confrontation. It is now more urgent than ever to
try to find common ground for a return to calm and a
ceasefire understanding.

Once again, civilians are paying the price for the
continuation of conflict. My paramount concern is for
the safety and well-being of all civilians, no matter
where they are. It pains me - and it should pain us all -
to be reliving circumstances that are all too reminiscent
of the two most recent wars in Gaza. I have consistently
condemned indiscriminate rocket fire from Gaza into
Israel. At the same time, the excessive use of force and
endangering of civilian lives are also intolerable. It is
unacceptable for citizens on both sides to permanently
live in fear of the next aerial attack.

All parties, including Palestinian armed groups,
must respect international humanitarian law. Israel has
legitimate security concerns, but I am also concerned
at the many Palestinian deaths and injuries as a result
of Israeli operations. I continue to condemn the rising
number of civilian lives lost in Gaza. Once again,
Palestinian civilians are caught between Hamas's
irresponsibility and Israel's tough response.

Over the past few days, I have been engaging with
world leaders, including the King of Saudi Arabia, the
Emir of Qatar, the President of Egypt, the heads of the
League of Arab States and the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation, the United States Secretary of State, the
European Union High Representative, and others. All
agree on the importance of returning to calm. Our
challenge is to help the parties move away from their
entrenched respective narratives.

I have also spoken to Prime Minister Netanyahu
of Israel and President Abbas of Palestine. I called
on both sides to exercise maximum restraint, show
statesmanship and weigh the risks of further escalation.
Gaza, and the region as a whole, cannot afford another
full-blown war and another fault line. The potential
negative spillover elsewhere in the West Bank is also
unpredictable in an already tenuous and combustible
situation. The current crisis underscores yet again that
the status quo is unsustainable.

A solution for Gaza is as indispensable as ever.
Core elements of resolution 1860 (2009) remain
unimplemented, including the reunification of Gaza
and the West Bank under one legitimate Palestinian
Authority, committed to the Palestine Liberation
Organization principles. If diplomacy can restore calm
and end the violence, a broader ceasefire will have
to address the underlying causes of conflict, provide
for a full opening of the crossings and ensure an end
to weapons smuggling. A solution must also include
overcoming the chronic humanitarian vulnerability
of Gaza, where water and energy are in constant short
supply. I continue to encourage the Government of
Egypt to urgently open its crossing for humanitarian
purposes.

Turmoil in the West Bank has continued with
attacks, reprisals and provocations. Although riots in
East Jerusalem have decreased since Monday, clashes
between Palestinians and Israeli security forces in
the rest of the West Bank have continued, including
in and around refugee camps. Yesterday, some 10
Palestinians were reportedly injured by the IDF near
Ramallah and Bethlehem during protests in solidarity
with Gaza, which included attacks on Israeli security
infrastructures in the West Bank. It is clear that the
international community must accelerate efforts to
achieve an immediate halt to this escalation and reach
a durable ceasefire. All actors must exercise maximum
restraint and respect international humanitarian law.
I will continue my efforts to bridge gaps and revive
negotiations.
At the same time, I understand that many Israelis
and Palestinians are disenchanted with the peace
process, especially after the lack of results from the
latest diplomatic effort. This setback, and the others
that we have seen over many years of Middle East
diplomacy, have certainly undermined confidence that
peace is possible. But surely no one can wish for the
alternative of perpetual cycles of violence, pervasive
mistrust and polarized peoples. Now is not a time for
further incitement or vengeance. We must not let spoilers
prevail. We must keep the situation from getting any
further out of control. Any further spiral of violence
could have alarming unforeseen consequences.

This is one of the most critical tests the region has
faced in recent years. More than ever, the situation calls
for bold thinking and creative ideas. We must strive to
restore not only calm today but a political horizon for
tomorrow. The parties themselves, regional partners
and the international community must do everything
possible to resume meaningful negotiations towards a
viable two-State solution. All must recognize once and
for all that only a peace agreement will bring lasting
security for Israelis and Palestinians.

