Mr. Yankey (Ghana): I wish to add a word of
appreciation for Under- S ecretary-General Jan
Egeland's thought-provoking assessment of the
humanitarian situation in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and Uganda. We welcome the positive
developments that he highlighted, but we are also
concerned about the remaining obstacles to the
extension of relief to displaced persons. Obviously, the
achievement of durable peace is the key to the
elimination of the humanitarian problems that he has
highlighted. It is therefore only right that the Security
Council continues to be fully seized of the
humanitarian consequences of conflict as an integral
part of its mandate.

It is well established that the forced displacement
of large segments of populations has become part of
the strategy of combatants in furtherance of their
military objectives. We need to pay close attention to
that. From our perspective, we have to focus closely on
the factors that aggravate suffering in camps for
internally displaced persons (IDPs). Those factors
include restrictions on humanitarian access and the use
of aid-dependant civilian populations as hostages and
political bargaining chips. Insofar as such restrictions
have potential genocidal effects on displaced
populations, there is a need to assign criminal liability
to identified offenders in that regard, and to pursue
their prosecution as far as practicable. We agree with
the Under-Secretary-General that, whatever the
outcome of the peace talks in Juba between the Lord's
Resistance Army (LRA) and the Government, those
liable for International Criminal Court prosecution
should meet the fate to be allotted to them.

Secondly, the deliberate targeting of humanitarian
workers, who are often the main lifelines for IDPs and
refugees, also deserves to be given much more serious
attention in the international criminal justice system.
Sexual exploitation and sexual abuse of women and
children should also not be tolerated. Related to that is
the phenomenon of human trafficking, which has been
reported to exist in certain camps in other parts of
Africa.

The proliferation of small arms in IDP camps -
and we have just heard, in the course of the briefing,
what the Mayi Mayi have been doing - is also another
problem that deserves the Council's attention. Those
arms are frequently used to terrorize displaced persons,
and they always have the risk of turning camps into
staging grounds for bloody armed confrontations,
thereby aggravating the humanitarian situation.

There is also the risk of the permanent
displacement of IDPs. I have in mind northern Uganda,
where a whole generation of people has been born and
raised in such camps, with little prospects of return and
of being integrated into the wider society. The threat
posed by prolonged stays in those camps should not be
underestimated. Given the changing dynamics of
conflicts on the continent, those camps could be fertile
grounds to recruit mercenaries, and even terrorists.

We recognize that not much can be achieved
without adequate funding. We commend those
countries, non-governmental organizations and civil
society groups that continue to be the backbone of the
global humanitarian effort, particularly in Africa.
Nonetheless, we support the appeal for extra resources
so that the agencies and groups on the ground can carry
on with the vital work they are doing.

Finally, we believe that the African Union and
other subregional groupings bear the primary
responsibility to provide humanitarian relief for their
own kith and kin. We hope to work with other African
countries to explore ways to enhance our contribution
to humanitarian relief on the continent.

