Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): I apologize
for requesting the floor again. As I mentioned before, I
have genuinely tried not to respond to the representative
of Syria, so that we do not start an argument for one
reason: we need to focus our discussion on the agenda
item. We should not divert our attention to other
issues that are not supposed to be discussed today.
However, given the fact that the representative of Syria
has mentioned this matter again and again, we are
compelled to respond.

As the Council knows, the representative of Syria
mentioned an individual called Al-Mutairi several
times. The New York Times featured an article on him
four or five years ago, to which he referred. I would like
to inform the Council that that individual, known as
Al-Mutairi, does not exist. The Al-Mutairi is a big tribe
in Kuwait. We are speaking of2 million individuals or
more. To be honest, the information of The New York
Times article is false. I hope that the representative of
Syria will provide us with a United Nations document
or any other credible report from the Secretariat. Then
we would respond to any proved accusations against
any individual. We have laws in Kuwait and can
prosecute and hold accountable any individual with ties
to any terrorist group, whether Al-Mutairi or any other
individual. I believe that there is one person whom the
representative of Syria mentioned that is designated on
the list of terrorists, and we took every possible measure
against him through the Security Council. If the Syrian
representative has names of persons who committed
crimes against the Syrian people or participated in
any operations on Syrian territories against the Syrian
people, then let the Syrian representative provide
us with their names, or he could directly provide the
Sanctions Committee established pursuant to resolution
1267 (1999) with all the information he has regarding
those persons. Should the Council decide to include
any of those names on the list, we will then take the
necessary measures against those individuals.

I do not believe that it is right to level accusations
haphazardly against persons who do not exist and
accuse them of terrorism based on reports issued by
The New York Times or any other newspaper. I wish
that the Syrian representative would accept the content
of United Nations reports on the situation in Syria
and the detainees there. United Nations reports are
independent, objective and unbiased.

