Mr. Mangaral (Chad) (spoke in French): I would
like to congratulate the Malaysian presidency on its
organization of today's meeting on peacebuilding and
to thank Mr. Antonio de Aguiar Patriota, the former
Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission, and Mr. Olof
Skoog, the current Chair, for their statements.

Chad takes note of the Commission's report on its
work during 2014 (S/2015/l74), welcomes its activities
and encourages it to continue to carry out its Vital
functions. In that regard I have the following comments
to make.

Regarding the issue of financial resources, the
Commission should put greater emphasis on enhancing
public income and combating illicit financing flows so
as to promote the direct participation of the countries
concerned in peacebuilding efforts. In Liberia, for
instance, where the lack of financial resources and
insufficient national revenue base have continued to
hinder progress in the areas ofthe rule oflaw and security
sector reform, the Commission could work harder to
mobilize more significant support for managing the
country's natural resources. We should establish global
policies aimed at limiting and mitigating the effects
that the illicit flight of capital can have on countries
and at supporting capacity-building in public finances
and the creation of national revenue. Ongoing support
in that area would allow those countries to generate
a more significant part of the financial resources
necessary for re-establishing economic infrastructure
and providing basic services. We note the areas in
which new policies could be designed to help countries
emerging from conflict, including the capacity to
negotiate contracts related to national resources; the
transparency and responsibility of mining companies,
and the tax regimes to be applied; the establishment
of international mechanisms to strengthen mutual
responsibility and international cooperation on tax
issues, against tax evasion and trade distortion; and the
fight against banking secrecy laws, which promote the
illicit movement of funds.

In terms of the national ownership of initiatives,
the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) must focus the
international community's attention on the priorities
of the countries concerned. In that way, it could
support the implementation of the Government projects
in Guinea-Bissau aimed at establishing a national
peacebuilding strategy and continue to promote the
coordination and harmonization of the support given
to the country's priority goals. The Commission could
do the same in Guinea, since the Government has
made its priorities known with regard to peacebuilding
and human rights. In Burundi, the Commission could
focus on the continued enhancement of social cohesion
and the speedy implementation of the development
programme established by the Government. Finally,
in Sierra Leone, the Peacebuilding Commission could
continue to work to promote the country's efforts to
ensure durable peace.

I wish to highlight the importance of regional
perspectives in the context of the work of the
Commission, because the role and functions of the
United Nations and regional actors are complementary
in nature. In that regard, countries that are neighbours
of those on the Peacebuilding Commission's agenda, the
African Union and other organizations must be major
partners in political processes and the combat against
factors that promote instability. It is therefore Vital that
the Commission enhance its cooperation and establish
closer ties with those countries and the African Union.
For example, the Central African Republic continues to
enjoy the region's support for the peaceful settlement
of the crisis.

At the bilateral level, and in the context of a
subregional effort, Chad, along with other countries
members of the Economic and Monetary Community
of Central Africa, contributed on several occasions to
the payment of civil servants' salaries in the Central
African Republic. The Commission could enhance its
support for regional initiatives promoting an ongoing
political dialogue that is open to all countries emerging
from conflict, and cooperate in such efforts. We pay
tribute to the efforts of the African Union to deal with
the problems caused by financial flows, and we support
the adoption of a regional approach to deal with that
challenge. Chad also reasserts its support for the African
Union's common position on the comprehensive review
ofthe peacebuilding architecture in 2015. We encourage
the review to strengthen the contribution made by
the United Nations peacebuilding architecture to the
African Union's peace and development objectives and
to make recommendations in that regard.

Concerning the Peacebuilding Commission's
advisory role for the Security Council, we encourage the
Commission to continue to look at ways of enhancing
that role and improving its relations with the Council,
particularly with regard to the issues of United Nations
missions in transition and repeated relapse into conflict.
We believe the Commission's advisory role should be
seen in a strategic light and should enhance the political
strategy of the Council and the United Nations in given
situations. We also believe that the dialogue between
these two entities should be based on flexibility and
the absence of any formalities, with the participation
of ambassadors and Council country experts, as well
as the active follow-up of Council deliberations by
the PBC. We favour making informal contacts with
individual countries before the Council takes any steps,
particularly when reviewing mandates.

The Peacebuilding Commission should insist
on the participation of women in peacebuilding and
encourage the adoption of measures relating to their
economic empowerment. We look forward to the
recommendations of the comprehensive high-level
review on the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000), which will allow us to assess the progress
made in enhancing the role of women in post-conflict
peacebuilding and any obstacles that may remain.

In conclusion, given the negative impact of the
Ebola pandemic in Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone
in 2014, we call on the Commission to enhance its
capacity to mobilize resources and invite the countries
concerned to generate resources at the national level.
The Peacebuilding Commission, the Peacebuilding
Support Office and the Peacebuilding Fund were
created in 2005 with the promise that assistance would
be given to countries to prevent them from falling back
into violence. We therefore look forward to a review
of the progress achieved since 2005, the difficulties
encountered in managing post-conflict problems and
the recommendations drawn from the review, which
should enable the three entities to do a better job.
We believe those recommendations should aim at
helping to prevent countries emerging from conflict
from relapsing into Violence, since recent examples of
the resurgence of violence, as in the Central African
Republic and South Sudan, have made clear the gaps
that exist in terms of assistance to peacebuilding.

