Mr. Kafando (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French):
My first words will be simply to warmly welcome you,
Sir. Allow me also to thank you for having proposed
this debate on an issue that, although it has been
discussed recently, nonetheless remains an urgent and
timely topic.

The regular consideration of this issue bears
witness to the vigilance and earnestness with which the
Council, in conjunction with the international
community, addresses that grave scourge. It is obvious
that, without that collective commitment on our part,
the scourge will continue to wreak havoc around the
globe through its frightening manifestations, including
the abduction, recruitment and enrolment of children;
attacks against schools; and above all sexual violence
against children, particular rape, which has reached
very disturbing proportions; not to mention the other
aspects of a humanitarian nature and the very adverse
impact that this problem has on development.

The situation of children in armed conflict first
requires the recognition that children's rights need to
be protected. States bear paramount responsibility for
that protection, followed, according to the same duties
and obligations, by the other parties to the conflict.

It is therefore essential to invest the bulk of our
efforts towards inculcating the rule of law and
bolstering democratic institutions. Since those norms
effectively place human beings, as well as respect for
human values, at the heart of society, the rights of the
child are already guaranteed in a democratic system.
That is why all States are duty-bound to become parties
to the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the
Rights of the Child on the Involvement of Children in
Armed Conflict.

The contributions of United Nations agencies and
other partners operating in the field are also necessary.
To that end, we would encourage the popularization of
international humanitarian law and educational
outreach regarding the rights of the child, with a view
to creating an environment conducive to the well-being
and prosperity of children. However, as Ms. Veneman,
the Executive Director of UNICEF, so rightly said, the
best way to protect children from armed conflict is to
prevent war itself, which is our collective
responsibility.

Although the prospects of totally eradicating that
scourge affecting child soldiers are still remote, we
hope to achieve the objectives of resolution 1612
(2005). The results already obtained, such as the
implementation of action plans, the prosecution before
competent courts of commanders who enlist children,
the reduction and even cessation of child recruitment in
certain cases, the release and reintegration of children
into their communities are, from that standpoint,
extremely encouraging. With respect to that problem,
we take this opportunity to congratulate C6te d'Ivoire
and Sri Lanka on the example that they have set in this
field.

We invite armed groups and forces, the names of
which appear in the annex of the Secretary-General's
report (S/2007/757), to demobilize children in their
ranks and to facilitate their reintegration into their
respective communities and families.

The best guarantee of successful reintegration
would be the adoption of measures to prevent any
recurrence of the problem through appropriate
education and the training of these children in income-
generating activity with a view to making them
independent once and for all. Such action can be
carried out, however, only if it is firmly supported,
particularly by donors and all national and
international structures with competencies in this field.

To conclude, I wish to congratulate the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict, the Executive Director of
UNICEF, the Chairperson of the Watchlist Steering
Committee, the entire United Nations system, the
donors and France, naturally, as well as the Working
Group it chairs, for their leadership, their constant
efforts and their commitment to this titanic endeavour.

Finally, I would like to say that we have taken
note of the draft presidential statement. Once we have
seen it, we will have the chance consider it and,
without a doubt, to support it wholeheartedly.

