Mr. Skau (Sweden): At the outset let me thank
Ms. Nakamitsu and Mr. Mulet for their briefings today.

I would like to start by reiterating that Sweden
unequivocally condemns in the strongest terms the
repeated use of chemical weapons in Syria. Chemical
weapons use is illegal, constitutes a threat to
international peace and security and can amount to war
crimes or crimes against humanity. There must be no
impunity for chemical weapons attacks.

I welcome the report (S/2017/916, annex) of the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW) on the implementation of resolution 2118
(2013). Sweden remains deeply concerned about the fact
that the OPCW is still unable to verify Syria's initial
declaration on its chemical weapons programme due to
a number of serious outstanding issues. We commend
the continuing efforts of the Declaration Assessment
Team. Full disclosure and proactive cooperation by the
Syrian authorities are urgently required.

We are deeply concerned about the findings
of the latest Fact-finding Mission report regarding
another sarin attack in the Idlib province, this time
in Ltamenah on 30 March. We look forward to the
OPCW-United Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism
(JIM) investigation regarding that attack. The Joint
Investigative Mechanism, set up unanimously by
the Council, plays a critical role in protecting the
international disarmament and non-proliferation
architecture. We offer our full support for the JIM
under its mandate to pursue objective, impartial and
independent investigations into chemical weapons
attacks in Syria. We count on the professionalism and
technical expertise represented in the JIM. and the
thorough forensic analysis it performs. We have provided
financial support and technical expertise to the JIM. in
order to enable it to carry out its important work.

We thank Mr. Mulet and his team for their
efforts and for their latest report on the chemical
weapons attacks in Umm Hawsh and Khan Shaykhun
(S/2017/904, annex). Those were abhorrent and
unacceptable attacks, which added to the number of
cases of international crimes committed in the conflict
by Da'esh and by the Syrian regime. The sarin attacks
in Idlib province are particularly repugnant, causing
large numbers of casualties, including children and aid
workers. The presence of military-grade sarin indicates
that all stockpiles of sarin precursors in Syria were not
shipped out or destroyed in 2014, as was foreseen.

The Mechanism has carried out thorough work, with
all necessary research and corroboration, as outlined in
the report. On that basis, it concluded that Da'esh was
responsible for the attack in Umm Hawsh in September
2016 and that the Syrian regime was responsible for the
attack in Khan Shaykhun in April 2017. With regard
to the attack in Khan Shaykhun, the Mechanism has
argued that the only one of the eight possible scenarios
reviewed to sustain detailed technical scrutiny, using
scientific and forensic techniques, is that of an aerial
bomb dropped by the Syrian armed forces.

We note that, beyond the Government and the
terrorist group responsible, it has not been possible
to provide further information on the individuals or
entities that were perpetrators, organizers or sponsors,
or were otherwise involved in the attacks, or on exactly
from where the attacks originated. Our assessment of
the JIM. report with regard to the technical and scientific
aspects is still ongoing.

Finally, let me turn briefly to the matter of the
extension of the mandate of the JIM. All members of
the Council have pledged support for its objective. As
we stated at the previous meeting on this issue (see S/PV.8073), the JIM. needs stability and predictability in
order to continue its essential work. It is also important
that we prevent the considerable costs that would follow
from a gap in the mandate of the JIM.

As the current mandate expires in only 10 days, it
is key that we now unite to ensure a timely renewal.
Sweden will continue to do its utmost over the coming
days to seek to ensure a continuation of the JIM. and
to uphold its mandate. We will support all serious and
genuine attempts to achieve that objective and we stand
ready to help to facilitate efforts to find a way forward.

The Syrian people, suffering every day from the
brutalities of a conflict that has been ongoing now for
more than six years, deserve no less.

