President Touadera (spoke in French): This
meeting of the Security Council is taking place at
an opportune moment, in that it is focused on the
question of peacekeeping operations and the protection
of civilians. I believes it affords us an opportunity to
discuss the case of my country - the Central African
Republic - which hosts an international peacekeeping
operation on its territory that has ensured the protection
of civilians for some time now.

With the support of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA), the
European Union-led peacekeeping force in the Central
African Republic, the European Union Military
Advisory Mission in the Central African Republic
and Operation Sangaris, the Transitional Government
was able quickly to put an end to mass atrocities.
The security environment was also conducive to the
success of popular consultations, the Bangui Forum,
the referendum and the parliamentary and presidential
elections. I would especially like to thank MINUSCA
and the entire United Nations system for its efforts
to protect civilians throughout our territory - from
Paoua to Obo and from Berberati to Birao. The effects
of those efforts are particularly evident in the return of
displaced persons and refugees populations, which has
accelerated in recent months, for example in Bangui,
Berberati and Kaga Bandoro.

In spite of that strategic success, the task remains
enormous, while the capabilities of MINUSCA,
combined with those of the security forces of the
Central African Republic, are unfortunately to date
insufficient to put an end to the Violence affecting
our citizens. The continued presence of armed
groups - whether anti-Balaka or ex-Seleka - as well
as that of the Lord's Resistance Army, poses a daily
challenge to the security of civilians. Added to that are
the ongoing inter-communal tensions, including with
regard to herding migration, which are being fuelled by
the presence of those groups.

The grass-roots consultations as well as the Bangui
Forum accorded significant attention to the issue of
Victims, who were able to share their Views and their
expectations. Displaced populations and ethnic and
religious minorities are at particular risk of Violence,
while women and children all too often suffer from
gender-based violence and are victims of recruitment
by armed groups. The refugees from the Central
African Republic want to go back to their country, and
they want there to be a return to justice, reconciliation
among communities, freedom of movement and peace.

Against a backdrop of heightened vulnerability
due to a drop in agricultural production, forced
displacement, rampant crime and the still too great
number of atrocities being committed by armed groups,
we together must do more and better to protect the
population throughout the breadth of the country. In
the immediate term, and this is the number one priority
of my Government, the Central African Republic needs
the unwavering support of the international community,
particularly of MINUSCA, to protect populations
sustainably. That is why the protection of civilians
must remain the priority mandate of MINUSCA and be
carried out in support of Government action.

In order to guarantee such protection, particular
support from the international community is needed to
equip and train our personnel and enable them to fulfil
their primary responsibility in respect of protection
and security. First and foremost, the Central African
Republic must first rebuild its army, gendarmerie and
police, in addition to itsjudicial and correctional system.
This will require the establishment of professional,
honest, equipped, trained operational structures that
are representative of all segments of the population.

Coordination of security operations must be
strengthened, and joint operations, particularly with
the internal security forces, can enable our forces to
benefit immediately from rapid response capacities and
contribute directly to the security of the population.
These operations will make it possible to apprehend
the perpetrators of mass crimes, as well as criminals
or even armed groups that continue to violate the rights
of citizens. These security operations must be carried
out in support of a political process focused on political
solutions, disarmament, demobilization, repatriation
and reintegration, and security sector reform in order to
contain and gradually reduce the presence and negative
action of armed groups.

In order to have a lasting impact, ourjoint security
efforts must, of course, be sustained and extended by
continued work towards national reconciliation, justice
and the fight against impunity and, more broadly,
towards the restoration of State authority and the
promotion of human rights throughout the country.
These actions aimed at establishing a protective
environment must remain a priority in the mandate
of MINUSCA, and be undertaken primarily in areas
where insecurity persists.

The deployment of administration throughout
the national territory is absolutely vital to providing
the population with basic social services so as to
effectively contribute to national reconciliation and
the restoration of State authority, as well as to respond
to the marginalization that fuels the country's cycles
of crises. The Government is resolved to undertake a
major reform of the decentralization policy in order to
help the population govern itself better, by asserting
its presence throughout the entire country and
meeting the basic needs of the citizens of the Central
African Republic.

At this point, I wish to express the Government's
gratitude to the international community for its support
in restoring the authority of the State. This support has
enabled the redeployment of 16 prefects, 71 sub-prefects
and 174 special delegations, as well as of 425 staff
professionals working in social services, 70 per cent of
whom work in the education sector. However, I note that,
in the context of restoring the authority of the State and
protecting civilian populations in the Central African
Republic, strengthening the functional and operational
capacities of the police and gendarmerie also remains
a priority. In this context, the internal security forces,
with the support of the MINUSCA police component,
have developed a plan for capacity building and
development that deserves to be implemented.

Here, I would like to highlight the Government's
efforts to engage all Central Africans on the path of
reconciliation and forgiveness, bearing in mind that
justice must be served in order to combat impunity and
promote human rights. By combining the referral to the
International Criminal Court with the establishment
of a strengthened specific national mechanism, the
Central African Republic has recently blazed a new trail
in the fight against impunity. However, it is important
for the international community to provide us, as soon
as possible, with experts and international judges
with real experience in prosecuting the most serious
crimes. Furthermore, the imminent establishment of a
national human rights commission, in accordance with
international standards, will enable my country to take
a crucial step in this area.

In addition, the establishment of the Truth,
Justice, Reconciliation and Reparation Commission
recommended at the Bangui Forum will also enable
the country to lay the foundations of lasting peace.
The consolidation of public finances and reform of the
productive sectors will be among the major pursuits of
this new presidential term. It will be a major reform
of State-owned financial agencies to increase and
secure State resources and contain public spending. A
relentless battle will be waged against fraud, corruption,
embezzlement and extortion.

In the same spirit, the Government will relaunch the
productive sectors - agriculture, trade, energy, private
foreign investment, public/private partnership - in
order to stimulate growth and ensure not only food
security but also increased exports and reduction of
imports. Social measures to combat unemployment,
improve the professionalization of the educational
system and enhance access to health care, medication
and housing are envisaged.

The various gains made have required the support
and assistance of the international community. Such
support should continue in a framework of mutual
engagement with international partners in the Central
African Republic to support its Government and people
in implementing the nationally agreed priorities of
peace and security, justice and reconciliation, the
restoration of State authority, and social and economic
development. Our hope is that the framework of mutual
engagement focuses on the immediate challenges.

Priorities for recovery and long-term development
will be taken into account in a framework in the style
of the New Deal, of which the Central African Republic
is a pilot country. The Government will undertake an
assessment ofrecovery and peacebuilding with the joint
support of the United Nations, the European Union and
the World Bank. The assessment will make it possible
to formulate a priority national action plan for recovery

and peacebuilding at the donor meeting to be organized
by the European Union in Brussels in November.

These are the topics that I wanted to present
to the Security Council. I express the hope that the
international community will provide its support for
the actions included in the Central African Republic's
agenda for recovery.

