Mr. Mantovani (Italy): At the outset, I wish to
warmly thank Mr. Martin for his clear and
comprehensive briefing on the situation in Nepal. I
would like to express our strongest appreciation for the
historical successes achieved in Nepal under his tenure
as Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
with the final goal being the peaceful establishment of
a federal democratic republic.

The commitment to democracy of the Nepalese
people and parties should obviously be praised first
and foremost, but we should also pay tribute to the able
guidance that Mr. Martin has ensured in his functions.

We have learned, with some concern, from the
report of the Secretary-General that the post-election
period in Nepal faces several difficulties, notably, an
increase in criminality in armed groups and a lack of
progress in the human rights situation. Probably the
most worrying finding is lack of full trust among the
parties to the peace process, which has, so far,
prevented the creation of a new and inclusive
government reflecting the outcome of the elections.

The 25 June agreement has to be welcomed, but
the report notes that the agreement leaves some key
issues unresolved. For instance, we share the concern
of the Secretary-General for the lack of progress in the
discharge of minors from the Maoist combatant
contingents. In this regard, I would like to stress that
the successful holding of the April elections, as
historical as that was, should be followed by concrete
and timely actions to address the underlying challenges
that still affect the Nepalese people.

Regarding these challenges, viable solutions can
only come from the Nepalese themselves. At the same
time, we believe that the assistance of the international
community will continue to be required for complex
processes such as security sector reform, inclusion of
women and traditionally marginalized groups in
peacebuilding efforts, and accountability mechanisms
for past crimes.

Against this background, we have taken note of
the Nepalese request for a six-month extension of the
current work of the United Nations in the monitoring
of arms and armed personnel. In this regard, we
support the idea of maintaining a United Nations
presence to shore up the post-election process within
the terms of the reasonable recommendations of the
Secretary-General.

We appreciate the Nepalese support for the idea
that the extension should be granted in the form of a
special political mission, so that the United Nations
can continue to work with the Nepalese authorities to
reach a durable and permanent solution to the
underlying issues. Therefore, we are ready to support
the draft resolution prepared by the United Kingdom
delegation, which we thank for its efforts.

We also appreciate the plans for substantive
downsizing of the Mission. In that regard, I would like
to emphasize that the phasing out of the civil affairs
component should be matched by a corresponding
reinforcement of the programmes implemented in the
same areas by the United Nations country team and the
Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights.
We welcome UNMIN's efforts to ensure a smooth
transition of expertise and projects in that field.

