Mr. van Walsum (Netherlands): We, too, are
grateful to Special Envoy Carl Bildt for his
comprehensive statement. In response, we will be brief,
as the European Union has spoken on our behalf.

It is appropriate that the European Union as such
should participate in this debate on the Balkans, for we
should once and for all be finished with the notion that
the countries which constitute the European Union are
naturally blessed with peace, whereas those which lie
in the Balkan peninsula are predestined for trials and
tribulations. Let us not forget that the concept of the
European Coal and Steel Community, the forerunner of
today's European Union, was based on the belief that a
new economic and political framework was needed if
future Franco-German conflict was to be avoided. That
was a totally self-evident fear when Robert Schuman
launched his plan exactly half a century ago. We
believe that what has been possible in Western Europe
should also be achievable in the Balkans.

In 1991, the Netherlands assumed the presidency
of the European Union- which was not yet called
"Union" at the time - less than a week after the
declaration of independence by Croatia and Slovenia.
This may explain why my delegation feels so deeply
involved in everything that has happened in the region
since. Throughout our presidency, until the end of
1991, our attempts to develop a common Balkans
policy were repeatedly hindered by fanciful stories in
the media about hidden historical ties between France
and Serbia or between Germany and Croatia, or about
Britain's insular lack of interest in either of them. At
the time these stories were written, they were already a
bit of a caricature, but today all these special ties are
completely a thing ofthe past. The European Union has
really succeeded in forging a common Balkan policy.

That is why it is my pleasure to stop here and
subscribe to everything that has been said by the
Permanent Representative of Portugal and by
Mr. Solana as the High Representative for the
European Union Common Foreign and Security Policy.

