This year marks the fifteenth anniversary of resolution 1612 (2005), which established the monitoring and reporting mechanism on children and armed conflict and the Security Council Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict. This year also marks the twentieth anniversary of the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the involvement of children in armed conflict. However, despite progress in the implementation of the mandate, there is little to celebrate. Last year, more than 25,000 grave violations against children in 19 country situations were verified by the United Nations. The violation of denial of humanitarian access has seen an exponential increase. The steady erosion of international humanitarian law, international human rights law and respect for civilian lives, in particular of children, continues. The numbers of incidents of rape and other forms of sexual violence and of attacks on schools and hospitals do not go down, even where action plans are adopted and measures are taken. The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) further exacerbates the situation. We must step up our efforts. It is fitting that we hold today's open debate under the French presidency of the Security Council, as France was the first Chair of the Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict. Belgium, as the current Chair of the Working Group, stepped into the shoes of its predecessors with ambitious goals. We aim for the Working Group to adopt conclusions on all of the 14 country situations with listed parties within our two-year term. We agreed with Special Representative of the Secretary- General Gamba de Potgieter to increase the frequency of country reports, shortening the reporting periods and increasing their relevance, as more timely conclusions of the Working Group are being adopted. The Working Group is also mainstreaming the topic of children and armed conflict in the work of the Council. For example, video-teleconferences are held with country task forces on monitoring and reporting ahead of mandate renewals of United Nations missions. This illustrates the importance we attach to sufficient child- protection adviser capacity in United Nations missions, whether they be peacekeeping operations or special political missions. The tireless and often dangerous work of the child protection teams and the country task forces on monitoring and reporting on the ground forms the basis of the children and armed conflict mandate and should be acknowledged and safeguarded. In addition, more attention has been paid to the follow-up and implementation of previously adopted conclusions. In February, Belgium organized a Security Council debate on children and armed conflict, with a statement by the King of the Belgians (see S/PV.8721). On that occasion, the Council adopted a presidential statement (S/PRST/2020/3) calling for the dissemination and use of the United Nations "Practical guidance for mediators to protect children in situations of armed conflict". In the light of the Secretary- General's call for a global ceasefire in response to COVID-19, it is now more relevant than ever that child protection should be a central focus in ceasefire and peace negotiations. Time and again, the Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict manages to find consensus on the protection of children, even in country situations about which the Security Council is often divided. This reflects the Council's continued strong support for the children and armed conflict mandate. This unity illustrates the importance of maintaining the strengths of the mandate, including the integrity and impartiality of its listing mechanism. Evidence-based listing and delisting, accurately reflecting the data collected and verified by the monitoring and reporting mechanism, according to the formal criteria included in the Secretary-General's annual report on children and armed conflict of 2010 (S/2010/181), are key. The listing mechanism provides leverage to the United Nations to work with listed parties to improve the situation of children on the ground, and is therefore a precious and powerful tool. Delisting parties prematurely takes away that leverage, including for the Working Group, as it is the basis on which it works. Accountability for all violations and abuses against children is at the heart of the mandate on children and armed conflict. Furthermore, we share the concern, expressed in the report of the Secretary- General (S/2020/525), related to children in detention for association with armed groups, including those designated as terrorists by the Security Council, or on national security-related charges. Those children should be treated primarily as victims and in line with international juvenile justice standards. Detention should be used only as a measure of last resort and for the shortest appropriate period of time. Reintegration is key, and reintegration programmes must be gender- and age- sensitive, include mental-health and psychosocial support, education and vocational training, and access to civil registry, identification documents and to justice. As His Majesty King Philippe said before the Security Council in February, "The year 2019 marked the end of a very challenging decade for children in conflict zones. It is up to us all to ensure - with just and concrete measures - that 2020 marks the start of a decade of hope for all children." (see S/PV.8721, p. 8)
