Mr. Kama] (Pakistan): It is my pleasure to address
the Council under your presidency, Sir, as you are the
Foreign Minister of Costa Rica, a country which shines as
a beacon in its commitment to peace and security.

The people of Bosnia and Herzegovina have
witnessed the most savage and barbaric conflict since the
Second World War. They were subjected to diabolic and
deleterious genocide and "ethnic cleansing". Though the
war has finally come to an end, the effects of the four-
year-long conflict have not yet disappeared. The scar of
the bitter past in the minds of the aggrieved community
is deep. The healing process is arduous, considering the
deep fissures and cleavages caused to the very fabric of
society.

 

Since the signing of the Dayton Peace Accords two
years ago, important progress has been achieved towards
resurrecting the unity and territorial integrity of the State of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, but there still remains a lot to be
done. The areas where progress has not been satisfactory
include the return of all refugees and displaced persons;
freedom of movement across the inter-entity boundary lines,
and the effective functioning of the common State structure,
namely, the Presidency, the Council of Ministers and the
Parliamentary Assembly. While the Government of Bosnia
and Herzegovina has extended full cooperation in achieving
these goals the Serbian entity demonstrated a lack of
commitment, seriously hampering international efforts.

In the military field, the Serbs also continue to evade
their obligations under the Agreement on Regional
Stabilization and the Agreement on Arms Control, which
are Vital for ensuring regional stability. We must ensure that
all parties fulfil their declared reduction liabilities and
implementation of other related obligations.

On the issue of criminal proceedings against the
perpetrators of genocide, the international community must
ensure compliance with the relevant provisions of the
Dayton Accords by all parties, particularly the Serbian
entity, in apprehending the indicted criminals. The United
Nations troops on the ground must also cooperate with the
International Tribunal in achieving the ideal of peace with
justice in Bosnia and Herzegovina. In this regard, we
welcome the role of British and Dutch troops in
apprehending some indicted war criminals in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. The perpetrators of mass killings must not go
unpunished, be it in Bosnia, in Afghanistan or in Kashmir.

During the last two years, the United Nations troops
in Bosnia and Herzegovina have contributed enormously in
ensuring relative security in the entire region. We support
the continued presence of the United Nations forces in
Bosnia and Herzegovina, providing a secure environment
for the implementation of the civilian aspects of the peace
plan beyond June 1998.

The International Police Task Force (IPTF) faces
enormous opposition from the Bosnian Serbs in reforming
the police institution, which is a matter of concern to all of
us. We support the efforts of the IPTF in the restructuring
and training of the police to operate according to the
principles of democratic policing, carry out weapons
inspections, promote freedom of movement and prevent
financial crime, smuggling and corruption. These efforts
will bear fruit if accompanied by a reform of the judicial
system, for which we must provide adequate resources and
qualified personnel. In supplementing the efforts of the
United Nations in these areas, Pakistan has provided 100
police personnel for the IPTF and has expressed readiness
to provide additional police personnel whenever required.
We are also implementing a programme for the training
of 200 Bosnian military personnel.

My delegation supports the recommendation of the
Secretary-General to extend the mandate of the United
Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina and the IPTF
to pursue the work entrusted to them in accordance with
Annex 11 of the Peace Agreement.

In conclusion, I would like to reaffirm Pakistan's
unqualified moral, political and economic support for the
people of Bosnia and Herzegovina. Our support has
always been based on our conviction that no nation
should be victimized because of its smaller size and that
no peoples should be brutalized because of their ethnic
origin. We also believe that no nation and no people
should be denied their inherent right to self-determination
and their right to wage a legitimate struggle for their
liberation.

