Ms. Sughayar (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank the Uruguayan delegation
for presiding over the Security Council this month and
wish it every success as it fulfils that charge. We also
thank Uruguay for convening today's open debate,
having chosen to make this vital subject a part of the
Council's agenda for the month.

My delegation would like to express its appreciation
to Secretary-General Antonio Guterres for his
invaluable briefing. We also thank the Vice-President
of the International Committee of the Red Cross and
the Deputy Executive Director of Human Rights Watch
for their statements. I would like to express Jordan's
condolences to the United Kingdom on the terrorist
attack that took place in Manchester and led to the death
of a number of children and other innocent civilians

The Security Council adopted resolution 2286
(2016) unanimously in response to the violence, attacks
and threats against medical personnel in armed conflict.
These threats and attacks are not limited to those who
were working in the medical and humanitarian fields
alone, but they also target the means of transportation
being used and medical equipment and facilities. Our
meeting today to discuss the steps taken by States
to implement resolution 2286 (2016) one year after
its adoption is important. I would therefore like to
underscore the following.

First, Jordan welcomes the report of the Secretary-
General of 10 May 2017 on the protection of civilians
in armed conflict (S/2017/414), the former Secretary-
General's recommendations attached to his letter
addressed to the President of the Security Council on
18 August 2016 (S/2016/722, annex), and the latter's
briefing to the Council on 28 September 2016 (see S/PV.7779).

Secondly, Jordan attaches great importance to
the international humanitarian law and international
human rights law and is in full compliance with all their
provisions, which is evidenced by the full compliance
of our security agencies and the Jordanian personnel in
peacekeeping operations with those bodies oflaw.

Thirdly, we would like to stress that it is important
to implement the measures aimed at improving the
protection of medical facilities and personnel as well as
measures for prevention, protection and accountability.

In the light of the ongoing crisis in Syria and
its political, security and social repercussions that
are a still having impact on Syria's neighbours and
other countries hosting Syrian refugees, Jordan has
demonstrated its respect for international laws in the
way it deals with these refugees. Jordan has coordinated
with different specialized United Nations agencies to
facilitate the entry of humanitarian relief convoys into
southern Syria in implementation of resolution 2165
(2014), and this assistance includes non-food items.

Today, the strike by Palestinian prisoners of war is
in its thirty-ninth day. These prisoners are continuing
their hunger strike as a call on Israeli prison authorities
to abandon their policies of isolation and administrative
detention. Accordingly, we call on Israel to comply
with its obligations under international humanitarian
law and international human rights law. We also note
the statement contained in the letter of the Secretary-
General of the League of Arab States addressed to the
Secretary-General ofthe United Nations concerning the
violation of rights of a Palestinian prisoners of war and
the deteriorating humanitarian conditions, namely, that
he called for an end to practices that violate prisoners'
basic rights.

In conclusion, the responsibility to protect civilians
and provide health care in armed conflict reflects a
genuine commitment by Member States, especially
in the light of diverse threats that we are facing today
in terms of the growing terrorism and extremism that
are threatening all parts of the world and are violating
principles of human rights law and international
humanitarian law and all other bodies of international
law.

