Mr. Matuszewski (Poland): Let me begin by saying
how pleased my delegation is to see you, Sir, presiding
over today's meeting of the Security Council.

In the light of Poland's alignment with a statement to
be made by the Ambassador of Luxembourg on behalf of
the European Union and associated countries, my statement
is intended to highlight some points which are of particular
significance for my country.

Poland, like other members of the international
community, attaches great importance to the situation in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. With the signing of the Peace
Agreement, this friendly country has embarked upon a
difficult journey towards peace and stability based on the
harmonious coexistence of all component parts of its
multi-ethnic society. The very future of Bosnia and
Herzegovina as an independent country and the prospects
for sustainable peace in the whole region hinge on how
smooth and fast this journey is.

The progress that Bosnia and Herzegovina has made
since the conclusion of the conference in Dayton, Ohio,
is significant. It constitutes yet further evidence of the
political far-sightedness of the architects of this complex
and unique construction known as the General Framework
Agreement for Peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina, and,
indeed, does credit to the international community's
multidimensional support for a peaceful and prosperous
Bosnia and Herzegovina.

Having participated in the Peace Implementation
Conference held recently in Bonn, Poland fully identifies
itself with the Conference's assessments and conclusions.
We join other members in appealing to the authorities in
Bosnia and Herzegovina to fulfil what they have
repeatedly declared themselves to be committed to: to
make peace in their country and to make its entities self-
sustainable. To achieve this, further progress is necessary
in building functioning governmental structures, to
advance the process of democratization, to institute
adequate protection of human rights, to reform the law
enforcement institutions and the judiciary system, to
create necessary conditions for the successful completion
of the return of refugees and displaced persons and to
cure the economy of its many diseases.

Let me focus on two issues which are, in the View
of my delegation, of particular importance for the future
of Bosnia and Herzegovina, and, as a matter of fact, for
the future of the whole region. The first is the problem of
interested countries' cooperation with the International
Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia. We regret
to have to note that there are still those who seem to take
lightly their obligations under the terms of the Peace
Agreement and the relevant resolutions of the Security
Council. In our View, progress in the administration of
justice is essential for the prospects of national
reconciliation, peace and stability in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and in the whole region. We join others in
calling upon the authorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina to
ensure that those indicted are tried as stipulated in the
decisions of the Security Council.

 

The second issue that I would like to briefly touch
upon is the return of the refugees and displaced persons. By
the number of those who have decided to return to their
original domiciles one may, in fact, measure quite
accurately the progress made in any other part of the
process of the normalization of the country's political,
social and economic life. We understand very well the
complexity of this whole problem, but at the same time we
believe that more efforts will have to be made, and they
should be better focused in order to achieve a genuine
breakthrough in this area.

My delegation is of the opinion that the International
Police Task Force (IPTF) has played an extremely
important role in creating conditions conducive to a secure
and durable peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina. We welcome
the progress made in other aspects of IPTF activities,
including assistance in restructuring and training the local
police, as well as in promoting model democratic standards
among the country's police force. As the Secretary-General
pointed out in his latest report, however, much remains to
be done, and the further IPTF presence is in our view
indispensable. It is important, however, that IPTF monitors
continue to be covered by adequate security arrangements,
which at present can be secured only by a credible
international military force.

The magnitude of the task in Bosnia and Herzegovina
warrants a great deal of organization and coordination on
the part of the international actors present in the country.
We believe that their achievements deserve our deep
appreciation. Today's debate and the beginning of a new
phase of the implementation of the Peace Agreement
coincide with the final preparations for Poland's assuming
the post of Chairman-in-Office of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe for the year 1998. We
stand ready to cooperate with all our partners in order to
assist the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina in building a
peaceful, prosperous and stable country.

