Mr. Wang Yingfan (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation thanks the Secretary-General
for his report, and we thank Mr. Jacques Paul Klein for
his detailed briefing.

In recent years, the United Nations Mission in
Bosnia and Herzegovina (UNMIBH) has made
progress in such areas as police reform and training
and the judicial system. It has also set up a mechanism
for internal resource management. We appreciate those
developments, and we believe they will provide a good
foundation for the long-term reconstruction and
development of Bosnia and Herzegovina. Members of
the Bosnia and Herzegovina police contingent trained
by UNMIBH have on several occasions participated in
United Nations peacekeeping operations in other
regions. That is another example of UNMIBH's fruitful
efforts.

The Secretary-General's report and Mr. Klein's
briefing provide insights about stability and national
reconciliation in Bosnia and Herzegovina; these
deserve our attention and merit serious study. Many of
the problems facing Bosnia and Herzegovina are
similar to those facing other parts of the Balkans and
the Great Lakes region of Africa. They therefore have a
degree of universal significance. In that sense, Bosnia
and Herzegovina is indeed a test case.

We note too that UNMIBH has faced some
practical difficulties in its work, for example in its
efforts to recruit and train police personnel from ethnic
minorities, in the return of refugees and in the sphere
of national reconciliation. Progress has not been
satisfactory in those areas. The recent violence in
Mostar and Banja Luka indicates that, while the war
ended nearly six years ago, the wounds it inflicted on
the people have not yet healed. The road to national
reconciliation and integration is a long one;
unremitting long-term efforts by the international
community are needed.

We endorse the recommendation that the mandate
of UNMIBH be extended for a further year. We hope
and trust that, under Mr. Klein's leadership, UNMIBH
will continue its work with a proactive and practical
approach that will gradually lead it to the attainment of
its objectives.

China supports the peace process in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. We have sent police and other civilian
personnel to participate in the work of UNMIBH. We
note too that the Secretariat and Mr. Klein have placed
their further requirements before us; we shall study
them.

