Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (interpretation from Russian): We look at the draft resolution in the
general context of the situation in Bosnia and its possible
future development, including from the point of view of
continuing and enhancing the effectiveness of United
Nations operations.

Nowadays it is often said that the lesson to be
learned from the present escalation of the Bosnian crisis
is that measures must be taken to prevent attacks against
United Nations personnel. While we agree with the
grounds for such measures, we think that the main lesson
is far broader: that the use of force is not a panacea, and
that decisive action is needed to achieve a breakthrough
for a political settlement.

In our view, those clear conclusions were reflected
in the report of the Secretary-General on the mandate of
the United Nations Protection Force (UNPROFOR). One
of the key ideas in the report relates to the need to draw
a clear distinction between peace-keeping and peace
enforcement operations. In considering the various options
for the future of UNPROFOR, the Secretary-General has
noted the advantages that could be gained by a return to
a purely peace-keeping function for the operation. We
think those arguments are very convincing.

We are convinced that, independent of the question
of the draft resolution, the assessment set out in the report
of the Secretary-General remains valid for the future work
of the Council, and not just on the question of Bosnia. In
principle, we favour enhancing the security of United
Nations personnel, including through providing
UNPROFOR with a rapid-reaction capability. Russia is as
interested as others in ending the treacherous actions
against peace-keeping personnel, whatever their source.

 

But strengthening UNPROFOR's ability to protect the lives
and safety of its peace-keepers should in no way make
United Nations forces a party to the conflict.

It is of paramount importance that the draft resolution
clearly calls for the maintenance of UNPROFOR's
impartial, peace-keeping nature and for the retention of
present decision-making procedures and rules of
engagement. We are grateful to the sponsors for taking into
account several of our other proposals as well, including
that relating to the demilitarization of the safe areas. We
call on both sides to facilitate the implementation of that
idea, which would make it possible to prevent the
emergence of hotbeds of tension around these areas and to
prevent the possible misuse of their status, especially for
preparing military attacks. It would also enhance the safety
of the peaceful civilians living there. It is extremely
important that, as stated in the draft resolution, measures to
strengthen UNPROFOR should be implemented in
consultation with all parties.

At the same time, some of our important proposed
amendments were not taken into account. Specifically, the
draft resolution does not manage to avoid the impression
that the rapid reaction force is intended to operate against
one of the Bosnian parties. We fully share the anger over
inadmissible acts committed by Bosnian Serbs, to which the
draft resolution refers in detail. But we cannot fail to note
that the Government of Bosnia and Herzegovina too bears
responsibility for provocations, for violating agreements and
for direct attacks on UNPROFOR. Today not only the
Serbs but Government forces of Bosnia and Herzegovina
are blockading UNPROFOR peace-keepers.

A few days ago the Government of Bosnia and
Herzegovina issued an ultimatum to the Canadian
contingent near Visoko, demanding the withdrawal of two
observation posts, which were then subjected to mortar and
artillery fire. As we speak, Government forces of Bosnia
and Herzegovina are attempting a massive attack in the
Sarajevo region. We warned about this threat and proposed
that the Security Council express its concern about this
matter in the very text of the draft resolution. That proposal
was not adopted.

We now face a serious escalation of the military
situation in Bosnia. We have no doubt about the right of
Governments to choose any policy. But if United Nations
forces are in a country and if Security Council resolutions
have been adopted on the matter, there is a concomitant
obligation to implement the decisions of the Council.

We also proposed referring in the draft resolution to
the inadmissible violations of the arms embargo in former
Yugoslavia, including in Bosnia; that proposal was not
accepted. These violations fuel the conflict, engender
illusions about the possibility of resolving it by military
means, and have a negative impact on the safety of the
peace-keepers. The Security Council must take genuine
steps to put an end to this heedless attitude towards
resolution 713 (1991).

We are also concerned about the haste with which
the draft resolution was brought before the Council. The
Secretary-General's document on financial implications
appeared only a few hours ago. But the main thing is that
the Council did not have time to agree on reliable
guarantees against attempts to use the rapid-reaction force
to involve UNPROFOR in a war. Such attempts are
already under way; we cannot ignore them.

We do not expect this to happen; we expect that the
administration of the United Nations operation, which
bears a great responsibility, will display the necessary
wisdom and care in implementing the decision with
respect to possible action by the rapid-reaction force and
carefully take into account the possible consequences of
any acts of force, so as not to allow further use of force
in Bosnia or a repetition of the hostage crisis - and
ultimately so as not to permit the situation to be played
out according to the Somalia scenario.

We also expect that the main efforts of the
administration of the United Nations operations will be
focused on ensuring the cooperation of both parties,
having them conclude a cease-fire agreement and putting
a decisive end to hostilities.

In the light of all the circumstances which I have
mentioned, Russia will be forced to abstain in the voting.
At the same time, we feel that it is necessary once again
to call quite seriously upon all parties to the conflict to
forgo any attempt to resolve their differences on the
battlefield; rather, they should try to do so at the
negotiating table.

As was indicated at the meeting of the Foreign
Ministers of the Contact Group in the Netherlands, Russia
assumes that it is necessary to make additional efforts to
give a new impetus to the settlement process. In this
context, the key issue is the question of ending the
sanctions against Belgrade. The possibilities of the
negotiating process have not been fully exhausted and we
will continue to cooperate with all in a political

 

settlement, especially with our partners here in the Security
Council and in the Contact Group and with all who favour
peace over war.

