Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): I could not resist the pleasure of taking
the floor one more time under your presidency,
Madam President.

The representative of France just said that all
members of the Council have called for the full
implementation of the Minsk agreement on Ukraine. We
should have liked that to be the case, but unfortunately
it is not because when the Minsk agreement was
made, the Russian delegation swiftly proposed the
adoption of a statement to the press in support of it.
However, we came up against attempts by a number
of delegations to rewrite the Minsk agreement. They
proposed amendments to the simple and brief statement
in support of the agreement that would have rewritten
the content of the agreement. The Council therefore did
not take a stance in support of Minsk agreement.

We have, unfortunately, heard similar attempts made
in certain statements to rewrite the agreement reached
between the Kyiv authorities and the representatives
of the south-east. These statements distort the idea
behind the Minsk agreement and paint the intentions
of the people in the south-east to hold elections on
2 November in a disingenuous light. We have heard
similar statements in Kyiv and some Western capitals.
This requires us to make an important corresponding
clarification.

In line with the Minsk agreement achieved in
September between representatives of the President
of Ukraine and representatives of the militias in the
south-east, with the participation of Russia and the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) , it was agreed to hold such elections between
19 October and 3 November. The law signed by President
Poroshenko on 16 October regarding the so-called
territories and their special autonomy, establishing
7 December as the date of the elections, runs counter
to the Minsk agreement. The date of 7 December was
included in the law arbitrarily and unilaterally, without
any discussion with the militias. Moreover, that law
cannot be applied in practice, as it does not define
the specific regions of its coverage. This issue must
remain pending until an additional decision is taken by
the Verkhovna Rada. Such a decision cannot be made
because Kyiv withdrew its signature to the document
defining the boundaries between the Ukrainian forces
and the militias. The statement issued by the head of
the Ministry of Internal Affairs of Ukraine concerning
the refusal to carry out the law signed by President
Poroshenko on 16 October is not constructive.

There have been constant violations by Kyiv
of the Minsk agreement on other matters as well.
Shelling continues of areas controlled by the militias,
in violation of the ceasefire. Promised acts of amnesty
and security guarantees for militia negotiators have not
been enacted. The provisions on the decentralization
of power and the continuation of the national dialogue
are not respected. The Kyiv authorities have totally
undermined the improving humanitarian situation in
the Donbas and placed artificial obstacles in the way of
humanitarian convoys from Russia.

Against this backdrop, the position of the militias
regarding the holding of elections, in particular those
of 2 June, is justified and fully in line with the Minsk
agreement and its provisional timelines. There is an
urgent need for a full-fledged governing body in south-
eastern Ukraine to resolve practical issues relating to
daily life and law enforcement.

Efforts to resolve the situation in south-eastern
Ukraine are being undertaken in the most difficult and
unfavourable conditions. It is important now to do our
utmost to support the tenuous ceasefire, the onset of the
economic and humanitarian rebuilding of the region and
the launch of sustainable political dialogue. Attempts
to impose artificial ultimatums and reduce the whole
package of the Minsk agreement due to just one aspect,
such as the date of the elections, or to use the conduct
of either side as a criterion could undermine the entire
process of peaceful resolution, making it hostage to
certain geopolitical ambitions.

We cannot rule out the possibility that those who put
forward such ultimatums are seeking to undermine the
Minsk agreement, just as the agreement of 21 February
was undermined, and creating a pretext to settle the
conflict in south-eastern Ukraine by force. The Russian
side firmly calls for such a turn of events to be averted
and for everything possible to be done to ensure that the
elections of 2 November are a step towards the further
normalization of the situation and a comprehensive
settlement of the internal Ukrainian crisis.

We recall that, before the beginning of the Minsk
process, the militia leaders publicly stated their
negotiating positions, which in part stressed that the
conduct of free elections on those territories, based on
the principles of national self-governance, would pave
the way for joint efforts to retain a united, economic,
cultural and political space in Ukraine. Russia will help
to ensure that the winner in the elections for leader of
the south-east adheres to that line. We expect specific
actions for the voluntary implementation of the Minsk
agreement from the Ukrainian authorities, Western
partners and the OSCE.

Today there is an opportunity to use the 2 November
elections, not for a reckless and unjustified exacerbation
of the confrontation, but rather to move things along in
a constructive way with a mutually respectful dialogue
and a search for compromise on the basis of a balance
of legal interests of all Ukrainian parties, as required
by the document signed in the framework of the Minsk
process.

