Mr. Lewicki (Poland): Let me begin by joining
other speakers in thanking Special Representative
Zewde and African Union (AU) Commissioner Chergui
for their insightful briefings. Allow me also to take
this opportunity to congratulate Ms. Zewde on her new
appointment and wish her every success in fulfilling
her mandate, including fostering progress between the
United Nations and the African Union.
We could not agree more with Ms. Zewde that
partnership is not a choice. It is a necessity, and that
is why Poland is a steadfast supporter of fostering the
strategic partnership between the United Nations and
the African Union. We therefore welcome the progress
made over the past year, covered by the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2018/678) under consideration.

In recent years, the African Union has taken on
important responsibilities, and its role in promoting
peace and security has only expanded. We appreciate the
ownership it has consistently demonstrated in tackling
security challenges and in bringing together subregional
organizations in joint efforts to ensure peace, stability
and development on the African continent. We all
acknowledge the comparative advantages of African
Union peace operations - their understanding of the
realities on the ground, ability to rapidly deploy and
flexibility, and capacity to perform mandated tasks
that United Nations peacekeeping operations are
unable to perform. Poland believes that, if African
peace and security operations are to be most effective,
the partnership between the two organizations should
be further strengthened in the area of joint analysis
and planning.

We recognize the need for flexible, predictable and
sustainable funding of AU peace operations authorized
or mandated by the Security Council, and we stand ready
to further discuss various options and models of such
support, including access to United Nations-assessed
contributions. At the same time, we underline the need
to ensure the full compliance of African-led peace
operations with United Nations rules and standards in
terms of troop quality, training and equipment, as well
accountability, conduct and discipline.

Let me stress that enhanced cooperation and
collaboration between the United Nations and the
African Union are needed not only in relation to peace
and security operations; they are equally important
in the area of mediation and conflict prevention,
as well as in addressing the root causes of conflict,
strengthening political processes and respect for rule of
law, and good governance, and promoting sustainable
and inclusive development. Therefore, we commend
the United Nations-AU action plan on implementation
of Agenda 2063 and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, as agreed at the second United Nations-
African Union Annual Conference held in Addis Ababa
in early July.

At this juncture, allow me to once again express
Poland's appreciation for African mediation and
facilitation efforts in various conflicts, including in
South Sudan, the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Central African Republic.

Poland believes that continued United Nations
support for the African Union in its efforts to equip
itself with the capacities, tools and means necessary for
effective action is critical. It is of utmost importance
in enabling both organizations to face new threats and
address complex sources of instability in Africa. We
believe that regular exchanges between the Council and
the African Union Peace and Security Council are an
essential instrument for deepening the partnership. In
that context, we would be supportive of the possible
expansion ofjoint field missions of both Councils. We
believe that a joint visit to the Democratic Republic of
the Congo in the weeks to come could be instrumental
in reaching a political solution in the country. In that
respect, we also stress the importance of the United
Nations Office to the African Union in providing
support and ensuring concerted action between the
two Councils.

In conclusion, I reiterate Poland's support for
strengthening United Nations-AU cooperation and our
appreciation to the Secretary-General for his continued
efforts focused on strengthening the partnership with
the African Union, as well as other regional partners in
Africa. Let me assure you, Madam, that Poland stands
ready to work closely with African partners not only on
African issues, but also on ways to address our shared
global challenges.

