Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in French): I thank you, Mr. President, for giving us the
floor in this important debate. I would also like to thank
Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix for his first annual briefing on
peacekeeping reform.

We are all aware of the challenges to peacekeeping
operations in recent years. We welcome the energetic
efforts taken over the past 12 months, namely, the
findings of the report prepared by former United
Nations Force Commander Lieutenant General Alberto
dos Santos Cruz, entitled Improving Security of United
Nations Peacekeepers, the action plan to implement
its recommendations, the Action for Peacekeeping
initiative, a presidential statement of the Security
Council in support of the Secretary-General's initiative
(S/PRST/2018/10), as well as the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations, which reached a consensual
outcome on crucial issues, such as performance, which
we are addressing today. We also welcome the integrated
performance policy framework recently presented
by the Department of Peacekeeping Operations to
Member States.

Furthermore, the reforms approved in recent
months, at the request of the Secretary-General, are all
steps towards more effective peacekeeping, including
the reform of the peace and security architecture to
increase coherency and the reform of management
to increase effectiveness on the ground. All those
processes contribute to improving the performance of
all peacekeeping stakeholders. But while those projects
are now nearing completion, there are others that
require even broader support from Member States.

As Ms. Blakemore illustrated, that is the case
for conduct and discipline issues, and in particular
sexual abuse and exploitation. The vast majority of
the 100,000 men and women who serve the Blue Flag
do so with conviction, a sense of honour and respect
for local populations. That is why it is in the interests
of all, and in particular those who honour the United
Nations flag, that those who commit crimes do not go
unpunished. We welcome the important work done in
recent years in that area, including the establishment
of compacts between the United Nations and Member
States that include reciprocal commitments. We now
believe that it is necessary to extend those compacts
to all troop-contributing countries and ensure that
national prosecution practices lead to similar results.

The Declaration of Shared Commitments on
United Nations Peacekeeping Operations, prepared this
summer, includes commitments that could effectively
lead to the improved performance of peacekeeping
operations. We welcome the balanced nature of that
document. Belgium has already endorsed it and
hopes that many other troop-contributors, financial
contributors, host countries and organizations will
do the same. In particular, we welcome the absolute
priority given to the protection of civilians, as well
as the central role given to performance, including
in planning.

Lastly, what more can be done, beyond reforms and
the implementation of mutual commitments? There are
some areas that we believe could be prioritized.

First, improving the effectiveness of missions
requires a better understanding of the challenges. That
is why we believe that the findings of the strategic
reviews should be made available to Council members
and key troop-contributors.

Secondly, we welcome the special investigations
held following major incidents. Their observations
can be usefully shared with the parties directly
concerned. It would also be useful to take stock - a
few months or a year later - of the implementation of
the recommendations, the improvements made and, if
necessary, the mechanisms for prosecuting those who
bear criminal liability.

Thirdly, beyond the primary responsibility of
the country of origin, there are many initiatives to
train staff. We commend the important work of the
Secretariat and the mobilization of Member States in
that regard. But that work remains incomplete if we do
not improve the mapping of those initiatives, as well as
follow up with the trained staff.

Moreover, we must be realistic. What is the point of
adopting a mandate if the human, logistical and financial
resources do not follow? Matching up those resources
with the mandate should be a concern shared by all of
us, at all times. Those resources include intelligence,
which is a crucial tool for the safety and security
of our peacekeepers and the protection of civilian
populations. Integrating the various components of
the missions must continue. Lessons must be learned
from pilot initiatives, such as joint patrols, and positive
experiences must be replicated, especially if that will
help to better connect missions with local populations.

Our experience in Mali has also shown how
much we can increase the effectiveness of an entire
mission when the various national contingents are
more integrated and complementary. Let us increase
the number of those initiatives and work on them even
before the deployment of staff.

Finally, as stipulated in resolution 2423 (2018), on
Mali, would it not be useful in some cases to reach a
political pact with the national authorities - a pact that
would make it possible to agree on common objectives
and lay the foundation for fruitful cooperation with
all stakeholders?

As can noted, there is no shortage ofideas. Ibelieve
that there is positive momentum right now to increase
the effectiveness of peacekeeping operations, and by
the same token make them safer.

