Mr. Voronkov: I would like to begin by thanking
you, Sir, for organizing today's important meeting,
which marks the sixteenth anniversary of the
adoption of resolution 1373 (2001). Allow me to start
by remembering the tens of thousands of victims of
terrorism around the world.

It is an honour to brief the Security Council for the
first time as Under-Secretary-General of the Office
of Counter-Terrorism (OCT). I thank all 15 members
of the Council for their strong support to the creation
of the OCT - the very first reform initiative of
Secretary-General Guterres. As he said last week in the
General Assembly,

"National and multilateral counter-terrorism efforts
have indeed disrupted networks, reclaimed territory,
prevented attacks and saved lives, but we need
to intensify this work. Stronger international
cooperation remains crucial against terrorism."
(A/72/PV3, p. 2)

I am strongly committed to the Secretary-General's
Vision and look forward to working with the Security
Council to achieve this goal.

I would also like to express my gratitude for the
able leadership shown by Ambassador Aboulatta of
Egypt, as Chair of the Counter-Terrorism Committee.
I look forward to working closely with the Committee
and its Executive Directorate (CTED) to build a
strong partnership among all General Assembly
and Security Council-mandated bodies to promote
the implementation of the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy and all relevant Security
Council resolutions.

The new Office of Counter-Terrorism established
by the Secretary-General, which I head, intends to
make a qualitative difference in our support to Member
States by bringing leadership, mobilizing resources
and developing, together with United Nations entities
at Headquarters and in the field, a coherent and well-
coordinated one-United Nations framework to counter-
terrorism and prevent violent extremism conducive to
terrorism. Support and assistance for Member States
are the key words in this regard.

In order to meet this goal, I intend to work closely
with all States members of General Assembly, the
Security Council and all other relevant organs and
bodies of the United Nations. Listening and acting on
their priorities will be my priority. That is why I held
more than 50 high-level meetings with Member States
and international and regional organizations last week.
I also listened carefully to the statements delivered in
the General Assembly, in which counter-terrorism was
clearly one of the highest priorities for the majority of
Member States.

From these consultations and statements, we have
already identified six key areas that are fully aligned with
the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy
and the Council's priorities, namely, strengthening
international counter-terrorism cooperation; preventing
violent extremism conducive to terrorism in the context
of Pillar I of the United Nations Global Counter-
Terrorism Strategy; addressing the terrorist use of the
Internet; enhancing intercultural dialogue; addressing
the threat of foreign terrorist fighters; and increasing
the exchange of information and good counter-terrorism
practices. I will continue listening in order to build,
together with the Security Council and all relevant
United Nations entities, an effective, future-oriented
and balanced counterterrorism programme to support
Member States.

Since 2001, the Counter-Terrorism Committee and
its Executive Directorate have resolutely contributed
to supporting Member States in the implementation
of resolution 1373 (2001). Leveraging their respective
comparative advantages, the United Nations Counter-
Terrorism Implementation Task Force (CTITF) has also
contributed significantly to that effort. Now it is high
time to bring together our collective efforts. I therefore
welcome the growing emphasis that the Security
Council is placing, in its resolutions and presidential
statements, on ensuring that United Nations entities
work closely together in addressing the terrorist
threat. This must be followed by concrete actions and
initiatives, respectful of mandates and done in the spirit
of collaboration from the very start.

Allow me to cite four examples of what the two
constituent parts of the OCT - the Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force, of which CTED is a core
member, and the United Nations Counter-Terrorism
Centre - are already doing.

First, our 12 Counter-Terrorism Implementation
Task Force inter-agency working groups represent
a good example of counter-terrorism coordination
in action. This means exchange of information, the
identification of threats and challenges, and the
development of all-of-United Nations projects. Our
new Office of Counter-Terrorism intends to further
mainstream the all-of-United Nations approach to our
counter-terrorism efforts across the United Nations
system both at Headquarters and the field. This
strengthening of coordination and coherence will be
the highest priority of the Office of Counter-Terrorism .

Secondly, through our CTITF Foreign Terrorist
Fighters Working Group, we have developed, as
mandated by the Security Council, an all-of-United
Nations CTITF foreign terrorist fighters capacity-
building implementation plan that now includes over
50 projects from 13 United Nations entities, addressing
the entire life cycle of the foreign terrorist fighters
phenomenon. Leveraging CTED's comparative
advantages, capabilities and knowledge of Member
States' needs and priorities, these projects have been
thematically and geographically ranked by their
criticality so as to ensure an impact on the ground and
efficient use of donor resources.

Thirdly, as requested by the Council, the OCT United
Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre is implementing
the all-of-United Nations Integrated Assistance for
Counter-Terrorism initiative in the Group of Five for
the Sahel, as well as in Nigeria and Mali. In mapping
the priorities and needs of those countries, close
coordination and input from CTED have been critical.
Fourthly, resolution 2242 (2015) calls for the greater
participation and leadership of women in developing
strategies to prevent terrorism and violent extremism
conducive to terrorism - a substantial component of
Pillar I of the Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. As
called for by the resolution, the CTITF is integrating
gender as an all-of-United Nations cross-cutting issue
in its work, and created a dedicated CTITF Inter-Agency
Working Group on Gender, chaired by UN-Women.

We must recognize that there are four important
spheres of United Nations activity that need to be
aligned if we are to effectively develop a coherent and
well-coordinated all-of-United Nations framework
for our future counter-terrorism efforts, namely, the
Security Council and its subsidiary bodies, with their
international peace and security mandate; the General
Assembly, which brings together our common efforts
through the consensus-based Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy, its review resolutions and international
counter-terrorism legal instruments; the Secretary-
General and the Secretariat, which now includes the
Office of Counter-Terrorism; and the 38 United Nations
agencies, funds and programmes that directly or
indirectly contribute to our efforts to counter terrorism
and prevent violent extremism in support of the
balanced implementation of the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy.

These four spheres of United Nations activity will
need to be more closely aligned if we are to build, as the
Secretary-General stated before the General Assembly
last week, "a new international counter-terrorism
partnership" (A/72/PV3, p. 2).

For their part, Member States will also have to
mobilize the political will and resources necessary
to backstop this effort, especially through the full
implementation of all relevant United Nations
resolutions and counter-terrorism Conventions.

Our new Office of Counter-Terrorism stands ready
to be strongly engaged in this effort, and I look forward
to hearing the Council's views on how we can move
forward together in pursuit of this goal.

I commit to doing my utmost in this regard and
thank all Council members for their support.

