Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Under-Secretary-General O'Brien for his briefing. The
situation in Syria, and in particular in Aleppo, has been
escalating and has resulted in a serious humanitarian
situation. The international community should work
together and take swift action to ease tensions.

China welcomes the recent humanitarian emergency
initiative taken by the Russian and Syrian Governments
in order to help the United Nations in evacuating the
sick and the wounded. However, due to the fact that that
initiative did not receive a response from other parties
in Syria, the United Nations operation to evacuate the
sick and the wounded failed to be implemented. China
calls on the parties in Syria to effectively implement
the agreement on the cessation of hostilities, work
actively with the United Nations to create the conditions
conducive to achieving a ceasefire that would ease the
humanitarian situation, and move the process for a
political solution forward.

On the question of Syria, the international
community must remain committed to a political
solution, which is the ultimate way to resolve the
current situation. Efforts should be made to encourage
the parties in Syria to resolve their disputes through
dialogue. Such efforts must be focused in a balanced
manner on the four tracks of a ceasefire, political
negotiations, humanitarian relief operations and
synergies to fight terrorism. China welcomes the
diplomatic efforts of the United Nations, Russia and
the United States of America in Lausanne and Geneva,
and hopes that the parties concerned will soon reach
consensus on concrete issues so as to ease tensions,
help the parties to resume negotiations and, through a
Syrian-led political process, arrive at a settlement that
is acceptable to all parties concerned in order to address
the root cause of the humanitarian situation in Syria.

The incessant terrorist attacks by terrorists in
Syria have seriously hampered the United Nations
humanitarian efforts. Efforts to ease the Syrian
humanitarian situation must not neglect the fight
against terrorism. The international community should
strengthen coordination and unify standards and
resolutely fight all terrorist groups, as designated by the
Council, including the Islamic State, and work together
to prevent the breeding and spread of terrorism.
