Mr. Ripert (France) (spoke in French): Allow me
first to thank the Deputy Prime Minister of Viet Nam for
his initiative in convening us here today for this meeting
on children and armed conflict. I would also like to
thank the Secretary-General, Ms. Coomaraswamy,
Ms. Veneman and Mr. Mullet for their contributions to
this debate, and more generally, for their tireless
devotion to the cause of children in armed conflict. We
have also listened with the greatest attention to the
remarks and suggestions made by the representative of
Watchlist.

I would like to make a number of brief comments
on the annual report on the activities of the Security
Council Working Group on Children and Armed
Conflict, established pursuant to resolution 1612
(2005) (S/2008/445), a working group I have had the
honour of chairing for the past year. The report reflects
the sustained activity of the Working Group that has
accompanied the implementation of the monitoring and
reporting machinery under resolution 1612 (2005) in
an increased number of situations of conflict. The
activities focused on reviewing the reports produced by
this machinery and adopting operational conclusions
on the reports. The negotiation of these conclusions
required efforts of varying intensity, depending on the
situation under review, which, on some occasions, led
to delays between the review of the report and the
adoption of conclusions. Nevertheless, the Working
Group has managed to adopt detailed conclusions for
all the situations it has reviewed.

These conclusions provide the parties concerned
with specific indications about the measures that have
to be taken or that are recommended for the release of
child soldiers and also is a useful tool for actors in the
field such as UNICEF, child-protection advisers in the
peacekeeping operations or the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General during her Visits, allowing
them to obtain results.

I would also like to recall that the Working Group
currently functions without using Secretariat resources
other than the use of meeting rooms and interpretation,
which unfortunately is not always available, a problem
that runs counter to the rules of the Organization.

I would like to conclude on this point by thanking
all members of the Working Group for their
contributions. The initial results obtained should
encourage us all to pursue with determination the
implementation of the mandate assigned to us by the
Security Council, aware of the opportunity given us to
contribute to changing the destiny of children in armed
conflict also gives us great responsibilities.
Individually and collectively, we must shoulder these
responsibilities.

I would now like to speak on behalf of the
European Union and those countries that have aligned
themselves with this statement. My full statement can
be found in the document that has been disseminated in
the Chamber. I would here like to single out the key
points of the European Union's position: support for
the analysis and recommendations in the Secretary-
General's reports on children in armed conflict; the
condemnation of all violations perpetrated against
children and a call for all parties to halt these crimes
immediately; the importance we ascribe to the
Convention on the Rights of the Child and its Optional
Protocols and to the role that the International Criminal
Court, created by the Rome Statute exactly ten years
ago day for day, plays in the fight against impunity -
there will be no peace without justice; support for the
Security Council's strong commitment to this issue, in
particular through its resolutions, the activities of its
Working Group and the use by the Council of the tools
available to it, including sanctions; support for the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict; promoting a broad-based
approached to the problem, addressing development
and humanitarian issues as well as security issues and
the promotion of human rights.

The European Union commends the
establishment of the monitoring and reporting
mechanism for all conflict situations where children
are involved. The European Union welcomes the
Working Group's adoption of concrete conclusions and
welcomes the fact that these have led to positive
results, as was reflected in the report of the Secretary-
General (A/62/609-S/2007/757). It calls on all parties
concerned to implement these conclusions.

The European Union also recognizes that, to date,
the Working Group and the Security Council have not
used or recommended using all the instruments that are
available to them and encourages the Working Group
and the Security Council to take resolute measures
against those parties to conflict to urge them to stop
violations.
Finally, the European Union invites the
Secretary-General and the Secretariat to focus on the

need to equip the Security Council Working Group
with the required means, allowing it to continue its
initiatives effectively and transparently.

The Council of the European Union affirmed in
its latest conclusions that the protection and promotion
of children's rights, in particular those of children
affected by armed conflict, remained a priority for
external action by the European Union. In June 2008,
the Council of the European Union adopted an updated
version of its guidelines, increasing the number of
priority countries and fully integrating the Paris
Commitments and Principles into European Union
reference texts.

The issue of children in armed conflict is
therefore better reflected in our common foreign and
security policy and also in European Union security
and defence operations, such as the European Union
Force (EUFOR), currently in place in Chad and the
Central African Republic, to protect the population of
refugees and internally displaced persons from Darfur.

The European Union is financing a significant
number of projects for the benefit of children in armed
conflict situations. Thus, more than €100 million have
been disbursed since 2000 to that end. It is imperative
that the efforts undertaken in the context of resolution
1612 (2005) be supplemented by strong efforts from
the international community to prevent child
recruitment and to reintegrate children associated with
armed groups. Moreover, as is stressed in the Paris
Commitments and Principles, it is also necessary that
reintegration programmes take children's diverse needs
into account, in particular ensuring that girls and
children with disabilities are not excluded. These
programmes must be integrated into broader-based
actions, targeting communities into which the children
will be reintegrated. And finally, it is necessary that
these programmes benefit from long-term donor
commitment.

The European Union is determined to work
closely with all concerned countries and organizations
to prevent children from being recruited, raped,
mutilated, killed or simply deprived of education and
robbed of their childhood during conflicts and then
abandoned or stigmatized in the post-conflict period. It
calls upon the Security Council to also continue to
work towards the fulfilment of these goals.

Children who are the victims of armed conflict
worldwide are our children; let us not abandon them.
