Mrs. Haley (United States of America): I thank
the briefers for talking about this very important issue
facing us.

The United States has been a supporter of South
Sudan from the beginning. Since independence, we
have invested well over $11 billion in South Sudan and
the Government of President Kiir. What began with
so much promise has slipped into a state of horror that
has haunted all of us for more than four years now.
We have tried to help; we have tried to find a solution.
The Security Council has tried to help as well. Our
support has consisted of much more than mandating
a peacekeeping mission. The Council has lent its
expertise, its guidance and its credibility to the effort
to help South Sudan's leaders find peace. We have
treated the Kiir Government as a partner in this effort.
We have assumed that the best interests of the people
were its priority.

Thus, in November we welcomed President
Kiir's Republican Order for the Free, Unimpeded and
Unhindered Movement of Humanitarian Assistance
Convoys, but instead of reaching more struggling South
Sudanese, aid workers continue to be blocked in record
numbers and the parties just will not stop fighting.
The Government continues to insist that aid workers
pay high fees just to provide assistance to the people of
South Sudan. These fees would cost the humanitarian
community $7.6 million - money that should be used
to provide clean water in a country plagued by cholera.
It could provide shelter for some of the 2 million
internally displaced or it could feed some of the six
million people facing life-threatening hunger.

Nonetheless, our support has continued. We were
encouraged by the efforts of South Sudan's neighbours
to create a forum to negotiate peace, but President
Kiir delayed and attempted to undermine the process.
We welcome the Agreement on the Cessation of
Hostilities, Protection of Civilians and Humanitarian
Access which that forum produced in December, but
hours - hours - after the Agreement went into effect,
it was violated. Instead of reporting the end of fighting
in South Sudan, independent ceasefire monitors are
reporting that Government forces continued their
deployments despite the agreement. Not surprisingly,
more fighting followed. Opposition forces are also
responsible for the fighting. Forces under Riek Machar's
command spearheaded an attack in which at least 15
civilians were killed, and on 4 January forces loyal to a
former South Sudan Army Chief orchestrated an attack
on a Government checkpoint.

All of this is bad news. It is not just a lack of
forward momentum; things are going backwards in
South Sudan. Just last month, President Kiir promoted
three generals who this Council sanctioned in 2015.
These are men who led the slaughter of innocent South
Sudanese children, women and old men. Hundreds of
victims reportedly were buried in mass graves and the
Government of South Sudan decided to promote their
killers. Human Rights Watch called this a slap in the
face ofjustice. It is also a slap in the face ofthe Security
Council and the nations that have supported the Kiir
Government. It is a slap in the face of basic decency.
Our attempts to ease the suffering of the people of
South Sudan are not working and what is worse, we are
failing - not despite the leadership of South Sudan but
because of it.

The time has come to acknowledge the hard reality
that the leaders of South Sudan are not just failing their
people, they are betraying them. Thus, the Council is at
a crossroads. We are morally obligated, and obligated
under the terms of the Charter of the United Nations,
to address threats to international peace and security
in South Sudan. We cannot stand by idly as innocent
civilians are murdered and raped. We must change
course. It is long past time that the Security Council
establish an arms embargo on South Sudan rather
than continue to hold endless meetings on a crisis that
only becomes worse each month. I urge my fellow
Council members to support an arms embargo. This is
neither punishment nor is it a meaningless gesture. It
is something we can do to actually help the people of
South Sudan to slow the violence, slow the flow of arms
and ammunition, and protect innocent lives.

Every council member can and should act on the
position we all took in our 14 December presidential
statement (S/PRST/2017/25) to impose costs and
consequences on those who undermine the peace process
in South Sudan. At the upcoming Intergovernmental
Authority on Development High-level Revitalization
Forum, the parties must find the political will to
compromise on longer-term security and governance
arrangements that meet the needs of South Sudanese
people. If they do not, the Security Council should
work with the region to find a new path to pursue peace.

At the upcoming African Union (AU) Summit,
we urge the African Union to consider seriously the
accountability measures it pledged for those who refuse
to pursue peace. The AU can hold these individuals
responsible for violating the ceasefire and obstructing
the peace process, including through the establishment
of the Hybrid Court for South Sudan. And it is past time
for the leaders of Uganda and Kenya to get involved and
put pressure on President Kiir. They are key players in
the success of a true peace process.

The Government of South Sudan is increasingly
proving itself to be an unfit partner to the Council and
any country seeking peace and security for the people
of South Sudan. The United States will never give up on
this effort, but ifthere is to be true peace in South Sudan,
its leaders must step up and make a true commitment to
ending this conflict once and for all. The time is theirs
to determine the future of South Sudan.

