Mr. Jessen-Petersen: First of all, allow me to
thank the Council for the many very generous
comments on the work that we have conducted and are
conducting in Kosovo. Although these words are
addressed to me, I see them also as very much
addressed to my staff and to our local and international
partners in Kosovo. I am grateful to the Council.

I also want to reiterate my thanks to the Council
for the constant support that I have been receiving over
the last two years. Allow me also today to thank the
Secretary-General for his trust and his support.

We have listened carefully to the many useful
observations made today. I have taken notes, and I am
sure that Prime Minister Seku has also taken careful
notes. We welcome the words of support, but we also
clearly agree - and I am sure that the Prime Minister
does as well - that there is need for further action.

Further action and results will be pursued. The Prime
Minister has taken very seriously the 13 points
conveyed by the Contact Group a couple of weeks ago.
Action is already under way, and we expect to see the
results in the course of this month, most of it before the
end of next month. That does not detract from the
importance of focusing on all the priority standards,
and that work will also continue.

I listened with particular attention and interest to
the statement by the representative of Serbia,
Mrs. Raskovic-Ivic. I must confess that, having lived in
Kosovo for two years - with my eyes and ears open
most of the time, I believe - I did not recognize
everything I heard. I certainly agree with
Mrs. Raskovic-Ivic, and I just said it, that the situation
remains very difficult for many of the minorities,
Kosovo Serbs in particular. I do agree, and said in my
opening remarks, that we need to focus on more
progress in the living conditions of the Kosovo Serbs.
Many of the statements here have once against urged
Belgrade to allow the Kosovo Serbs to participate in
the process.

Let me just mention four or five examples of
statements with which I do not quite agree. We have
heard that there has been little progress on property
issues, when in fact 98 per cent - 98 per cent - of all
private property cases, have been resolved.
However - and this is where our focus will be - 10
per cent of those 98 per cent resolved cases are still
pending in terms of enforcement, which is where
action should be focused. Furthermore, a couple of
months ago we did establish the Kosovo Property
Agency. That new agency will be focusing on the very
important work related to agricultural and commercial
lands, which is of particular importance to the many
Kosovo Serbs, including the returnees. In that
connection, it would be extremely helpful if Belgrade
could help us with returning the cadastral records. It
would be difficult to make progress without them.

We heard a reference to a report on the so-called
187 incidents. Our UNMIK Directorate of Crime
Analysis has, of course, analysed these reports,
because we take all such reports seriously. Our
preliminary finding is that some of the 187 cases were
wrongly reported statistically. The number of cases in
the document is actually 101, and not 187. Nine of
those 101 can indeed be categorized as inter-ethnic.
Forty-two of the cases were never reported to the
police nor to the judicial authorities. Thirty-five are
categorized as having an unknown motive;
investigations are still continuing. Ten cases were seen
as crimes for personal gain, and in five cases, anger
was seen, in a not-very-legal impression, as the motive.

Then there were references to recent incidents in
the north. Let me first say that we regret each and
every security incident, because each incident adds to
the fears of the Kosovo Serbs. I will cite an example:
of the four most recent incidents, one was an attack on
a petrol station. It is clear that it was robbery and, by
all indications, Serb-on-Serb. There was a regrettable
killing of a young man in Zvecan. The police
immediately interviewed two suspects, neither one of
which was Albanian. A third incident involving a Serb
Orthodox priest who was driving in his car and was
attacked with his family. Two days ago, the police
arrested a Kosovo Serb policeman as the suspect in that
case.

Once again, I just want to underline that we
should not jump to conclusions. We have to address
these incidents, we have to prevent them and we have
to investigate them. But facts do not bear out what we
had heard on that point.

I do welcome the statement by Mrs. Raskovic-
Ivic that she considers it to be of utmost importance
that the Kosovo Serbs should participate. She also
rightly says that their participation must be meaningful.
I would suggest that we let them participate and let
them decide whether their participation is meaningful.
For two years, we have reserved two ministerial
positions for Kosovo Serbs; they are still vacant. We
have 10 reserved seats in the Assembly; they are still
waiting. We have several deputy ministerial posts; they
are still waiting. But I agree that Kosovo Serb
participation should be meaningful. Let us give them a
chance and let them decide whether it is meaningful.

There were several references to returns, and I for
one certainly regret that we have seen so few returns.
In fact, for me personally it is one of my most serious
regrets over the past two years. I thought I had come to
the job with a certain experience on return and
humanitarian issues. I thought that I could make an
impact. I have to accept that the numbers remain very,
very low.

However, I think we have to accept that the
conditions have gradually been put in place for returns.

We have the Protocol on Returns; I welcome the very
constructive engagement of Belgrade in that. That is
now being developed into a plan of action in which we
have the direct involvement of the internally displaced
persons. We are doing this on behalf of the internally
displaced persons. I do believe that the very fact that
the plan of action is now being developed with the
direct involvement of internally displaced persons
could lead to larger returns. We will have to wait and
see. It is certainly an area in which we have not seen
the kind of results we must see.

There were some concerns expressed that the
ethnic bus lines will cease to operate. That is not
correct. They will be taken over lock, stock and barrel
by the Provisional Institutions of Self-Government.
They will be taking over the operation that UNMIK has
been running for the past seven years, so it will of
course continue and both KFOR and UNMIK will be
there in total support of those bus lines and also to
make sure that there are no incidents.

Talking about incidents, there was some reference
to the repeated stoning of buses. Our police statistics
will show that, over the first five months of this year,
some 1,400 minority buses drove through Kosovo.
There were stoning incidents in six of the 1,400
journeys, and five arrests have been made. I still regret
the sixth. There should not be one single stoning
incident, and I know that this is something that the
Provisional Institutions take very seriously. We have to
make sure that it does not happen.

Finally, there was some reference to corruption at
the airport. Let me just refer to the report of the Office
of Internal Oversight Services, which is based on
shortcomings up to and including 2003 - in other
words, it is three years out of date. Since then,
considerable measures have been taken. There has been
overall management reform and criminal action against
a few who were found to have been conducting their
activities in a way that is not acceptable, and
disciplinary action has also been taken.

Let me just say that the airport is actually a
success story for Kosovo. It has just won the Best
Airport 2006 award in the category "Under 1 million
passengers per year" from Airports Council
International. I believe that is a very, very strong
reflection of the solid management of the international
airport of Kosovo.

Once again, this is my sixth and last report to the
Security Council since assuming my post. I believe
that, together, we have come a long way, but we also
know that there is still a considerable way to travel
before we get to the kind of society we all want to see
in Kosovo. I am grateful for the role played by this
Council in moving the process forward and for its
decisions to launch the comprehensive review last May
and the status process last October. And as I leave, I
certainly count on the Security Council to see the
process through to what I hope will be an early and
06-39548
successful conclusion. It will be successful only if the
beneficiaries are the people of Kosovo and of the
region. I count on all Council members to make sure
that our focus is on the people of Kosovo and of the
region.

