Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank Mr. Mulet for introducing the
Secretary-General's report (S/2012/72) on the work of
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK). We note the participation in this
meeting, through the use of telecommunications
technology, of the Head of UNMIK, Mr. Zarif. We
welcome the presence of the Minister of Foreign
Affairs, Mr. Vuk Jeremic', and we share his assessment.

We have listened closely to Mr. Hoxhaj.
Mr. Hoxhaj began his statement by citing ancient
history. To paint the full picture, he should have
mentioned the mass exodus of Albanians from Kosovo
at the time of the 78-day bombardment of Serbia by
NATO. I also note that members of the Security
Council that are members of the European Union (EU)
were certainly grateful for Mr. Hoxhaj's clarification
with regard to relations between the EU and Serbia,
and for his formulation of the instructions received
from Brussels in that regard.

Russia's position of not recognizing Kosovo's
unilateral declaration of independence remains
unchanged. Resolution 1244 (1999) remains fully in
force and binding as an international legal basis for
settlement in Kosovo. With regard to the Secretary-
General's report on the activities of UNMIK, I would
like to make the following comments. The current
trends in the province are generally correctly reflected
in the report, but in diluted form. It clearly distances
itself from the real situation and security of minorities,
the preservation of Serbian cultural and religious
heritage, and the return of internally displaced persons.

Yet these issues are of key importance for the
security of the province. We have serious doubts about
the report's claim that the international presence - the
Kosovo Force (KFOR) and the European Union Rule
of Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) - respect the
principle of status neutrality and resolution 1244
(1999). It is precisely their failure to respect the latter
that has led to conflict with northern Kosovo Serbs and
obliged UNMIK, as noted in the report, often to act as
a fire brigade.

Force must not be used in this situation, and we
must ensure that a political settlement is found to
emerging problems. We can only be alarmed at the
actions of EULEX in December 2011 with regard to a
Russian humanitarian aid convoy in northern Kosovo.
Russia itself decides to whom and at what level it will
provide humanitarian assistance. Resolution 1244
(1999) imposes the obligation on the international
presence to provide unrestricted access for
humanitarian aid.

The situation in Kosovo remains bleak. We note
the breakdown in the policy for the return of internally
displaced persons to Kosovo and the growing exodus
of the Serbian population from the province. The
situation is only partly reflected in the Secretary-
General's report. We intend to give this issue priority
attention during the forthcoming visit to Kosovo in late
February by the Russian High Representative on
human rights, democracy and the rule of law. The
disappointment of the Serbian population, who feel
that they are not supported or protected by the
international presence in Kosovo, is expressed in the
setting up of roadblocks and the plan of Serbian
municipalities in the province to hold a referendum on
the issue of the legitimacy of the Kosovo Albanian
authorities.

We believe that, in seeking a solution, we must
use only peaceful means within the framework of
dialogue with all interested parties. We are convinced
that, despite efforts to repudiate the role of UNMIK,
the Mission remains the principal international civilian
presence in Kosovo, pursuant to resolution 1244
(1999). We insist on the full implementation by
UNMIK of its mandate, including with regard to the
foreign representation of Kosovo in regional and
international organizations and mechanisms.

The international community must pay greater
attention to the Orthodox holy sites and congregations.
We share the concern of the Serbian authorities and
Orthodox Church with regard to the imminent hand-
over of protection responsibilities for important
Serbian cultural and religious cultural sites from KFOR
to the Kosovo Police. We believe that this development
may cause further uncertainty in the security of
Kosovo.

We would like to obtain clarification with regard
to the reasons and parameters for the coming
drawdown of EULEX and the planned conditions for
transferring the police and customs functions it
inherited from UNMIK to Kosovo institutions. Why
this is being done without the approval of the Security
Council, which sanctioned the deployment of the
European mission?

Finally, we are concerned at the way EULEX is
investigating facts revealed by Dick Marty, Special
Rapporteur of the Council of Europe, on the illegal
trade in human organs in Kosovo. These very grave
facts point to the criminal involvement of some current
Kosovo leaders. The investigation must be impartial
and worthy of trust.

It is with this in mind that we advocate the
transfer of the investigation to the Security Council. At
the moment, the investigation is looking into the
involvement of some Kosovo leaders in illegal
trafficking in human organs, and is being undertaken
by those countries which in the past helped these very
people come to power in Kosovo. As we know,
a leading role was played here by the United States.
And - what an amazing coincidence - it is a United
States citizen who is heading the ongoing
investigation. There is a clear conflict of interest here.
We recall that Carla del Ponte, the former Prosecutor of
the International Criminal Tribunal for the former
Yugoslavia, noted significant problems with the
investigation being led by international entities and the
Kosovo authorities into organ trafficking in Kosovo.

We note the unsatisfactory situation with regard
to witness protection, as confirmed by the Council of
Europe. There is no progress here; key witnesses are
simply rubbed out. In this regard, we call on the new
non-permanent members of the Security Council to
support the Serbian initiative to establish a Security
Council mechanism to follow up on the findings of the
Marty report. Their support would be an important
contribution to ensuring justice and the rule of law and
to guaranteeing that the investigation will not once
again be brushed under the carpet. We hope that those
countries that view this initiative negatively will
change their positions. The humanitarian importance of
this problem is too great.

