Mr. Nesho (Albania): At the outset, Sir, allow me
to congratulate you on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council and to wish you
every success.

Our delegation welcomes the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2004/613) and today's
comprehensive briefing by Assistant Secretary-General
Annabi. We believe that the recommendations of the
Secretariat and of the Security Council on the
improvement of the situation will serve to overcome
the impasse concerning the destabilized situation
brought about by the events of March 2004. Reflection
on these events highlights the need for fundamental
changes and a realistic evaluation of the situation by
the international community.

First, there is a need for the rapid implementation
of the "standards before status" policy, focusing on the
attainment of a democratic, multi-ethnic and
multicultural society in which the rule of law and
tolerance prevail. This can be achieved when the
legitimate organs of the democratic institutions in
Kosovo possess complete responsibility for building up
their society. For that to happen, competences of the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) must be transferred to Kosovo's
executive institutions and UNMIK's role must be
restructured, from that of a decision-making body to
that of an advisory and monitoring body.

Secondly, the international institutions must
maintain a continued presence as a guarantee of
stability and peace in the region. Albania is grateful for
the role of UNMIK and for the role and the
commitment of the military forces of the North
Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO), including the
United States, and those of the other nations of the
KFOR contingent in the region, and emphasizes the
need for their continued presence in Kosovo. Albania
also appreciates the establishment of the "Contact
Group Plus" for Kosovo as an important step towards
fulfilling the Kosovo Standards Implementation Plan.

In turn, the political factions and people of
Kosovo should understand that in the future Kosovo
will be a free, democratic and multi-ethnic society and
a country in which minority rights are protected by
law. Kosovo belongs to all the people of Kosovo. They
are all an integral part in the new society and are equal
in their rights and obligations.

We commend the positive fact that the
Government of Kosovo has taken the appropriate
measures for the reconstruction of destroyed buildings
and the return of displaced people. We also particularly
commend the proposal for the creation of a ministry for
communities and integration. All these initiatives stem
not only from the commitment of the representatives
and institutions of Kosovo to accomplishing the
standards set forth by the international community, but
also from their growing maturity and responsibility
regarding the dynamic realities in Kosovo and
throughout the region.

It is important that the climate of understanding
and the process of integration being created continue.
Members of minorities must participate in the
parliamentary elections and not boycott them. They
should not be instrumental in nationalist and divisive
scenarios. Kosovo needs its minorities to participate in
the construction of the country; it needs them to
participate in governing the country; and it needs them
to create, together, the future while forgetting the past.

Albania reconfirms its support for the
implementation of the "standards before status" policy.
The achievement of the standards selected by the
international community is essential for the new
Kosovo society; their objectives are necessary
conditions for defining final status. We think that a
useful step towards stability would be for the
international community, while undertaking a
discussion of standards, to take into consideration the
final status of Kosovo, in the belief that the
implementation of a "status with standards" policy will
concretely advance the political process in Kosovo and
further normalize the situation in the region.

We believe in a European future for Kosovo as
the most appropriate and realistic solution.
Implementation of this idea could be achieved through
the expansion of the economic presence of the
European Union (EU) in Kosovo, and with Kosovo's
inclusion in the EU integration processes.

One of the primary conditions of the standards
policy is revitalization of the dialogue between Pristina
and Belgrade. Albania supports this dialogue between
the two countries on both the political and the technical
levels. In this course of action, it is also important that
the internal dialogue between the two communities in
Kosovo be expanded.

For its part, Albania is committed to furthering
the dialogue with Serbia and Montenegro on areas of
mutual interest and in the framework of Balkan and
European integration. This will serve to strengthen
relations between the two countries and to create a
better and more constructive climate between
Albanians and Serbs in the region, in the interest of
stability and regional integration.

We commend the current progress made by the
Government of Kosovo in collaborating with UNMIK,
the EU, the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe (OSCE) and the United States Agency for
International Development (USAID). We also
commend the effort to reform and strengthen local
government in Kosovo as an important element in
reducing ethnic tensions in the long run.

We believe that greater autonomy for local
government- an autonomy that does not distort the
vertical line of power and that does not harm the
central Government of the territory of Kosovo - is an
important element of the "standards before status"
policy and will strengthen and improve the economic,
social and cultural situation. It will help bring the
citizens of all communities closer together in the
decision-making process, further local development
and create greater space for local initiatives.

It is important that all the political and
institutional factors in Kosovo and the representatives
of the Serb and other communities cooperate to achieve
understanding, reach common solutions for the
successful reform of the self-government process, and
to go even further.

In conclusion, let me extend our best wishes to
the newly appointed Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Soren Jessen-Petersen, wish
him every success in his important mission and assure
him of our Government's support.

