Mr. Kouchner (France) (spoke in French): I
greet all my colleagues seated here around the table. I
would like in particular to welcome my former foreign
ministerial colleague, the Permanent Representative of
Chad to the United Nations, since, as the High
Representative of the European Union has just told us,
nothing would be accomplished without the
participation of the Africans. Nothing would be done or
would have been done without the participation and the
agreement of Chad, of course, but also of the entire
African Union.
08-51755

It has not been easy to make it clear that the
people of eastern Chad demand security. So I thank
Javier Solana and I am very pleased that the action of
the European Union-led military force in Chad and the
Central African Republic (EUFOR) has been described
here, as this is the largest autonomous military
operation ever deployed by Europe. EUFOR in Chad
and in the Central African Republic symbolizes, to my
mind, the European Union contribution to United
Nations action, first and foremost.

But I know that this is not the first time that
Europeans have committed themselves alongside the
United Nations in Africa. I recall that, in 2003 and
2006, the European Union was also deployed in the
context of its Common Foreign and Security Policy
and its Common Security and Defence Policy in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo; let us recall that
fact. And the outcome was positive.

By taking the initiative last year of adopting
resolution 1778 (2007), we wanted to provide a
response to the regional dimension of the Darfur crisis
as a complement, of course, to the actions undertaken
by the United Nations and the African Union in Darfur
itself, and in fact on the other side of the border. This
EUFOR operation is working smoothly, and I thank
Mr. Solana for pointing that out. But it is not going as
smoothly as we had expected, since we had thought
that on the other side of the border, in the Sudan, a
hybrid force would be deployed: in an African Union-
United Nations force that would have been a
counterpart to EUFOR, which would have provided
complete security to the population - to more than a
million persons - refugees, displaced persons and
Chadian populations within Chad.

Eastern Chad and the north-western Central
African Republic need both protection and
humanitarian assistance. But they will never have that
in full if, on the other side of the border, a similar force
is not deployed to contain the rebellion that is spilling
over to both sides of the border.

Thanks to the commitment of the numerous
countries that have contributed to this operation,
EUFOR is fulfilling its role effectively, and the
European mission has been able to provide security to
this zone. And there is no need for me to recall the
recent incidents that resulted in deaths.

The non-governmental organizations and the
United Nations agencies also welcome the presence of
3
the European forces, as they can attest. We have always
played our role by deploying rapidly more than 3,000
troops. Moreover, the operation has also been
appreciated by the great non-governmental
organization Oxfam, which recently reported that
EUFOR has made numerous refugees and displaced
peoples feel safer and has been able to act in an
impartial manner, which was far from easy to do.

However, despite EUFOR's small successes,
there is a persistent lack of security, which is fed by the
lack of a sustainable political solution and by the
difficulties encountered in the deployment of an
operational police force. I apologize for emphasizing
this point, but there has to be an operational police
component, in particular in order to provide security
for the refugee camps and the areas surrounding them.
I referred earlier to displaced persons in Chad, but
there are also refugees. They benefit, of course, from
the support provided by the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, but these
people still lack security.

The activities on the ground of the United
Nations Mission in the Central African Republic and
Chad (MINURCAT) and the Chadian Detachement
inte'gre' de securite provided for in resolution 1778
(2007) are indispensable in order to improve security
for the civilian population.

I am adamant: without that, we will never be
truly satisfied, and the local populations will continue
to live through a time of insecurity. Anyone who has
visited the camps would know that women are unable
to leave the camps without being attacked just
100 metres away. To search for water is a huge trial
that they risk their lives to undertake. The danger has
abated in some places, but it is not enough.

As Mr. da Silva Angelo indicated to the Council
last week (see S/PV.5976), acceleration of the
deployment of MINURCAT and the Detachement
integre de securite is crucial and urgent. I know that I
am pressing hard on this point, but I assure the Council
that it is necessary. The adoption later today of the
draft resolution renewing MINURCAT's mandate is of
course important and necessary, and my country fully
supports it.

The international community must remain
engaged, in particular to lend its support, as
emphasized by Javier Solana, to the return of displaced
persons under the best possible conditions, and on a
voluntary basis, of course. I understand that a first
timid movement has taken place: a few thousand
individuals have started to return to the areas they were
forced to flee because of the violence. EUFOR only
makes sense if there is an effort at development and if
the non-governmental organizations are sufficiently
safe to allow for the rebuilding of villages. That is
what is essential.

Once these steps are undertaken, and once the
rainy season is over, the efforts at rebuilding and
assistance to the civilian population must be expedited,
thanks in particular to financing from the European
Commission, which is something that we and
Mr. Solana have underscored. We must maintain a
sufficient level of security in the areas of return.

In accordance with the guidance of resolution
1778 (2007), the Europeans are in favour of the
replacement of EUFOR by a United Nations force in
March 2009. We thank the Secretary-General for his
report (8/2008/601), which closely examines the
possible options for this takeover. As Mr. Solana
indicated, we must do everything we can to prevent a
security vacuum in the area.

The transfer of authority from EUFOR to a
United Nations force must take place in good
conditions. Otherwise, we will have to start again from
scratch. So the transfer must take place in the best
possible circumstances and at the time of the expiry of
the European Union force. Any option that would
postpone this transition would endanger the people
whom we have sought to protect and whom we have
succeeded in protecting. Therefore, we welcome
agreement that has been reached among Security
Council members to express, in a resolution renewing
MINURCAT's mandate, their intention to deploy a
United Nations force to take over from EUFOR, the
mandate of which will be decided upon by
15 December.

To conclude, the Secretary-General should now
start planning for this force, which we believe should
be deployed both in Chad and in the Central African
Republic, whose modalities and the size of whose
components will have to be carefully studied. It must
be capable of meeting the challenges that are faced
every day as a result of crime. That is what we will
implement in Chad and in the Central African
Republic. It is in the spirit of fulfilling our
responsibility to protect, an old notion that has been
somewhat forgotten with which the Council is well
acquainted. In the spirit of this responsibility to
protect, in situations where the civilian population is
threatened and exposed to violence, we are committed
to providing support on the ground at the request of
States, who of course still bear the primary
responsibility for protecting their populations.

