Mr. Brammertz: I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for the opportunity to introduce the third
report of the United Nations Independent International
Investigation Commission. It provides an update on the
progress made in investigating the assassination of
former Prime Minister Rafik Hariri and 22 other
persons and gives an initial account of the technical
assistance extended to the Lebanese authorities'
investigations of 14 other cases of alleged terrorist
acts. The report also details recent developments in
securing very much needed cooperation from Syria.

I assumed my responsibilities as the new
Commissioner eight weeks ago. My first priority upon
arrival was to address the many concurrent challenges
that confronted, and are still confronting, the
Commission, namely, its resource needs, ensuring
continuity, making progress in the investigation,
providing technical assistance to the Lebanese
authorities, making progress in obtaining Syria's
cooperation and, most of all, managing the very high
level of expectations within Lebanon, and outside, that
those tasks will be completed quickly.

With regard to organizational needs, when I
arrived in Beirut only 6 investigators were left, out of a
budgeted number of 48. Most of the departures had
occurred since September, in anticipation of the
expiration of the Commission's mandate in December.
As a result, while working to ensure continuity in the
investigation, we are rebuilding the investigative team.
As of today, the Commission has 16 staff members in
the investigation division, with 21 vacancies
remaining.

Finding qualified people with expertise in highly
complex criminal and terrorism investigations is a
serious ongoing problem. Good people have jobs, are
not available for short-term assignments or are not
being released by their organizations. While the
mandate's extension for six months has given us some
more stability, 15 June is not far in the future. If we do
not act now, and if we do not get the medium-term
stability we need for our work, the Commission will
find itself in a similar situation in just three months
from now. We urgently need the Council's support and
that of other Member States in quickly identifying and
making available qualified investigators.

I would like to thank my colleagues in the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY), the International Criminal Tribunal
for Rwanda (ICTR), the International Criminal Court
(ICC) and Interpol for the help extended to us on short
notice. Discussions are ongoing with Interpol
concerning the creation of a roster of experienced
investigators and criminal analysts for international
deployment. Such a roster would benefit not only the
Commission but also any future international inquiry
or investigation.

Ensuring continuity in the investigation has been
a critical priority since my arrival. Yet it is important to
recognize that we are in a new phase of the
Commission's work. During its initial three-month
mandate, the Commission naturally focused on quickly
collecting information in support of, and for further use
by, the national judicial authorities. Since the Council's
adoption of resolution 1644 (2005), and with the
possibility of a tribunal of an international character
looming, a more systematic and methodological
approach will be essential. We have to make sure that
this investigation is conducted with the utmost
professionalism and in adherence to recognized
standards of international criminal law. Only then will
it be accepted and thus provide the basis for a judicial
process - possibly before such a tribunal.

In fact, professionalism is reflected not only in
the Commission's investment in highly qualified staff
but also in its tools. Adequate investigation capacity
requires appropriate information and case management,
the analytical capability and methodology necessary
for a case of such high complexity, legal advice that
ensures adherence to the recognized standards of law,
readily available in-house expertise in forensics, and
adequate capacity to address witness-protection needs.

With that more systematic approach we have
made further progress in the investigation into the
assassination of former Prime Minister Rafik Hariri
and 22 others. We have advanced our understanding of
the crime, its circumstances and modus operandi. We
have developed new lines of inquiry and pursued and
further evaluated existing leads and discarded others. I
am optimistic that that progress will provide critical
links in identifying and holding accountable those
responsible for the crime, at all levels of the chain of
command.

While I understand the strong public interest in
learning about further details on the status of certain
lines of inquiry, we have agreed with the Prosecutor
General of Lebanon not to publicly discuss such details
at this stage of the proceedings. I firmly believe that
that policy is necessary to safeguard the integrity of the
ongoing investigation and to avoid revealing our
strategy. Bearing in mind the possible establishment of
a tribunal of an international character, it is critical that
we respect the rights of the defence and not jeopardize
the security of witnesses or other sensitive sources.

We have also made progress in implementing the
request to provide technical assistance to the Lebanese
authorities in their investigations of 14 other cases of a
possible terrorist nature. We have completed our first
round of evaluations of all cases, and agreed with the
Prosecutor General and the investigation judges on
what assistance is needed. We have also started to
provide, on a case-by-case basis, practical assistance in
such areas as forensics and analytical and legal
expertise.

However, structural problems within Lebanese
law enforcement and judicial systems in coping with
the demands of those cases have been apparent. More
cooperation and communication among the different
Lebanese agencies is necessary, as are more specialized
and investigative capability and forensic expertise. If
we succeed in addressing those problems swiftly, the
investigations into the additional 14 cases could
provide valuable links and commonalities among these
cases and with the assassination of Rafik Hariri and
22 others.

Investing in technical assistance to the relevant
Lebanese authorities is therefore an investment in the
Commission's investigation. However, the Commission
will not be able to address the broader capacity
problems alone. It will be for the international
community at large to support the Lebanese authorities
through more in-depth needs assessments and targeted
long-term assistance programmes.

Improved and timely cooperation from Syria will
be a critical factor in continuing the Commission's
work successfully. It was therefore of the utmost
importance to achieve clarity with the Syrian
authorities about the legal framework for cooperation
and access to information, sites and Syrian citizens. By
addressing those issues, the Commission can now
focus its efforts on the substance of its requests for
cooperation from Syria. The understanding reached
with the Syrian Foreign Ministry on the practical
modalities of our cooperation should be seen against
that backdrop. Our expectations vis-a-vis the Syrian
authorities are high in that respect. The Commission
has already prepared several new requests for
cooperation to the Syrian Foreign Ministry. The
coming weeks will prove whether our requirements
will be fulfilled and our cautious optimism was
justified. I will report to the Council on the progress
made in that respect in my next report, or earlier if
necessary.

Let me conclude by making some general
observations.

The management of expectations remains a key
challenge. Expectations are very high, sometimes
unrealistically so, and differ depending on one's
perspective. Therefore, the Commission has to strike a
balance between the understandable interest for
transparency in its work, on the one hand, and the need
to protect the confidentiality of its findings, on the
other. At this stage, transparency for us can only mean
reporting on working methods and professional
standards applied, and revealing in general terms the
progress made in the investigation. Confidentiality, on
the other hand, requires that we not disclose
information on the investigative strategy or harm the
rights of the accused. That would inevitably have a
negative impact on a later case in court.

We cannot predict the outcome of the
investigation. We also cannot guarantee that the
investigation will be finalized in a few months, but we
will work to ensure that the best possible investigative
result is achieved. That will be done by combining
professional skills with analytical and forensic
expertise, while respecting internationally recognized
standards.

Before closing, let me take this opportunity to
express my thanks to the Prosecutor General of
Lebanon and his staff for the excellent interaction
between his office and the Commission. We are aware
of the challenges the judiciary is facing in his country
and hope that the presence of the Commission in Beirut
will contribute to strengthening the Lebanese judicial
system.

Let me also express my gratitude to the security
and military forces ensuring in Beirut our security
around the clock. They are doing an excellent job, and
I would like to thank the media in Lebanon and the
wider region for respecting the confidentiality of the
investigation and thereby facilitating its conduct.

Finally, I wish to thank the Security Council for
its support and continued interest in this very important
matter.

