Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): I thank the
Secretary-General for being with us today and for his

remarks. I would like to welcome Mr. Achim Steiner
and to thank him for his very interesting briefing.
Brazil associates itself with the statement to be
delivered by the representative of Argentina on behalf
of the Group of 77 and China.

Brazil has a deep and long-standing commitment
to combating climate change. We have translated that
firm commitment into concrete actions and
constructive proposals. Climate change is a complex
and difficult issue. There are no shortcuts or easy
solutions. The only effective way forward is to achieve
an ambitious result under the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC)
and its Kyoto Protocol. Our efforts for mitigation and
adaptation must be based on the principle of common
but differentiated responsibilities and respective
capabilities. That is crucial to ensuring an equitable,
balanced and effective solution.

The Security Council must take a holistic View of
conflict. Violence is born not only of ethnic or
religious disputes, but also of hunger, poverty and the
competition for scarce resources. In some cases, the
adverse effects of climate change may aggravate those
disputes. However, when they do, it is not a function of
climate change alone. It is usually a result of
underdevelopment and lack of access to resources and
technology for adaptation.

We firmly acknowledge the interdependence of
development, security and human rights. The links
between climate change and development and between
security and development are clear and have been
explicitly recognized by the United Nations. The
possible security implications of climate change,
however, are far less obvious. Environmental impacts
do not threaten international peace and security on
their own. In certain circumstances, the adverse effects
of climate change may contribute to aggravating
existing threats to international peace and security.

The rather indirect relationship between security
and climate change in no way diminishes the urgency
of supporting countries and populations that are most
vulnerable to climate change, in particular small island
developing States, many of which face truly existential
challenges. Such challenges require political, economic
and humanitarian approaches, and not necessarily a
security response.

The grave consequences of sea-level rise may
lead to humanitarian catastrophes if unchecked. The

United Nations, under the UNFCCC, must work to
strengthen prevention and to build resilience through
adaptation. Humanitarian instruments need to be
further developed in order to address the specific
nature of the impacts of sea-level rise on populations.

In that context, I recognize and welcome the
presence of His Excellency the President of Nauru,
Mr. Marcus Stephen. We acknowledge his concerns
and the untiring efforts of his country and of the other
small island developing States in bringing the issue of
sea-level rise to the forefront of the international
agenda. Brazil expresses its full solidarity with them.
We agree with them that expressions of concern or
political declarations are no substitute for concrete
action. We need to do more, and to do it faster. Climate
change negotiations must yield significant results to
curb emissions in a balanced and fair manner.
Adaptation programmes must be prioritized and
sufficiently funded.

The issue of food security is high on Brazil's
agenda. At the international level, we must all support
the leading role of the Food and Agriculture
Organization and the World Food Programme. We must
redouble our efforts to eliminate the scourge of hunger.
Effective political will is needed to improve market
access to food products from developing countries by
reducing agricultural subsidies and bringing the Doha
Round to a successful conclusion. Efforts must also be
made to boost productivity in developing countries,
particularly in Africa. Where food insecurity
contributes to aggravating instability in conflict or
post-conflict situations, the Council should coordinate
its efforts with the work of other relevant actors within
the United Nations system and the World Bank.

The United Nations system has the necessary
tools to deal with the challenges associated with
fighting climate change. The wealth of knowledge,
experience, political leverage and legal instruments
that the system possesses must be used to its full
capacity.

Security tools are appropriate to deal with
concrete threats to international peace and security, but
they are inadequate to address complex and
multidimensional issues such as climate change.
Effectively fighting climate change and dealing with its
myriad implications must be a priority for the
international community. To do so, we must take full
advantage of all of the tools that the United Nations
system has to offer, especially in the area of
sustainable development, and redouble our efforts to
achieve ambitious results in the international
negotiations on climate change.

