Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (Spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank the Secretary-General for
his twelfth report (S/2019/938) on the implementation of
resolution 2334 (2016), which is a written report in line
with the provisions of the resolution and presidential
note S/2017/507, as is the case with all other items on the
Security Council agenda. We look forward to receiving
at least two written reports every year in that regard.

We commend the efforts of the Special Coordinator
for the Middle East Peace Process, Mr. Nickolay
Mladenov, and reaffirm our full support to him in
his efforts to carry out his mandate. We also thank
Ms. Adele Raemer for her briefing and Mr. Mladenov
for his update on the situation of the implementation of
this important resolution, which we will be highlighting
in our statement today. We will also shed light on
the illegal settlement policy. Resolution 2334 (2016)
stresses that Israeli settlement activities are a blatant
violation of international law and an obstacle to peace.
Unfortunately, however, that has not deterred Israel, the
occupying Power, from expanding its policies to annex
Palestinian territories at an unprecedented rate. The
Secretary-General's report clarifies that Israel took no
steps during the reporting period to end its settlement
activities, which means that Israel, the occupying
Power, has paid no attention to the calls of the Security
Council, as outlined in the resolution, to fully and
immediately end its settlement activities.

Israel, the occupying Power, has carried out plans
to build, expand, fund and license its settlements that
have led to an increase in crimes against innocent
Palestinian people, their properties and their holy sites.
Sadly, that has gone on under the protection of the
occupying authorities, which are fully responsible for
the crimes and aggressions that violate international
law, international humanitarian law, the 1949 Fourth
Geneva Convention and other international conventions
that guarantee peace and security for people on
occupied land. We therefore strongly condemn Israel's
illegal expansionist settlement policy in all its forms
on all the territories of the State of Palestine occupied
since 1967, including East Jerusalem. We reaffirm that
Israeli settlements are null and void and cannot be
accepted as a fait accompli.

We are not exaggerating when we say that the
future of the Palestinian question is on the line. We
cannot achieve a breakthrough in the peace process if
any of the parties fail to comply with the international
terms of reference for the peace process in the Middle
East, that is, the resolutions of international legitimacy,
the principle of land for peace and a two-State solution,
which would bring the Israeli occupation to an end. It
is therefore essential that all Member States that have
not yet recognized the State of Palestine do so in order
to put an end to occupation, save the two-State solution
and promote the prospects for peace, especially in these
critical circumstances.

The States concerned must also practice neutrality
when they mediate to achieve peace, given that taking
unilateral measures that contravene the relevant United
Nations resolutions represent a real threat to peace
and security in the Middle East and throughout the

world. They may have repercussions that could help
to fuel frustration as well as instigate extremism and
violence in the Palestinian territory and the region as
a whole, especially given that Israel, the occupying
Power, insists on depriving the Palestinian people of
their legitimate rights and is determined to entrench
its occupation. In addition, it has tightened the blockade
imposed on Gaza for more than 12 years and restricted
freedom of movement for individuals and goods. It
continues to carry out attacks on holy sites and seeks
to alter the historic status and character of Jerusalem as
well as its demographic composition. It undermines the
work of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East, which provides
basic services to Palestinian refugees in areas such
as health, education and relief. Israel, the occupying
Power, has also taken other unilateral unjust decisions,
such as not renewing the mandate of the Temporary
International Presence in Hebron and freezing part of
the Palestinian tax returns.

In conclusion, we reaffirm the Arab position,
which holds that peace is the strategic choice and is
the solution to the Israeli-Arab conflict, in line with
the relevant legitimate international resolutions,
international law, the Charter of the United Nations and
the provisions of the 2002 Arab Peace Initiative, which
stipulates that comprehensive peace in Israel must be
preceded by ending the Israeli occupation of all Arab
and Palestinian territories since 1967 as a prelude to
realizing all legitimate political rights ofthe Palestinian
people and establishing an independent Palestinian
State on their land, with East Jerusalem as its capital.

