Mr. Baali (Algeria) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank Ambassador Cesar Mayoral, Ambassador
Ellen Loj and Ambassador Mihnea Motoc for their
excellent briefings, and to commend them for their
efforts as Chairs of their respective Committees. And I
would say that my delegation fully subscribes to the
objectives of the three Committees, whose efforts are
making an undeniable contribution to freeing mankind
from the fears generated by terrorist threats.

With respect to the Al Qaida and Taliban
sanctions Committee, I would like to once again point
out the dynamic leadership of Ambassador Cesar
Mayoral and his team in accomplishing the mandate of
the Committee. We would also like to commend
Richard Barrett and his team, as well as the other
members of the Secretariat for their work and for the
assistance that they have provided to the Committee.

We agree with Ambassador Mayoral that States
that have not yet submitted their reports should do so
as soon as possible.

We are pleased that the Committee has begun an
in-depth analysis of recommendations contained in the
second report of the Monitoring Team (S/2005/83, annex), and that some of these will, I am sure, find
their way into the new draft resolution, whose
objective will be to further strengthen the current
sanctions regime.

We support the Committee in implementing its
mandate and in carrying out the tasks before it. We
encourage it to pursue dialogue with Member States to
ensure that the sanctions regime is implemented. In this
regard, Ambassador Mayoral should make full use of
the effective tool of visits to selected countries to bring
about this high-level dialogue.
We would also like the new draft resolution,
which will probably be adopted next July, to take into
consideration the recommendations of the Monitoring
Group, so long as they are in conformity with the
Committee's mandate.

With respect to the Counter-Terrorism Committee
(CTC), I would like to commend Ambassador Loj for
the proactive way in which she has conducted the work
of the Committee. I would like to take this opportunity
also to thank the Executive Director of the CTC
Executive Directorate (CTED), Ambassador Javier
Ruperez, his team and the other members of the
Secretariat for their support to the work of the CTC.
We note that the CTC has taken some positive actions,
including the following: strengthening dialogue with
Member States; introducing new methods to determine
States' needs for technical assistance, the first letters in
which regard have been examined by Subcommittee C,
which I chair; engaging in the dialogue with
international, regional and subregional organizations;
making efforts to strengthen the practical capacity of
the Executive Directorate; and initiating best practices
relative to the issue of the financing of terrorism.

We note that, in spite of the sizeable number of
reports presented, 75 States are late in submitting their
reports due to a lack of technical capacity, or, it must
be said, to "report-fatigue". We urge the CTC to pursue
its dialogue with these States and to continue to be
proactive with respect to increasing the awareness of
the regional organizations to which those countries
belong. Here, we are pleased that the first visit of the
CTED was to Morocco, our neighbouring country.
Other visits are scheduled in the near future for Kenya,
Albania and Thailand.

In this respect, we hope that States members of
the Council, and thus of the CTC, will invite the CTED
to visit their countries, because, in our view, these
visits are an important tool for assessing
implementation of the provisions of resolution 1373
(2001) by States.

We support the fifteenth work programme of the
CTC (S/2005/266); we would be very pleased to see
the Executive Directorate fully operational as soon as
possible so that it better carry out the missions
entrusted to it.

Considerable progress has been made since the
adoption of resolution 1540 (2004) in terms of the
international community's efforts to confront the threat
posed by the acquisition of weapons of mass
destruction by non-State actors. The measures
proposed by that resolution are an effective response
that can save us from the proliferation of such
weapons. We are nonetheless convinced that the most
effective way to deal with the problem is to completely
eliminate weapons of mass destruction.

The establishment of the 1540 Committee and its
three subcommittees, as well as the adoption of
guidelines for its procedures and for the preparation of
national reports, are accomplishments which testify to
the momentum in implementing resolution 1540
(2004).

My delegation is pleased that States have
expressed their support for the process initiated by the
resolution by submitting national reports under
paragraph 4 of the resolution. We hope that countries
which have not yet submitted their reports will be able
to do so as soon as possible. In this connection, it
would be a good idea for the Committee to begin to
consider the possibility of providing assistance to
States that request it in complying with the provisions
of the resolution.

We also welcome the Committee's decision to
recruit eight experts to assist it in meeting the mandate
given to it; and we will give them our full support and
our full cooperation.

Finally, we are pleased that the General Assembly
has adopted by consensus the International Convention
for the Suppression of Acts of Nuclear Terrorism
(General Assembly resolution 59/290), and we hope
that a draft comprehensive convention will be adopted,
also by consensus as soon as possible.

My delegation supports the draft presidential
statement that will be adopted at the end of today's
meeting.

