Mr. Yafiez-Barnuevo (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
Spain voted in favour of resolution 1576 (2004) to
extend the mandate of the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH). However, I should like
to make a few observations, because we believe that
the decision that we have just taken should not be
considered as merely procedural. We believe that the
United Nations operation in Haiti has a particular
importance, precisely because of the previous setbacks
that the international community has experienced in
that country. Because of those setbacks, we must now
think in terms of a comprehensive and long-term
operation, so that we are sure we will attain the
objective we have set of restoring to the Haitian people
the possibility of governing themselves in conditions of
freedom, democracy and better economic and social
conditions in the country.
The problems that the international community
faces in Haiti are so serious that it is not enough to
resolve the immediate security crisis in the country or
to take short-term measures. We must insist on a
comprehensive approach that addresses the political
and security situation, human rights and economic
development as elements of a whole. Moreover, even
though the prospect of free elections constitutes a
notable achievement, it is crucial to begin an inclusive
process of national dialogue that will enable all social
and political sectors to participate. The history of Haiti
has taught us that there is little use in palliative
measures. We must learn from past mistakes and take a
long-term approach to defining the action to be taken
by the international community.

For all those reasons, we are pleased that the
resolution we have just adopted contains sufficient
political, economic and social elements to help in
promoting all those endeavours. At the same time, we
must regret that the Council has been unable to support
the recommendation of the Secretary-General and his
Special Representative that MINUSTAH's mandate be
extended for a longer period than usual - for 18
months - precisely so that it would be possible to plan
in the long term. Nonetheless, we joined the consensus,
because resolution 1576 (2004), which we have just
adopted, extends the mandate of MINUSTAH for six
months but makes it clear that the Security Council has
the intention to renew for further periods. We hope that
such renewals will take place, because that will enable
the international community fully to meet its
commitment to the Haitian people.

