Ms. Tawfiq (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): Allow me to
speak on behalf of the Permanent Representative of
Iraq, who is otherwise engaged at this time. I should
like to convey his thanks and his appreciation to you,
Sir, for presiding over this open debate to discuss the
report of the Secretary-General on children and armed
conflict, given the importance and gravity of the
question.

My delegation has read the report of the
Secretary-General on children and armed conflict,
contained in document S/2005/72. My delegation
would like to refer to the following points with respect
to the part concerning Iraq.

First, the Government of Iraq admits to facing
problems in its efforts to achieve stability and security
as a result of the terrorist acts carried out by extremist
groups and elements loyal to the former regime. Those
groups use innocent children, women and elderly
people as human shields, which leads to heavy losses
among those segments of the population.

Secondly, the Government of Iraq has officially
announced the beginning of reconstruction operations,
the provision of health and humanitarian services, and
the rehabilitation of hospitals, health centres and
schools in areas where military actions took place.

Thirdly, the information contained in the report
came from the United Nations Children's Fund
(UNICEF) Office in Amman - that is to say, from
outside Iraq. The Government of Iraq has repeatedly
expressed to the United Nations its need for assistance
from the international Organization and its specialized
agencies. The Government has requested the reopening
and expansion of those agencies in the north and the
south of Iraq, areas which enjoy security and stability.
That would enable the two parties to consult and to
agree on the assistance required by the Iraqi people -
children in particular. That would be preferable to that
carrying out such activities through offices in other
countries that are far from the actual areas needing
assistance.

Fourthly, my delegation has seen no mention
made of the compliance and the progress made in
Iraq's Kurdistan and in other parts of Iraq which enjoy
social, economic stability and security.

Fifthly, having read the report in general and in
particular the part pertaining to the organigramme of
the monitoring and reporting mechanism in the area of
children and armed conflict, the Government of Iraq
reaffirms its keen interest in cooperating with the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Children and Armed Conflict and in translating that
cooperation into reality in order to achieve our
common objective of protecting the children of Iraq.

