Mr. Szijjarto (Hungary): We appreciate the
Dominican Republic's invitation to speak at today's
open debate and that the members of the Security
Council want to listen to non-Council members speak
on this matter as well, considering that there is no
doubt that climate change is among the most important
challenges facing the international community and
should be addressed properly. Climate change will
definitely generate fights for resources as access to
them becomes increasingly difficult. That is why we
consider climate change as a security challenge, as the
President very succinctly said in his statement.

Water scarcity, increasing ocean levels,
desertification, the decreasing productivity of arable
lands and the demographic boom in certain regions
will definitely result in additional massive migration
flows, even at the inter-continental level, as the Foreign
Minister of Guatemala stated earlier. According to
estimations and predictions, by 2050 approximately
200 million migrants will have taken to the road owing
to environmental causes. We have our experience from
Europe. During the three-year period from 2015 to
2017, 3.3 million people submitted requests for asylum,
of whom 90 per cent came from 34 countries. In those
34 countries the populations will grow by 26 per cent in
the next 10 years, which means an additional 640 million
people. That foreshadows further migratory flows.
Unfortunately, it has been demonstrated over the past
years that migration poses an enormous security threat
to the countries of origin, transit and destination. In
Europe we have been faced with the security challenges
associated with migration over the past couple of years.
That is why, based on our experience, we believe that
the United Nations and all international organizations
should not adopt decisions or documents that encourage
further migratory waves or portray migration as a
human right or as having only a positive impact.

Instead of encouraging new migratory flows
and putting pressure on countries that do not accept
accommodating that phenomenon, the international
community should do everything possible to tackle
the root causes of migration, whether they are
political, security-related, economic or environmental.
Therefore, we do not agree with the Global Compact for
Safe, Orderly and Regular Migration and the premise
that it should serve as a blueprint according to which
all countries should and will serve as origin, transit or
destination countries for migration. We do not accept
that, and we believe that all countries should have the
right to decide whether they want to be one of the latter
three, with whom they would like to live and whom they
would like to allow to enter their countries. That is why
border protection will be the most important factor for
ensuring security in the future. If those national rights
are not respected, then that can be another root cause
leading to further conflicts and security risks. We will
also face enormous future security risks caused by
the environment and climate change, as the President
stated earlier, and we would better off avoiding as many
conflicts as possible in the future.

