Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola): Since this is the first
public meeting to be held under your presidency, Sir, I
would first like to congratulate you and the delegation
of Egypt on your assumption of the presidency and your
convening of today's very timely briefing on the critical
issue of the protection of civilians, with particular
emphasis on medical and humanitarian personnel,
hospitals and other medical facilities. I would also
like to welcome and thank the Secretary-General, who
was here earlier, as well as Ambassador Peter Maurer
of the International Committee of the Red Cross and
Ms. Joanne Liu of Medecins Sans Frontieres - the
organization that is present in so many of the theatres
that we have heard about this morning and that is doing
what we would like to see many more doing, not just
the 35,000 who are its members, as Ms. Liu pointed out
this morning.

Angola is honoured to be a sponsor, along with
other States, of resolution 2286 (2016), which we just
adopted today.

Attacks on medical and humanitarian personnel
engaged in medical duties and on their means of
transport and equipment, as well as on hospitals and
other medical facilities, are flagrant violations of
international humanitarian law as enshrined in the 1949
Geneva Conventions and their Additional Protocols
of 1977 and 2005, as well as the Convention on the
Safety of United Nations and Associated Personnel
and its Optional Protocol. Today's resolution also
represents a meaningful contribution to making the
parties to conflicts aware of the gravity of such attacks
and making their perpetrators accountable for their
criminal deeds, which are in absolute contravention of
international law. At the same time, the resolution also
strengthens the United Nations agenda on the protection
of civilians.

Since the Security Council's adoption of its first
resolution on the protection of civilians (resolution 1265 (l999)), it has emphasized the importance of
protecting humanitarian and health-care personnel
in various country-specific and thematic resolutions.
However, despite the robust normative framework
established by the Council, the General Assembly
and other international bodies, and the strengthening
of human rights mandates in peacekeeping missions,
a great deficit remains in the protection of civilians
in situations of rampant conflict. Today's adoption of
resolution 2286 (2016) helps to fill that gap. Now is time
to proceed with the implementation of the resolution.

We are deeply concerned by reports highlighting
attacks on health-care workers and medical facilities
in conflict zones. Shootings, kidnappings, physical
violence and aerial bombardments are a part of daily life
in countries such as Afghanistan, Syria, Iraq, Pakistan,
South Sudan, the Central African Republic, Somalia
and Yemen, among others. This year the number of
attacks on medical facilities, as well as the number of
deceased, increase daily in a rampage of irrationality.

Ms. Joanne Liu and Mr. Peter Maurer have shared
with the Council sobering stories of the prevailing
reality in a number of conflict zones. The appeal they
have launched and presented to the Council should be,
without a doubt, enough for us to heed and respond
positively. The recent death in Aleppo of Dr. Wassim
Maas, a humanitarian hero and the last paediatrician
in the city who, with his bare hands, struggled to give
some hope to the children of the martyrized city, bears
witness to that.

In conclusion, we condemn all attacks on health-
care and humanitarian workers and facilities for their
disadvantageous impact on people in need, who have
their access to health care and humanitarian assistance
totally obliterated. We call on all parties to armed
conflicts to fully comply with their obligations under
international humanitarian and human rights law, and
to ensure the respect and protection of all medical and
humanitarian personnel, as well as hospitals and other
medical facilities. We urge parties to the conflict to
facilitate safe, rapid and unimpeded passage for medical
and humanitarian workers and their access to all people
in need of protection and assistance. That would be an
adequate response to the appeal we heard this morning
in the Council.

