Mr. Djokic: At the outset, let me express on behalf
of my Government profound condolences to the United
States on the occasion of the tragic event that occurred in
Oklahoma City, in which innocent citizens were Victims
of an outrageous terrorist act.

The Security Council is about to reach a decision on
the further extension of the partial and very limited
suspension of sanctions against the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia. Despite consistently positive reports by the
Co-Chairmen of the International Conference on the
Former Yugoslavia (ICFY) and the ICFY Mission that
Yugoslavia is adhering to the unilateral commitment to
close its border with the Bosnian Serbs, and despite the
well-known fact that it has absolutely and completely
fulfilled all the provisions of the relevant Security Council
resolutions by which the sanctions were introduced, we
note with regret that once again the Security Council
cannot muster the political will to make a bolder decision
and lift the sanctions against Yugoslavia altogether.

This negative stand is indeed highly unfortunate,
because by opting to lift the sanctions against the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia the Council would be making a
very significant breakthrough towards peace in the
Balkans. The war-option mentality and ideology of
extremists in Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia and the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia would be seriously
undermined. Most important, the Bosnian Serbs would be
finally convinced that their recalcitrant approach has
definitely been superseded and that they must accept the
continuation of negotiations on the basis of the Contact
Group as a starting point.

 

By opting to maintain the greatest part of the most
comprehensive sanctions regime adopted against any State
Member of the United Nations, the Security Council is
continuing to pursue the policy of punishment against the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and the Serbian and
Montenegrin people for things for which they bear no
responsibility and which are out of their control. This
policy of collective punishment is being carried out despite
the increasing calls and appeals of numerous States,
especially States of the region, on the superfluousness of
the sanctions, their ineffectual nature and the extremely
harmful and devastating effects on the economy and
infrastructure of the whole of south-eastern Europe.

At a meeting in Athens on 15 April, five countries of
the Black Sea group adopted a declaration (S/1995/313, annex) in which they stated that the implementation of the
sanctions could have a considerable negative impact on
the overall political, economic, security and social situation
in the region as a whole and called upon the Contact Group
to continue efforts towards achieving a peaceful, just and
lasting political solution to the crisis in parallel with the
suspension and lifting of the sanctions. A similar appeal
was adopted by the members of the Danube Commission in
Budapest.

The recent non-paper on the humanitarian impact of
the sanctions which was circulated by the five permanent
members of the Security Council focused on the need to
improve the effectiveness of the Sanctions Committees in
expediting humanitarian implications as much as possible.
We have taken particular note of the proposal that it should
be allowed to supply clearly defined categories of medical
supplies and foodstuffs even without the notification of the
relevant Sanctions Committees.

However, despite this non-paper and the clear call in
Security Council resolution 943 (1994) on the Sanctions
Committee concerning Yugoslavia to adopt appropriately
streamlined procedures for consideration of applications
concerning legitimate humanitarian assistance, the
Committee has not meaningfully resorted to doing so, and
the sanctions continue to be applied in a very strict manner.

In addition, the Council has opted to ignore the
request of the Government of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia for a one-shot export of $70 million worth of
goods, through which it would finance humanitarian
imports of medicines and foodstuffs even though it was
decided to allow similar operations under different
sanctions regimes.

The new conditions being set by some members of
the Contact Group, especially the calls for the recognition
by the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia of Bosnia and
Herzegovina and the Republic of Croatia as a prerequisite
for the further suspension of sanctions not only lack any
basis in the Security Council resolutions by which the
sanctions were introduced, but also represent a false and
counterproductive form of pressure. The Federal Republic
of Yugoslavia is not prepared to make the same grave
mistake committed by the international community and
recognize the separatist republics before the fundamental
problems have been resolved between the peoples living
in them.

These calls for premature recognition are a classic
example of putting the cart before the horse. Even if
recognition were granted, none of the problems of Bosnia
and Herzegovina would be resolved. The civil war would
continue. It would even gain in intensity as the Muslim
Government forces could well interpret the recognition as
giving carte blanche for continuing hostilities and
intensifying their drive to impose their will to create a
unitary State under Muslim domination, which is
unacceptable to other peoples of Bosnia and Herzegovina
and is the main cause of the civil war.

In spite of very clear-cut reports by the ICFY
Mission that the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia is fully
cooperating with the mission personnel and doing
everything it possibly can to fulfil its commitment to
keeping the border closed except for humanitarian
foodstuffs, medical supplies and clothing, it is constantly
being subjected to provocations and absurd allegations
that it is supplying the Bosnian Serbs with military
materiel. Preposterous reports on massive helicopter
flights from Bosnia and Herzegovina to the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia are circulated despite the fact that
they have never been verified by the ICFY Mission on
the ground.

The aim of such unprincipled provocations is to
undermine the constructive and peace-oriented policy that
the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia is following and is
basically geared towards the continuation of the conflict
in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

 

Unjustified calls for the cutting off of
telecommunications links between the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia and the Bosnian Serbs, demands for ridiculous
control of fuel supplies in Yugoslav Airline planes and the
Bar-Bari ferryboats, demands that the partial suspension be
continued for only 30 days: all these are absolutely
counterproductive and can only strengthen the hand of those
that do not wish the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia to
continue to cooperate with the international community.

The decision by the Government of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia to cut political and economic links
with the Bosnian Serb leadership was completely unilateral.
It is being pursued as a form of pressure on Pale to
convince it to accept the Contact Group plan as a basis for
negotiations on the final settlement. Yugoslavia accepted
the ICFY Mission as a way of facilitating its unilateral
decision. If, however, further pressure and new unprincipled
and totally meaningless conditions are brought to bear on
the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, it must be very clear
that the Yugoslav Government will have to respond to great
internal pressure and reject all forms of blackmail and
coercion and call into question the activities of the ICFY
Mission as a whole on Yugoslav soil. The responsibility
for all negative consequences on the peace process in the
territory of the former Yugoslavia that might ensue would
rest solely with those members of the Security Council that,
by their absurd demands on the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia, give obvious proof that they do not seek an
urgent and comprehensive political solution and the
restoration of peace. Instead, they abuse the Security
Council to pursue their own political interests.

Fully convinced that a peaceful settlement of the
conflict in the former Yugoslavia can be achieved only by
political means and negotiations conducted by equal
partners, the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia stands ready
to do all it can to facilitate the peace process. It is not
prepared, however, to accept provocations and unprincipled
demands, conditions or blackmail which are contrary to the
Charter of the United Nations and international legal norms.
Such attempts by some Powers it has always rejected, and
I wish to assure the Security Council that this time again
Yugoslavia will do the same thing, most resolutely.

