Mr. Kouchner to set the date for elections: 28 October.
We very much hope that the elections will result in a
multi-party system. The Netherlands will contribute to
monitoring them by providing two long-term and
approximately 30 short-term observers.

The Netherlands condemns the new surge of
politically motivated violence in Kosovo. The recent
attacks seem to aim at destabilizing Kosovo in the
period preceding the elections. All these attacks are a
matter of grave concern to my country: the cowardly
grenade attack on Serbian children at play, which left
nine of them injured; the bombing of the Political
Parties Services Centre of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) in Pristina, which
clearly targeted not only the office itself but also the
democratization process as such; and the recent spate
of attacks on moderate Kosovars, especially officials of
the Democratic League of Kosovo. Here, KFOR and
UNMIK face the task of preventing the violence that
would result in the marginalization of political
moderates. My delegation is aware that this calls for a
balancing act by KFOR and UNMIK, as polarization
between the forces of the international community and
the Kosovar population is to be avoided as well.

My delegation also welcomes the recent steps by
KFOR and UNMIK to take control of the Zvecan lead
smelting factory, a major source of lead pollution and
therefore a major health hazard. UNMIK already bore
formal responsibility for the Trepca complex; it has
now taken de facto responsibility. We welcome this
development and appreciate UNMIK's comprehensive
approach to this matter, as described by Mr. Annabi
this morning.

As to the elections to be held in the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia on 24 September, we fully
understand that UNMIK will not be able to take
responsibility for the organization of those elections in
Kosovo. However, on the basis of Security Council
resolution 1244 (1999), Kosovo Serbs who wish to cast
their votes in the elections for the Federal parliament
and in the presidential elections should be able to do
so. Therefore, if this is feasible, we would recommend
that UNMIK and KFOR assist those Serbs by
facilitating their voting in Serbia.

The Netherlands is concerned at persistent reports
about activities by Kosovar extremists in the Presevo
valley. We appreciate the further information provided
by Mr. Annabi, and hope that this remains a matter of
concern.

Finally, we wish to associate ourselves fully with
the observations made by the representative of the
United Kingdom about the unacceptable behaviour by
the authorities of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
with respect to the treatment of the detainees from the
United Kingdom, Canada and the Netherlands, in
particular with regard to consular access, private legal
counselling, and independent health examinations. We
once more call upon the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia authorities to comply with their
international obligations, enshrined in the Vienna
Convention.

