Mr. Djani (Indonesia): First ofall, like others before
me I would like to thank South Africa, particularly my
brother Jerry, for the Visit to the African Union (AU)
last week, which not only provided us with insights on
the issues in Africa, but closer engagement with our
brothers and sisters of the African Union Peace and
Security Council.

I would also like to thank the briefer, my sisters
Hanna and Fatima, for their presentation. We also
met with them while Visiting Addis Ababa this past
week, and this additional information is certainly a
contribution to our understanding on the issue.

Indonesia shares the View that partnership with
all stakeholders is pertinent to addressing peace
and security challenges in Africa, and we welcome
the significant progress made between the United
Nations and the African Union. The Silencing the
Guns by 2020 initiative and the Political Agreement
for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central African
Republic are but two examples of such progress and
achievement. I should like to underline that success
in any initiative entails unity, solidarity, partnership
and the involvement of all. In that regard, I would like
to applaud the African Union for its commitment to
finding solutions to African challenges.

Now, please allow me to address some key points.

The first concerns the importance of maintaining
communication between the United Nations and the
African Union. We join the Secretary-General in
highlighting the fact that a strong partnership between
the Organization and the AU is essential to effectively
seeking solutions to Africa's increasingly complex
peace and security challenges. We welcome the joint
meeting of the AU Peace and Security Council and the
United Nations Security Council last week and urge
more strategic discussion between them to find the most
suitable solutions and concrete actions, and ensuring
full implementation of the various agreements related
to many conflict cases. Closer collaboration would
entail finding ways and means for both organizations
to complement each other's roles and mandates, and
provide impact on the ground on preventive diplomacy,
peacekeeping and peacebuilding activities. We
should be innovative in our approach to enhancing
our partnership, with focus on outcome-oriented
solutions, hybrid peacekeeping and pursuing projects
on socioeconomic objectives. This would of course
include focusing on both organizations' comparative
advantages to which many have alluded.
Secondly, development and capacity-building
are prerequisites for sustainable peace in Africa. We
recognize the African Union-United Nations Framework
for the Implementation of Agenda 2063 and the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development last year and
look forward to hearing updates on its progress. More
possible collaboration and synergy should be explored
through better coordination between the United
Nations, the African Union and international financial
institutions. We recall the collaboration undertaken by
the Organization and the World Bank through the 2017
joint report Pathways for Peace: Inclusive Approaches
to Preventing Violent Conflict. It provides the key
message that economic policies, including economic
incentives, can be tools for prevention. Indonesia also
supports the work of the Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC) and Peacebuilding Fund in addressing the root
causes of conflict. We welcome the work of the country
configuration of the PBC in preventing countries from
relapsing into conflict through development. The clear
majority of African issues in its agenda re-emphasizes
the important role of the PBC in Africa.

Thirdly, the existing partnership between United
Nations and the AU should be complemented with
additional international support. Indonesia and Africa
have been close since the Bandung Conference of 1955,
and we will continue to support Africa through technical
cooperation and capacity-building programmes. In
April 2018, we held the Indonesia-Africa Forum and
subsequently the Indonesia-Africa Infrastructure
Dialogue in August 2019. These events have resulted
in concrete economic cooperation in various strategic
sectors, including infrastructure, trade, connectivity
and strategic industries. We believe that economic
development will certainly address some of the major
issues that Africa currently faces.

We also maintain our commitment to maintaining
peace in Africa through our participation in United
Nations peacekeeping operations. Currently, Indonesia
is the largest personnel-contributing country sitting on
the Council, with around 3,000 personnel, including 128
female peacekeepers. We are preparing more female
peacekeepers who are adept and able to contribute
to capacity-building in their field. We are currently
contributing to seven United Nations missions in Africa.
Interregional support is equally important. Just
like the AU, the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations (ASEAN) is also working closely with the
United Nations through its partnership with the
Organization. We are working together to strengthen
the cooperation between ASEAN and the AU on issues
of common interest.

Indonesia will remain committed, as a true partner
of Africa, to maintaining peace and security. Allow
me to reiterate Foreign Minister Marsudi's words at
the Security Council ministerial meeting on peace and
security in Africa, under the Russian presidency this
past month. Partnership with Africa should be

"based on good faith, honesty and sincerity. This is
the spirit of togetherness that we need to replicate
at the global level: a partnership that will not
cause any harm to Africa; a partnership that will
bring mutual benefits to Africa; and a partnership
that will bring equality and common progress to
Africa." (S/PV8627, p. 15)

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate once
again our conviction in the truth of the principle that
neighbours know best. Just as in the case of Africa,
this principle can offer solutions to the issues at hand.
In our experience in the ASEAN region, being a
neighbour is not only about geography; it is also about
camaraderie and about caring and sharing, and it is
always about humanity.

