Mr. Elaraby (Egypt) (interpretation from Arabic): I
should like first to welcome Mr. Kromah, Member of the
Collective Presidency of the Liberian National Transitional
Government, and to thank him for his extremely complete
report, which we all followed with great interest.

The Council's special meeting last week to study the
fifteenth progress report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in Liberia reflects the importance that the
international community attaches to the question of Liberia
as well as its consensus on the need to assist our brothers
in Liberia. In that respect, I should like to thank the
Permanent Representative of the United States, Mrs.
Albright, for the complete report that she presented to us
after her visit to the region.

The Security Council, in approving the extension of
the mandate of the United Nations Observer Mission in
Liberia (UNOMIL) to 31 May 1996, should encourage the
political leaders in Liberia to implement the provisions of
the Abuja Agreement as quickly as possible so that this
opportunity is not lost.

A settlement of the question of Liberia is now at hand.
This increases the responsibility of the United Nations, the
Organization of African Unity (OAU) and the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS), which
should make the greatest possible efforts to promote the
peace process and check any attempts dictated by narrow
interests or considerations. It is therefore important to grant
all necessary assistance to the ECOWAS Monitoring Group
(ECOMOG) so that it can discharge its mission.

The delegation of Egypt calls upon all the Liberian
factions and their leaders to ensure the demobilization and
disarmament of combatants in order to facilitate their
reintegration into civil society, and to allow the United
Nations to ensure the deployment of the observers and to
increase their number to 160.

Our delegation also urges all Liberians to fully
cooperate with UNOMIL and to give it the necessary
protection. We should also like to take this opportunity to
express our gratitude to the United Nations for the efforts
that it is currently making in Liberia and for the technical
and humanitarian assistance provided by the international
community to the Liberian people. We hope that this will
allow for the recovery and reconstruction of Liberia and
enable it to resume its proper place, both regionally and
internationally.

The Egyptian delegation, convinced of the need to
allow the people of Liberia to implement security and
stability and to put an end to the sufferings that have
gone on since the civil war of 1989, will vote in favour
of the draft resolution.

Finally, we hope that the progress report to be
submitted by the Secretary-General to the Council by the
end of March will include positive elements reflecting a
real desire for peace.

