Mr. Hickey (United Kingdom): The United
Kingdom would like to congratulate you, Madam
President, on taking up the presidency of the Security
Council, and we wish you every success. I also wish
to thank High Representative Inzko and his team for
their objective and detailed reports and their continued
efforts to support the implementation of the General
Framework Agreement for Peace in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. They have the United Kingdom's full and
constant support.

I would agree with my French colleague that
Bosnia and Herzegovina remains at a crossroads today.
In the six months since we last met (see S/PV.8089),
there has been some small, incremental progress in
terms of reform and in reaching at least two significant
milestones. And yet the vestiges of division continue
to mar that progress and to prevent Bosnia and
Herzegovina from reaching the potential its citizens
deserve. I will briefly touch on those two milestones.

First, the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) issued its final judgments in
November and transferred responsibility to the
Mechanism for International Criminal Tribunals
at the end of the year. We recognize the Tribunal's
achievements, including the first instance conviction of
former wartime commander Ratko Mladie of genocide
and crimes against humanity. Although Mladie's
conviction will not bring back the thousands who
lost their lives, it demonstrates that the architects of
suffering will be held to account, giving others around
the world hope that there can be justice for appalling
human rights abuses.

The Tribunal has accumulated a wealth of practical
knowledge and experience over the 24 years it has
been operating, and it is important that the lessons
learned are shared with other international criminal
courts and tribunals. It has done ground-breaking work
to investigate, prosecute and convict perpetrators of
wartime sexual violence. I would like to echo the report
of the Counter-Terrorism Committee in welcoming
Bosnia and Herzegovina's initiatives to integrate
women and peace and security in counter-terrorism
and countering violent-extremism issues through the
development of national and local action plans. The
United Kingdom encourages Bosnia and Herzegovina
to continue and intensify its efforts on this positive
trajectory. It is a matter for regret that some political
leaders have disputed the rulings of the Tribunal and
the decisions of domestic war crimes chambers in the
region and have even made inflammatory remarks
about a return to conflict. I agree with my American
colleague that we should condemn such rhetoric, which
privileges the pursuit of political advantage ahead of
the pursuit ofjustice for victims and a peaceful future
for all.

Secondly, Bosnia and Herzegovina submitted its
European Union (EU) questionnaire earlier this year. We
commend that achievement, which is not insignificant
given the complexities of the system being assessed.
But we have been disappointed to see only limited
commitment to the difficult but essential reforms that
underlie the political commitment to becoming an EU
member State. Now that the questionnaire has been
submitted, Bosnia and Herzegovina must demonstrate
its commitment to upholding the rule of law and
implementing agreed reforms. Among these, as my
Dutch colleague has already highlighted today, there is
an urgent need to amend the provisions of the criminal
procedure code on special investigative measures in
order to comply with the Constitutional Court decision
of June 2017 and align with international standards.
Failure to do so would seriously undermine the fight
against corruption and organized crime and put
international cooperation and the security of partner
countries in jeopardy.

As the High Representative noted, 2018 will also
be a significant year for Bosnia and Herzegovina, with
elections expected in October. However, amendments
to the electoral law are necessary so that the results
of those elections can be implemented. If political
leaders fail to agree to those amendments, the entire
country will be exposed to an unnecessary and
serious risk. Political leaders must demonstrate their
ability to compromise on a solution without further
delay and move towards European standards. As
elections approach, we see an opportunity for Bosnia
and Herzegovina to focus on the future, not the past.
Divisive nationalist rhetoric demeans those who use it
and does a disservice to the people and the country as
a whole. The United Kingdom encourages the political
leaders of Bosnia and Herzegovina to demonstrate
to their people and the European Union that they are
committed to building a better and more secure future
for them and their children.
The consequences of Bosnia and Herzegovina's
divisive politics are easy to see. Huge numbers of
young people leave every year in search of the political
stability and employment opportunities that they are
denied at home. The people of Bosnia and Herzegovina
deserve better. As a long-standing friend of Bosnia
and Herzegovina, the United Kingdom will continue to
stand in solidarity alongside those who want a better,
more prosperous and stable future for the country even
as it pursues Euro-Atlantic integration.

The United Kingdom's hosting of the Western
Balkans Summit of the Berlin Process in London this
summer is a signal of that solidarity and commitment.
We also remain committed to Operation Althea and the
High Representative, including the use of Bonn powers,
if the situation requires, until stability and security are
firmly entrenched.

