Mr. Elnour (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to congratulate your country, Mr. President, on
presiding over the Council this month. I would also
like to congratulate your predecessor, the Permanent
Representative of Poland, for her wise and effective
conduct of the Council's work over the past month.

I thank the Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations for his briefing, as well as the
Secretary-General and the Chairperson of the African
Union (AU) Commission for their report (S/2018/530),
which is before us today.

It has been a year since the Council adopted
resolution 2363 (2017), which announced the start of
the implementation of the exit strategy of the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID) from Darfur and its reconfiguration
to conform, qualitatively and quantitatively, with
developments on the ground. The situation has been
progressing daily in all areas, particularly security
and humanitarian. Those were the priorities of the
UNAMID mandate.

That progress has been reflected in more than eight
successive reports over the past year. They have all
underscored the progress achieved in Darfur. A number
of the Council's members have also taken note of that
fact during their visits to Darfur on various occasions.
That proves the authenticity of the resolution and its
contents, as set forth in the provisions guiding the
start of UNAMID's exit strategy, while negotiating the
decision to extend UNAMID's mandate by the end of
this month. I would like to draw the Security Council's
attention to the following facts and information.

First, the Government of the Sudan intends to
continue all activities to promote lasting peace and
stability in Darfur.

Second, we will continue to implement the
weapons-collection campaign, which has demonstrated
its effectiveness by alleviating tensions and disputes
and by stabilizing the security situation in all states
of Darfur.

Third, we reaffirm that the issue of internally
displaced persons will remain a top priority for the
Government of the Sudan in the upcoming period. As
the Security Council knows, the projects announced
earlier by the Government underpin three elements that
require the assistance of the international community
in order for us to implement them. They all require
vast material and human resources. We look forward
to the genuine support of the international community
in that regard.
Fourth, we will pursue such exemplary cooperation
among the Sudan, the AU and the United Nations, in
particular the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
and the Department of Field Support. We would like to
underscore that the Peacebuilding Fund is also engaged
in promoting the current peacebuilding phase.

Fifth, the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur
remains the only agreed political framework for
addressing the political issue. The Government of the
Sudan is therefore striving to implement its provisions
on the ground. In cooperation and coordination with
the sisterly State of Qatar, the sponsor of the Doha
Document, the Government is looking at ways and means
to implement the remaining provisions. In addition, we
are cooperating with the High-level Independent Panel
of the African Union and other partners to include
the non-signatories in the peace process. We must
emphasize that the international community should
pressure the armed groups that have not signed the
Doha Document to join the political process.

Sixth, we underscore that the Government of the
Sudan will continue to cooperate and coordinate with
UNAMID in the upcoming period in order to enable
the mission to smoothly fulfil its mandate and carry
out its tasks. We will cooperate with the United Nations
country team in the Sudan, which, we hope, will receive
the necessary financial and human rights support to
discharge the duties entrusted to it by UNAMID.

Seventh, we must maintain our efforts to extend the
State's control in Darfur and to deploy more police units
and rule of law institutions in all five states of Darfur.

The current situation in Darfur speaks for itself.
It proves the fact that peace has become tangible
throughout Darfur, even in the small pockets under
the control of the rebel Abdul Wahid movement.
Popular sentiment supports full reconciliation and
sustained peace.

The Government of the Sudan is fully aware of the
needs in the upcoming period, including the various
social cohesion and development programmes, as well
as the need to address the root causes of the conflict.
We once again emphasize the need for the international
community to provide the assistance necessary to
implement such programmes by means of direct
support or through the various United Nations agencies
or its country team in the Sudan. In that regard, we call
on donor countries to fulfil their previous pledges and
commitments. We would like to thank the Secretary-
General for having agreed to provide the necessary
support through the Peacebuilding Fund. We also thank
friendly and sisterly countries for their ongoing support
to our people in Darfur.

We take this opportunity to call for unity and
consistency among all mechanisms set up by the
Council to help the Sudan to bring about lasting peace
in Darfur. The follow-up to the implementation of
resolution 1591 (2005) on imposing targeted sanctions
must be consistent with the Security Council resolve
to restore normality, as provided for in resolution 2363
(2017). In that regard, we propose a reduction in the
number of experts and the lifting of the military ban in
Darfur. There are two options with regard to the listed
individuals, namely, either to delist them from the
sanctions list or to list the rebel Abdul Wahid Nour in
implementation of the resolution, which warned about
his designation on the sanctions list.

The current situation is testament to the importance
of empowering the Sudanese armed forces to lead and to
have full control of entire Darfur region, thereby filling
the gaps left following the withdrawal of UNAMID.
That is why it is imperative to lift the arms embargo
imposed on Darfur as soon as possible.
In conclusion, we commend the comprehensive and
concerted efforts made to conclude the peace process in
Darfur. We once again welcome the new peacebuilding
era, which will bring development and thus an end to
the conflict. My delegation thanks UNAMID for its
efforts in various areas, and peacekeepers for their
sacrifices over the past years. We would also like to
thank the troop- and police-contributing countries. We
reiterate our Government's readiness to cooperate with

all regional and international partners on UNAMID-
related matters until the last of its components leaves
my country after having brought about peace and
stability in Darfur.

