Mrs. Haley (United States of America): Let me
thank Special Representative Zerrougui and Ms. Mbela
for their briefings and their insights.

I want to direct my comments today to my
colleagues, but above all to the people ofthe Democratic
Republic of the Congo as they approach elections
with great consequences for their future. At an Arria
Formula meeting on the Democratic Republic of the
Congo last February, the Congolese Foreign Minister
made a comment that "you have to visit the Congo to
really understand the situation there". I have visited the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, met with its leaders
and listened to its people. I spoke with mothers, fathers
and children, in and out of camps. Their message was
heartfelt and unmistakable: they want a better life. And
they want a voice in their own futures. The people of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo want what every
human being wants - to be safe and free to raise their
children and live their best lives.

There are voices today telling the Congolese that
democracy is not the way to achieve their hopes for
themselves and for their families. They want them to
believe that representative Government is too risky and
too inefficient. They are asking them to continue to
put their trust in Government that is not accountable to
them. Those voices are wrong.

Democracy can be messy, and it can be unpredictable.
But democracy is a process, and it is not dependent
on a single event or decision. It is the result of years,
decades - sometimes centuries - of actions and
decisions. Democracy is the hard work of allowing
the people to fairly and safely express their will, and
giving them the confidence that their decisions will
be honoured.

My country, the United States, has over 200 years
of experience with democracy. It took us much of that
time to fully include all Americans in the vote. And our
democracy is still far from perfect. Democracy takes
time and effort, but history shows us that it is worth
it. Democracies are more prosperous, more peaceful,
less corrupt and more innovative. Most importantly,
democracy honours the desire in every one of us to
build lives of dignity and self-determination, not just
for ourselves - not even mostly for ourselves - but for
our children, grandchildren and great-grandchildren
yet to come.

That is why so many people have fought so hard
and sacrificed so much over the years for the right to
hold their Governments accountable.

The democratic process is under way in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. It began with the
Saint-Sylvestre agreement of 31 December 2016, built
on the foundation of the Congolese Constitution. It
gathered strength with the electoral calendar that set
out a clear process for elections on 23 December 2018.
It gained momentum with President Kabila Kabange's
agreement that he would not run in the upcoming
elections. Democracy in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo is now poised for its greatest test. It is a
historic opportunity.

For any country struggling to govern itself, the
peaceful transfer of power is a decisive moment. It is
the moment when all of the theory of representative
Government fades into the background and the decisions
of real people in real situations come to the forefront.
Peacefully surrendering power tests the ability and
willingness of individual men and women to put aside
their personal interests and agendas and put the people
first. The hopes and aspirations ofmore than 80 million
Congolese people now depend on the leaders of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo passing that test.

The Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo has been very clear that it is holding elections
on 23 December and that it is doing so without the
help of the international community. We respect their
sovereign right to make that decision. It is a decision
with tremendous consequences for the Congolese
people. We have spent the past two years reiterating
in the Security Council the necessity for free, fair
and credible elections on 23 December. All of the
parties know what they need to do. President Kabila
understands his role. The Democratic Republic of the
Congo Government understands what must be done.
The National Independent Electoral Commission knows
the preparations that it must undertake in the coming
six weeks. There is no excuse for failure, no reason for
delay. All that is remaining is for the leadership of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to show the will to
follow the democratic path that has been laid out before
it. The whole world is watching to see what the legacy
of President Kabila will be.

To the Congolese people, as they prepare to take
this momentous leap into their future, my message is
this: life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness is the
birth right of each citizen and every human being. They
must claim it; demand it; seize it for themselves and
their grandchildren yet to come. I want them to know
that there are people throughout the world hoping for
their success. And I want them to know that the prayers
and best wishes of the American people are with them.

