Mr. Tiirk (Slovenia): Let me I assure you,
Mr. President, that I will be relatively brief.

None among the many observers of the Security
Council will fail to notice the historic character of the
action the Council is about to take today. With the
adoption of the draft resolution the United Nations will
assume responsibilities for security and administration in
East Timor and for other issues related to the transition
towards self-government and East Timor's independence.
This is an important event for the people of East Timor,
as well as for the United Nations.

Today we have to recall that back in 1975 and 1976,
about a quarter of a century ago, the Security Council and
the General Assembly laid down the political and legal
framework that enabled an eventual genuine and honest
fulfilment of the right of the East Timorese to self-
determination. The way from resolutions 384 (1975) and
389 (1976) to the present was long and arduous, and it
sometimes seemed that short-term considerations of
realpolitik had prevailed. However, the lesson relearned
in the case of East Timor is precisely the opposite, and it
is very clear: a people committed to the legitimate cause
of self-determination can succeed.

The United Nations will now assume a huge
responsibility. Rarely in the practice of the United Nations
has so much had to be done by the Organization directly.
It is essential that all United Nations Member States
understand that their individual and collective contribution
to this effort will be of decisive importance for the
success of the United Nations Transitional Administration
in East Timor (UNTAET) and, indeed, for the credibility
of the Organization as a whole. As in several instances in
the past, success will to a large extent be dependent on
the resources committed to the task.

Some priorities will require immediate attention. The
humanitarian situation continues to be very serious and
the return of refugees needs to be accelerated. The safety
and dignity of returning refugees must be ensured. The
Government of Indonesia has the essential responsibility
for the conditions of return of those refugees who are still
in its territory. Subsequently, it will be very important
that the United Nations Administration be sufficiently
sensitive to the needs of the people of East Timor. We
are pleased that the draft resolution to be adopted today
underlines the importance of including in UNTAET
personnel with appropriate training in international
humanitarian, human rights and refugee law, including child-
and gender-related provisions, negotiation and
communication skills, cultural awareness and
civilian-military coordination.

Last but not least, the atrocities against the civilian
population need to be fully investigated. The Security

 

Council should be informed in due time about the progress
of investigations. Truth is always the way towards
reconciliation and justice is its guarantee. We hope that
activities in the coming months will enable the United
Nations to close a chapter of East Timorese history in
dignity and to open a new one in a spirit of confidence,
trust and realistic hope for a decent future.

