Mr. Motomura (Japan): Mr. President, my
delegation welcomes your decision to convene today, at
the request of the Caribbean Community (CARICOM),
an emergency public meeting concerning the situation
in Haiti. We believe that this action testifies to the
international community's concern over the
deterioration of the situation in Haiti and its
commitment to achieving a peaceful resolution of the
conflict. In addition, since the start of the violence at
the beginning of this month, we have been pleased to
see that concerned parties, led by CARICOM. and the
Organization of American States (OAS), have
formulated a Plan Of Action for the restoration of
stability in Haiti. Since the end of last week, those
regional organizations, in cooperation with the United
States, France and Canada, have sent missions to Haiti
to propose a mediated agreement that must be accepted
by both the Government and the opposition, and
through diplomatic efforts have been working to
persuade both parties to accept it. My delegation
believes that the elements contained in the Plan of
Action provide an important basis for a negotiated
settlement and urges both parties to show the utmost
flexibility in order to achieve a peaceful political
resolution through dialogue. In that connection, we
take note of the proposal explained by France earlier
this afternoon.

My Government is gravely concerned about the
humanitarian issues in Haiti posed by the continuing
conflict and the resulting food shortages and worsening
health and education conditions. Halting further
deterioration in the humanitarian situation requires an
immediate end to the violence. We fear that, should the
conflict continue to escalate and should it spread to the
capital city of Port-au-Prince, even greater human
casualties and property damage will result.

Since the restoration of the Aristide presidency in
1994, the Japanese Government has provided in excess
of $200 million in economic cooperation with Haiti,
the bulk of which has been in the form of grant aid
assistance. However, due to the deterioration of the
security situation as a result of the continuing conflict,
there have been unavoidable delays in the
implementation of economic assistance, and this has
led to a vicious circle in which the further delaying of
Haiti's economic development makes it difficult for a
democratic political system to take hold. And those
sustaining the damage are the general populace, in
particular women and children, who are the most
vulnerable members of society. My Government hopes
that, by bringing the conflict quickly to a halt, the
vicious circle can be broken and an environment
conducive to cooperation for Haiti's economic
development by the international community, including
Japan, can be restored at the earliest possible date.

In addition, Japan requests that, as soon as the
security situation is ameliorated, a needs assessment be
carried out on the ground, primarily by United Nations
agencies, for the purpose of responding to the urgent
humanitarian situation in Haiti. We further strongly
request that the parties to the conflict allow access for
the required humanitarian activities and that the other
countries concerned exert themselves through a variety
of channels to persuade the parties to permit such
access.

We believe that a peaceful political resolution,
achieved through dialogue between the parties, is the
best possible strategy. For that purpose, a committed
effort on the part of both parties is required. My
Government supports the continued efforts made in
solidarity by the international community to bring
about political stability in Haiti.

