Mr. Berteling (Netherlands): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the European Union. The following
associated countries have aligned themselves with this
statement: Bulgaria, Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Hungary,
Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Romania, Slovakia and Slovenia.
Iceland, Liechtenstein and Norway also align themselves
with this statement.

For many years, the people of Afghanistan have been
suffering from war, human rights violations, extortion and
corruption. They are tired of the conflict and long for
peace, justice and order. However, the European Union
notes with deep concern the continuation and even the
intensification of armed hostilities in Afghanistan. The
warring factions still seem to believe in a military solution
to the conflict. The European Union calls on all Afghan
parties to cease the hostilities and to engage in political
dialogue aimed at the establishment of a broad-based
government representing the different ethnic and religious
groups in the country, and at achieving national
reconciliation.

Furthermore, harmful influence by countries in the
region continues. In this context, the European Union
wishes to reaffirm its strong commitment to the
sovereignty, independence, territorial integrity and national
unity of Afghanistan. The European Union strongly urges
third parties to refrain from interfering in the conflict and
from supplying arms to the warring factions. On 17
December 1996 the European Union established an arms
embargo concerning Afghanistan, under which no
European Union member State will deliver arms to any of
the warring parties in that country. The associated
countries have aligned themselves with this embargo. The
European Union encourages all States to follow a similar
policy of restraint.

The European Union encourages the States in the
region to support the United Nations efforts to promote
peace in Afghanistan and to use any influence they have
to encourage the Afghan parties to cooperate fully with
the United Nations Special Mission to Afghanistan.

The European Union reaffirms the central role of the
United Nations in international efforts towards a peaceful
resolution of the Afghan conflict. The European Union
fully supports the efforts of the United Nations Special
Mission to Afghanistan, which is uniquely placed to act
as an impartial mediator in the search for peace. It calls
upon all Afghan parties to cooperate with the United
Nations Special Mission to achieve a negotiated and
comprehensive solution. As a first step, there should be
an immediate ceasefire.

The already serious situation in Afghanistan is
compounded by grave and persistent human rights
violations and breaches of humanitarian law. Of particular
concern to the European Union is the deteriorating
situation of women and girls, who are increasingly
deprived of their human rights, particularly in areas
controlled by the Taliban. The European Union is also
concerned about the situation of displaced persons in
Afghanistan, in particular those from villages north of
Kabul. The European Union urgently appeals to all
Afghan parties involved to respect all human rights and
fundamental freedoms.

In addition, the European Union wishes to express
its concern about the conditions under which international
personnel and non-governmental organizations have to
work in Afghanistan.

The European Union is also worried to note that the
continuation of the conflict in Afghanistan increases the
potential for international terrorism and drug trafficking
with destabilizing effects for the region and beyond. The
European Union therefore calls upon all parties in
Afghanistan to halt such activities.

The European Union is actively engaged in
discussions in various forums with a view to enhancing
humanitarian aid and reconstruction and developing a

 

unitary approach by the donor community to the Afghan
crisis.
As the leading contributor of humanitarian aid to
Afghanistan, the European Union remains concerned about
the possible repercussions of the violations of human rights
on the beneficiaries of European Union, United Nations and
other relief programmes in Afghanistan. It looks forward to
continuing the dialogue with all the parties concerned on
cooperation modalities aimed at ensuring the delivery of aid
while maintaining the quality of support already provided
to the people of Afghanistan, irrespective of their gender
and ethnic background.

The European Union draws attention to the existence
of mine-clearing programmes in Afghanistan and urges all
Afghan parties to support and participate in these
programmes. In this context, the European Union also
appeals to the Afghan parties to put a complete halt to the
use of landmines, in view of the great number of innocent
people falling victim to these weapons.

In conclusion, let me reiterate the European Union's
continuing commitment to support actively the United
Nations in its search for and its facilitation of a resolution
of the conflict in Afghanistan, which has claimed so many
innocent lives.

