The President (spoke in Chinese): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda.

The Security Council is meeting in accordance
with the understanding reached in its prior
consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the
report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Disengagement Observer Force, document 5/2000/459.

Members of the Council also have before them
document S/2000/482, which contains the text of a
draft resolution prepared in the course of the Council's
prior consultations.

It is my understanding that the Council is ready to
proceed to the vote on the draft resolution (S/2000/482)
before it. Unless I hear any objection, I shall put the
draft resolution to the vote now.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

A vote was taken by show of hands.

In favour:
Argentina, Bangladesh, Canada, China, France,
Jamaica, Malaysia, Mali, Namibia, Netherlands,
Russian Federation, Tunisia, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America

The President (spoke in Chinese): There were 15
votes in favour. The draft resolution has been adopted
unanimously as resolution 1300 (2000).

In connection with the resolution just adopted on
the renewal of the mandate of the United Nations
Disengagement Observer Force, I have been authorized
to make the following complementary statement on
behalf of the Security Council:

"As is known, the report of the Secretary-
General on the United Nations Disengagement
Observer Force (S/2000/459) states, in
paragraph 11: 'Despite the present quiet in the
Israeli-Syrian sector, the situation in the Middle
the

East continues to be potentially dangerous and is
likely to remain so, unless and until a
comprehensive settlement covering all aspects of
the Middle East problem can be reached.' That
statement of the Secretary-General reflects the
View of the Security Council."

This statement will be issued as a document of
Security Council under the symbol

S/PRST/2000/19.

The Security Council has thus concluded the

present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 4.30 p.m.

