Mr. Haroon (Pakistan): We would like to
congratulate you, Mr. President, on your assumption of
the Council's presidency for the month of July, as well
as to thank you for convening today's debate.

I would like to especially mention with
appreciation the briefing by Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Staffan de Mistura. Pakistan
always values the work of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), which
is ably led by Special Representative De Mistura. I
hope that the rumours of his not continuing in his post
are not true.

The Secretary-General's quarterly reports are an
important barometer of political and security
developments in Afghanistan. I would like to
emphasize that they provide useful indicators to gauge
the progress and setbacks in our collective efforts for
peace in Afghanistan.

First, the period under review marks the
beginning of implementation of the transition towards
greater Afghan leadership and ownership, as envisaged
in the Kabul Process. This is a point that Pakistan
drives home in every meeting held in the Security
Council. Secondly, it coincides with the start of the
comprehensive review of UNAMA's mandate as set out
in resolution 1974 (2011). We believe that UNAMA's
priorities in this period should continue to be defined
along the lines of facilitating national reconciliation,
supporting governance and promoting socio-economic
development in Afghanistan, which is perhaps the least
so far to show an upward incline in its graph.

With regard to the ongoing comprehensive review
of the UNAMA mandate, which is to be completed in
2011, I must emphasize that Afghan ownership and
respect for the sovereignty of Afghanistan in all areas
must be ensured. Greater harmonization of UNAMA's
work with the goals of transition as well as
coordination within United Nations bodies have to be
essential ingredients of the new mandate.

Is Afghanistan heating up as we come closer to
hypothetical withdrawal dates? Well, I would like to
reiterate that the Secretary-General's report has
documented a 51 per cent increase in security-related
incidents in Afghanistan during the reporting period.
The report rightly expresses concern at the human cost
of the conflict, characterized by a steady rise in civilian
casualties resulting not only from the insurgency but
also from military operations.
Allow me to concede that the security challenges
in Afghanistan are complicated by three decades of
war, the capacity of Afghan security forces, the
presence of foreign forces and the exploitation of
socio-political complexity by criminals and drug
traffickers. The problem of security in Afghanistan
does not lend itself to near-facile explanations
exemplified by externalization and a self-defeating
blame game.

Violence and instability in both Afghanistan and
Pakistan are a threat. We are therefore extending all
possible cooperation to Afghanistan in the areas of
security and intelligence. A viable mechanism for such
cooperation is the Tripartite Commission, which meets
regularly and includes the United States and the
International Security Assistance Force.

The number of our military and paramilitary
personnel deployed along the border with Afghanistan
is greater than that of all international troops present
inside the whole of Afghanistan. Pakistan's
commitment to peace in Afghanistan is unwavering.
The cause of regional and international peace will not
be served if Afghanistan becomes a theatre of proxy
wars or if its land is used for extraterritorial subversive
activity.

A long-term solution to security challenges in
Afghanistan lies in workable reconciliation and
reintegration processes. An Afghanistan at peace with
itself can best ensure its own security. The Secretary-
General's reports and the briefings by his Special
Representative have rightly pointed out the linkages
between reconciliation and security.

Pakistan supports an Afghan-led and inclusive
reconciliation process, with a view to bringing the
opposition groups into the political mainstream. We
believe that the engagement of the Organization of the
Islamic Conference and UNAMA with the
reconciliation process is going to be helpful.

We emphasize the need to ensure that the newly
created Afghanistan-specific Sanctions Committee
contributes effectively to curbing the insurgency and
promoting reconciliation in Afghanistan. This must be
seen to happen. We hope that UNAMA's cooperation
with the Security Council Sanctions Committee on
Afghanistan will go a long way towards adding
professional and political input for listing and
de-listing.
Pakistan will continue to assist the Afghan-led
reconciliation process, including through the
Afghanistan-Pakistan Joint Commission for
Reconciliation and Peace in Afghanistan. The first
meeting of the Joint Commission was held in
Islamabad last month, on the eve of the visit of
President Hamid Karzai. Both our countries have
affirmed the resolve to work closely for lasting
reconciliation and peace in Afghanistan. As a follow-
up to the Islamabad meeting, the first working-level
meeting of the Joint Commission was held last week in
Kabul. It has been decided to set up specialized
working groups to move forward in a responsible and
sure-footed manner. Make no mistake, this process is
very active and shall produce beneficial results.

Our quest for peace and stability in Afghanistan
is dovetailing into a long-term cooperative partnership.
Today's Washington Post headlines of hundreds of
militants crossing over from Afghanistan to attack a
Pakistani border village, with some killed, will not
deter us from this process. My advice to my friend is
that all peace processes normally come to the point
where this sort of activity takes place through militants
who would like to prove the peace process to be
otherwise. We will not succumb to it.

Despite the utmost efforts of those militants
crossing over to create havoc and derail the process, let
me reaffirm that we will not let that happen. The
Islamabad declaration signed during the visit of
President Karzai to Pakistan last month documents the
contours of this partnership in the areas of trade and
the economy, transport connectivity, and project
cooperation in infrastructure, energy and minerals, as
well as in enhancing parliamentary exchange and
people-to-people contact. International assistance in
these areas, especially corporate-sector engagement,
can catalyse rich dividends for peace and prosperity in
the region.

The Secretary-General's report has noted that just
over 19,000 refugees returned to Afghanistan from
Pakistan in the past three months. This figure can
hardly be called encouraging. We need greater
attention on this issue. But of course, no matter what
happens, we are hosts to the largest refugee population
in the world.

I would like to conclude by reiterating our
support for the objectives and efforts of UNAMA,
especially those of Special Representative of the
Secretary-General De Mistura. We are confident that
the redoubtable people of Afghanistan will overcome
all pressing challenges and seize new opportunities for
a brighter and prosperous future. Pakistan shall remain
their committed and steadfast partner.

