The President (spoke in Spanish): I should like to
take advantage of the presence of the Deputy Secretary-
General, His Excellency Mr. Jan Eliasson, most likely
for the last time at a meeting of the Security Council
during his term of office, to say a few words on behalf
of the Security Council.

A lot has been said about Jan Eliasson, all positive.
It has been recalled that he always carries a copy of the
Charter of the United Nations, that Chapter VI is his
favourite, that he is undoubtedly a citizen of the world
and that he knows the field work and the Headquarters
of the Organization like few others.

The Council has benefited from his extensive
experience and has enjoyed his support, vision and
commitment over the past four years. He has been
an extraordinary professional - loyal, imaginative,
headstrong and tireless - and always open to listen to
world leaders as well as to ordinary citizens, thereby
giving the most human face to the United Nations.

During the nearly 40 years he has been associated
with the Organization, and despite having seen the
worst kind of horror in conflicts all around the world,
he has never lost his idealism and conviction that a
better future is within our reach. With his enthusiasm
and perseverance, he has pushed for and encouraged
us to bridge the gap between the world as it is and the
world as it should be.

For all those reasons, on behalf of the Council, I
wish to convey our deepest gratitude and appreciation
for the dedication and courage with which he has served
"we the peoples", and to extend to him our warmest
wishes for prosperity, health and success in the new
phase that he is about to start.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

Preventing catastrophe: A global agenda for
stopping the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction by non-State actors

Letter dated 1 December 2016 from
the Permanent Representative of Spain
to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General (S/2016/1013)

The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Afghanistan,
Albania, Andorra, Algeria, Argentina, Armenia,
Australia, Austria,Bangladesh, Belarus, Belgium,
Bolivia, Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada, Chile, Colombia,
Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea, Denmark,
Ecuador, Estonia, Ethiopia, Finland, Georgia,
Germany, Guatemala, Haiti, Hungary, India, Indonesia,
Ireland, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Israel, Italy,
Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Latvia,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar,
Malta, Montenegro, Mexico, Morocco, Nepal, the
Netherlands, Norway, Pakistan, Palau, Panama, Peru,
the Philippines, Poland, Portugalthe Republic of Korea,
the Republic of Moldova, Romania, San Marino, Serbia,
Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa, Sweden, the Thailand,
The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Tunisia,
Turkey, the United Arab Emirates to participate in
this meeting.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Kim Won-soo,
High Representative for Disarmament Affairs; Mr. Brian
Finlay, President and Chief Executive Officer of the
Stimson Center; Mr. T. James Min, Vice-President,
International Trade Law and Head, Global Trade Law
Practice Group of DHL Global Business Services;
Mr. Ahmet Uziimcii, Director General, Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons; Mr. Raja Raja
Adnan, Director of the Division of Nuclear Security,
International Atomic Energy Agency; Ms. Alison
August Treppel, Acting Executive Secretary for the
Inter-American Committee against Terrorism of the
Organization of American States; Mr. Juan Manuel
Vega Serrano, President, Financial Action Task Force;
Mr. Ham Sang-wook, Chair, Missile Technology Control
Regime; Mr. Song Young-wan, Chair, Nuclear Suppliers
Group; Mr. Emmanuel Roux, Special Representative,
International Criminal Police Organization; Mr. Paul
Bekkers, Director of the Secretary-General's Office,
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe;
and Ms. Julia Blocher, Research Officer, New York
Office, United Nations University.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite His Excellency
Mr. Tete Antenio, Permanent Observer of the African
Union to the United Nations, to participate in
this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite His Excellency
Mr. Jacek Bylica, High Representative Special Envoy
for Non-proliferation and Disarmament, European
Union, to participate in this meeting.

I propose that the Council invite the Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of the Holy See to
the United Nations to participate in this meeting, in
accordance with the provisional rules of procedure and
the previous practice in this regard.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda.

I wish to warmly welcome the Deputy Secretary-
General, Ministers and other representatives present
in the Security Council Chamber. Their presence
today underscores the importance of the subject matter
under discussion.

Members of the Council have before them document
S/2016/1052, which contains the text of a draft
resolution submitted by Andorra, Angola, Argentina,
Armenia, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bolivia,
Bulgaria, Canada, Chile, China, Colombia, Costa
Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Egypt,
Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece,
Guatemala, Haiti, Hungary, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan,
Jordan, Kazakhstan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malaysia, Malta, Mexico, Montenegro,
Morocco, the Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway,
Palau, Panama, Peru, Poland, Portugal, the Republic
of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, the Russian
Federation, San Marino, Senegal, Serbia, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, the former Yugoslav Republic
of Macedonia, Tunisia, Turkey, Ukraine, the United
Arab Emirates, the United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, the United States of America,
Uruguay, the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela and
Viet Nam.

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2016/lOl3, which contains the text of
a letter dated 1 December 2016 from the Permanent
Representative of Spain to the United Nations addressed
to the Secretary-General, transmitting a concept note
on the item under consideration.

The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
draft resolution before it. I shall put the draft resolution
to the vote now.

A vote was taken by Show ofhands.
In favour:
Angola, China, Egypt, France, Japan, Malaysia,
New Zealand, Russian Federation, Senegal, Spain,
Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America,
Uruguay and Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)


The President (spoke in Spanish): The draft
resolution received 15 votes in favour. The draft

resolution has been adopted unanimously as resolution
2325 (2016).

I now give the floor to the Deputy Secretary-General.


