Mr. Lucas (Angola): The Security Council is
again holding an emergency session, for the second
time in less than a month, to consider the critical
situation in Palestine.
Again, we meet in circumstances of pain and
sorrow, with blind terror and violence taking the upper
hand and the attempts to move forward with a
meaningful peace process between Israelis and
Palestinians once again jeopardized by unilateral
actions that might definitively compromise the
prospects of peace between the two peoples.

My delegation deeply regrets the prevailing
situation, in which any signal of hope is immediately
destroyed by terror, by policies of collective
punishment and by revenge, in a never-ending cycle of
death and terror.

The Israelis and Palestinians are our common
friends and we would like to see them enjoying the
benefits of peace and conviviality. Unfortunately, all
the efforts that have been deployed for years, both
bilaterally and multilaterally, have remained in a
deadlock. This is cause for great frustration and despair
for the entire international community.

My delegation has stated time and time again its
total opposition to the extrajudicial killings of
Palestinians. We expressed our deep regret at the recent
events in Gaza City. The killings of Sheik Hamad
Yassin and Abdel Aziz Al-Rantisi will most likely add
to the frustration among the Palestinians and encourage
extremist elements to acts of terror.

It is absolutely necessary to break the cycle of
violence. In our view, an investment in peace by both
Palestinians and Israelis would surely be more
rewarding than the actions we witness. That means
abiding strictly by international law, admitting just
demands of the international community that the
parties work together by implementing the road map
for a comprehensive peace in the Middle East.

We reiterate our conviction that terrorism and
occupation are the factors that feed conflict. They close
every window of opportunity for peace and should be
addressed by the parties with realism and
determination. Once again we call on the Palestinians
and Israelis to put an end to terror and to occupation.
We also call on them to avoid any step that could
escalate terrorism and violence and to abide by their
obligations under international law.

The international community, for its part, must
persevere in its efforts to bring the parties to the
negotiating table. My delegation renews the appeal to
the parties - Israelis and Palestinians - to take risks
for peace and to take the first steps envisaged by the
road map, not unilateral action but mutually agreed
steps, and by doing so create the necessary mutual
confidence that is conducive to meaningful peace
negotiations.

