The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received a letter from the representative of
Sierra Leone, in which he requests to be invited to
participate in the discussion of the item on the Council's
agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, I propose,
with the consent of the Council, to invite that representative
to participate in the discussion, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and
rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Dabor (Sierra Leone) took a seat at the Council table.

The President: The Security Council will now begin
its consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached in its
prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before themthe sixth
report of the Secretary General on the United Nations
Observer Mission in Sierra Leone, document S/ 1999/645.

Members of the Council also have beforet h e m
document S/ 1999/664, which contains the text of a draft
resolution prepared in the course of the Council's prior
consultations.

I should like to draw the attention of members to the
following documents: S/l999/585 and S/1999/656, letters
dated 19 May and 7 June 1999, respectively, from the
Permanent Representative of Togo addressed to the
President of the Security Council; and S/1999/599, letter
dated 24 May 1999 from the Permanent Representative of
Burkina Faso addressed to the President of the Security
Council.

It is my understanding that the Council is ready to
proceed to the vote on the draft resolution (S/l999/664)
before it. Unless I hear any objection, I shall put the
draft resolution to the vote now.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:

Argentina, Bahrain, Brazil, Canada, China, France,
Gabon, Gambia, Malaysia, Namibia, Netherlands,
Russian Federation, Slovenia, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of
America


The President: There were 15 votes in favour. The
draft resolution has been adopted unanimously as

resolution 1245 (1999).

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The Security Council will remain seized of the
matter.

The meeting rose at 12.15 pm.

