Mr. Duale (Somalia): Thank you, Sir, for giving
me this opportunity to address the Security Council on
the situation in Somalia and specifically with regard to
resolution 1907 (2009), adopted today by the Council.
I wish also to state my support for and agreement with
the statement made by my colleague from Djibouti. I
also wish to thank the Ambassador of Uganda for the
very consistent way in which he has made efforts to
ensure that the resolution was adopted by the Security
Council. I also thank you, Sir, for your presidency.

We fully support the resolution just adopted
because we sincerely believe that Eritrea has been a
major negative factor in the prolongation of the
conflict in Somalia. The Transitional Federal
Government has repeatedly shown its willingness to
enter into dialogue with the Government of Eritrea
with a view to resolving all differences between all
parties concerned and to persuading Eritrea, a member
country of the African Union, to desist from meddling
in Somalia's affairs, but so far to no avail. We therefore
believe that the resolution just adopted by the Council
is a very positive step towards resolving the situation
of insecurity in the Horn of Africa. We hope that
Eritrea will be persuaded accordingly.

On the Djibouti front, I agree with what my
colleague from Djibouti has stated; additionally,
Eritrea has demonstrated an unfriendly and
unneighbourly attitude towards Djibouti all along. As
in the past, Eritrea lacks any justification for its
desperate and expansionist moves against Djibouti. It
is not my intention to enumerate all the destructive and
hostile activities carried out by Eritrea against Somalia
during the past two decades, but I must mention a
number of those activities.
First, Eritrea has been giving refuge and safe
haven to known terrorists, rebels, spoilers and violators
of human rights, whose purpose all along has been to
destabilize Somalia. Those same groups have
committed crimes against humanity and crimes against
the Somali people.

Secondly, Eritrea has been providing, financing
and facilitating the flow of arms and resources to
extremists and terrorist elements in Somalia.

Thirdly, Eritrea has been providing as much
economic, political, moral and propaganda support as it
can to the armed insurgents and spoilers in Somalia.

Fourthly, Eritrea's hostile activities of the past
two decades include the blatant sabotaging of peace
efforts and reconciliation, as well as frustrating the
efforts of the previous Transitional National
Government and the current Transitional Federal
Government, towards the stabilization, rehabilitation
and reconstruction of Somalia.

Despite all the hostile and negative activities of
Eritrea against the Somali Government and people, the
Transitional Federal Government is ready at any time
to enter into serious dialogue with Eritrea to solve any
09-66454
outstanding matters and issues. Unfortunately, its past
behaviour does not give us confidence that Eritrea will
change its hostile attitude towards Somalia.

Under those circumstances, we seek the urgent
support of the Security Council, the United Nations
and the international community in confronting Eritrea
squarely, now rather than later, and in encouraging it to
join the ongoing efforts of the United Nations and the
international community in support of enhancing the
ongoing peace and stabilization process in Somalia.

