Ms. Phee (United States of America): First, my
delegation would like to join others in thanking Special
Representative Fall and Ambassador Mulamula for
their comprehensive briefings today. We also wish to
congratulate them both: Mr. Fall for his recent
leadership of the Conference, and Ambassador
Mulamula on her new appointment. We wish her well
on that new endeavour.

The United States also wishes to congratulate the
countries of the Great Lakes region for convening the
Second Summit of the International Conference on the
Great Lakes Region. The timing of this Conference is
opportune, following the historic elections and
peaceful transition in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and coming at a juncture when we see positive
signs of momentum towards greater stability in much
of Central Africa. The Conference underscores a sense
of hope and cautious optimism for the future of the
region.

The United States also welcomes the Pact on
Security, Stability and Development signed by core
countries at the International Conference. This is a
positive and encouraging step. We would note the
obvious, however. Whether the lofty goals contained in
the Pact make a real difference will be measured more
by the follow-on action of the parties than by the words
in the document. We were therefore heartened by the
statements of the leaders that they intend to take their
commitment seriously. We urge them to do so.

We believe the principles in the Pact are
important. They lay a solid foundation for peace and
security in the Great Lakes region. They also provide a
useful framework to guide relations among the
countries of the region as they work together to reach
the goals of democracy and good governance and to
realize the development possibilities of the region.
The United States remains convinced that peace,
stability and development can prevail in this region of

Africa, which, regrettably, has suffered from horrific
conflict and violence for far too long. To that end, we
will continue to encourage such regional efforts and
leadership, including the Tripartite-Plus process, which
we are facilitating.

