The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of Somalia, in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
consideration of the item, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Daale
(Somalia) took a seat at the Council table.

The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2007/96, which contains the text of a draft
resolution submitted by Congo, Ghana, Panama,
Slovakia, South Africa, the United Kingdom and the
United States.

I would like to draw the attention of the members
of the Council to document S/2007/34, which contains
the text of a letter dated 22 January 2007 from the
Charge d'affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of the
Congo to the United Nations transmitting a copy of the
communique of the African Union Peace and Security
Council adopted on 19 January 2007.

It is my understanding that the Council is ready
to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution
(S/2007/96) before it. Unless I hear any objection, I
shall put the draft resolution to the vote now.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
A vote was taken by show of hands.

In favour:
Belgium, China, Congo, France, Ghana,
Indonesia, Italy, Panama, Peru, Qatar, Russian
Federation, Slovakia, South Africa, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America


The President: There were 15 votes in favour.
The draft resolution has been adopted unanimously as
resolution 1744 (2007).

I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements following the
voting.


