Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): The Russian Federation supported resolution
1770 (2007), adopted today, on the extension of the
United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI)
and the expansion of the scope of its activities. Over
the past few years, Russia has been in favour of the
maximum possible involvement of the United Nations
in the process of the settlement of the Iraq issue,
actively using its independent mediating potential to
overcome the profound military and political crisis in
Iraq and advance the political process there. The draft
resolution adopted today reflects to a great extent our
concept of the role of the United Nations in Iraqi
affairs.

We expect the United Nations Mission to deal
more broadly now with the political and socio-
economic problems of Iraq and to help the Iraqi
political factions to complete the tasks of achieving
national reconciliation and agreement, preserving the
sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity of the State.
We hope that UNAMI, as it is assigned new
prerogatives, will become a tangible element in
regional diplomacy, creating an atmosphere favouring
the normalization of the situation in Iraq.

Of course, increasing the potential of the United
Nations in Iraq must be ensured through appropriate
security measures. UNAMI must be assisted in this by
the Multinational Force and the Iraqi, the army and
police.

UNAMI will be able to successfully complete the
task before it only if the Iraqi Government is in a
position to work on establishing peace in the country
and returning it to the road to stability and
development.

Greater participation by the international
community is also necessary for the resolution of the
Iraqi crisis. Initial steps in this direction were taken in
the Sharm el-Sheikh conference and the work just
started in the regional working group. We feel that the
well-known Russian proposal on carrying out a broad-
scale and comprehensive international meeting on Iraqi
issues fully meets the requirements of an accelerated
settlement to the Iraqi problem.

