Mr. Cabral (Guinea-Bissau) (interpretation from French): For many years, Afghanistan has continuously
and disturbingly been in the foreground of the
international stage. As control of Afghanistan, we are
told, is one of the keys to some hegemonic stratagems,
both old and new, this country has always been coveted.
However, and despite the vicissitudes of time and a
gamut of trials, Afghanistan tried to re-establish its place
in the world after having achieved independence - after
its liberation, I should say - in 1919.

After the adoption in 1964 of a constitution that
recognized the separation of political, legislative and
judicial powers, there was relative stability, which opened

 

the way to the full enjoyment by Afghan citizens of both
genders of their civic, political and economic rights.
Unfortunately, that period was not to last, being abruptly
interrupted by a military coup d 'e'tat in 1973. Afghanistan
thus once again became a linchpin in the war of influence
among the countries of the region and hence a pawn of
global politics. The satellitization of the country in 1979
further exacerbated East-West rivalries and fanned tension
caused by the cold war. The evolution of the events which
have continuously overwhelmed the Afghan people is too
well known for us to dwell further on it, except to express
the concern of Guinea-Bissau at a worsening situation.

The successive reports of the Secretary-General on
Afghanistan suffice to demonstrate that, despite United
Nations efforts, the crisis remains severe. The Security
Council and the General Assembly, as well as the Non-
Aligned Movement and the Organization of the Islamic
Conference, have all tried by means of many resolutions to
chart the course to be followed in the search for a peaceful
solution to the conflict in Afghanistan. It has not yet been
possible to achieve the negotiated solution for which the
international community has advocated for many years. War
continues because to date the factions have been unable to
reach an understanding amongst themselves, which,
unfortunately, has led to continued fighting and to the
complete ruin of the country.

Today the Security Council is meeting at a crucial
moment in the history of Afghanistan. The reports from this
country are very troubling. Violence continues to claim
many victims among the civilian population. In
Afghanistan, a people is in the throes of a war in which
adversaries do not hesitate to use vile methods to achieve
their purposes.

We are duty-bound to act and to unite our efforts,
because the persistence of this conflict is also affecting
neighbouring countries, where hundreds of thousands of
unfortunate people have sought refuge, and it is imperilling
peace in this part of the world. This is why our delegation
considers that we must spare nothing that might lead to a
cessation of hostilities and to a ceasefire - of which the
demilitarization of Kabul would be a major element.

In this connection we are pleased to note the special
attention that the Secretary-General himself is giving to the
conflict. We support all of his initiatives to find a lasting
solution. We are gratified by the progress that has been
made by the United Nations Special Mission in
Afghanistan, whose staff deserves our admiration, thanks
and support, in the light of the many risks that these
people daily confront in carrying out their noble work.

To be useful, the discussion in the Security Council
on the situation in Afghanistan must provide a framework
for dialogue which takes into account the stakes involved
for each of the parties, as well as the opinions of all of
them. It should encourage the articulation of a collective
approach - the only means of achieving peace.

The international community, and the countries in
the region in particular, must do their utmost to convince
the Afghan factions that it is necessary to stop fighting
and to commit themselves to negotiations without further
delay. The neighbouring countries of Afghanistan, by
exercising a stabilizing influence on the protagonists, can
and must play a decisive role in the restoration of peace.

There can be no acceptable military solution,
because for peace to be lasting, it must be based on
national reconciliation and on the right of all factions to
participate in forming a government which represents all
the components of the Afghan population in its full multi-
ethnic diversity.

The leaders of the Afghan factions must take their
inspiration from the universal principles of democracy and
promote the creation of new political, social and
economic structures which will respect ethnic and
demographic balance and the equality of citizens and
genders. These conditions are necessary to ensure the full
flowering of their people and the harmonious
development of their country.

The international community would find it difficult
to accept the imposition of discriminatory laws on Afghan
girls and women, refusing them, in particular, the right to
education and to equal pay for their work, in violation of
the most elementary rights universally recognized as
belonging to every human being. Nor could we accept
Afghanistan becoming a breeding- ground for international
terrorism or a centre for the illicit international drug trade.

Afghanistan, a country whose history and culture go
back five thousand years, cannot slip into the practices of
an earlier age, practices which run counter to the precepts
of Islam, in which tolerance and respect for others are
high priorities. This country - which provided the
chosen pass for the old Silk Road and whose fabulous
mountains have witnessed some of the greatest figures of
history: Darius I, Alexander the Great, Genghis Khan,
just to mention a few - cannot sink into obscurantism,

 

rejecting all ideas of progress or of belonging to a modern
and independent world.

Afghanistan deserves to resume its rightful place in the
concert of nations. My delegation is pleased that the
Secretary-General has called for the convening of a second
meeting, on 16 April, to bring together the countries
concerned about the Afghan crisis. We hope that the
participants in that meeting will be able to study all the
ways to promote intra-Afghan discussions in order to put an
end to the hostilities, as well as ways of implementing the
recommendations of the International Forum on Assistance
to Afghanistan held last January at Ashgabat.

In conclusion, the situation in Afghanistan remains of
concern to the international community as a whole. The
United Nations must continue to play its central and
irreplaceable role in the search for a peaceful solution to
the conflict, because we obviously cannot accept the
feasibility of a military option. The Security Council must
take steps to that end by ensuring that all the parties
involved will fully participate in negotiations on national
reconciliation and the formation of a broadly representative
Government. In this connection, the countries of the region
should be encouraged to do their utmost to halt the flow of
weapons to Afghanistan and be called upon to cooperate
with the United Nations Special Mission and to refrain
from any interference that might impede rapprochement
between the factions. The Afghan leaders, for their part,
must commit themselves before the international
community to halting drug trafficking and to ensuring that
their country does not spawn international terrorism. It is
our duty to guarantee the security of the personnel of
humanitarian organizations and to make sure that no
barriers prevent those men and women from delivering the
necessary humanitarian assistance to the needy populations.
Girls and women in Afghanistan must not be subjected to
discriminatory laws, which, as we have already stated,
violate their fundamental rights and contribute to delaying
economic and social progress in the country.

Guinea-Bissau hopes that the Security Council will
take into account the opinions expressed by all delegations
in the debate on the question of Afghanistan and will give
clear expression to an agreed position that will promote the
building of peace in that country, whose population has
suffered all too much and deserves our continued attention
and all the humanitarian assistance it requires.

