Mr. Thoms (Germany): This year we commemorate
the centennary of the beginning of the First World War,
and 75 years ago, Germany plunged humanity into the
catastrophe that was the Second World War. The toll
that both wars took - the suffering and the millions of
dead - still leaves us speechless today. It strengthens
our resolve to draw the right lessons from past conflicts
instead of repeating the terrible mistakes of the past.

The collapse of the shaky balance of power
100 years ago in Europe was also a huge failure of
diplomacy. That was the case not only for the days of
the July crisis; already in the years before, diplomats
and politicians alike had failed to construct institutions
and instruments for building trust and coming to a
peaceful trade-off of interests among neighbours. At
the time, foreign policy dwelled on outdated paradigms
that could not keep up with the highly interlinked and
rapidly changing world that was the young twentieth
century. When the disaster took its course, diplomacy
lacked the means as much as the will to prevent the
catastrophe. One hundred years later, that should be
a great spur for us to draw lessons for the future by
understanding the causes of past wars.

The year 2014 also marks the fall of the Iron Curtain
25 years ago. In Germany, we take it as a reminder that
reconciliation and sustainable peace can indeed be
achieved based on diplomatic and political efforts and
mutual understanding.

From a European point of view, two key lessons
have been drawn from the calamities of the first half
of the twentieth century. The first was to strive with
our partners around the world for an international
order that is based on common rules and shared values.
The United Nations is in itself a lesson learned from
the atrocities of two world wars. As the second lesson,
Europeans decided to replace the fragile equilibrium
of their continent's powers with communities based on
a new legal order. The project of the European Union
was built on an ever-closer network of neighbouring
countries interlinking politics, economies and
societies. Today, war has become unthinkable within
the European Union.

Overcoming the Franco-German antagonism was
an important cornerstone of that achievement. It is a
prime example of how a shared understanding of history
and a common vision of the future can contribute to
lasting peace and a prospering friendship. That concept
is at the core of the Elysee Treaty signed in 1963 by
both countries. It does not leave peace in the hands
of politicians but makes it a cause for civil societies.
Particular emphasis is placed on engaging youthjointly
in the critical analysis of historic developments. Today,
many students in France and Germany use the same
Franco-German textbook when learning about their
common history.

Open questions about the past can mean open
wounds in the present. From its own experience,
Germany cannot but underline the importance of
learning from history in general and sharing an
understanding about conflicts in particular. Working
jointly on a better concept of why and how certain
conflicts came about can serve as a powerful catalyst
and solid foundation for reconciliation between two
parties. It is an honourable cause for the United Nations
to engage in supporting such processes where it can.
The concept note (S/2014/30, annex) prepared by the
presidency of the Council contains some very pertinent
points for addressing this in practice.

However, the task may sound simpler than it is.
Conflicts, may they be wars between States or civil
wars, leave deep scars. Those springing from ethnic
or other cultural backgrounds run particularly deep.
The will to seek peace and true reconciliation can
come only from the former adversaries themselves.
Hence, there are limits to what can be achieved by
third parties. As valuable as assistance from outside
can be in those processes, those paramentres should
be kept in mind when designing them. Nevertheless,
the manifold commemorations that 2014 holds teach us
about learning from history and sharing those lessons
with our neighbours. That should be worth every effort.

