Mr. Van Bohemen (New Zealand): It was with
great disappointment that New Zealand abstained
today. This was the first time during our current term
on the Security Council that we have not supported the
adoption of a Council resolution.

It should not have been like this. It should have
been possible to maintain the tradition of consensus on
this important issue. We thank the United States for its
determined efforts to that end. But consensus implies
a meeting of minds and common commitment. Those
elements have not been a feature of the preparation of this
resolution. Rather, we have seen, again, the preparation
of a text in a Group of Friends whose composition does
not reflect the span of perspectives that exists on the
Western Sahara, neither among the protagonists on
this issue nor on the Council, and an unwillingness to
accept modest amendments on a text that deals with an
issue of importance to the whole Council, indeed to the
whole United Nations membership.

In New Zealand's view, today's resolution falls
short of what the Council should be doing to discharge
properly its responsibilities on the Western Sahara.
A resolution that truly reflected the gravity of the
current crisis over the United Nations Mission for
the Referendum in Western Sahara (MINURSO) and
the magnitude of the challenge inherent in the full
discharge of the MINURSO mandate should have done
the following things.

First, the resolution should have stated the reality
that the expulsion of the civilian component had
seriously compromised the Mission and its ability to
discharge its mandate. These facts have been repeatedly
stated by the Secretariat in its briefings to the Council
over the past month.

Secondly, the resolution should have called for
the immediate restoration of the full functionality of
the Mission and provided for the Council's continued
engagement to ensure that a return to full functionality
is achieved in the near future.

Thirdly, on the core political direction of the
mandate, the Council should have taken up the sensible
and appropriate advice of the Secretary-General,
reiterated in this week's consultations by the Personal
Envoy of the Secretary-General, Christopher Ross,
and Under-Secretary-General Herve' Ladsous, that
the time had come to engage in serious negotiations
without preconditions and in good faith to reach a
mutually acceptable political solution that would
provide for the self-determination of the people
of Western Sahara. And that mutually acceptable
solution should include the resolution of the dispute
over the status of Western Sahara, including through
agreement on the nature and form of the exercise of
self-determination. As Mr. Ladsous told the Council
quite categorically on Wednesday (see S/PV.7679), we
can no longer procrastinate in addressing these deep
underlying issues.

MINURSO fulfils an essential function, and its
inability to fulfil its mandate risks fuelling further
instability in an already troubled region. The Council
must provide the full weight of its support to the
Mission. Notwithstanding our abstention, New Zealand
reiterates its full support for MINURSO, its mandate,
the Secretary-General, his Personal Envoy and
Special Representative.

Finally, in our view, every member of the Security
Council must reflect on the broader implications of
the current episode over MINURSO's deployment
for the Council's stewardship of its peacekeeping
operations globally.

