Mr. Zerihoun: As Council members know, today's
March of Return near the Gaza fence has, unfortunately,
resulted in violence. Based on the information at our
disposal, around 30,000 people participated in and
around a march at various locations in Gaza. Soon after
the demonstration started, the situation deteriorated
in several locations. Late afternoon, local time, the
Palestinian Health Ministry in Gaza confirmed that
at least 15 Palestinians had been killed and more
than 1,000 had been injured, including by tear gas
suffocation. Several of the casualties were reportedly
the result oflive ammunition used by the Israeli security
forces during the march, but also following armed
clashes between Palestinian and Israeli security forces,
including the shelling of a Hamas observation point.

Reports indicate that most of the demonstrators
stayed well away from the border fence and did not
engage in violence. However, there are also reports
that some protesters engaged in stone throwing
and violent behaviour - some reportedly carrying
weapons. According to Israeli security forces reports,
militants tried to get through the fence in an attempt
to plant explosives. Palestinians reportedly also sent a
nine-year-old girl across the fence, but Israeli troops
were able to send her safely back. Hamas leaders
reportedly were also present at some of the gatherings.
Prior to the march, Israel had increased its forces
around the border, deploying snipers, special units
and drones, and sent out warnings that it would act to
prevent any breach of the border fence or violation of
Israel's sovereignty.

Violence also broke out in the West Bank, with an
estimated 900 Palestinians demonstrating, mostly in
central West Bank cities, such as Ramallah and Hebron.
According to the Palestine Red Crescent Society, 27
Palestinians were wounded during clashes near Nablus.

In his Security Council briefing earlier this week
(see S/PV.8214), Special Coordinator Mladenov noted
the developing Palestinian plans for today's march,
and called on all to exercise restraint and to take the
necessary steps to avoid violent escalation. In statements
to the media, he reiterated those calls and emphasized
the need to ensure that civilians, particularly children,
should not be put in harm's way. The Office of the
Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process
and Personal Representative of the Secretary-General
to the Palestine Liberation Organization and the
Palestinian Authority (UNSCO) has also engaged with
the Israel Defense Forces and Palestinian factions,
particularly in Gaza, to reinforce the same messages.

In order to ensure the safety and security of United
Nations personnel, the Department of Safety and
Security issued repeated security advisories to all staff.
Throughout the day, UNSCO has been in contact with
both Palestinian and Israeli security forces and will
continue to do so as more demonstrations are expected
throughout the next six weeks. There is fear that the
situation might deteriorate in the coming days. We will
continue to underline that it is imperative that civilians,
in particular children, not be targeted and that all actors
refrain from putting children at risk at any time. Israel
must uphold its responsibilities under international
human rights and humanitarian law. Lethal force
should be used only as a last resort, with any resulting
fatalities properly investigated by the authorities. We
therefore also continue to urge Israeli security forces to
exercise maximum restraint to avoid casualties.

The developments in Gaza today are another
painful reminder of the consequences of a missing
peace between Israel and Palestine and the need to step
up our efforts in support of a peaceful resolution of
the conflict. As the Secretary-General and the Special
Coordinator have repeatedly reminded the Security
Council, the United Nations strongly urges Palestinians,
Israelis and the international community to take
concrete measures to reverse the current course of the
conflict and advance the goal of a just and sustainable
peace based on the two-State solution.

