Mr. Ladsous (France) (interpretation from French):
I should like first to emphasize that the military action of
the United Nations and the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization (NATO) in Bosnia and Herzegovina is the
outcome of decisions taken at the London Conference on
21 July last year as part of a plan to protect the safe
areas. These operations were triggered by the particular
heinous shelling of the central market of Sarajevo, Whose
perpetrators have been clearly identified and which has
been vigorously condemned by the entire international
community.

 

I hardly need to recall that the NATO operations are
based upon the United Nations/NATO "dual key"
mechanism, whose legitimacy is beyond challenge, and in
strict respect for the prerogatives of our Council and, more
generally, the responsibilities of the United Nations.

This being so, this meeting of our Council - and this
is the most important point - is taking place at an
especially crucial moment for reviving the peace process in
the former Yugoslavia. The meeting of the three Foreign
Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia and the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, which took place in
Geneva today under the auspices of the Contact Group, has
made it possible to produce an agreement on basic
principles acceptable to the three countries. That agreement
constitutes a decisive step forward.

This initial result, which should lead as soon as
possible to the opening up of peace negotiations, is based
upon the proposals of the Contact Group. It was achieved
thanks to the diplomatic efforts of all concerned and
particularly the initiatives of the United States, as well as
France and its partners in the European Union. Nor should
we forget the decisive support of the countries of the
Organization of the Islamic Conference, with which a
lasting and permanent partnership for peace has been
established.

I should like to recall that France had long advocated
direct contacts between the three countries, advanced
specific proposals to that end and reaffirmed repeatedly its
desire that a summit meeting should take place. In short,
we hope that in this way a dynamic for peace will emerge.

This progress towards a settlement of the conflict in
the former Yugoslavia is taking place at a time when the
military situation on the ground is becoming clearer,
revealing that the actions under way are working in the
service of a comprehensive diplomatic solution.

Military firmness is an essential condition for the
success of diplomatic action. We must continue to be
extremely vigilant. It is essential in this respect that the
siege of Sarajevo be lifted, and that heavy weapons be
withdrawn from the exclusion zone around that city. All
attacks against the safe areas must cease.

In any case, our Council can note with satisfaction
today that an important step along the road to peace has
been taken, and it must continue to demonstrate the same
determination if we intend to progress towards a
comprehensive negotiated settlement. We therefore
solemnly appeal to the three parties to approach the next
steps in the settlement process in an open-minded spirit,
a spirit of compromise. France, for its part, is prepared to
give its full support to peace and to ensure that the
cohesion of the international community, an essential
factor in such a settlement, will continue to grow
stronger.

