Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
want to express our thanks for the convening of this
meeting and the important briefings given by Mr. Martin
Griffiths, Mr. Mark Lowcock and Mr. David Beasley,
who from different perspectives have described a bleak
scenario that requires urgent support on the part of the
international community and concerted action on the
part of the Council.

Peru notes with deep concern the worsening
violence and suffering in various parts of Yemen,
which have resulted in new fatalities among the civilian
population, most of them women and children. We
strongly condemn the attacks by the Houthis, which
have intensified in recent weeks and have included
the use of drones and missiles in populated areas of
Saudi Arabia. We hope that those reprehensible acts,
which may qualify as war crimes, will be subject to
exhaustive investigations leading to the identification
and punishment of those responsible. However, any
response must comply with international law. We must
reiterate that there can be no military solution, and that
any indiscriminate action would risk aggravating an
already catastrophic humanitarian situation and work
to the advantage of terrorist groups, especially when
violations of international humanitarian law and human
rights are being committed throughout the conflict.

We are particularly concerned about the fact that
the upsurge in violence coincides with the positive
initial progress that has been made in the process of
redeploying the forces in the ports of Al-Hudaydah,
Saleef and Ras Isa and is a threat to the possibility
of reaching a political solution. In that context, Peru
reaffirms its gratitude and support for the efforts
that Mr. Griffiths is making with all parties to the
conflict in Yemen to bring them closer to an inclusive
political solution. We also welcome the fact that his
work has received the firm and unanimous support
of the international community and the members
of the Council in particular. We must stress that the
agreements reached in Sweden constituted a turning
point in the bloody and prolonged conflict in Yemen,
and that no circumstance can serve as ajustification to
abandon the commitments agreed there. In that regard,
we urge the parties to reaffirm their commitment to
the political solution promoted by the United Nations
and to tackle the difficulties that will arise throughout
that complex process in prudence and good faith,
avoiding unilateral actions that further undermine
trust. The renewed commitment demanded of them
must be translated into new and tangible progress in the
implementation of the Stockholm Agreement, both in
relation to the redeployment of forces from the crucial
port of Al-Hudaydah and to the exchange of prisoners
and the commitment to de-escalation in Taiz.

We also want to highlight the professionalism and
sense of duty of the staff of the United Nations Mission
to Support the Hudaydah Agreement (UNMHA), and
to underline the importance of ensuring that the Houthi
authorities provide the necessary facilities for their
deployment, which include the timely issuance of visas
for Mission personnel and guarantees for their freedom
of movement and safety. In that regard, Peru supports

the renewal of the mandate of UNMHA, whose presence
and effective stabilizing role are much appreciated.

All those efforts at the political level are even
more imperative when the humanitarian crisis seems
to be worsening on the ground, as Mr. Lowcock and
Mr. Beasley reminded us. That is reflected in the
imminence of widespread famine that could affect 80 per
cent of the Yemeni population, as well as the more than
360,000 new cases of cholera reported so far this year,
which indicate a major spread of that scourge. We must
therefore be consistent in our responsibility to protect
the most vulnerable people. That means eliminating all
barriers to assistance, ensuring that aid is not diverted
or misused, guaranteeing humanitarian personnel a safe
space to do their work and establishing conditions for
the place, form and beneficiaries of that assistance. It
also demands that the international community step up
its contributions aimed at stabilizing and reactivating
the local economy, since factors such as inflation and
currency devaluation significantly increase the risk
of famine.

My delegation will continue to work and speak out
to end the suffering of civilians and support all efforts
to promote the easing of tensions required to achieve
peace and reconciliation in Yemen.

