Mr. Kafando (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French): I
should like to thank the delegation of the United
Kingdom for its tireless efforts in the context of the
negotiations on the resolution just adopted, which
renews the mandate of the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID). I
must tell Ambassador Sawers and the delegation of the
United Kingdom that, on this occasion, we truly
appreciated British patience.

Burkina Faso supported the resolution, convinced
that UNAMID is the essential intermediary in the
efforts to achieve peace and stability in Darfur. It was

with that in mind that we decided to deploy swiftly to
Darfur a battalion of nearly 800 troops to make our
contribution to the paciflcation of the Sudan. We
express our satisfaction that the Council managed to
retain its unity regarding the extension of UNAMID's
mandate. We appeal to the troop contributors, the
donors and the entire international community to lend
all the necessary support to the Secretary-General so
that he can attain the objective of deploying 80 per cent
of UNAMID by 31 December 2008.

Burkina Faso voted in favour of the resolution
notwithstanding the fact that not all of our concerns
were taken into account, in particular those expressed
by the African Union in the communique issued by the
Peace and Security Council on 21 July 2008. As my
delegation stressed during our last round of
consultations, the United Nations has invested
significant resources and made considerable efforts in
the quest for a political solution to the Darfur crisis.

When we consider, in addition to UNAMID's
expected deployment, the current involvement of the
Sudanese authorities and the fact that the new Joint
African Union-United Nations Chief Mediator is soon
to take office, it seems clear to us that the international
community has never been closer to a political
resolution of the crisis. It is therefore desirable that the
process be given every chance of success if we are to
put an end to one of Africa's deadliest conflicts. That is
why it is absolutely crucial that the Security Council
return to the issue at a later date, in accordance with
the ninth preambular paragraph of resolution 1828
(2008).

