Mrs. Zappia (Italy): I would like to thank
the Indonesian presidency for organizing this
annual open debate and all the briefers for their
important presentations.

Italy aligns itself with the statement to be delivered
shortly by the observer of the European Union and
with that delivered by the representative of Switzerland
on behalf of the Group of Friends on the Protection
of Civilians.

As we celebrate the seventieth anniversary of
the adoption of the four Geneva Conventions, it is
essential to reaffirm the importance of international
humanitarian law and to strengthen our efforts to
guarantee its respect, implementation and promotion.
The role ofnon-State actors in armed conflicts, the new
tactics of warfare, the absence of clear battlefields and
the increasing number of parties to conflicts are posing
new threats to international humanitarian law, the
principle of humanity and the dignity of every human
being in a situation of conflict, especially the most
vulnerable. We must reaffirm in the most urgent terms
the need to ensure the protection of civilians under all
circumstances and in full compliance with international
humanitarian, human rights and refugee law.

Italy is firmly committed to protecting and
promoting international humanitarian law and to
implementing the principle of accountability for
violations of international humanitarian law and human
rights law in situations of armed conflict. My country
attaches particular importance to the protection of the
most vulnerable categories among civilians.

With regard to children, we strongly condemn all
attacks against schools, as well as any military use
of educational facilities, in accordance with the Safe
Schools Declaration and the Guidelines for Protecting
Schools and Universities from Military Use during
Armed Conflict, which we hope will be subscribed to
by a growing number of Member States.

As it relates to persons with disabilities, we call for
the full implementation of the Charter on Inclusion of
Persons with Disabilities in Humanitarian Action.

With regard to women, as we stated during the
important recent Council debate on sexual violence
in conflict (see S/PV.8514), we strongly condemn the
fact that sexual and gender-based violence continues to
be widely employed as a tactic of war, and we support
a gender-oriented approach to emergency situations
and to the protection of civilians, recalling our strong
commitment to the Call to Action on Protection from
Gender-Based Violence in Emergencies, all the relevant
United Nations acquis on this subject, as well as the
recommendations contained in the Secretary-General's
most recent report on conflict-related sexual Violence
(S/2019/280).

United Nations peace operations are still a very
powerful instrument at the disposal of the international
community in the pursuit of sustainable peace and the
fulfilment of its responsibility to protect civilians.
Therefore, peacekeepers should be trained and
equipped to fully implement their protection of civilians
mandate. We should enhance our efforts and fulfil the
commitments we have undertaken in the framework of
the Action for Peacekeeping initiative, which provide a
comprehensive and whole-of-mission approach to the
protection of civilians.

Furthermore, we welcome the recommendations
formulated by the Secretary-General in his report
(S/2019/373), and in particular his call to develop national
policy frameworks for the protection of civilians; step
up advocacy efforts to ensure their protection; promote
stronger accountability, which in our view must also
be achieved through targeted measures; establish or
renew fact-finding bodies and commissions of inquiry;
and promote the use of referrals to the International
Criminal Court.

In conclusion, as we look back and reflect on 20
years of the protection of civilians, we must, on the one
hand, build on what has been already achieved since
the adoption of resolution 1265 (1999) in terms of the
implementation of all resolutions and international
norms adopted thus far. On the other hand, we have to
look ahead in order to keep the protection of civilians
high on the agenda as a cornerstone of the Council's
activity and a fundamental duty and responsibility of
the international community as a whole.

