Mr. Dorda (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke in Arabic): Allow me first of all, Mr. President, to extend
my thanks to you and to your delegation for your efforts
in presiding over the Council this month, which has seen
so much activity.

We have twice seen the Council hold public
meetings this month and we hope that it will not go back
to holding meetings behind closed doors as if it were
hatching something unacceptable to the international
community. The Council works on behalf of the
international community, at least in theory.

We would also like to pay tribute to the
representative of Namibia, Ambassador Andjaba, for his
successful presidency over the Council last month.

We also thank the Secretary-General, who single-
handedly performed his duties on behalf of Africa in the
best possible way and within his competence and terms of
reference.

We have heard many things from those who have
taken the floor at this meeting. We will therefore be very
brief and not repeat what has already been said. The
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya will not go into the details of
what it has done for the continent of which it is a part.
My country feels that what it has done in Africa -
whether during the struggles for liberation from
occupation, in the area of reconstruction and development,
in stopping bloodshed in all areas of conflict or in
preparing Africa to enter the next century unified and on
the road to recovery - has been nothing more than its
duty. These actions are for us daily acts and are an
integral part of our shared responsibility.

At these sorts of meetings, some see an opportunity
to continue, to a boring degree, to remind Africa of what
they have offered to and spent on the continent. We
Africans are not very happy about being constantly
reminded that we owe those countries a debt of gratitude,
and we are not very happy that those countries have no
objective other than winning African votes. We would be
happier if an end could be put to recalling this debt of

 

gratitude, which so provokes our feelings and our
dignity - in particular as we have not forgotten the fact
that what has been taken from us is almost impossible to
compensate for.

It is unnerving for Africa that the United Nations and
the rich and powerful States do not give it anything other
than words. We see them take boisterous action when other
regions are concerned while they spend without limit. Even
worse, African countries are forced to pay for this spending
lest they be deprived of the right to vote. There are many
well-known examples, and the Secretary-General mentioned
some of them at yesterday's meeting.

The Secretary-General has done his duty according to
his terms of reference. He has sent emissaries and
representatives and has established ad hoc groups. He has
submitted reports and made suggestions and even demands.
But he does not have competence to issue resolutions.

The United Nations withdrew from Somalia and let it
drown in its conflicts and fade into oblivion. The Somali
people are being killed and displaced and their territory is
being divided. Angola also is abandoned, except for the
provision of weapons and ammunition to the intransigent
warring parties. Where is the United Nations when it comes
to the Great Lakes, the Horn of Africa and West Africa,
except, of course, for the representatives of the United
Nations and their reports? The Council has never adopted
any resolutions that had any practical effect on them.

Africa's wounds cannot be healed by good intentions,
statements, public debates or even closed sessions. Africa
looks to the United Nations to take concrete action on the
urgent and persistent issues. Let me briefly address these.

First, with respect to conflicts, it should endorse the
studies or decisions that the Organization of African Unity
(OAU) has arrived at through the efforts or mediation by
African countries. This should be done in accordance with
the formula adopted by the OAU without any fundamental
or substantive changes, as has happened in regional
conflicts where the Council adopted draft resolutions
submitted to it by the geographical groups where these
conflicts took place. The United Nations should also
finance what is needed for the implementation of these
resolutions.

Second, with respect to health, an urgent international
programme should be set up under the auspices of the
United Nations and the OAU, supervised by the World
Health Organization, to deal with AIDS treatment,
prevention and awareness. This disease threatens the
entire continent and must be swiftly dealt with through an
international plan of action. It should also adopt a similar
international programme against malaria and other
endemic diseases. In addition to the United Nations, all
countries and international organizations, governmental
and non-governmental, foundations, companies and
individuals should provide contributions, financial and in
kind, to this humanitarian work.

Third, turning to democracy, I would like to note
that the meaning of that word, according to its Greek
origin, is government by the people. Peoples have the
right to govern themselves. Indeed, it is their duty. This
means that no one has the right to impose on Africa their
own formula for democracy. To achieve democracy, we
must take into consideration many objective
considerations: political, economic, social, educational and
cultural. Some of these considerations are historical and
others are still relevant today. There is absolutely no
question about the importance and necessity of
democracy, but where disagreements arise is when we try
to impose a particular model on societies, no matter how
alien such a model is to them from the perspective of
history or practicality.

To ignore the level and degree of cultural and
historical development of societies is to ignore reality and
the objective considerations that have formed the
particularities of these societies. To try to make reality fit
a prefabricated formula is akin to forcing someone into a
suit made for someone else. If we were to recall what
happened in most industrial societies or so-called
democracies only a few decades ago, we would realize
that those generations that survived two of the largest
wars in this century had not known or even expected the
freedoms and rights that exist now.

Only recently generals ruled Portugal, Spain, Greece
and other countries in the European Continent. The
attempts to impose multiparty systems or parliamentary
democracies were among the reasons for the many
conflicts that have taken place in African countries. In
Africa, belonging to a tribe or a religious sect is much
stronger than belonging to a political party or having any
intellectual or political affiliation. Political parties in
Africa are made up of tribes, religious sects or geographic
groups - in Somalia, Rwanda and other countries where
there are internal or regional conflicts.

Therefore, if the United Nations wishes to help
Africa with respect to democracy, it can do the following:

 

first, refrain from imposing a particular model of
democracy and respect the choice of peoples, their history,
their particularities and their level of development; second,
affirm that any formula to be followed must guarantee
freedom, the rule of law, rights and rotation by free popular
choice at the local and central level; and, third, invite all
Member States to respect these fundamentals and deal with
African and other countries economically and politically
without the imposition of any formulas or conditions. In
addition, international financial institutions and others must
not impose any conditions that would prejudice the choice
of peoples in governing themselves.

Fourth, with respect to development, the following
steps should be taken. First, Africa's debts should be
cancelled. Second, an international technical training
programme should be set up. Third, the United Nations
Development Programme must prepare studies on
agricultural projects that would maximize food and
agricultural production. Africa would contribute to these
projects through its natural and human resources, and
international investment firms would provide financing and
technical know-how. Fourth, the United Nations
Development Programme must prepare studies on industrial
projects for manufacturing basic commodities -
agricultural and mineral - where Africa again would
contribute raw materials and human resources, and the
international investment firms would provide financing and
technical know-how in a fair manner applied to all. Fifth,
the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund (IMF)
must finance infrastructure projects in Africa, such as
railroads and highways, and also develop port systems and
electrical grids. Sixth, support should be given to the
present economic groupings and the economic institutions
that the special African summit in Sirte has decided to
establish.

Seventh, abandonment of the market economy system.
Most of the countries on the continent do not have an
economy or a market that conforms to current economic
concepts. We must also abandon the cliched policies of the
IMF, which were created and distributed to all countries
without taking into account differences. Eighth, the Security
Council must not be subjected to pressure from some
countries to adopt resolutions imposing sanctions, and it
must end such sanctions, as in the case of my country,
which has been unjustly treated.
Africa needs concrete actions to be taken to help it
heal its wounds and achieve economic, political and social
progress. We hope that this discussion will lead to that
outcome without any delay.

