The President (spoke in French): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as representative of
France.
I wish to welcome the Chairman-in-Office of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE), Mr. Kanat Saudabayev, Minister for Foreign
Affairs and Secretary of State of Kazakhstan, and to
thank him for his briefing. We fully share his views on
the relationship between the OSCE and the United
Nations, which we wish to strengthen.

France especially supports the dialogue on the
future of European security in the framework of the
Corfu process, mentioned by the Chairman-in-office of
the OSCE. French President Nicolas Sarkozy has
outlined our position on this on several occasions. We
hope to see the process lead to improved security in
Europe both for States and for private citizens, and
including every country concerned, from Vancouver to
Vladivostok.

The ideas contained in the draft treaty on
European security disseminated by Russia on
30 November make an interesting contribution to this
debate. The questions raised by the text correspond to
those currently being examined in the framework of the
Corfu process on respect for the right of every State to
choose its own way of ensuring its security. In this
regard, France fully supports the proposal just put
forward to convene an OSCE summit this year, the
objective of which should be to reaffirm the validity of
our commitments under the Helsinki Final Act and our
common will to prevent and solve conflicts through
cooperation, to guarantee respect for human rights, and
to combat common threats.

The concept of two blocs confronting each other
is far behind us, but the crises continue. The OSCE
must be present to resolve them and prevent others. We
must work at the highest possible level to formulate a
renewed security architecture in which other
organizations, particularly NATO and the European
Union, should also participate.

The OSCE is playing an essential role in
stabilizing the borders of Afghanistan, particularly in
training Afghan frontier guards. This is a good example
of successful cooperation between the OSCE and the
United Nations, and will, we hope, be a good example
of what the Kazakh chairmanship of the OSCE can
contribute to the region.

It is in its global view of security and cooperation
that the OSCE finds its full value. I salute the
commitment of the Kazakh chairmanship to View the
human dimension of the OSCE as one of the priorities
on its agenda. The Office for Democratic Institutions
and Human Rights must continue to play an essential
role, particularly in election monitoring. Its autonomy
there is its strength and must be preserved.
In conclusion, the OSCE must also work in close
coordination with other international and regional
organizations. The presence of the Kazakh
chairmanship in the Security Council is a testament to
the vitality of the cooperation between the United
Nations and the OSCE, which France welcomes.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I give the floor to Mr. Saudabayev so that he may
respond to the comments and questions raised.

