I would like to begin by expressing my profound gratitude to the presidency of the Dominican Republic for convening today's important open debate via video- teleconference. I would also like to thank the speakers for their comprehensive briefings on the implementation of resolutions 2250 (2015) and 2419 (2018), on youth and peace and security. Georgia aligns itself with the statement delivered by the observer of the European Union (EU), and would like to add the following remarks in its national capacity. First of all, let me avail myself of this opportunity to express solidarity with the Member States that are fighting the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. I offer my country's heartfelt condolences for their losses. Only through solidarity and multilateral cooperation can we turn the tide against COVID-19 in the world. As essential partners for peace, youth represent a cornerstone in preventing violence, resolving conflict and building and sustaining peace. Addressing the needs and supporting the agency and leadership of young people is a critical lever to leave no one behind. We should therefore prioritize all forms of meaningful youth participation in the promotion and maintenance of peace and security. With that in mind, we welcome the Secretary-General's first-ever report on youth, peace and security (S/2020/167), and convey our appreciation for the work the Council has done over the past five years to promote youth inclusion in its agenda. One of the report's key findings is that there is worldwide progress in acknowledging young people's indispensable role in peace and security. The report also provides ample evidence that young people around the world are striving for peace, justice, inclusion, gender equality and human rights. We must therefore not forget that persistent human rights violations and many structural barriers limiting young people's capacity to influence the decision-making process remain key challenges that must be addressed. In addition, more resources are needed to operationalize resolutions 2250 (2015) and 2419 (2018) at all levels and across diverse stakeholders, including youth-led and -focused civil society organizations. Young people in Georgia enjoy growing recognition of their potential in sustaining peace, preventing conflict and transforming processes. In that light, the Government continues to facilitate the engagement of youth in public-diplomacy and confidence-building projects. One of the latest peace initiatives, Step to A Better Future, aims to enhance young people's educational opportunities and ease access to numerous State services. As a result, every year an increasing number of young people from Georgia's occupied regions of Abkhazia and Tskhinvali/South Ossetia have an opportunity to enrol in Georgia's higher education institutions. Free health care services is yet another success story of the Georgian Government's peacebuilding and engagement policy. The residents of the Abkhazia and Tskhinvali regions, including young people, are able to access various State health care programmes. Georgia's commitment to promoting a culture of peace through youth empowerment has also been borne out by the Government's decision to include young people in identifying Georgia's priorities for the presidency of the Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe. Strengthening democracy through education, culture and youth engagement is a core value of Georgia's presidency from November 2019 to May 2020. Nevertheless, Georgia's capacity to ensure the full participation of young people in peace processes will remain limited as long as its regions of Abkhazia and Tskhinvali/South Ossetia continue to be under illegal Russian military occupation. Russia's protracted occupation of those two regions continuously deprives ethnic Georgians of their basic human rights, including the right to the freedoms of movement and to be educated in their native language. Furthermore, they often fall victim to ethnically motivated violence and other forms of ethnic discrimination. On several occasions, such actions have resulted in the dreadful and regrettable deaths of young Georgian citizens. To make matters worse, the provocative actions of the Russian Federation persist even amid the coronavirus pandemic and during religious holidays. In these extraordinary times for the whole world, when it is particularly important to care for this population living in conflict - a people who have long suffered from growing restrictions - the Russian Federation continues its illegal process of erecting so- called border signs along the occupation line of the Tskhinvali region, specifically in the vicinity of the village of Takhtisdziri, in Kareli municipality, in clear violation of international norms and principles and the EU-mediated ceasefire agreement of 12 August 2008. Against that bleak background, I would like to stress that Georgia remains committed to promoting the active engagement of youth in peace processes. Let me conclude by calling upon the Russian Federation to immediately cease its provocative and destructive actions and to implement its international obligations, including the EU-mediated ceasefire agreement of 12 August 2008.
