At the outset, we wish to commend the Permanent Mission of Germany to the United Nations for taking the initiative to convene this important and timely debate on pandemics and security. We also wish to thank Secretary-General Antonio Guterres, Mr. Peter Maurer, President of the International Committee of the Red Cross, Ms. Amira Elfadil Mohammed, African Union Commissioner for Social Affairs, and other briefers for their informative briefings. Pandemics are infectious diseases that can kill millions of people and cause trillions of dollars in economic damage in countries, regions and the world, and thus become a threat to international peace and security. Beyond the debilitating, sometimes fatal, consequences for those directly affected, pandemics also have a range of negative social, political and economic consequences. Only a few other events can pose such a great threat to human lives and cause such great damage to the global economy. Pandemics do not respect international borders, and therefore have the potential to simultaneously weaken the political, social and economic foundations of many societies. The novel coronavirus disease (COVID-19) has affected at least 10 million people, with over 500,000 reported fatalities, and has spared but a few countries. National responses have been strikingly uncoordinated, even at the level of regional and subregional bodies. The dominant approach among affected countries has been to lock down or restrict non-essential activities and impose sharp limitations on national and international travel. The disease and the response measures have had immediate effects on some of the world's wealthiest countries, which were among the first to be hit. The pandemic has revealed the inadequacies of the health-care systems in many countries to swiftly manage and contain the spread - as we have seen with shortages of hospital beds and specialized equipment for a crisis of this magnitude, including personal protective equipment for front-line responders. Unlike the proactive measures taken by the Security Council during the HIV/ AIDS and Ebola outbreaks in West Africa - measures prompted by the United States, largely, to generate more focused attention and serve as a call for action in situations where global responses had been insufficient and poorly coordinated, which subsequently led to the adoption of resolution 2177 (2014) - the COVID-19 pandemic, the worst crisis since the Second World War, which demands even more urgent attention, has not received the needed attention from the Security Council. That has vitiated the globally coordinated response and worsened the outbreak. As a result, the virus continues to spread through countries, exacerbating the humanitarian situations and overwhelming already failing health-care systems. The spread of the virus and the unanticipated and unprepared swift lockdown measures taken by States on a global level have hampered their social and economic development and exposed their weak governance, which failed to support and protect its population. It has also exposed the inadequacies of Governments in dealing with unexpected situations of such magnitude that they not only threaten lives but also food security. As the world battles to contain the pandemic, it has become glaringly evident that effective prevention and response to a pandemic require national health systems that are well-funded, equipped, accessible and well-staffed, with emergency response measures capable of tackling the current novel coronavirus and other related diseases of such proportions. We stress the need for a cessation of hostilities in times of pandemic, as emphasized in the Secretary-General's call for a global ceasefire. The ongoing conflicts have hampered access to timely deliveries of supplies and have hindered the implementation of control measures, thereby making access difficult for humanitarian relief agencies. The Secretary-General's call has been endorsed by 114 Governments, regional organizations and leaders. In addition, civil society groups and 16 armed groups have also supported the call. The effects of that support has not yet been fully felt. The COVID-19 pandemic has impacted peace operations, including restrictions on their movement and troop rotations. We commend the United Nations initiative to freeze rotations in countries where peacekeeping operations are fragile. That measure seeks to slow the spread of the virus to the troops and from the troops by limiting travel to countries in conflict. If unchecked, such movements of peacekeepers could potentially spread the virus to local populations, with huge fatalities. Given that health care in conflict situations is delivered by a wide range of national and international agencies, extensive collaboration between relevant health authorities and implementing partners should be encouraged. The World Health Organization has a major role to play in assisting its regional offices to effectively cooperate with Member States in their respective regions. At the regional and global level, the African Union and the United Nations may face a situation where peace operations have significantly less capacity. It is unlikely that the risk to civilians in those situations will be overcome in the short to medium term. The more likely scenario is that the effects of the coronavirus, coupled with other enduring factors, such as climate change and food insecurity, will likely exacerbate the instability and increase the associated risks. Nevertheless, most peace operations have demonstrated remarkable resilience in the way they have coped with and adapted to the crisis. Africa, where the bulk of the peace operations are deployed, appeared to have been spared from the initial brunt of the crisis, but may perhaps be bracing to address the virus spread in the medium term. Essentially, the innovations and practices that emerged in this process and which are specific to the virus may change over time in response to the potential severity of the risk that the virus still poses as countries continue their search for the right vaccine for the novel virus. Let me conclude by appealing for sustained vigilance by the international community towards our collective responsibility to protect civilians. If we act purposefully and in concert, we can better shield civilians from the ravages of armed conflict and its attendant security implications. The Security Council is expected to be the ultimate enforcer of preventive mechanisms to save the world from the scourge of war; its failure or success will determine the fate of humankind amid the myriad of threats to international peace and security arising not only from war and terrorism but also from deadly pandemics such as COVID-19, whose effect is especially profound, given that it is an unseen enemy that respects no individual, social stratum, race, religion, ideological tendency or military might, and which is capable of killing millions without a single nuclear or conventional weapon.
