Mr. Djangone-Bi (cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): Mr. President, my delegation is grateful to
you for organizing this interactive exchange on the
report of the Secretary-General on progress achieved in
West Africa in the implementation of the
recommendations of the Security Council's mission to
that area, of 5 December 2003, in document
S/2003/1l47. I would like to thank Mr. Kalomoh for
the excellent presentation of the report of the
Secretary-General.

With your permission, Sir, I would like to confine
my statement primarily to the situation in Cote
d'Ivoire. My delegation fully agrees with the statement
made by the Ambassador of Ghana, who is Chairman
of the Group of Permanent Representatives of the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS). Above and beyond a few informational
errors, which in the final analysis are minor ones, the
report of the Secretary-General can be considered, by
and large, to be in accordance with the real situation on
the ground, even though we should emphasize that
considerable progress has been accomplished since the
report appeared.

It should be pointed out that, in an address to the
nation, the President of the Republic reiterated his
commitment fully to implement the Linas-Marcoussis
Agreement and that the Ministers of the Force
Nouvelle have regained their seats in the Government
of National Reconciliation. The disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR) process has
practically begun, in particular with the withdrawal of
heavy and light weapons from the front line and their
collection under the control of impartial forces in
agreed upon areas.

In summary, everything would seem to point to
the fact that the year 2004 will be a year of peace, even
if peace has to be consolidated on a daily basis, until
the general elections of 2005. Here, once again, I
should like to express the gratitude of the Government
and of the people of cote d'Ivoire to the international
community for their tireless efforts to bring a return to
peace in West Africa, and especially in C6te d'Ivoire,
for it must be emphasized that peace can be considered
in the long term only with a subregional perspective.
This is why my delegation welcomes the subregional
approach for the problems considered in the third part
of the Secretary-General's report, in particular the
search for a regional solution to the problem of youth
unemployment and the possibility of defining an
overall framework for DDR at the regional level, to
refer to only two examples.

At any rate, I would like to reaffirm here the
determination of the Ivorian parties to achieve peace.
The Ivorian Government thus hopes to be able to count
on the Security Council, so as to make the peace
process irreversible, by transforming the United
Nations Mission in C6te d'Ivoire (MINUCI) into a
genuine peacekeeping operation.

My delegation would like to take this opportunity
to impart to you our concerns, by clarifying our point
of view on a particularly sensitive issue. Indeed, since
the beginning of this crisis imposed on the Ivorian
people to this day, the issue of helicopters and combat
aircrafts acquired by the national armed forces seem to
give rise to concern in certain parts of the international
community, which seems to have become obsessed
with this, thinking that these conventional combat
weapons are the source of all evils being experienced
in Cote d'lvoire today. Without going into detail, I
should like to state the following.

First, it is important to bear in mind that, as a
sovereign State, Cote d'Ivoire has the right to acquire
any arms of its choice, on any market, in conformity
with its interests, for national defence, with strict
respect for all international instruments pertaining to
general disarmament. It is important that the
sovereignty of Cote d'lvoire be respected.

Secondly, I would note that, once they have been
disarmed, helicopters and so-called combat aircraft can
also be used in civilian police missions for surveillance
of the territory. But systematically grounding them
would be detrimental to the work of the civilian and
national police, which would have considerable effects
on the overall security of Cote d'lvoire.

Thirdly, it is important to observe that, because of
the difficult situation they are in, the institutions of the
Republic have not been the ones to initiate anything:
they are merely victims and are engaged in the self-
defence that is authorized by the Charter of the United
Nations. Helicopters and combat aircraft have been
used militarily only in response to individual attacks;
they will therefore stay the ground as long as these acts
of aggression are halted. That will remain the case as
long as great strides towards peace continue. The
international community may rest assured of that, and
it should take this dimension of the issue into account.

The people of C6te d'lvoire fully understands the
need for genuine reconciliation among its sons and
daughters - who in the final analysis are the major
losers in this war.

