Mr. Westdal (Canada) (spoke in French): Canada
welcomes the Secretary-General's report on small arms
and the action it recommends to curb their
proliferation.

We especially value its recognition that human
security, the safety of people and their communities, is
the central goal of small arms policy and action; it is
the point of controlling licit flows of those arms,
curbing illicit trafficking and destroying excess
weapons. That is why, to make them effective,
embargoes against weapons must be respected and
truly imposed.

We are gratified that several of the
recommendations we made in the Security Council
debate on small arms last year have been incorporated
in the report's recommendations. We also wanted
funded provisions for disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration (DDR) in Security Council peacekeeping
mandates and protection for children in peace
agreements. We had also emphasized that control of
natural resources like oil and diamonds could fuel
deadly violence. We also commended Interpol's
Weapons and Explosives Tracking System, which the
Royal Canadian Mounted Police helped develop. In all
those respects, we think we've been heard.

(spoke in English)

The priority now, a year after the United Nations
Conference, is to implement the Programme of Action.
We want the biennial meetings in 2003 and 2005 and
the next full conference in 2006 to have real impact
worldwide against small arms proliferation. We think
that that necessitates international conviction and
action to contend with the problems of all small arms
trade, not just its illicit dimensions.

There has been heartening progress over the last
year, notably in developing legislation, in promoting
technology for marking and tracing, in coming to grips
with harmful brokering and in weapon collection and
destruction. We want the meeting next year to swell
that momentum by fostering productive cooperation
between States, regional organizations and non-
governmental organizations.

For our part, Canada has been active. With host
countries and partners, we sponsored seminars and
encouraged non-governmental organizations in San
Jose, Pretoria, Manila and several Central Asian
centres. Presiding over the G-8, we promoted local,
national and regional security sector reform in the G-8
Africa Action Plan. We underwrote the Canada/West
Africa Peace and Security Initiative to professionalize
institutions responsible for the protection of public
safety. We supported small arms and human security
projects in South and South-East Asia and helped study
the socio-economic impact of small arms availability
and use in Pacific Island States and the links between
foreign direct investment and small arms-related crime
and violence.

Through the Biting the Bullet series, we
supported essential public briefings on arms
embargoes. We have also been proud to support the
truly outstanding work of the Geneva-based Small
Arms Survey, producing global baseline data for policy
formulation and results measurement, emphasizing the
devastating human impact of small arms proliferation.

While we are pleased to cite significant early
success in implementing the Programme of Action, we
must not forget that the United Nations Conference was
unable to address several key dimensions of the
problems we confront, including the regulation of
civilian possession and transfers to non-State actors.
We thus believe policy and action against small arms
proliferation should be based on, but not limited to, the
Programme of Action.

In that context, we particularly welcome those
elements of the Secretary-General's report that
re-energize debate and transcend the Conference
agenda. Several, noteworthy, warrant our robust
support: the establishment of an international
instrument to enable States to identify and trace illicit
small arms and light weapons; legislative,
administrative and related measures to ensure effective
control over the export and transit of small arms and
light weapons, a critical responsibility of all States; the
effective monitoring and enforcement of United
Nations arms embargoes, including coercive measures
applied as needed to regimes and individuals; enhanced
transparency in arms transactions, which is particularly
timely, given the tenth anniversary this month of the
United Nations Register of Conventional Arms; and
recognition of the link between the spread of illicit
small arms and human rights violations, which is
essential to any comprehensive understanding of the
impact of small arms on human security.

Canada's view is that the Secretary-General's
report enhances our comprehension and our prospects
for effective action against the cruel contagion of small
arms and light weapons proliferation. We think the
report will enrich our debate and deepen our
commitment for years to come.

