Ms. Coleman (United States of America): I thank
you, Mr. Minister, for your leadership in focusing the
attention of the Security Council on the important
linkages between water and international peace and
security. I also thank our briefers for so eloquently
framing the issues this morning.

As we have heard, conflict over water is increasingly
a serious global issue. In discussing water, peace and
security today, I would like to focus my remarks on two
points: first, the example of the Lake Chad basin as an
area struggling with water and security and, secondly,
the role that the international community can play
in helping to prevent water disputes from becoming
armed conflicts.

The Lake Chad basin, which spans the border
region of Chad, the Niger, Nigeria and Cameroon, is
an example of what happens when water scarcities
contribute to conflict. Overuse, poor management
practices and expanding desertification have caused
the lake to recede by approximately 90 per cent. The
disappearance of that critical resource, which is the
basis of survival for millions of people, has led to
territorial disputes and helped nurture the rise of Boko
Haram. Boko Haram uses the dying lake as a recruiting
base, easily exploiting the tens ofthousands of displaced
people who are searching for a means of livelihood.
Boko Haram deploys brutal tactics of abduction, sexual
slavery, killing and looting to terrorize the population,
and the resulting armed conflict has left over 9 million
people in need of humanitarian assistance.

However, there is a glimmer ofhope in that otherwise
dark reality. The Lake Chad Basin Commission was
established by Governments of the region and civil
society to try to peacefully resolve disputes over the
lake. The Commission also formed the Multinational
Joint Task Force (MNJTF) to fight Boko Haram - a
powerful testament to the role regional cooperation can
play in combating issues that result from water scarcity.
It is urgent that the international community bolster its
support to the MNJTF to assist in its efforts to counter
Boko Haram. In particular, the main challenge for
the MNJTF is a severe lack of funding, and therefore
we all must recommit to contributing to the Force.
Greater international support would be a strong Sign
of solidarity with the people of the four countries that
are bearing the brunt of a terrorist threat that mocks the
value of human life. Support to local Governments to
help build capacity for rehabilitation and reconstruction
would also go a long way in helping to ensure lasting
peace and stability.

Conflict over water is not exclusive to the Lake Chad
basin, of course. In Syria, poor drought management
resulted in the loss of livelihood for thousands of
farmers, leading to mass migration to urban areas
and farming the flames of what was already a deep-
rooted discontent with respect to Government policies.
In Iraq, the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant has
manipulated strategic dams on the Tigris and Euphrates
Rivers as a key component of its strategy.

I doubt that there is a single country represented
in this Chamber that is immune to water challenges. I
know that the United States is not. With 50 states that
share 21 large rivers and more than 20,000 watersheds,
we have had to learn to cooperate. For more than 100
years, the United States has had close relationships
on water management with both our neighbours,
and all three countries have benefited. For example,
our 2012 bilateral agreement with Mexico permits
Mexico to store water in the United States for drought
protection, but it also allows United States entities to
invest in water conservation projects in Mexico and
then share in the water that is saved. That model has
proved to be successful in strengthening water security
for both countries and in encouraging investments in
water conservation and sound resource management.
Drawing from that partnership and others, I would
like to share some thoughts on best practices we have
learned in helping to keep water disputes from erupting
into conflict.

First, the international community should support
regional resolution of water disputes by building the
capacity of States and stakeholders. Countries require
the ability to negotiate, resolve disputes and implement
agreements relating to their water resources. That
includes the technical skills needed to understand
emerging challenges and opportunities, as well as the
means to address them. One model of capacity-building
is the programme funded by the United States Agency
for International Development in the Kadamjay region
of Kyrgyztan, which provided technical assistance and
resources to better manage water inefficiencies. The
programme enabled the construction of a permanent
diversion dam, which benefited nearly 2,000 farmers
and residents.

Secondly, institutions and processes can help lock-in
progress. The establishment of regional organizations,
bilateral agreements and information-sharing platforms
can all play a role in institutionalizing and maintaining
cooperation. The United States has been working with
several other donors to develop the Shared Waters
Partnership, which supports cooperative efforts on
transboundary waters in regions where water is or
may become a source of conflict. The programme is a
resource to any country looking for support to resolve
water issues.

Finally, sound data and impartial analysis
are essential to developing a common view of the
challenges and opportunities that face us, and they help
provide a foundation for decision-making. A project in
the Okavango River basin, which is shared by Angola,
Namibia and Botswana, effectively used data to give
early warning of locations at risk of resource conflict,
thereby allowing the parties involved to proactively
resolve potential issues before they could develop.

To conclude, I would like to reiterate our support for
developing creative, win-win solutions to transboundary
water challenges. I thank you, Mr. President, for calling
our attention to this very important issue.

