Mrs. Pierre-Louis (Haiti) (spoke in French): In
this forum, where I have been invited to take the floor
today, may I on behalf of my country, Haiti, convey to
the Council friendly greetings and expressions of
solidarity from President Preval, from the Government
of the Republic and from the people of Haiti.

I would like first of all on behalf of the
Government to thank Ambassador Susan Rice,
President of the Security Council; Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon; his Special Representative for Haiti,
Ambassador He'di Annabi; his Special Envoy, President
Clinton; the Deputy Special Envoy, Mr. Paul Farmer;
the members of the Security Council; and all States
Members of the United Nations. All of them have made
a significant contribution to the work of the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH). I
should also like to take advantage of this occasion to
pay tribute to the memory of all of those who have laid
down their lives in working to bring about and ensure
lasting stability in my country.

The people of Haiti are the first to know the
progress that has been accomplished thanks to the
combined efforts of MINUSTAH, the international
community and the Haitian National Police towards
restoring peace, stability and security to the country 4
conditions essential for bringing the investment that
the country needs so badly today. And here we must
emphasize the undeniable contribution that
MINUSTAH has made to the stabilization process.
MINUSTAH arrived in a Member State in the
grip of a profound and multidimensional crisis, and
today we must acknowledge what has been achieved in
implementing the mission's mandate. I refer to
supporting our institutions and strengthening the State;

helping with capacity-building and enhancing the
competencies of local administrations in serving
citizens; assisting with reforms; guaranteeing the
emergence of the rule of law by improving the Haitian
National Police and its services, the legal and prison
systems; disseminating practices and attitudes that
respect human rights; and improving the short-term
socio-economic situation of people living in areas
considered to be most difficult.

Today our country is going through a sea-change,
and, as members are all aware, any change gives rise to
entrenched conservative resistance to any move away
from the status quo. This threatens efforts to set the
country on the course of modernization and
development. But despite the tremors to which it is
sometimes still subject, which still render it fragile, the
Government is resolutely committed to creating
conditions that can inspire confidence in local
investors and attract foreign investment. This is
because today priority must go to the creation of good,
lasting jobs that also respect the environment.

Despite the successive upheavals of 2008, the
Government continues to invest in rebuilding urban
and rural infrastructure, supplying electricity and
drinking water, increasing food production capacity
and creating other goods and services. The national
road network is under construction, and the availability
of energy and drinking water is improving. Laws and
administrative provisions confirm this in both these
sectors. Reforms central to economic development are
under way, and the participation of citizens in political
life is being encouraged. The process of identification
of all the citizens of Haiti, men and women alike, has
also begun.

It is for us, then, the men and women of Haiti of
all political complexions and ideologies, with the
support of our international partners and of the
members of the Security Council, to help us hold fast
to a course that takes Haiti unwaveringly to economic
growth and sustainable, equitable development that
truly takes into account the needs of our people.

However, given the level of widespread
underinvestment, both public and private, unsatisfied
legitimate demands and the lack of structure still
affecting the country, this progress, while it is
perceptible and not negligible, is far from removing us
significantly from risk, enormous fragility and extreme
environmental and human vulnerability. It is true that

the resolution of all serious and complex problems
often requires time and considerable investment, and
the Council is no stranger to Haiti's situation. President
Clinton and Mr. Annabi have just spoken of this.

I stated repeatedly during the donors conference
held in Washington, D.C., on 14 April that Haiti is
today at a critical juncture in its history, and that we
must grasp the opportunities provided for the benefit of
the people. Indeed, we are working unstintingly to
prevent any relapse into instability and unrest, and we
wish to continue to be able to rely on the Council's
cooperation as a partner in bolstering the progress that
is being achieved so that we may continue to harvest
the fruit of social peace and political stability, the seeds
of which we have sown together.

For this, we must collectively and progressively
confront the huge challenges still threatening the
country's stability. The first is the forthcoming
elections, where much is at stake in the struggle for
local, legislative and presidential power, and where
there is a risk of going astray in many ways, a risk we
must avoid at all costs. And the second is the draft
constitutional amendment, which must pass through the
participatory process of the various political forces and
interest groups, and where political compromise is vital
for our future.

Faced with these challenges, which require
commitment and firmness from all of us, we cannot
wait to respond. First, we must commit to investments
that can increase national production, reduce
environmental vulnerability, develop our vast tourist
potential and improve basic social infrastructure, thus
ensuring broader access to the population. It is
important here that the international community keep
the promises it entered into in April at the Washington
donors conference. I thank President Clinton once
again for having referred to this during his briefing.

We need to build or extend productive
infrastructure to foster the development of private
enterprise and intensive job creation. Employment is
the country's number one priority today. We have to
break the vicious circle of corruption and impunity and
rebuild State institutional capacity so that governance
and the rule of law may be recovered and extended
throughout the land. We must arouse the interest of
local actors all over the country in creating
decentralized job opportunities in the various regions,
redress the imbalance in population distribution and

improve living conditions. We have to inspire young
people with renewed confidence. They are the majority
of the population, and they have been neglected. We
should be channelling and appreciating their potential
and creativity in the national reconstruction effort. We
must positively welcome the contributions of the
Haitian diaspora - and I thank President Clinton again
for having mentioned this ~ in its areas of
competence, which it has gained after sore trials in
foreign lands. Lastly, we must involve the State and
civil society in the fight for social, economic and
cultural rights essential to the vast majority of Haitians,
women, artists and initiators.

Those are the challenges that we must face. That
is the agenda to which we are committed together with
the members of the Security Council and the
international community, because the Government of
Haiti cannot play a waiting game. We have taken
initiatives that seek to enable the Government to
improve its overall functioning and that of the business
sector.

As all Council members know, the Government
has met the requirements for debt relief to the tune of
$1.2 billion. It submitted the 2009-2010 budget by
respecting the constitutional deadline for the first time
since the adoption of the Constitution in 1987. It has
completed the process that should lead to Haiti being
certified to benefit from the opportunities offered by
the Hemispheric Opportunity through Partnership
Encouragement (HOPE) Act.

It has democratically negotiated with the
Parliament and stakeholders the setting of a minimum
wage at a level that ensures Haiti's attractiveness and
competitiveness. It has provided direct support to
strengthen production and the building of investment
capacity in sectors that can protect the environment
and encourage reforestation, including Haiti's premium
grade coffee programme.

To improve the business registration process, the
Government encourages businesses to establish
themselves in the country and to continue to boost the
HOPE II Act activities - farm products, cattle
farming, tourism and the construction of housing and
industrial buildings, which offer huge opportunities for
investors, who now must look at Haiti in a different
light. We are all aware that development will come
from private and public investment, which is the
creator of jobs and wealth, not from humanitarian aid,
even if today such aid is necessary to relieve the
suffering of the most vulnerable sectors of the
population.

The Republic of Haiti, President Preval and I
echo the recommendations of the Secretary-General's
report, dated 1 September 2009. And I am pleased to
quote it here:

"While the road of stabilization and peace
processes is rarely smooth, I remain confident
that Haiti today enjoys a historic opportunity for
progress. I urge the Haitian leadership and
people, and their partners in the stabilization
process, to remain engaged and to persevere in
their efforts to create a brighter future for this
remarkable country." (S/2009/439, para. Sfl 
I can only echo the Secretary-General's words.
And to the younger generations of my country, so
thirsty for knowledge; to the women engaged in the
struggle for equality and for recognition of their rights;
to the farmers who have been too long neglected and to
whom a significant share of the positive results of
growth and development must fall, as is only fair; and
to all the men and women in the private sector, in
non-governmental organizations and in civil society
who have invested and still invest in the country, in
one way or another, taking daily risks, expressing their
creativity and devoting time and energy to
undertakings that are still vulnerable to reversibility, I
say loud and clear, in this gathering where all the
concerns and hopes of the world are voiced, that Haiti
will survive. Haiti must press forward. Haiti can once
again, as it has already done in the past, reach a
moment of epiphany that will set it firmly on the
course of progress and modernity to the benefit of the
entire Haitian population.

