I thank you, Sir, for convening this open video-teleconference on Afghanistan. I also thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General Ms. Deborah Lyons for her briefing and her tireless efforts to lead the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) in the challenging environment caused by the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. At the outset, let me express my heartfelt condolences to the bereaved families of those who lost their lives due to the damage caused by heavy rains and flash floods in eastern Afghanistan last week. I express my sincere wishes for the early recovery of the afflicted areas. Achieving sustainable peace in Afghanistan is of paramount importance not only for the people of Afghanistan but also for the stability of the region and the whole world. Japan supports an Afghan-led and Afghan-owned peace process and appreciates the continued efforts of the Government of the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan and its partners to commence an intra-Afghan negotiation. We hear reports that the start of the negotiation is imminent, and hope that it will begin at the earliest possible time and that, once started, it will produce a concrete outcome in achieving peace and stability in Afghanistan. We welcome, in this respect, the announcement of the full cabinet nominations by the Afghan Government earlier this week. Japan stands ready to play a constructive role in creating an environment conducive to moving the peace process forward, in partnership with the international community. As we await further progress in the peace process, we continue to see the unbearable human toll of the ongoing conflict in Afghanistan. We are deeply concerned about unabated violence in certain parts of the country. Japan reiterates its support for the Secretary-General's call for a global ceasefire, which has been supported by the statement issued on behalf of around 170 Member States and by Security Council resolution 2532 (2020), and hopes that this call will be observed by all parties in Afghanistan. Sustainable peace in Afghanistan can be achieved only through the efforts of the Government and the people of Afghanistan towards self-reliance, in partnership with members of the regional and international communities. Japan commends the initiative of the Governments of Afghanistan and Finland, as well as the United Nations, to review the progress made under the Geneva Mutual Accountability Framework and to prepare for the upcoming pledging conference in November. As Afghanistan's long-standing partner, Japan continues to be fully committed to supporting its reconstruction and nation-building efforts. As a sign of this commitment, this year Japan has already provided around $110 million, including to assist the nationwide response to the COVID-19 pandemic. Key areas that necessitate international support are health, education and infrastructure, as well as security service delivery. Vulnerable populations, such as returnees and internally displaced persons, as well as women and children, have to be protected and empowered. More needs to be done in the field of human resource development and institution-building to realize good governance, the rule of law and the fight against corruption. They are the prerequisites for ensuring human security, constructing resilient societies and achieving self-reliance. In concluding my remarks, I reiterate Japan's commitment to continued support for peace and development in Afghanistan.
