Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I wish to join the other speakers in expressing
my deepest condolences to the Russian Federation with
respect to the event just mentioned.

I thank Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura and Mark
Lowcock for their exemplary commitment and their
briefings, which not only make clear the gravity of the
current situation but also illustrate the potential that
exists today for a way out of this crisis.

Syria is today at a crossroads: it can either spiral
further into military escalation in Idlib, which would
begin one of the darkest chapters of the Syrian tragedy,
or it could instead take the path of genuine political
engagement towards resolving the conflict. Both
scenarios, the darkest and the most encouraging, are
possible at this point. The decision largely depends
upon the Security Council's ability to unite around
peace - on option that is today, despite the immense
the immense challenges, within our reach.

Syria is once again on a precipice, with an
offensive threatening the Idlib area for the past several
weeks, where more than 3 million people are now
located. Locations there have already been subjected
to shelling, tens of thousands of civilians have fled
the indiscriminate strikes and yet worse still could
be to come. Several hospitals have been the targets
of attack. We cannot reiterate it too much: attacks
against health personnel and hospitals constitute war
crimes and their perpetrators will have to answer
for their actions. The fight against terrorism is in no
circumstance an adequate argument to justify such a
disaster. Indiscriminate attacks represent not only a
humanitarian outrage but also acts of strategic folly,
serving only to fuel the terrorism they purport to fight.
Syria has therefore become the pre-eminent incubator
of terrorism. An offensive in Idlib would have the same
effect and, furthermore, contribute to dispersing the
jihadist fighters there across the region, potentially to
Europe and beyond.

France has deployed tireless efforts in all forums,
on all fronts, in seeking with its partners ways to avert
disaster. A four-party meeting was held last Friday
among the diplomatic Councillors of Turkey, Russia,
Germany and France, with a view to finding common
ground between the small group and the Astana group.
In our view, that is an unavoidable path. Turkey has
made significant efforts to contribute to concrete
solutions. While we note the agreement announced
yesterday by Presidents Erdogan and Putin regarding
the establishment of a demilitarized zone in the Idlib
area, we call on Turkey and Russia to specify the
parameters, such as the fate and movements of terrorist
groups designated by the Security Council.

In that context, when we want to believe that
diplomacy is finally regaining ground, we must
persevere in our joint efforts to persuade all parties to
the conflict that there are alternatives to escalation and
that the path of dialogue is the only way to deliver on a
lasting solution to the situation in Idlib.

The protection of civilians must be an absolute
priority for all stakeholders. It is incumbent upon all
parties to respect their obligations under international
humanitarian law, in particular pursuant to the principles
of distinction, proportionality and precaution. We must
also do everything possible to protect humanitarian
and medical facilities and personnel and to ensure safe,
full and unimpeded humanitarian access to populations
in need. I should like to recall the unique and crucial
nature of cross-border humanitarian assistance, which
in August alone provided vital daily assistance to nearly
750,000 individuals in the north-west.

We continue to support Turkey's efforts to find
a negotiated solution in Idlib. We commend its
commitment, like that of the United Nations, which is
making a real difference. It is the very future of Syria
that is at stake. How is it possible to simultaneously hope
for the return of refugees and prepare for an offensive
that could displace hundreds of thousands of people?
How is it possible to generate the necessary trust for a
credible political process at a time when the population
of Idlib continues to be threatened by a brutal military
campaign? How can we call for the rebuilding of Syria
at the same time as preparing to destroy Idlib and there
exists no credible and irreversible political process?
The reality is that there can be no military solution
in Syria. An offensive in Idlib would further destroy
hope for peace in Syria. I repeat it once again: we will
tolerate no further use of chemical weapons in Syria,
and we stand ready to respond.

Avoiding an escalation in Idlib is all the more
necessary given that a credible negotiated political
solution acceptable to all is within our grasp. That is
my firm belief. This option was generated by United
Nations mediation. The discussions held last week
in Geneva should lead to the prompt establishment
of the constitutional committee, the first component
of a political process endorsed by the international
community, including the Security Council, through
resolution 2254 (2015). The small group, which met with
the Special Envoy on Friday, expressed its full support
for those efforts. However, the Asana guarantors have
expressed reservations regarding the composition of the
constitutional committee established by Special Envoy,
despite the mandate entrusted to him by the Sochi final
statement of 31 January.

France firmly believes that the time has come to
move forward with the setting up of the constitutional
committee by Mr. De Mistura as soon as possible. That
is the call I wish to issue today on behalf of France,
echoing, and supporting, the message Mr. Mistura
has just delivered to us. An imminent date is needed
for that work to begin. I recall that participants in the
Sochi congress agreed that the Special Envoy would be
responsible for the committee's composition under the
Geneva process. Those commitments must be upheld.
The Special Envoy must be in a position to update us on
his progress at the next Council meeting on this matter,
and the constitutional committee should finally be able
to meet as soon as possible. In our view, that is key
to building real political momentum. We all are aware
that the road ahead is long and difficult; that is the very
reason for our call: not one minute do we have to waste.

A political solution does not begin and end with
the drafting of a new constitution; detailed discussions
must now begin on its many other elements, such as
modalities for the adoption of a new constitutional
text; the holding of free and transparent elections in
which all Syrians, including refugees and displaced
persons, can vote; and, more broadly, the creation
of a safe and neutral environment, underpinned by
confidence-building measures, which is integral for
granting the necessary credibility to the entire process.

Our road map has been clearly laid out: a strong
commitment to a cessation of hostilities in Idlib; the
continuation of the political process, with collective
support for the launch of the constitutional committee's
work as the first step; and the unity of the Council
around a constructive political agenda with a view to
a peaceful and agreed upon resolution to the conflict.
It is France's unambiguous position that the rebuilding
of Syria can be envisioned only on that basis, once an
irreversible, credible and inclusive political transition
has begun. Let us be clear: without a guarantee that
such a transition is under way, no Syrians will believe
that their country has changed and the vast majority of
them will refuse to return home, dooming any hope of
lasting peace in Syria.

In conclusion, I would like to stress our belief
that the Security Council has a special responsibility
to break the cycle of tragedy in Syria and to generate
genuine political momentum. On behalf of France, I
call on the Council to rally around that shared political
goal by supporting the Geneva process, the Special
Envoy and an inclusive political settlement.

