Mr. Fulci (Italy): Let me begin by expressing our
sincere appreciation to the Permanent Representatives of
New Zealand, Ambassador Colin Keating, and of
Argentina, Ambassador Emilio Cardenas, who were the
movers and doers behind the ideas and initiatives we are
discussing today.

From the very beginning the Italian delegation made
clear its strong interest in taking part in the discussions
among 34 troop-contributing countries belonging to the
different regional groups.

I was among those who had the honour of co-signing
the letter addressed to you, Mr. President, on 11 December
suggesting today's debate, because we believe that it is
fully consistent with the Council's previous deliberations,
particularly with the presidential statement of 4 November
1994, which indicated improved procedures for
consultations with troop-contributing countries. Today, we
are ready to move further.

Certainly, improvements have been made, especially
with regard to the calling of regular meetings with troop-
contributing countries presided over jointly by the President
of the Security Council and by a representative of the
Secretary-General. These meetings are duly announced in
the monthly calendar of the Council's work. They are
meetings for consultation and not merely for information
purposes. They take place before, and not during or after,
the deliberations of the Security Council on any given
peace-keeping operation. The participation of troop-
contributing countries that are non-members of the Council
has so far, in our opinion, been at a satisfactory level, and
those meetings are becoming more successful as the feeling
spreads that they can be a very appropriate and useful place
indeed for troop contributors to express legitimate
questions, concerns and expectations.

In order to improve them further we suggest that they
be held within a reasonable margin of time prior to the
Council's decisions in order to give the delegations of
troop-contributing countries more time to consult their
capitals and all the authorities concerned, civilian and
military alike. Moreover, the documentation does not
always seem to have been prompt and thorough.
Improvement could also be made in this field.

Italy fully endorses the statement by the Permanent
Representative of Argentina, whose suggestions and
proposals deserve the Council's utmost attention and
should be acted upon. The key proposal concerns the
establishment of a structured mechanism that would
assure not only a constant flow of information between
Council members and troop-contributing countries but
also consultation on matters of substance. This
corresponds to the expectations that full use be made of
the possibilities offered by the Charter - expectations
which Italy has been voicing for some time, both in the
General Assembly and in the Security Council, ever since
the general debate during the forty-eighth session of the
General Assembly.

Certainly, considerable progress has been made
following the bitter experience in Somalia. But the fact
that we are not living in a perfect world is proved by the
concern, shared by many, that the present financial
difficulties of the United Nations will lead to measures
that will seriously affect the resources and capacity of the
Department of Peace-keeping Operations. Such austerity
measures would also have a negative effect on the
relationship between the Secretariat and the troop-
contributing countries and seriously hinder planning
activities and day-to-day management of peace-keeping
operations.

If, for example, there were to be a downsizing of the
two vital organs of the Department of Peace-keeping
Operations, the Office of Planning and Support and the
Situation Centre, how could the dialogue between the
troop contributors and the Secretariat be maintained at a
satisfactory level? Some would say that this is a problem
that regards the Secretariat and not the Security Council.
It is certainly true that the Security Council must operate
in the political sphere of decision making and not get
involved in macro- or micro-management, but it is clear
that if the Secretariat's ability to interact with troop
contributors were weakened, that would have to be
compensated for by increased consultation between the
Security Council and the troop contributors.

A concrete response to the aforementioned problem
is therefore necessary at present, as it will be in the
future, to assure the success of peace-keeping operations.
In the end, only a direct, true voice in the decision-
making process by countries that contribute troops or
resources can ensure adequate participation and an
efficient chain of command and control able to delegate
authority to commanders in the field.

 

The consultation mechanisms should not only invest
the political sphere, but should be extended to the military
sphere as well. We should therefore reflect on the idea of
revitalizing the Military Staff Committee, providing for
inclusion in it of the countries that contribute troops to each
operation. It is only through participation and transparency
that we can win over public opinion, whose support is
essential in confronting the burden of peace-keeping in
terms of funding and personnel.

I have one final consideration. The attention that the
United Nations dedicates to this problem is a direct
reflection of its capacity for increasing democracy and
transparency in the Organization. Therefore, today's
initiative fits extremely well into the broader road towards
reform, on which my country's ideas and proposals are
well-known.

