Mr. Garcia Moritan (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): First of all, Mr. President, allow me to
express my delegation's gratitude for your organization
of this open Security Council debate on cooperation
between the Council and relevant international
organizations in the implementation of resolutions
1540 (2004) and 1673 (2006).

This debate has given us the opportunity to be in
direct contact with organizations such as the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), the
Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW) and the World Customs Organization (WCO),
whose work in this field is of fundamental importance
and should enjoy the firm support of all Member
States.

International cooperation in the non-proliferation
of nuclear, chemical and biological weapons and their
means of delivery and related materials is of crucial
importance in achieving the Security Council's
objective of prevailing in the fight against the threat to
international peace and security posed by the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and by
international terrorism. We believe also that specific
actions in the field of non-proliferation must go hand
in hand with a clear and specific commitment that can
be translated into a plan of action in the field of
disarmament by all members of the international
community.

My country has offered its support to those
countries that may need assistance in the
implementation of obligations arising out of
resolutions 1540 (2004) and 1673 (2006), especially
countries in our region.

In June 2005, together with the Government of
Spain, we organized a first regional seminar on the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004), held in
Guatemala. Its objective was to address the specific
difficulties of the countries of Central America and the
Caribbean. Subsequently, in September of the same
year, we organized another seminar, this time together
with the United Kingdom, in Buenos Aires, Argentina.
That seminar was the first time since its establishment
that the 1540 Committee had the opportunity to be in
contact with the entire region. Argentina also actively
participated in the seminar held in Peru last November
under the auspices of Spain and the European Union.

It is because we believe that in this area regional
cooperation is fundamental that we are meeting the
challenge of implementing these extremely important
resolutions. That is why cooperation with regional and
subregional organizations should also be encouraged.

We submitted in a timely manner our national
report, prepared by our Ministry of Foreign Affairs,
which is our focal point on this issue, with the support
of an inter-ministerial commission created for this
purpose. The report has since been updated. Those
actions mesh with national criminal and administrative
legislation to implement at the national level our
international obligations. In this context, I would like
to note that Argentine legislation is under constant
review and revision so that we can make the necessary
changes. Argentina's commitment to disarmament and
non-proliferation is reflected in our adoption of all
existing export control regimes and their national
implementation through a commission established for
that purpose as early as 1992.

In that context, our work and the experience we
have gained enable us to offer any support that other
countries of the region may request to help with
national implementation in the technical, judicial and
customs fields.

My delegation would like to reaffirm its support
for the work of the Committee and recalls that

resolution 1673 (2006) requested that it intensify its
efforts through a work programme to include the
compilation of information, outreach, dialogue,
assistance and cooperation. Within this framework of
action, the adoption of measures for accounting,
physical protection, border and police control and
national control of trans-shipment and export,
including monitoring the provision of financial and
other services, is of particular importance.

In this respect, we renew Argentina's
commitment to these objectives and hope that the
action plan promoted by the 1540 Committee will
enable us to achieve our common goals.

Let me reiterate the determination of the
Argentine Government in the fight against the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, their
means of delivery and related materials, as well as our
readiness to move forward together with the
international community in the fight against terrorism.

Finally, we would like to say that we regret the
way in which the 1540 Committee recently proceeded
to renew the contracts of the groups of experts. We
urge that, in the future, criteria be used, both for
selecting experts and for renewing their contracts, that
would ensure that the solution is transparent and that
would guarantee equality for all Members of the
United Nations.

