Mr. Chaudhry (Pakistan): I would like to begin
by thanking Foreign Minister Lavrov on his initiative
in convening a meeting of the Security Council on
this very important issue, which is a real threat to
international peace and security.

What seemed at its start to be a spring in the
Middle East has turned into an autumn of despair and
suffering for its people. As we discuss the conflicts in
the Middle East today, people in the region are dying,
and their exodus has created a humanitarian catastrophe
thousands of miles from its source. We must look at
the reasons behind this desperate situation. First, the
people's legitimate aspirations have not been fulfilled.
Secondly, external interventions, both overt and covert,
have exacerbated the conflicts. Poor governance, of
course, is a common thread in many of these situations.
This year, world leaders gathered here in New York
to talk about the transformation of the development
agenda over the next 15 years. The agenda is all about
keeping people at its centre; the question is, have we
actually put people at the centre? If we had, young
Aylan Al-Kurdi would not have suffered his tragic fate
in search ofa better life.

If we dig deeper into the underlying reasons for
this crisis, the Palestinian issue remains one of the
primary causes of instability in the region. Without a
just, sustainable and enduring resolution of the Arab-
Israeli conflict, peace in the Middle East will remain a
pipe dream, and experience tells us that without peace
in the Middle East, peace and security for all of us will
remain under threat. An independent and viable State of
Palestine, based on the pre-1967 borders, with Al-Quds
Al-Sharif as its capital, remains the only solution.

We must ask ourselves why Daesh has become
the hydra-headed monster that it is today in Syria
and Iraq. Were there lost opportunities? Could the
Security Council, in particular, and the international
community, in general, have done more to prevent the
situation from deteriorating and, more importantly, can
we do something now? In our opinion, the answer to all
those questions is an emphatic yes. Disputing what is
past is no use. We must now unite behind the mediation
efforts of Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura. Today the
regional Powers, the supporters of all the parties to the
conflict and the paramount members of the Council
and the international community must all decide that
enough is enough. This war must end and we must all
contribute to that goal.

In Yemen, the country's legitimate Government
must be restored, but that should be done through
negotiations. A peace process must be launched based
on the Council's resolutions and the work tackled at a
national dialogue conference in order to chart a path to
a peaceful settlement.

Violent extremism and terrorism, whatever
their causative factors, thrive in an environment of
desperation and frustration. What could be more
frustrating than a conflict that is on the Security
Council's agenda yet remains unresolved for decades?
The relationship between prolonged unresolved conflict
and instability is obvious. Only helplessness can emerge
from protracted conflicts in which the people have
been prevented from exercising their legitimate right
to self-determination. The international community as
a whole, and the Security Council in particular, should
play a just and effective role in conflict resolution in
an expeditious manner. If the United Nations cannot
ensure a people's legitimate right to self-determination,
who can?

Terrorism in all its forms and manifestations is
reprehensible. Nothing justifies its despicable acts of
barbarism and cruelty, but if we want to counter it, we
must be ready to root it out completely. Fighting only
the symptoms of terrorism will not do. We will have
to address its causes, political, social and economic.
It must be a comprehensive fight, involving much
more than military might. Pessimistic arguments
must be countered and hearts and minds won. Above
all, a positive environment must be created in which
individuals can have an optimistic outlook on their
lives.

