Mr. Cotan (Indonesia): Madam President, at the
outset, on behalf of my delegation, I would like to
express our appreciation to you for organizing this
debate on the relationship between the United Nations
and regional organizations, in particular the African
Union (AU), in the maintenance of international peace
and security.

Coming so soon after the recent African Union

summit meeting in Addis Ababa, this thematic debate,

under the auspices of the delegation of a key member

of the African Union, is a pertinent opportunity for us
to re-examine this important subject.

Present-day relations among nations feature four
important processes that affect, in one way or another,
the internal and external dynamics of every nation. The
first is multilateralism. The United Nations is central to
contemporary multilateralism; since its inception, it
has been working steadily and in a concerted manner to
maintain international peace and security and to
achieve international cooperation in solving
international problems of an economic, social, cultural
or humanitarian character.

The second process is regionalism, which has
been steadily proliferating, emerging as a force that
reinvigorates the world's dynamics. In Europe, the
European Union integrates Europeans into a deep sense
of "we-ness". The transformation of the Organization
of African Unity into the African Union marked a new
departure towards a more integrated Africa. In our
region, the Association of South-East Asian Nations
(ASEAN) is moving from a mere association towards a
community with a deep sense of interdependence and
unity. The ASEAN community ideal is developed on
the basis of benchmarks embedded within its three
pillars, namely, the ASEAN Security Community, the
ASEAN Economic Community and the ASEAN Socio-
cultural Community.

Thirdly, there have been tremendous efforts
recently to optimize mutual benefits through
interregional partnerships. Asia-Pacific Economic
Cooperation, for example, has facilitated cooperation
between Asian nations and the Americas. We have the
Asia-Europe Meeting - a bridge between Asians and
Europeans. Between Asia and Africa, the long-
established bridge of cooperation between the two
continents has also been reinvigorated by the launch of
the New Asian-African Strategic Partnership through
an initiative co-sponsored by Indonesia and South
Africa - your beloved country, Madam President.

Lastly, we are also currently becoming aware of
the growing urgency of collaboration within the
framework of multilateralism; regionalism. This
manifests itself in particular in the relationship
between the United Nations and various regional
arrangements, a subject on which my delegation would
like to dwell further.

The drafters of the Charter were visionary about
the regionalism that was yet to come and the
importance of its relationship with the United Nations
when they included Chapter VIII in the Charter. In our
view, that Chapter reflects the sense of the authors'
pragmatism concerning situations in which the United
Nations would not always be able to achieve its
objectives alone. As also stipulated in the Charter,
regional organizations are encouraged to develop and
play their role in the maintenance of international
peace and security. Today, their vision is relevant, and
its realization is visible.

The contributions of regional organizations to the
maintenance of peace and security and the promotion
of economic and socio-political progress both within
and outside their milieu are increasing. The EU's
assumption of responsibility in the stabilization efforts
in Macedonia and Bosnia and Herzegovina has enabled
the United Nations to use more of its resources to
address threats to international peace and security in
other regions.

The African Union and some subregional
arrangements have begun to play a similar role in
response to various security challenges in the African
continent. The EU has broadened its reach beyond
Europe. It collaborated with ASEAN in deploying a
monitoring mission in Aceh, Indonesia. That has
become the first model for interregional cooperation in
the South-East Asian region.

There are three scenarios as to how the United
Nations and regional organizations may be able to
nurture their relationship with regard to conflict
resolution. First, both entities may develop a joint
mission deployed in different parts of the globe. Such a
concerted venture requires complementarity of
resources.

Secondly, the United Nations could resume a
mission previously under the auspices of a regional
organization. That is what has been under discussion in
the case of Somalia. Thirdly, regional organizations
can take responsibility for the continuation of a United
Nations-initiated peace mission. A good example of
that scenario is the takeover of the United Nations
International Police Task Force by the EU Police
Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Another scenario could be a subcontracting
arrangement, by which the United Nations tasks a
regional organization to do all or part of its work. That
option is particularly relevant when the use of a
regional organization to address threats to peace is
considered more effective than direct involvement by
the United Nations.

Cooperation between the United Nations and
regional organizations will be viable when it develops
on the basis of equal partnership. Nevertheless, my
delegation believes that regional arrangements should
not, in any way or shape, substitute for the United
Nations role in the maintenance of peace and security.
It is the primary responsibility of the United Nations,
as stipulated in its Charter, to maintain international
peace and security. The United Nations must remain
the centre for harmonizing the actions of nations in the
attainment of peace and security, as you, Madam
President, rightly stated during your opening remarks.

In order to ensure close collaboration between the
United Nations and regional organizations, it is
important to ensure not only that there is a legal
foundation for such cooperation - such as
memorandums of understanding - but also that
pertinent, mutually reinforcing structures exist within
the two entities to maintain contacts.

As regards cooperation between the United
Nations and the African Union, my delegation is
gratified that extensive work has already been done in
this area. At the 2005 World Summit, Member States
recognized the special needs of Africa and agreed to
the development of a 10-year plan for capacity-
building with the African Union. We are encouraged by
the fact that, in November of last year, the Secretary-
General of the United Nations and the Chairperson of
the African Union signed a declaration entitled
"Enhancing United Nations-African Union
Cooperation: Framework for the Ten-Year Capacity-
Building Programme for the African Union".

My delegation would also like to express its
pleasure at the joint African Union/United Nations
action plan for United Nations assistance for African
Union peacekeeping capacity-building. We welcome
the discussions between the African Union Peace
Support Operations Division and the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO), which were held
twice last year to identify specific areas in which the
United Nations could respond to the capacity-building
requirements of operationalizing the African Standby
Force, for which a planned date of 2010 has been set.

We believe that both of those discussions were of
paramount importance in ensuring effective joint
responses to security challenges in the continent, as
well as in clarifying lingering issues as to how best
cooperation can be organized and effected in both
general and specific areas.

Cooperation between the United Nations and
regional organizations - particularly between the
United Nations and the African Union - is a
significant multilateral engagement that we must all
continue to encourage and contribute to. We believe
that regional organizations could play a bigger role in
contributing to the maintenance of international peace
and security in the pursuit of more acceptable and
comprehensive solutions to conflicts in various
regions.

Indonesia wishes to reaffirm its support for the
enhancement of cooperation between the United
Nations and regional organizations, particularly the
African Union, in whose region most of the conflicts
have occurred. We are hopeful that that partnership can
develop viable joint actions, not only to put an end to
armed conflicts, which undermine the continent's
peace, prosperity and security, but also to promote the
sustainable development of its States.

