Mr. Valdivieso (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I
speak with great pleasure today, as we consider the
report of the Security Council to the General Assembly
in its new format. Colombia found it very satisfactory
to participate in the initiatives aimed at proposing and
reaching agreement on a new format, a process in
which the delegation of Singapore played an
outstanding role.

This is the appropriate opportunity to present
comments so as to contribute to what will be the
document considered by the rest of the Member States
of the United Nations, to whom we have the obligation
of giving an account of our actions. In this spirit, I will
offer some reflections.

Does the new report reflect the work of the
Security Council? In general, I can affirm that it does.
However, the report still portrays the situation in a very
formal manner, with lists of documents, communiques,
resolutions, issues and so on, which take up the
greatest part of the body of the report. I recognize that
the introduction is a very positive step in the right
direction. Here, I should acknowledge that the
delegation of the United Kingdom, a permanent
member, has shown great support for the process of
reforming the working methods of the Council. In
future, it will be necessary to intensify those efforts.

What is the usefulness of the report under
consideration? The report is a practical reference guide
with which the Members of the General Assembly and,
in a more global way, the international community can
critically observe the Security Council. Here we have a
document that even in its size is more attractive, and
which gains the necessary attention for the work of this
principal organ of the United Nations. Of course, the
facts are the main judge of the Council. The threats to
international peace and security and the Council's
response to them are what enables one to evaluate the
performance of the Council. However, the report in its
present format gives order to this critical vision,
encourages a more informed discussion and exposes
members of the Council to a constructive examination
by the rest ofthe United Nations membership.

Has the modification of the report been
worthwhile? Yes, definitely. The efforts to improve the
report, lasting many months, has proved that it is
possible to reform Council practices and customs that
had seemed unchangeable. It is a lesson for future
generations of Council members, applicable to other
practices in the Council's proceedings. It is a lesson to
both permanent and elected members of the Council
that it is possible to change without creating political
situations that are difficult or impossible to control.
Finally, it is a lesson for the Secretariat, which early on
made public its doubts on the advisability or even the
viability of such a Council report.

What is the benefit to the Members of the United
Nations? It is difficult to speak of a concrete, tangible
benefit that is created by the modified report. However,
in general, the new format is a concrete sign of a
collective effort towards transparency. It is a clear
signal that we want to keep the General Assembly
better informed. It is an acknowledgement of the
existence of political points of connection between the
two bodies. It is a report on the complementarity of the
two organs.

Should we understand that the process of
reforming the report is now finished? In no way. This
report will be submitted for scrutiny by Members ofthe
General Assembly, to which we belong. Based on their
comments and suggestions, it might be possible to
continue to adjust the content and composition of the
report. It is therefore a permanent process of creating a
product suited to the demands of the Members of the
Organization. It is also an attempt completely in line
with the discussions on reforming the United Nations
which are taking place based on the report of the
Secretary-General (A/57/3 87) issued earlier this month.

We will also have to reflect on aspects of its
content. For example, my delegation is still convinced
that the report needs a more detailed section on
missions - which in recent years have been extending
the presence of the Security Council in the field -
including their justification, cost, scope and so on. This
issue has sparked great interest beyond the Council, but
it is not adequately reflected in the report, as we might
have wished.

There are also simple but curious questions,
which appear to be the result of a very strict
interpretation of the format being used. I am referring,
for example, to the section on Nobel Prizes awarded -
in chapter 21, perhaps in the second part, on page 285
of the English draft - where it says "Security Council
missions or Groups of Experts, none". In other words,
this strict format leads to laughable situations, as can
easily be seen.

What is the next step? The next step is, of course,
to listen attentively to the debate in the General
Assembly and to participate very actively in it. That
discussion must follow two avenues. One ofthem is the
performance of the Security Council, in other words,
the purely political consideration of the action and
inaction ofthe Council. The other avenue of discussion
will deal with the characteristics of the report. That
discussion will provide the guidelines for our work in
coming months.
Having said that, I want to comment on the
discussion during this morning's meeting. The
comments made seemed very interesting. Because I
was absent during the first part of the meeting, I tried
to read the text of Ambassador Mahbubani's statement
distributed by the delegation of Singapore. This
meeting of self-criticism has been very interesting, as
have been the exchanges, which should give rise to
new reforms ofthe Council.

In other words, the Council must do a great deal
to create such opportunities, which in truth we have not
always sought, to criticise ourselves and improve our
work. We should have more such exercises and analyse
the substantive parts of our work. Assessing the
Council's performance is a very important task that we
must continue to perform, as is mentioned in paragraph
16 of Ambassador Mahbubani's written text.

However, I wish to make the point that, as
indicated in its agenda, this meeting was convened to
consider the draft report of the Security Council to the
General Assembly. This meeting should not be made
into some kind of wrap-up on the Council's agenda and
performance. In other words, we must use this meeting
to consider the draft report and convene others to
analyse and comment on the Security Council's
performance and our assessment of it. That is a
separate matter.

