Mr. Feltman: Since the Council last met on Ukraine
on 6 March (see S/PV.7400), while the situation in eastern
Ukraine has remained tenuous, we have had some
grounds for hope. The ceasefire continues to largely hold
in most parts of the conflict zone, and the number and
pace of casualties have generally slowed. lmportantly,
the political process aimed at full implementation of
the package of measures for the implementation of the
Minsk agreements, adopted on 12 February, is finally
under way. I also wish to reiterate that, had it not been
for the continued diplomatic efforts of Ukraine, France,
Germany and the Russian Federation in the Normandy
format and the support of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), we would likely
be faced with a more challenging situation. The full
implementation of Minsk is sine qua non for leading
eastern Ukraine and the country out of conflict. The
continued non-implementation of various provisions of
the agreement entails a dangerous limbo.

Mr. Alexander Hug, Deputy Chief Monitor of the
OSCE Special MonitoringMission,willbriefthe Council
in detail on the security situation in eastern Ukraine,
including on Wednesday's hostilities. However, I would
be remiss not to note the grave concern of the United

Nations about the ongoing, almost daily deadly clashes,
the use of heavy weaponry, the laying of minefields on
both sides of the contact line, the reported continued
presence of foreign mercenaries on Ukrainian soil and
the reported flows of heavy weaponry into eastern
Ukraine, all of which run contrary to key provisions of
the Minsk package of measures.

The latest death toll since the outbreak of the
conflict stands at over 6,400 people. Since the signing
of the Minsk package, some additional 400 lives have
been lost. Sadly,just on Wednesday, 3 June, according to
the latest figures from the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights, an additional 28
people, including nine civilians, were killed in deadly
clashes around Marinka. This is a sharp increase over
the past weeks, particularly as heavy shelling elsewhere
in Donetsk reportedly continued throughout yesterday.
We are either looking at a return to a deepening,
intractable conflict or a momentary upsurge in parts of
the conflict zone. We cannot afford either scenario. The
ceasefire must be fully respected and the protection of
civilians a priority. I would also like to stress that all
concerned should refrain from using threats of violence
and military leverage to influence the political process.

The humanitarian situation also remains dire.
Ukraine now ranks among the top 10 countries in
terms of internally displaced persons (lDPs), with over
1.3 million IDPs. There were none just over a year
ago. In the last week of May alone, 16,000 people were
displaced. Similarly, nearly 870,000 Ukrainians have
sought asylum, residence or other forms of legal stay
in neighbouring countries; 10,000 of those were in the
second half of May alone. The number of displaced will
only grow if the violence continues.

Of immediate concern is the now complete lack
of humanitarian access across the contact line in
either direction, which has been preventing lifesaving
humanitarian assistance from reaching those most
in need. All parties to the conflict must immediately
guarantee unimpeded access for humanitarian
personnel and cargo, both by the United Nations
and non-governmental organizations (NGOs). The
Government of Ukraine must remove all bureaucratic
impediments to the delivery ofhumanitarian assistance,
and the 2 June decree issued by the de facto authorities
in Donetsk that prohibits international NGOs from
operating in non-Government controlled Donetsk must
be immediately revoked.

Since this crisis began, we have seen the Council
convene dozens of times. Security Council members
have repeatedly raised concern about the deteriorating
humanitarian situation. Yet the $3l6-million 2015
humanitarian response plan to assist victims of
this conflict faces a shortfall of $221 million. The
Secretary-General calls on Member States to urgently
translate their concern into action and to fully fund
the humanitarian response. This will ensure that the
capacity and resources are in place to reach those in
desperate need the moment that access is restored.

On the political-diplomatic front, we are most
encouraged by the continued and critical work in the
Normandy format, with the next political director-
level meeting scheduled for 10 June in Paris, by the
diligent efforts of the Trilateral Contact Group, and
by the commencement of the four working groups on
political, security, humanitarian and economic issues.
In our View, these three interconnected mechanisms
are all equally important pieces of the political and
diplomatic process, and we are heartened to see that the
international community is fully committed to these
efforts.

With regard to the working groups specifically, we
understand that, although they have not been without
challenges, each group has met at least twice and that
the atmosphere has mainly been constructive. The
political working group has, we understand, focused its
energies on the modalities of local elections, which also
includes finding common ground on the special status
law. Equally important efforts to fmd political solutions
to some of the most pressing economic, humanitarian
and security questions are also under way.

From 7 to 10 May, the Secretary-General visited
Poland, Ukraine and Russia. During his visits, he
held a number of constructive meetings with regard
to the conflict in Ukraine, including with Presidents
Poroshenko and Putin. Although they had varying Views
on the conflict in the east, both Presidents reassured the
Secretary-General of their continued commitment to a
peaceful resolution of the conflict. It was evident that,
although the road ahead would be long and arduous,
the full implementation of the Minsk agreements is
possible if all concerned fulfil their obligations and
engage in good faith.

The Secretary-General will continue his good
offices role on Ukraine, and remains open to
considering how best to further support the OSCE, as
well as the implementation of the Minsk agreements
more broadly. The critical work of the Human Rights
Monitoring Mission in Ukraine, evinced by its latest
report of 1 June, as well as of the humanitarian and
development actors on the ground, remain priority
areas for our Organization.
The package of measures for the implementation
of the Minsk agreements, including the reinstatement
of full control of the State border by the Government
of Ukraine, has a deadline. That deadline is less than
six months away. As we have stated on a number of
occasions, neither Ukraine nor the region nor the
international community can afford to have this process
fail. Above all, we cannot forget the tremendous human
cost ofthe conflict, which can only begin to be addressed
through respect of the ceasefire and fulfilment of the
political, economic, social, humanitarian and human
rights provisions of Minsk.

I would like to close by reiterating the United
Nations unwavering support to Ukraine's sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity. The people of
Ukraine deserve nothing less.

