The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of the United
Republic of Tanzania.

I would like to thank the President of the
Democratic Republic of Timor-Leste, His Excellency
Kay Rala Xanana Gusmao, for having addressed the
Security Council. I acknowledge the presence in the
Council Chamber of the Foreign Minister of Timor-
Leste, Mr. Ramos-Horta. I would also like to thank the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Sukehiro Hasegawa, and commend him for his
presentation of the progress report on the United
Nations Office in Timor-Leste (UNOTIL).

We are encouraged by the many positive
developments that have been recorded by UNOTIL,
including the completion of the final rounds of local
elections in a peaceful and orderly manner, with a huge
voter turnout; the strengthening of the country's legal
system and the submission of the report on human
rights abuses, marking an important milestone in the
search for truth and reconciliation in Timor-Leste; the
progress that has been made on border demarcation
between Timor-Leste and Indonesia; the prevailing
environment of good-neighbourly relations, as
manifested by the recent signing of an agreement
between Timor-Leste and Australia on sharing national
resources and revenue from the Timor Sea; and the
timely move to start preparations for parliamentary and
presidential elections in 2007.

We note, however, that, despite the remarkable
progress so far achieved, many institutions in Timor-
Leste are still young and fragile, calling for United
Nations agencies and other development agencies to
provide support for consolidating the pillars of
statehood: democratic governance, security and
sustainable development.

As the UNOTIL mandate expires, we believe that
Timor-Leste would benefit from a small United
Nations presence in the form of a special political
office to help it to complete the unfinished work,
including by providing electoral assistance covering
technical and logistical support for the upcoming
elections for the national parliament and the
presidency, and by making available civil advisers in
critical areas that require assistance, including the
justice and finance sectors, police training and
capacity-building in the security sector. We fully
support those modest requests.

We are mindful of the issues of human rights that
need to be addressed, and we commend the
Government for the way in which it has handled them
so far. It is our expectation that human rights issues in
Timor-Leste will be dealt with so that justice can be
rendered among the Timorese population and so that
reconciliation can be achieved, in cooperation with
Indonesia, in a manner that will meet the expectations
of the international community.

Finally, I wish to express my appreciation to the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Sukehiro Hasegawa, and all UNOTIL staff, for their
dedication and outstanding performance, which is an
excellent example of cooperation between the United
Nations and a Government. East Timor is, indeed, one
of the success stories of United Nations missions.

I resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I give the floor to the representative of Austria.

