Mr. Valero Bricefio (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): I congratulate you,
Madam President, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council and wish you every
success in executing your tasks.

The debate on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict continues to evoke concern and controversy.
The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela believes that the
State bears or should bear the primary responsibility
for the protection of civilians and the prevention of
violations of human rights or humanitarian law during
armed conflict that should be condemned in all
instances.

I wish briefly to refer to the protection of
civilians in armed conflict in the framework of
peacekeeping operations and their mandates. The
consent of the parties, impartiality and the non-use of
force are guiding principles for such operations and
must be preserved. On other occasions, we have
insisted that any strategy for protecting civilians must
systematically address the causes that led to a conflict,
including discrimination, poverty, injustice and a lack
of channels for the peaceful settlement of disputes.
A functional political system founded on social
justice, dialogue and coexistence is very important to
conflict prevention. Under the Fourth Geneva
Convention, the State or parties to the conflict has or
have the primary responsibility of protecting civilians.
The responsibility of peacekeeping operations is
limited to specific and limited occasions when it
becomes necessary to protect the physical safety of
civilians when there is a real danger of loss of life, and
always in the context of a deployed mission or when
humanitarian assistance is needed.

However, based on recent experiences,
international interventions in such cases are of
increasing concern. Discrepancies persist in the
manner, timing and advisability of undertaking military
interventions, and in identifying who is authorized to
undertake them.

Great world Powers have sought to invoke
seemingly noble concepts for political or military
interventionist actions that undermine sovereignty. For
that reason, the concept of the responsibility to protect
has not attained the consensus necessary to become an
instrument for the protection of civilians in armed
conflict. In some cases, certain States may be accused
of violating human rights, whereas world Powers may
undertake actions leading to coups, territorial
splintering and social and economic crises. The fact
that a domestic conflict has been created or stimulated
from beyond its borders is obfuscated.

Those who create and encourage such crises are
the ones who must be condemned and punished. Not
infrequently - and history provides plenty of
examples - an international intervention ends up
supporting those who breach and violate human rights.
Foreign interventions thereby undermine the
sovereignty of States. At other times, conflict situations
are ignored in which it does not suit transnational
interests to provide international solidarity, as the State
violating human rights acts as the intermediary for
those interests. Some Powers brandish rhetoric of
humanitarianism and human rights, but they undermine
and distort the true nature of those rights. The case of
Iraq is emblematic of that.

In recent decades, we have seen a succession of
various concepts and categories that tend towards neo-
colonial domination. We understand the reasons why
many countries of the South would identify with a
concept such as the responsibility to protect, for
instance. We understand their concerns, since
international solidarity is essential. But international
solidarity is one thing and intervention in order to
dominate is another. We must show a common front for
solidarity and unite to reject intervention that oppresses
peoples. We must reject the concept of the
responsibility to protect, for it disguises the violation
of sovereignty in order to promote neo-colonial
interests.

When it comes to providing support to a people,
there is near unanimity as to the serious violation of
human rights and international humanitarian law by the
State of Israel through its occupation of Gaza. Why do
we not then protect the Palestinian people and
decisively help them to become a sovereign State?

The financial leadership that currently governs
the world is predicated on increased military
expenditures, financial speculation and economic
policies that foster the recessive trends being
experienced throughout the world. That crushing
reality produces wars and poverty and the destruction
of the planet and of sovereignty, human rights and
democratic systems. That is the basic cause of
conflicts. It is up to the United Nations to consistently
implement, for the benefit of peoples and not the
interests of the powerful, the Charter and the other
legal instruments and resolutions that sovereign States
have established through the years for the good of
humankind and the planet.

