Mr. Takasu (Japan): We are now at a critical
juncture in the Angolan peace process, and the
international community is once again compelled to
express its grave concern at the worsening situation in
that country. The report of the Secretary-General
identifies, clearly and unambiguously, who is primarily
responsible for the recent negative developments: UNITA.
Because of UNITA's persistent and blatant disregard for
the peace process, the progress that has been achieved so
far is in jeopardy and the entire process is in danger of
unravelling.

The patience of the international community has
worn thin as, time and again, UNITA has failed to live up
to its obligations under the Lusaka Protocol and the
relevant Security Council resolutions. Once again, we call
upon UNITA to comply, fully and unconditionally, with
the provisions of the Protocol and those resolutions. In
particular, it is imperative that UNITA demilitarize its
forces and complete the transfer of the localities it has
occupied to Government control as soon as possible.

The situation in Angola as described in the
Secretary-General's report is profoundly discouraging. We
are gravely concerned that full-scale hostilities might
resume. Both sides are building up their military
capabilities, exchanging incendiary propaganda and
engaging in other actions that run counter to the efforts
which the Angolan people have made to achieve national
reconciliation. There can be no military solution to the
situation in Angola. It is urgently important that the
Government and UNITA enter into a political dialogue to
put an immediate stop to this dangerous escalation of
tensions. The United Nations, and especially the Security
Council, has been engaged in Angola for a decade,
beginning with the United Nations Angola Verification
Mission (UNAVEM. I). Most recently, the United Nations
Observer Mission in Angola (MONUA) has been working
tirelessly with the Angolan people to achieve the full
implementation of the Lusaka Protocol so as to put an
end to the long years of conflict. Thus, we are all the
more disturbed by the lack of cooperation with, and even

 

efforts to obstruct, the activities of MONUA on the part of
both parties, particularly UNITA. The Government is also
expected to comply with the requirements under the Lusaka
Protocol and to refrain from any actions that are
inconsistent with it. We strongly urge both parties to extend
the fullest possible cooperation to the United Nations
Observer Mission.

We are grateful to the Secretary-General for his
steadfast commitment to the peace process, and we look
forward to hearing the report of his Special Envoy, Mr.
Brahimi, when he returns to New York, so that we may be
better able to assess the situation and devise a course of
action for the future. I also wish to take this opportunity to
welcome the appointment of Mr. Issa Diallo as the
Secretary-General's new Special Representative. My
delegation looks forward to working with him in the
coming months.

As I stated earlier, this is a critical period in the
Angolan peace process. A great deal is at stake for the
people and for the international community. The
international community must not fail the Angolan people
by allowing the situation to once again escalate into full-
scale conflict. Therefore, the draft resolution before us
authorizes a one-month extension of the mandate of
MONUA, after which time its future will be subject to a
review on the basis of an assessment of the situation by the
Special Envoy. We hope it sends a clear message not only
to UNITA but also to the Government regarding their
respective roles and responsibilities for effective national
reconciliation in accordance with the Lusaka Protocol. For
this reason, Japan will vote in favour of it.

In closing, I join other Council members in paying
tribute to Maitre Beye and to the five MONUA staff and
two crew members who were killed when their aeroplane
crashed near Abidjan. Their contributions to the peace
process were incalculable, and they will long be
remembered. My delegation shares the wish of the
Secretary-General, as quoted by the Ambassador of the
Gambia, that their deaths should not be wasted. We are
confident that Mr. Diallo will be effective in continuing the
important work to which Maitre Beye and other people
dedicated their efforts and their lives.

