The President (spoke in French): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of Benin.

I should like to thank the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for having introduced the
report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK).
We particularly appreciated the objective technical
assessment of the implementation of the standards-
before-status policy.

We have gleaned from what we heard that the
situation in Kosovo is, on the whole, developing
satisfactorily and that significant progress has been
made in standards implementation. We particularly
welcome the progress made by the Provisional
Institutions of Self-Government in Kosovo since the
October 2004 elections. We welcome the fact that there
has been strict compliance with the Constitutional
Framework and the rules of the Kosovo Assembly, and
we commend the ongoing efforts made by the new
Government to ensure respect for the consistent
implementation of standards to stabilize the political,
economic and security situation in Kosovo, as well as
to reinforce the multi-ethnic nature of Kosovo.

We encourage the Government to continue to
work towards effective minority integration. We agree
with the Secretary-General, who stresses that the
Government of Kosovo will be judged on its efforts to
build confidence among minorities without losing the
confidence of the majority. Therein lie the true
challenges that need to be met in order to make Kosovo
a multi-ethnic, viable and liveable entity where all
communities can be on good terms with each other and
work together for a consensus-based management of
their daily lives, so that they can design, and have a
future together in, a shared society.

We believe that the Government needs to step up
its initiatives to overcome the reluctance of the Kosovo
Serb community to cooperate with the Provisional
Institutions. The Government must promote
constructive dialogue with the authorities of Serbia and
Montenegro to that end. The Serbian side must be
willing to engage in that dialogue.

Belgrade's opposition to the participation by
Serbs in the Provisional Institutions of Self-
Government has been a real impediment to the
implementation and the attainment of the principal
goals of the standards-before-status policy. We
welcome Belgrade's willingness to resume direct
dialogue within the working groups on missing persons
and on energy. UNMIK should, for its part, also
intensify discussions with the Belgrade authorities,
because participation by minorities is the only realistic
option for creating understanding among communities
that are bound by a common history and by their
commitment to a common land where coexistence is
their only choice.

Likewise, it is important for the Kosovo
authorities to take a clear stance on inter-community
incidents, which continue to taint the atmosphere in the
province. However minor they may be, they have a
major impact on the subjective considerations which
mould people's perceptions about security and give rise
to confidence among minority groups.

We encourage all countries in the region to try to
find solutions that suit all parties and to restore the
inalienable rights of all communities living in Kosovo.
For its part, the international community must remain
mobilized and speak with one voice to the parties
involved in Kosovo to obtain the results we hope to
see.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

The next speaker on my list is the representative
of Luxembourg. I invite him to take a seat at the
Council table and to make his statement.

