The President (spoke in French): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance with
the understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Following consultations among the members of
the Security Council, I have been authorized to make
the following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council welcomes the
Lebanese parliamentary elections held between
29 May and 19 June 2005. It commends the fair
and credible character of the vote and pays tribute
to the Lebanese people who demonstrated,
throughout the process, their strong commitment
to democracy, freedom and independence.

"The Security Council congratulates the
newly elected members of the Lebanese
Parliament.

"The Security Council commends the
Lebanese Government for the successful conduct
of the elections, in accordance with the
constitution and the planned schedule. It
expresses its appreciation for the advice and
technical support given to the Lebanese
authorities by the United Nations Electoral
Assistance Division. The Security Council also
pays tribute to the crucial contribution of the
international observers, notably from the
European Union. In this regard, it welcomes the
report of the EU observer mission and its
conclusions regarding the satisfactory conduct of
the four electoral stages.

"The Security Council looks forward to the
formation of a new Government in the near
future. It stresses that the establishment of this
Government in accordance with the constitutional
rules and without any foreign interference would
be another sign of the political independence and
sovereignty of Lebanon.

"The Security Council reaffirms that the
Lebanese people must be allowed to decide the
future of their country free of violence and
intimidation. It strongly condemns, in this context,
the recent terrorist acts in Lebanon, in particular
the heinous assassination of former leader of the
Communist Party George Hawi, and calls for
their perpetrators to be brought to justice.

"The Security Council reaffirms its
profound commitment to a stable, secure and
prosperous Lebanon. It underlines accordingly the
need for the newly elected Lebanese authorities to
exercise their full sovereignty over the entire
territory, to preserve unity through national
dialogue, to strengthen the nation's institutions
and to respect the principles of good governance,
in the sole interest of the Lebanese people.

"The Security Council calls upon the
international community to stand ready to examine
possible requests from the newly elected Lebanese
authorities for enhanced assistance and cooperation,
in support of a credible governmental programme
of political and economic reform.

"The Security Council reiterates its call for
the full implementation of all requirements of
resolution 1559 (2004) and urges all concerned
parties to cooperate fully with the Security Council
and the Secretary-General to achieve this goal.

"The Security Council also calls for the full
implementation of resolution 1595 (2005) and
looks forward to the cooperation of the newly
elected Lebanese authorities in this regard.

"The Security Council reaffirms its strong
support for the sovereignty, territorial integrity,
unity and political independence of Lebanon
within its internationally recognized borders and
under the sole and exclusive authority of the
Government of Lebanon."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2005/26.

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on the
agenda.

The meeting rose at 12.15p.m.
