The President (spoke in Arabic): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of cote d'Ivoire, in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the discussion of the item on the
Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, I
propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite that
representative to participate in the discussion, without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of
the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Djangone-Bi
(Gate d'Ivoire) took a seat at the Council table.

The President (spoke in Arabic): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on its
agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council.

(spoke in French)

"The Security Council commends the efforts
made by the African Union and, in particular, the
personal involvement of President Thabo Mbeki,
President of the Republic of South Africa, to promote
dialogue and relaunch the peace and national
reconciliation process in C6te d'Ivoire. It expresses
its full support for the facilitation mission undertaken
by President Mbeki on behalf of the African Union.

"The Security Council welcomes the
encouraging prospects resulting from these efforts
and the commitments made by all Ivorian parties,
demands that all Ivorian parties fully comply with
their commitments, and underlines that it will
monitor with vigilance their full implementation.

"The Security Council reaffirms its conviction
that the full implementation of resolution 1572
(2004) is a key element in ensuring that all Ivorian
parties commit themselves fully to the
implementation of the peace and national
reconciliation process in Cote d'Ivoire, and deplores
the fact that the signatories of the Linas-Marcoussis
and Accra III Agreements have not implemented by
15 December 2004 all their commitments under the
Accra III Agreement.

"The Security Council underlines that any
failure by any Ivorian party to respect their
commitments made to President Mbeki would
constitute a threat to the implementation of the peace
and national reconciliation process as defined in the
Linas-Marcoussis and Accra III Agreements, and
recalls in this regard the measures referred to in
paragraphs 9 and 11 of resolution 1572 (2004).

"The Security Council requests the Committee
established by resolution 1572 (2004) to continue its
work, taking fully into account the developments of
the peace process in Cote d'Ivoire arising from the
facilitation efforts undertaken by the African Union.

"In addition, the Security Council demands that
all Ivorian parties stop all incitement to violence and
hatred in broadcast, written and other media, and
calls upon the Committee to monitor this closely
without delay.

"The Security Council also demands that all
Ivorian parties ensure freedom of the press and
unlimited access to information throughout C6te
d'Ivoire.

"The Security Council expresses its intention to
consider without delay further steps to ensure the
effective monitoring and implementation of the arms
embargo imposed by resolution 1572 (2004).

"The Security Council expresses its
appreciation to the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Albert Tevoedjre, for his
unsparing efforts to support the restoration of a
durable peace in Cote d'Ivoire under challenging
circumstances."

(spoke in Arabic)

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2004/48.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The meeting rose at 4.50 p. m.

