Mr. Harrison (United Kingdom): The United
Kingdom welcomes the Secretary-General's report. It
provides a useful general overview of disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR) issues in the

 

peacekeeping context, and it puts forward some interesting
proposals. I should also like to thank the Secretary-General
for his very useful introduction to today's debate.

I will not make a detailed statement on this subject
today. The Permanent Representative of Portugal will be
making a statement on behalf of the European Union later
in this debate which comprehensively reflects the United
Kingdom's views on this subject.

I would, however, like to highlight two key issues
from the United Kingdom's recent experience of
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration in Sierra
Leone. The first is the importance of adequate resources.
As the Secretary-General observes, disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programmes need to be
placed on a firmer financial footing. The World Bank has
struggled to persuade donors to contribute to its Trust Fund
for Sierra Leone. Unless further substantial contributions
are received, key initial disarmament and demobilization
activities in Sierra Leone will not be carried out. This will
jeopardize not only the success of the United Nations
Mission in Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL), but also the peace
process as a whole.

We agree with the Secretary-General that further
thought must be given to ensuring reliable funding for
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration programmes.
We would suggest that the Secretary-General might explore
a range of possible financing options with interested
Member States, the World Bank and others, and make
further recommendations on this subject.

The second point I wish to highlight is the need for
proper coordination of all players involved in disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programmes. They
invariably involve a number of actors from different
organizations. In Sierra Leone, the lack of effective
coordination between key players has resulted in confusion,
delays and misunderstandings. We would therefore
encourage the United Nations to provide a coordinating
framework wherever this is possible.

