Sir Jeremy Greenstock (United Kingdom): The fact
that this draft resolution is being adopted today and that this
discussion is taking place today already silently expresses
much of the United Kingdom's message.

We all want to see an end to the decades of misery
caused by the conflict in Angola. We all believe that the
only way to achieve this is to deprive UNITA of the
practical means to continue to wage war. We have all, in
previous Security Council resolutions, committed
ourselves to sanctions on UNITA in order to achieve that
goal.

When a leader and his organization in civil conflict
reject peace and ignore the will of the majority of
ordinary people, then sanctions are one of the few tools
the United Nations has at its disposal to try to make them
reconsider. Having decided on a sanctions regime, we
must make it work.

I congratulate Canada and thank Ambassador Fowler
for the impetus you, Mr. President, and he have delivered
to implementation of United Nations sanctions on
UNITA. This effort, and the work of the Expert Panel,
both solidly supported in practice by the United Kingdom,
have already sent an important message: that violators of
sanctions will be pursued. UNITA now knows that, even
before the Security Council has taken its decisions,
law-breaking friends are harder to find, illegal supplies
harder to secure and stolen diamonds harder to sell.

Making this draft resolution work will be tough
going. It will require a new level of cooperation among
Member States, and between Governments and the private
sector. It will require technical expertise and political will.
The United Kingdom will play its part. While all Member
States are affected, the draft resolution places a particular
burden on States neighbouring Angola. We very much
welcome the commitment which the States of the
Southern African Development Community have already
expressed to follow up this draft resolution. That is in
their interests, because peace in Angola would make a
significant positive difference to the region. At the same
time, we recognize the burden on them. Some of the
measures needed, such as tightening up controls of
borders and airspace, will not be easy to implement. As
this draft resolution makes clear, the international
community needs to consider how it can help.

Today's draft resolution addresses more than the
achieving of peace in Angola. The text, the process which
has led to it and, most importantly, the action which must
follow from it, also send a forceful message about the
seriousness of this Council's business. We must live up
to it.

