Ms. Sison (United States of America): I thank
Under-Secretary-General Lacroix for his briefing. I
would like to welcome Foreign Minister Coulibaly and,
on behalf of the United States, congratulate him on his
re-appointment. We look forward to working closely
with him.

As Ambassador Haley has said, it is our priority
to see enduring peace and security for all of Mali's
citizens, as well as stability in the region. The
upcoming local and presidential elections should not
prevent or delay the Government and signatory parties
from pursuing the implementation of the Agreement for
Peace and Reconciliation in Mali. We believe the Peace
Agreement remains Mali's best hope ofbuilding a future
stable enough to support peaceful political transition.
The United States takes positive yet cautious note of the
September commitments reached by signatory parties
to not return to the battlefield. We are encouraged by
the absence of ceasefire violations and call upon all
signatory parties to take advantage of the momentum.

However, we are disappointed by the lack of
substantive progress on major elements of the Peace
Agreement. Interim authorities may be operational but
we have yet to see the fruits of effective governance in
the regions. Mixed patrols took place in Gao but do not
provide regular security back-up there. The continuing
standoff with regard to the criteria and numbers
of combatants to be submitted for disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration reflect a serious lack
of trust among parties and suggest a need for additional
confidence-building measures.

In a country fraught with a growing regional threat
of violent extremism and transnational organized
crime, parties must adopt a renewed sense of urgency
to make progress together on key security provisions
of the Agreement. Mali's collective security must be
arrived at collectively, with input and collaboration
among all parties. The Peace Agreement is the
signed road map for the parties to get there and the
Agreement's deliberative bodies provide the forums
for debate on issues related to security and much more.
Unilateral endeavours outside those forums can lead to
misunderstanding and mistrust.

The parties' most recent timeline for progress
agreed to earlier this month, in particular on the
security provisions of the Agreement over the next
few weeks and months, is a positive sign. However, if
there is still no progress by the Council's next quarterly
meeting, we should be prepared to consider action
through the sanctions regime we unanimously adopted
last September.

Unfortunately, we must also take note of the
increased frequency, magnitude and lethality of attacks
on both United Nations and Malian targets, which rose
by one third as compared to the previous reporting
period. That unacceptable number of troop deaths
demands that we take a long, hard look at the current
configuration of the United Nations in Mali.

We hope the Secretary-General's strategic review,
in tandem with the Council's requests and resolution
2364 (2017) for a strategic prioritization plan for
the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA), will deliver
recommendations ahead of the Mission's renewal that
will bolster mission security, elevate its most crucial
tasks and increase its operational effectiveness.
The Mission's ongoing efforts to implement recent
recommendations to improve security, which are crucial
in the light of MINUSMA's unacceptably high casualty
rate, will help in that effort. However, MINUSMA'S
chronic shortage of forces and resources remains a
matter of concern.

We must find an enduring solution for the most

critical capability gaps, such as those related to combat
convoy battalions, helicopters and armoured personnel
carriers. Inthe most dangerous ofpeacekeeping missions,
the United Nations, troop- and police-contributing
countries and all Member States must work together to
find a sustainable solution that will save peacekeepers'
lives and bring peace closer in Mali. The United States
applauds the efforts of the Group of Five for the Sahel
(G-S Sahel) in establishing its Joint Force. We are also
pleased to hear of the progress of the United Nations
in the development of the technical agreement. Pledges
already made and those to be made at the upcoming
23 February donors' conference in Brussels will be
critical to reimbursing MINUSMA's support through
the Agreement. We would like to reiterate the Council's
appeal in resolution 2391 (2017) that the technical
agreement be a temporary measure to bring about the
G-5 Sahel's self-sufficiency and not adversely impact
MINUSMA's operations and personnel.

The United States pledge of $60 million specifically
for the operationalization of the Joint Force will continue
through its robust bilateral security assistance for the
G-5 Sahel States, which totalled $1 billion in the past
five years. We also applaud the efforts of the United
Nations and the G-5 Sahel towards the development
of a human rights compliance framework as a key
component in respecting human rights and avoiding
alienating local communities in the battle against the
violence and recruitment of violent extremists.

The United States believes that even in a challenging
electoral year, with the continued regional threat of
terrorism, the parties to Mali's Peace Agreement, along
with the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali and its partners, can work
together to achieve concrete progress in the coming
weeks and months. That progress, or the lack thereof,
will be of paramount interest to the United States and
the Security Council. For the people of Mali, and for
Mali's friends in the region and beyond, the stakes are
too high to delay progress any longer.

