Mr. Djedje (C6te d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Jeremiah Mamabolo, Joint Special Representative
for Darfur and Head of the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID),
for presenting the report of the Secretary-General
on the implementation of the UNAMID mandate
(S/2018/389). The report informs us of the UNAMID
operational environment and of developments in the
overall situation in Darfur. My intervention will focus
on the security and political situations in Darfur, the
operational environment for UNAMID and the different
phases of the reconfiguration of the mission.

With regard to the first point, C6te d'Ivoire notes
with satisfaction that the overall security situation
in Darfur remains stable, in view of the Sudanese
Government's continuing efforts to create a secure
environment in the country.

My country also welcomes the launch of the
Government's arms control plan, launched so that only
regular forces are equipped with them, and welcomes the
positive impact that the weapons-collection campaign
continues to have on reducing intercommunal conflicts
and crime.

Cote d'Ivoire welcomes the extension of the
unilateral ceasefire by the Government. However, it
urges the parties involved to engage in frank discussions
in order to achieve the signing ofa permanent ceasefire.

On the political front, my delegation shares the
concerns expressed by the Secretary-General regarding
the impasse in the Darfur peace process. Despite
ongoing efforts by the African Union High-level
Independent Panel and the Joint Special Representative
to find a political solution to the crisis in Darfur, little
progress has been made in the political process and in
the implementation of the Doha Document for Peace
in Darfur.

My country therefore notes with regret the
persistence of land ownership disputes, which continue
to affect the people of Darfur. In view of the situation,
Cote d'Ivoire believes that the full implementation of
the Doha Document would provide lasting solutions to
the root causes of the conflict, including those relating
to land management, in the interests of the people.

To that end, my delegation shares Mr. Mamabolo's
view that the Security Council should do everything
in its power to encourage the various parties to adhere
to the Document and embrace the imperative need
for a political settlement of the crisis and to redouble
their efforts to negotiate an inclusive peace agreement
focused on the implementation of the measures
stipulated in the Doha Document.

With regard to the UNAMID operational
environment, my country condemns the attack on
a UNAMID national staff member on 24 February,
as well as all unjustifiable acts of violence against
UNAMID staff in general, which are violations of the
status of forces agreement.

Nevertheless, Cote d'Ivoire notes with satisfaction
the improved collaboration between the Government
of the Sudan and UNAMID in the implementation of
the mission's mandate. Therefore, while welcoming the
progress made in that regard, my delegation reiterates
its call to the Government of the Sudan to ensure
strict compliance with the status of forces agreement
with a view to facilitating the fulfilment of the
mission's mandate.

With regard to the reconfiguration of UNAMID,
Cote d'Ivoire welcomes the fact that no negative impact
has been recorded following the withdrawal ofUNAMID
from the various areas in which the team sites were
closed during the first phase of the reconfiguration. As
for the second phase of the mission's reconfiguration,
my country welcomes the significant progress made in
its implementation, including the establishment of the
Jebel Marra Task Force.

My delegation hopes that the recommendations
of the UNAMID strategic review, as mandated by the
Security Council through its presidential statement
of 31 January (S/PRST/20l8/4), will enable Council
members to better define the mission's priorities in the
context of the renewal of its mandate.

In conclusion, my delegation commends UNAMID
for its ceaseless efforts to re-establish peace and
stability in Darfur.

