Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): Kazakhstan expresses
its serious concern about the sharp escalation of the
situation in Syria. We call on all parties to prevent
further military escalation and take effective steps
aimed at restoring confidence and establishing peace
and ensuring security in the long-suffering land of
Syria on the basis of the Charter of the United Nations
and the relevant resolutions of the Security Council.

We called yesterday and the day before yesterday,
and every time when we have observed increasing
tensions, in this Chamber for responsible action in
accordance with the Charter of the United Nations and
international law. Who else, if not Council members,
should show the world an example of compliance with
the principles and provisions of the Charter?

We are telling others to strictly follow international
law and order, but sadly, yesterday we witnessed
a different example. Whatever action taken under

whatever good pretext cannot and will not justify the
military use of force. Violence carried out against
violence will never bring about peace and stability.
Kazakhstan's position has always been, and continues
to be, that military action is the last resort, to be used
only in cases approved by the Security Council. There
was no approval by the Council of the military strikes
that took place yesterday.

"Humanity hoped that the twenty-first century
would herald a new era of global cooperation. This,
however, may turn out to be a mirage. Our world
is once again in danger and the risks cannot be
underestimated... The threat is a deadly war on a
global scale... Our planet is now on the edge ofa new
cold war that could have devastating consequences
for all humankind." (S/2016/317, annex, p.2)

That is an exact quote from the manifesto of my
President, entitled "The World. The Twenty-First
Century", of 31 March 2016. Just yesterday Secretary-
General Antonio Guterres confirmed, to our regret, that
the Cold War is back with a vengeance (see S/PV.8231).

Kazakhstan appeals to the parties to adhere to both
the Charter of the United Nations and international
law. We think that the time has come for serious
talks encouraging the United States and the Russian
Federation, given their standing as the co-Chairs
of the International Syria Support Group and their
respective influence on the parties, to move actively in
the direction of finding middle ground and a political
settlement to the conflict in Syria. The United Nations
has a vital role to play in convening those negotiations
and helping the parties resolve their disputes.

My delegation is also extremely concerned
about recent developments and the lack of unity
among Security Council members with regard to
the chemical attack in Syria. From its early days of
independence, through a series of practical steps,
Kazakhstan has consistently promoted peace initiatives
in the international arena to achieve disarmament,
non-proliferation and the prohibition of weapons of
mass destruction, including chemical weapons, and
strongly condemns their development, testing and use.
I repeat: Kazakhstan strongly condemns the use of
chemical weapons.

It is important to conduct a thorough, objective
and impartial investigation into all aspects of the
alleged chemical attack in Douma so as to enable the
international community to render a fair verdict against
the perpetrators, in full compliance with international
law. The Government and other parties must thoroughly
execute their obligations to comply with the relevant
recommendations made by the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons and the United
Nations by accepting designated personnel, while
providing for and ensuring the security of the activities
undertaken by such personnel.

We would like to remind the members of the
Council that Kazakhstan's principled position is not
only to condemn in the strongest terms the use of
weapons of mass destruction by anyone, in particular
against the civilian population, but also to resolve
conflicts exclusively by peaceful means. President
Nazarbayev stressed in his manifesto that the main tools
for resolving disputes among States should be peaceful
dialogue and constructive negotiations on the basis
of equal responsibility for peace and security, mutual
respect and non-inference in the domestic affairs of
other States. Preventing the escalation of conflict and
ending wars are the most challenging tasks; there are no
other reasonable options. World leaders must treat such
tasks as the highest priority on the global agenda. We
must also respect the sovereignty of States Members
of the United Nations and the purposes and principles
enshrined in the Charter.

We urgently need apolitical solution. Onlyapolitical,
diplomatic approach, dialogue and confidence-building
measures in the spirit of the Charter and Security
Council documents on preventive diplomacy and
sustaining peace can bring about proper results. We
therefore call upon the international community to
show political will to overcome differences and resume
negotiations, in the belief that only a United Nations-
led political transition in accordance with resolution
2254 (2015) can end the Syrian conflict, which, in turn,
can advance only if the Council is united.

There is great need to continue to support the aims
of the Astana talks and further the Geneva negotiations
in order to see positive results. All parties at the
international, regional and Syrian levels should support
an immediate ceasefire and seriously and objectively
move forward without any preconditions within the
framework of the International Syria Support Group,
under the auspices of the United Nations Office
in Geneva.

We believe that the Syrian people are capable of
determining their own future. However, achieving their
aspirations for democracy, reconstruction and stability
is impossible without genuine international support
to contain the negative impact of spoilers and to help
Syrians combat terrorism and build their State on a firm
and stable foundation. Kazakhstan has always stood for
dialogue and the resolution of international conflicts.
All parties must ensure that the situation does not
further deteriorate. Military means will not work; only
political solutions will succeed. My President warned
that there will be no winners in any modern war, as
everyone will be on the losing side. He proposed to
work towards the total elimination of war and a world
without conflict.

Finally, we again call upon all relevant parties to
persist in diplomatic efforts, seek political solutions,
engage in dialogue and support the United Nations as
the main mediation channel. Kazakhstan is ready to
work with all colleagues to preserve peace and security
on the basis of mutual understanding, goodwill and
determination to make the world a safer place.

