Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (Spoke in Spanish): Allow me to thank Mr. James Swan, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Francisco
Caetano Jose Madeira, Special Representative of
the Chairperson of the African Union Commission,
Ms. Pramila Patten, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict, and
Ms. Amina Arale, Executive Director of the Somali
Women Development Centre, not only for their briefings
but also for their commitment, work and energy for the
well-being of Somalia and in favour of the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations.

I also take this opportunity to welcome the Somali
Ambassador to the United Nations, Mr. Abukar
Dahir Osman.

After two years of peaceful transition of power,
Somalia is in the process of rebuilding a State and is
making significant progress in the political, economic
and security spheres thanks to the Government's
development programme under President Mohamed
Abdullahi Mohamed. The support of its people,
the countries of the region, the United Nations, the
African Union, the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development and other international players has been
key in speeding up this important and delicate process.

Equatorial Guinea welcomes the efforts of the
international community to achieve peace and stability
in Somalia and to counter and overcome policies that
promote stagnation and the ongoing terrorist threats
that seek to reverse this process.

Good relations between the federal member states
and the Federal Government of Somalia are important
for addressing the country's continuing challenges
and are necessary for the implementation of the joint
development projects. Since the end of last year, the
Secretary-General's reports have reflected a climate of
estrangement between those two levels of Government,
a situation that continues to this day and jeopardizes
some of the gains made on issues such as federal
elections, enhanced security and debt relief. In that
regard, we urge the parties concerned to engage in a
spirit of consensus and cooperation, and to do all they
can to accelerate political discussions on key issues as
an immediate priority.

We welcome the announcement of the Speakers of
the House of the People and the Upper House of the
resumption of cooperation between the two houses of
the Federal Parliament, after seven months of rupture.
That enabled more positive developments to take place
in the overall political process in Somalia.

On this year's pending electoral processes of the
federal member states, we urge all parties concerned
to ensure transparency and to refrain from violence.
Similarly, we encourage the relevant authorities to ensure
the broad participation of women in those elections. We
ask the same of the 2020 and 2021 general elections, as
women's participation in all decision-making bodies in
Somalia will help to consolidate the process ofthe State
recovery process.

Before concluding, I would like to express our
concern about the series of attacks perpetrated in
Mogadishu and other parts ofthe country by Al-Shabaab
and factions of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant.
We strongly condemn those heinous attacks and
firmly maintain our support for and solidarity with the
Government and the people of Somalia in combating
the threat of terrorism in their country.

Finally, the delegation of Equatorial Guinea would
like to express its confidence in the work of the United
Nations in Somalia. We are convinced that the collective
response to terrorist threats and political instability in
Somalia must be strong and consistent. The international
community must continue to strengthen cooperation to
ensure the full implementation of the national security
architecture throughout Somali territory so that, in the
very near future, Somali security forces can assume
full responsibility for maintaining the security of their
country and its people.

