Mr. Hreggvidsson (Iceland): The situation in
Gaza is unacceptable. In the three weeks since the end
of the six-month ceasefire between Israel and Hamas,
hundreds of civilians, including many women and
children, have died in military actions and thousands
have been injured.

My country has condemned the killings of
civilians and aligns itself with the Secretary-General of
the United Nations and with those Member States that
have called upon Israel to immediately stop its military
actions in that densely populated area. Iceland has also
condemned the firing of rockets from Gaza to terrorize
Israeli civilians. Hamas bears a heavy responsibility for
drawing civilians into the conflict zone. However,
Israel's actions in Gaza in the past two weeks are both
disproportionate and clearly contrary to international
humanitarian law.

The immediate imperative is the suspension of all
violence by all parties. It will then be essential for
Israel to lift its blockade on Gaza so that humanitarian
aid can immediately be given access to Gaza.

The peace process must recommence with the
active involvement of the international community.
Iceland renews its call for the better inclusion of
women in the peace process, in accordance with
Security Council resolution 1325 (2000). In that
regard, as it did in December, Iceland calls the
attention of the Council to the International Women's
Commission for a Just and Sustainable Palestinian-
Israeli Peace (IWC) - a tripartite body involving
Israelis, Palestinians and prominent international
women leaders. The solidarity among these women
across the lines of conflict can offer inspiration and
hope for their societies as a whole.

The Security Council is the international body
responsible for maintaining international peace and
security. The situation in Gaza demands a concerted
effort by the Council to bring an end to the bloodshed
and put forward a plan on how to further the goal of
ending the occupation and achieving a two-State
solution, which is a prerequisite for durable peace.

