The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received letters from the representatives of
Belgium, Croatia, Germany and Italy, in which they request
to be invited to participate in the discussion of the item on
the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual practice,
I propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite those
representatives to participate in the discussion, without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of
the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Simonovic
(Croatia) took a seat at the Council table; Mr. Reyn
(Belgium), Mr. Metscher (Germany) and Mr. Terzi di
Sant'Agata (Italy), took the seats reserved for them at
the side of the Council Chamber.

The President: The Security Council will now begin
its consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached in its
prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the report
of the Secretary-General on the situation in Croatia,
document S/l997/487, and the report of the Secretary-
General on the United Nations Mission of Observers in
Prevlaka, document S/ 1997/506.

Members of the Council also have before them
document S/l997/537, which contains the text of a draft
resolution prepared in the course of the Council's prior
consultations, and document S/ 1997/53 8, which contains the
text of a draft resolution submitted by Belgium, France,
Germany, Italy, Japan, Portugal, the Russian Federation,
Sweden, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland and the United States of America. The Republic
of Korea has joined as a sponsor of the draft resolution
contained in document S/ 1997/538.

I should like to draw attention to document
S/1997/522, which contains the text of a letter dated
7 July 1997 from the Charge d'affaires ad interim of the
Permanent Mission of Denmark to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General.

It is my understanding that the Security Council is
ready to vote on the two draft resolutions before it.
Unless I hear any objection, I shall put the draft
resolutions to the vote now.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I shall first put to the vote the draft resolution
contained in document S/ 1997/537.

A vote was taken by show of hands.

In favour:
Chile, China, Costa Rica, Egypt, France, Guinea-
Bissau, Japan, Kenya, Poland, Portugal, Republic of
Korea, Russian Federation, Sweden, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America


The President: There were 15 votes in favour. The
draft resolution has been adopted unanimously as
resolution 1119 (1997).

I shall now put to the vote the draft resolution
contained in document S/1997/538.

A vote was taken by show of hands.

In favour:
Chile, China, Costa Rica, Egypt, France, Guinea-
Bissau, Japan, Kenya, Poland, Portugal, Republic of
Korea, Russian Federation, Sweden, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America


The President: There were 15 votes in favour. The
draft resolution has been adopted unanimously as
resolution 1120 (1997).

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The meeting rose at 11.20 am.

