Ms. DiCarlo (United States of America): I would
like to welcome Foreign Minister Saudabayev to the
Council and congratulate him on assuming the
chairmanship-in-office of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE). I thank him for his
comprehensive briefing. The United States would like
to assure him of our full cooperation during the coming
year.

At our open debate last month (see S/PV.6257),
we discussed the critical importance of the United
Nations coordinating conflict prevention and post-
conflict peacebuilding efforts with regional
organizations. We welcome the important partnership
between the OSCE and the United Nations, which has
allowed both organizations to exploit their comparative
advantages in order to strengthen regional and

international peace and security. Today, I would like to
highlight a few important examples of this cooperation.

United Nations-OSCE cooperation in the Balkans
has been exemplary. In Kosovo, the OSCE served as a
critical pillar in the United Nations mission, promoting
democracy and governance. Just as the United Nations
has reconfigured its mission and refocused its efforts in
Kosovo, the OSCE has adjusted its own role as part of
the overall international effort. The successful
municipal elections held in Kosovo last year were the
first democratic elections in the country held without
the assistance of the OSCE. Local and international
observers confirmed that the elections adhered to
democratic standards. They were testament to the
excellent work of the OSCE in helping the people of
Kosovo build up their own democratic institutions.

Regarding Georgia, the OSCE plays an important
role, along with the United Nations and the European
Union, in supporting dialogue through the Geneva
process. The United States urges all parties to
participate in the Geneva process actively and
pragmatically and to make full use of agreed-upon
measures to prevent and respond to incidents that could
increase tensions. We must continue to work toward
the re-establishment of an OSCE presence in Georgia
and a long-term, peaceful resolution of the conflict.
The United States once again expresses its support for
Georgia's sovereignty and territorial integrity within its
internationally recognized borders.

We welcome and encourage the continuing close
cooperation of the OSCE with the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan. The OSCE has
drawn on its vast experience in securing and managing
borders, training police and promoting democratic
elections to assist the Government and people of
Afghanistan in strengthening the rule of law. During and
following last year's presidential and provincial council
elections, the OSCE shared its expertise on ways to
improve the electoral process with Afghan leaders.

We agree with the findings of the OSCE Office
for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights that
deep and sustained reform is required to enhance the
Afghan Government's ability and credibility in
conducting future elections. We would encourage
Afghanistan and the OSCE to explore further
cooperation in that area and in areas such as advancing
gender equality and human rights and training for
parliamentarians.

Further, we commend the commitment of the
Chairman-in-Office to promoting the implementation
of Security Council resolution 1540 (2004) as part of
the global effort to address nuclear disarmament and
non-proliferation. We also welcome the commitment of
the OSCE to implementing other Security Council
resolutions on terrorism, protecting civilians and
combating sexual violence in conflict zones.

We note that the Chairman has stressed the
importance of addressing environmental threats. We
remain committed to working with all participating
States on those challenges, including climate change
and energy security. Diverse and reliable energy
supplies are important for the security of Europe, and
the OSCE, with its comprehensive approach to
security, is well placed to highlight the links between
energy and security. The United States has suggested
developing new mechanisms through which any
potential supply disruptions could be effectively dealt
with on a political level.

Finally, we support the continuing efforts under
OSCE auspices to resolve the dispute over Nagorny
Karabakh and to bring all concerned parties to
consensus on the future of Moldova's Transdniestria
region. We will continue to work with other
participating States in the Corfu process and to
strengthen our ability to address security challenges in
Europe and to prevent new conflicts from arising.

The United States encourages the continued
dialogue and deepening cooperation between the
United Nations and the OSCE. We applaud the OSCE
for its many important efforts to date.

