Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
Guatemala has not intervened in the prior debates on
this matter. We did, at the time, hail the capacity the
Council revealed to bring together support for
resolution 1441 (2002). We also noted with mounting
concern the divisions that arose around the
fundamental question of how to implement it. But we
refrained from joining the growing polarization that
characterized the positions taken on this burning issue,
which gradually transcended the scope of the Council
and spilled over to the general membership. Rather, up
to the end we nourished the hope that the members of
the Council, particularly the permanent members,
would find some way of bridging their differences.

Today we are confronting a situation that is
altogether different. We understand that it is not
realistic to expect this collegial body to look backwards
or try to arrest a momentum over which those of us
who are not members exert little or no influence. We
are fully aware, furthermore, of the risks that would be
involved in bringing additional tensions to bear on the
sole multilateral body that takes collective decisions on
the maintenance of peace. I shall, therefore, confine
myself to expressing, with almost telegraphic
conciseness, our opinion on three aspects.

First, we are extremely concerned about the
humanitarian situation that has arisen in Iraq and in
neighboring countries. We would prefer that
humanitarian assistance be administered by the United
Nations and we unreservedly support the Secretary-
General with regard to organizing the provision of
assistance to the Iraqi population. We feel that, for
now, the programme known as oil for food should
continue. We also fully subscribe to the Secretary-
General's appeal to the conflicting parties to respect
the civilian population, in keeping with international
humanitarian law. We agree that, until such time as the
United Nations is in a position to act, the exigencies of
the circumstances demand that the humanitarian
assistance required be provided by the entities that
exert control over the affected areas.

Secondly, even though it may be premature to
address the post-conflict situation, we think that it will
be incumbent upon multilateral agencies, and
particularly the United Nations, to play a fundamental
role in facilitating a situation in which the Iraqi people
themselves make decisions regarding their future. In
this respect, we take it as a given that the sovereignty
and integrity of the Iraqi nation will not be impaired.

Finally, we reiterate our faith in multilateral
agencies and in the unique role of the Security Council.
We do not concur with the assessment of some
observers who believe that the debate that has taken
place within the Council these past few weeks has dealt
a mortal blow to that body. This is not the first, nor will
it be the last, time that the members of the Council
have failed to reach agreement on complex and
potentially divisive issues. It would, nevertheless, be
naive to think that that debate has not left wounds,
even deep wounds, which will require a deliberate
effort by all members - I emphasize all - to
safeguard the integrity of the Council and preserve this
singular body established under the Charter to maintain
peace.

