Mr. Valdivieso (Colombia) (Spoke in Spanish): I
want to reiterate the welcome that has been expressed
to Mr. Petritsch, the High Representative, and to the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr.
Klein. We want to thank them for the information that
they have brought to us. Through their statements and
the report, we can see that there is a combination of
positive and negative events that demonstrate how
complex it is to implement the Dayton Accord.

This also shows the kind of commitment that the
international community still must have. The future of
Bosnia and Herzegovina lies in the resolve of its
leaders to persevere on the path that has been designed
by the international community in order to strengthen
the reforms on the policies that are necessary for the
internal stability of the country.

This means that the country will have a more
active role in the community of nations and that it will
be possible for it to progress towards regional
integration. The international community must
continue to give its assistance in this process, but there
must be a steady change in the role that has been
played by it thus far. From being an actor within the
process of reform and stabilization, it must become an
observer. Of course, the most difficult thing is to
determine the appropriate time to effect that change.

We want to highlight a few of the elements that
were mentioned by Mr. Petritsch and by Mr. Klein that
underscore the achievements and the challenges ahead.
First of all, in the political field, we note the adoption
of the Election Law by the Parliamentary Assembly.
That law makes it possible for Bosnia and Herzegovina
to begin to reform through democratic processes the
political attitudes of the past.

We are, however, concerned about the refusal of
the authorities of the Republika Srpska to cooperate
with the International Criminal Tribunal. We hope that
the draft law of cooperation, which is to be considered
by the National Assembly, will be adopted in the near
future to ensure that the cooperation that has thus far
existed on the part of Republic of Bosnia and
Herzegovina will be extended to the Republika Srpska.

We also want to underscore the increase in the
number of minority persons that have been returning in
recent months. We hope that the required policies will
be adopted at the state level and between the Entities so
as to ensure an increase in those numbers. We also
welcome the regional programmes adopted by the
Government of Yugoslavia, Croatia and Bosnia and
Herzegovina, because these measures will facilitate the
adoption of lasting solutions to the problems of
refugees.

Lastly, we wish to mention the need to improve
the demining programme. We know from the report
that one of the problems is the lack of funds. For that
purpose it is necessary for the authorities of Bosnia and
Herzegovina to increase their own internal
contribution. It is alarming that in five years only 12
per cent of high-risk areas have been examined and
only 7 per cent of the land has been cleared of mines. It
will therefore be up to the competent authorities to take
action in order to have a more active programme in
operation, ensuring the cooperation of the international
community.

