Ms. Mulvein (United Kingdom): I should like to
thank the Presidents of the International Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals and
the Prosecutor for their reports (see S/2017/436 and S/2017/434) and their presentations.

At the outset, let me reiterate the United Kingdom's
continued support for the ICTY and the Mechanism and
for all that they do to end impunity for the most serious
international crimes.

As the ICTY progresses through its final year, the
international community as a whole must continue
to support the Tribunal so that it leaves behind a
continuing and enduring legacy. Completion of its
judicial work remains the priority. We welcome the fact
that the Tribunal remains on track to deliver its final
judgments in the cases of Mlaa'ie and Prlie et al before
the end of the year. Let me commend the work of the
judges and staff as well as the Tribunal's efficiency
measures, such as the prosecution's "one office" policy,
which have made this possible. We also pleased that
the transfer of residual functions from the ICTY to the
Mechanism remains on track.

We are, however, very much aware of the challenges
that the ICTY faces. We share the Tribunal's concern
over continued stuff attrition, and we welcome the
measures taken to address this issue. We hope that staff
will feel able to see their work through to the finish.

The United Kingdom is very concerned that
more than two years on, the arrest warrants for the
three individuals in the Jojic' et al contempt case have
still not been executed. We strongly urge Serbia to
cooperate fully with the ICTY in all respects, including
complying with its international obligations in this
matter. Failure to do so risks undermining the central
principles of international justice and the rule of law by
allowing those suspected of interfering with witnesses
to avoid accountability.

It is essential that the ICTY's vast experience and
lessons learned not be lost. Its legacy must reflect
its achievements and make a lasting contribution to
regional peace and stability. We are therefore pleased to
note its forward-looking approach to maximizing digital
outreach and transforming the ICTY's website into a
permanent repository for the Tribunal's digital legacy.

The legacy of the ICTY should be a clear and
resounding message to those who commit such crimes
that they cannot escape justice. Whether it takes two
years or 20, history will eventually catch up with them.

With regard to the Mechanism, we note that it
has entered an important phase, shortly commencing
a retrial in Stanisie and Simatovie and undertaking
complex appeals in Karadeic' and Seselj. We look
forward to the Mechanism's continuous, expeditious
and efficient treatment of these cases and to receiving
updates as they progress.

We remain concerned at the fact that the situation
of Judge Akay has not yet been resolved and by
consequent ongoing delays in the Ngirabatware case.
We hope that a pragmatic resolution can be found as
quickly as possible.

We fully support coordination between the
Prosecutor's Office, national enforcement agencies
and INTERPOL with regard to apprehending the eight
remaining fugitives, and we welcome the Prosecutor's
initiatives to improve tracking activities. We hope that
they can be brought to justice soon, and we urge all
States to cooperate to this end.

We also welcome the relocation of two further
acquitted and released persons from Arusha and
support the Mechanism in its ongoing work in this
respect, recognizing the challenges.

In addition to the work of the Mechanism and the
ICTY, there can be no doubt that effective national
prosecutions are vital in achieving justice for the
victims of atrocities and holding perpetrators to account
for their crimes. So we are troubled by the Prosecutor's
report for the ICTY that regional judicial cooperation
is moving in the wrong direction. It is imperative
that all States work together to achieve justice.
We strongly urge all relevant authorities to initiate
discussions immediately so as to remove any barriers to
investigating and prosecuting the most serious crimes
ofinternational concern, and we call on regional States
to work with the Office of the Prosecutor to develop
practical proposals to improve the situation as soon as
possible. Individuals suspected of war crimes cannot
continue to be shielded from justice simply by virtue of
their location.

We are also deeply disturbed by the Prosecutor's
reports, both for the ICTY and the Mechanism, of denial
of crimes, in particular genocide and revisionism. If
such crimes are to be prevented in future, it is essential
to accept the ICTY and Mechanism findings and rulings
on the tragic events of the not-so-distant past.

