Mr. Wilson (United Kingdom): I thank Special
Envoy Hiroute Guebre Sellassie for her briefing and
take this opportunity to welcome her to her new role.
I also want to thank the Secretary-General's Special
Representative for West Africa, Said Djinnit, for his
work over recent months to begin the implementation
of the integrated strategy.

Recent developments again underscored the deep
inter-connections between States in the Sahel region.
Events in northern Mali in May affected not only Mali
itself but the wider region, and the barbaric attacks of
Boko Haram in northern Nigeria damaged not only the
prosperity and security of Nigeria but also that of its
immediate neighbours. To address the threat of Boko
Haram, the British Foreign Secretary hosted a meeting
on 12 June, in London, to further boost regional
cooperation against Boko Haram. Representatives from
Nigeria and other countries of the region, the African
Union, the United Nations and the European Union
attended that meeting, following the Paris summit of
17 May. Participants at the meeting highlighted that
the issue of Boko Haram spreads further than Nigeria's
borders. They agreed to law enforcement, military and
intelligence cooperation to help combat the terrorist
threat, and they stressed that security and stability
could be achieved only through respect for human
rights, alleviating poverty, creatingjobs, strengthening
the rule of law and building accountable governance.

The complexity and scope of the challenges in
the region, taken with what is required to meet them,
justify the adoption by the integrated strategy of a
flexible definition of the broad Sahel-Sahara region.
The broader view is right. It enables the United Nations
and the wider international community to flex their
responses across the region according to priority needs.

We fully support the integrated strategy's
three-pillared approach to activity in the Sahel.
All three pillars - governance, security and
resilience - are linked. Without concerted progress
across each ofthose agendas, it will be difficult to make
lasting overall progress. The Secretary-General's latest
report (S/2014/397) shows us that progress has been
made in all three areas. It shows what can be achieved
by mobilizing both multilateral organizations and the
States of the Sahel region. One year into the strategy's
implementation phase, more still needs to be done.

First, in the immediate term, with the onset of the
annual lean season, the international community must
be ready to alleviate the hardship of food insecurity.
As the representative of France already pointed out,
an estimated 20 million people will endure the pains
of food insecurity this year: that is one in eight across
the region. The United Kingdom, through its continued
commitment to provide 0.7 per cent of gross domestic
product for development assistance, stands ready to do
our part.

Secondly, looking ahead, we must help Sahel
States to manage their porous borders more efficiently
and enable them to deliver core services such as
health, education and justice. The United Kingdom
will continue to work with its partners, including the
European Union, to help achieve that.

Thirdly, as the Secretary-General's report notes, we
should also encourage the development of the Group of
Five for the Sahel, and we should encourage those five
countries to enhance their cooperation across a broad
regional agenda, including economic cooperation.

The Secretary-General's report calls for an
increased level of coordination to make our efforts as
effective as possible. The United Kingdom agrees with
that conclusion and will support the Special Envoy
for the Sahel as she leads the implementation of the
integrated strategy and seeks to strengthen governance,
resilience and security across the Sahel.

