Mr. Braun (Germany): First, I would like to thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Nicholas Haysom, for his comprehensive briefing
today. We highly appreciate the outstanding efforts of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) in leading and coordinating international
civilian efforts to promote human rights, economic
development, political stability and regional and
international cooperation. We commend the Mission
for its remarkable support for the Afghan Government
in its striving for security, peace and development.

Germany aligns itself with the statement delivered
on behalf of the European Union.

Supported by the international community,
Afghanistan has made significant progress over
the past 14 years. Greater observance of human
rights, in particular women's rights, advances in
the field of counter-narcotics and fostering regional
and international cooperation and coordination are
examples of the progress made last year. Nevertheless,
to achieve long-lasting peace and the maintenance of
security and human rights, much remains to be done.
Further reforms by the Afghan Government are of
the essence. The year 2016 will yet again be a critical
year for Afghanistan. We look forward to the Warsaw
NATO Summit in July and the Brussels Conference in
October. Germany will not falter in its commitment to
Afghanistan in terms of support for its development,
stabilization and the Afghan National Defence and
Security Forces, and by participating as lead nation in
the Resolute Support Mission.
We are highly concerned about the volatile security
situation and the resulting high number of civilian
casualties. We encourage the Afghan Government
to continue its efforts in countering the rising levels
of displacement and low rates of economic growth.
Nevertheless, facing an intense level of insurgency,
the efforts of the Afghan Government to strengthen
regional economic integration and to move forward in
activating a peace process have been duly noted. The
Afghan National Defence and Security Forces have
proven their strong commitment and great courage. We
therefore commend them for their efforts to establish
and uphold peace and security in their country.

We encourage and support a peace process among
all Afghan parties, which we regard as the only path
to a sustainable internal peace. We welcome the
quadrilateral initiative. A peace process can succeed
only if it engages not only the Government, but
also the population of Afghanistan and its political
representatives. It will also need the unequivocal
backing of the international community here at the
United Nations, and especially of all Afghanistan's
neighbours. As Chair of the International Contact
Group and one of the largest donors to Afghanistan,
Germany will continue to play an active role to that end.

For Germany and the European Union, migration
from Afghanistan has become a pressing issue with
the arrival of over 150,000 Afghan nationals to
Germany this past year alone. Germany will fulfil
its international obligation and moral duty to provide
those fleeing persecution with international protection.
At the same time, it is counting on the full cooperation
of the Afghan Government to ensure a prompt return
of those who are not in need of such protection to
their home country and to stem the drain on its human
resources. Afghanistan and its international partners
can be successful in building a future for the country
and its people only if Afghans themselves believe in
that future.

Lasting peace, guaranteed compliance with human
rights and sustainable growth can be achieved only by
a strong Afghan Government and the involvement of all
Afghan people. We commend the Afghan Government
for its work towards democratization and electoral
reform, and further encourage it to ensure transparency
and accountability in all political processes, as well
as freedom of speech. We condemn the murder of
seven media professionals in Kabul by the Taliban
on 20 January, which was an attack on the free flow
of ideas and the liberty of the media, and offer our
condolences to the families of the victims.
To conclude, let me assure the Council that Germany
remains committed to supporting Afghanistan during
the transformation decade, in close cooperation with
the Afghan Government and our international partners.

