Mr. Mansour (Palestine): I did not ask for the
floor to make another statement with regard to some of
the issues that have been discussed in this body. Of
course, I could very easily make comments about those
things. For example, I could talk about the Prime
Minister of Israel, who stated again today that
aggression against Gaza would continue and that what
he called "accidents" - similar to what happened in
Beit Hanoun - would most likely be repeated. That
means that he is completely disregarding this debate
among almost all countries from every corner of the
globe.

I could also refer to the actions of the Israeli
Government with regard to extremism. While President
Abbas is trying to create a unified Government on the
Palestine side and to prepare the atmosphere for a
resumption of negotiations, what are the actions of the
Israeli Government? It was only the other day that a
Deputy Prime Minister - and we know his name; I do
not need to mention it - was added to the
Government. His positions are very well known: he is a
segregationist and an advocate of ethnic cleansing.

If one wanted to derail this debate in the Security
Council by raising those issues, one could do so very
easily. But I have not taken the floor to exercise the right
of reply; I asked for the floor simply to say that we thank
all delegations that have conveyed condolences to the
families of the victims of the massacre and to the
Palestinian leadership. We will convey those messages to
the families, to our people and to the leadership.

We also urge all members of the Security Council
to adopt the draft resolution before them as soon as
possible. We would prefer that they adopt it today, if
they are ready to act. But, whatever the case, we urge
them to act on the draft resolution as quickly as
possible. We hope that, this time, the Council will not
let our people down. We hope that the Council will be
able to adopt the draft resolution in order to send the
appropriate message to everyone in the Middle East,
including the Israeli occupying authorities and the
Palestinian people.

