Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): I thank the United
Kingdom presidency for convening this briefing. We
welcome Foreign Secretary Jeremy Hunt, whom we are
honoured to see presiding over today's meeting. I also
thank Under-Secretary-General Vladimir Voronkov,
Head of the Office of Counter-Terrorism; Assistant
Secretary-General Michele Coninsx, Executive
Director of the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate (CTED); and Ms. Joana Cook, Senior
Research Fellow at the International Centre for the
Study of Radicalisation and Political Violence, for their
insightful remarks. My delegation would like to make
the following observations and recommendations.

We see a definite changing trend in the tactics
related to terrorist acts in the world today, which can
be described as low-cost, localized terrorism. The
weakening of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL) has resulted in urging its supporters throughout
the world into what can be described as autonomous
jihad in their places of residence by using any means at
their disposal during major social, political, sporting,
religious and cultural events. We see an increase in
the number of suicide attackers who use improvised
explosive devices, vehicles and drones laden with
explosives. Such tactics now widely prevail, thereby
causing serious damage, exacerbated by the return
and relocation of foreign terrorist fighters. The latter
have acquired practical skills in conducting mine and
explosive warfare and military operations in highly
concentrated urban areas. Alarmingly, members of
militants' families, especially women and children, are
being used for the ill-intentioned ends of terrorists to
spread radical ideology and facilitate, or even carry
out, lethal terrorist acts.

As we heard today, Central Asia constitutes a
potential target of terrorist activities. As noted in
the report of the Secretary-General (S/2018/770), the
greatest threat to the region comes from the largest
terrorist groups in the north of Afghanistan, owing to
the inflow of militants from Syria and Iraq with the
aim of transferring terrorist activities to the region
and beyond. Driven out of Iraq, they see Afghanistan
as a springboard for the creation of a world Islamic
caliphate - an expansion of the so-called Wilayat
Khorasan, comprised of foreign terrorist fighters,
former members of the Taliban, the East Turkestan
Islamic Movement and others. Therefore, international
terrorist organizations will attempt to infiltrate and
incite terrorist activity in Central Asia. That process
is facilitated by the dissemination of terrorist ideology
to radicalize vulnerable segments of society in
Central Asian countries, thereby leading to the spread
of various unconventional religious movements in
Islam the adherents of which are a recruiting base for
replenishing the ranks of terrorists.

Furthermore, in the light of ISIL's weakened
position, the authority of Al-Qaida and its regional
branches is gradually growing, thereby creating
another dangerous front in the fight against terrorism.
In that context, Kazakhstan calls making every effort
to consolidate international, regional and national
counter-terrorism systems. Considerable attention
should be paid to preventing the spread of terrorism
and extremism, especially among young people, as
apriority.

At the regional level, Kazakhstan actively carries
out the Joint Plan of Action for the implementation of
the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy
in Central Asia, by addressing all four of its pillars.
The third phase of the regional Joint Plan of Action for
implementing the Global Counter-Terrorsim Strategy in
Central Asia was successfully launched by the United
Nations Regional Centre for Preventive Diplomacy
for Central Asia (UNRCCA), the Office of Counter-
Terrorism and CTED in May in Ashgabat. Kazakhstan
was the first country to provide financial support for its
activities. We thank other donor countries - first and
foremost the Russian Federation - for their financial
contributions. One of the first events in the framework
of the Joint Plan was a regional workshop - on the
theme "Addressing conditions conducive to the spread
of violent extremism and terrorism" - organized by
the UNRCCA and the Office of Counter-Terrorism in
Astana in May.

To address present-day challenges, Kazakhstan
reiterates the steps it proposed at the High-Level
Conference of Heads of Counter Terrorism Agencies
of Member States, held in New York in June: first, the
adoption of the code of conduct to achieve a world free
of terrorism, initiated by Kazakhstan, as a multilateral
political commitment of the States Members of the
United Nations to engage in a collective fight against
terrorism through concerted efforts; second, placing
under rigorous control, and eventually halting, drug
trafficking, the illegal trade in natural resources and
cultural artefacts and the use of new technologies
and payment modalities, which are the main sources
of financing terrorism; thirdly, sharing experiences
and best practices among Members States to prevent
all forms of terrorism, including countering the
financing of terrorism and identifying terrorist
threats in cyberspace, together with protecting critical
infrastructure; fourthly, enhancing the sharing of
biometric information on terrorists among regional
and international databases in order to obtain timely
information about groups and individuals with
destructive intentions; fifthly, establishing an exchange
of best practices on forensics and the suppression of
terrorist ideas on the Internet 4 it is equally critical
to counteract activities in cyberspace - sixth, taking
proactive measures to counter self-radicalization
and prevent the recruitment of citizens by extremist
organizations; and, seventh, ensuring sustainable
economic development to complement security efforts
in order to provide a meaningful alternative for young
people in particular.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate Kazakhstan's
support for the efforts of the Office of Counter-Terrorsim
to establish a global network of national counter-
terrorism coordinators under the auspices the United
Nations, as proposed by the Secretary-General. We are
committed to fully engaging in multilateral efforts to
implement the relevant Security Council resolutions.

