Ms. Murmokaite (Lithuania): I thank you, Sir,
for organizing this highly pertinent open debate. I
would also like to thank the Secretary-General for his
comprehensive briefing.

Lithuania associates itself with the statement to be
delivered on behalf of the European Union by the Head
of its Delegation to the United Nations.

Since the inception of the United Nations,
peacekeeping has developed to become an indispensable
tool for the maintenance of international peace and
security. Nearly 70 missions have been deployed over
that time, and the experience and lessons learned
from those missions continue to feed into the concept
of peacekeeping as it evolves further, owing to the
changing nature of conflicts and the requirements on
the ground. While today's trends in peacekeeping can
pose considerable challenges, they also highlight the
inherent adaptability of United Nations peacekeeping,
which remains one of its major strengths.

Today, let me focus on three issues: ensuring
capabilities needed to implement peacekeeping
mandates, inter-mission cooperation, and the use of
modern technologies.

Former United Nations Secretary-General Dag
Hammarskjold once noted that "peacekeeping is not a
job for soldiers, but only soldiers can do it". Owing to the
multidimensional character of today's peacekeeping,
the troops on the ground must be able to respond
quickly to the multiple challenges at hand. Besides
traditional peacekeeping tasks, they must provide
effective protection of civilians and their human rights,
humanitarian assistance, and, in cooperation with
country teams and relevant regional and subregional
actors, engage in early peace- or State-building. That
raises new demands for the peacekeeping partnership
of the Security Council, Member States, the Secretariat
and the relevant regional organizations.

Highly mobile units and task forces with
appropriate equipment and sustainability capabilities
are increasingly preferable to traditional infantry
battalions, which are best suited to operate in static
configurations. Approaches that integrate infantry,
police and gendarmerie, engineering and support
structures are being tested in real time. The operational
readiness of troops and their preparedness for rapid
deployment are an increasing necessity. A capability-
driven and qualitative rather than quantitative focus
must be maintained in order to ensure the effectiveness
and operational value of peacekeeping forces in the
highly volatile and rapidly changing crisis situations in
which peacekeepers carry out their missions today.

Such complex, multidimensional environments
also raise new demands for peacekeeper training and
readiness to perform an increasing variety of tasks.
Being able to read the signals of and act accordingly
to deal with gender-based violence, rape as a tool of
war, and the abuse and recruitment of children is key
for implementing protection-of-civilian mandates.
Because of the increasing focus on civilian protection
and humanitarian issues, human rights and gender
sensitivity training is essential for peacekeepers to be
able to carry out their tasks properly.

Predeployment assessment is critical for ensuring
that peacekeeping contingents meet United Nations
standards, including with regard to the protection of
civilians. Even more importantly, all personnel must
respect the values of United Nations peacekeeping and,
first of all, the principle of"do no harm". All allegations
of misconduct involving peacekeeping personnel, in
particular those related to sexual exploitation or abuse,
must be examined thoroughly, and those responsible
must be brought to account. A zero-tolerance policy
with regard to sexual misconduct, wherever and
whenever it occurs, must be strictly implemented.

Let me now turn to inter-mission cooperation.
While the concept paper (S/20l4/384, annex) notes
that inter-mission cooperation should not affect the
implementation of particular mission mandates, we
believe that such cooperation could in fact help their
implementation and should therefore be an inherent
feature of overall mission planning. As crises multiply
and the United Nations peacekeeping budget keeps
growing, we believe that peacekeeping should not
be seen as a patchwork of separate missions, but as
a global enterprise in which efficiency gains and
synergies should be identified so as to provide added
value and benefit for all mandates. Broader regional
and operational theatre thinking and assessment of
crisis situations and conflict trends should take place,
possibly going as far as preparing contingency plans
for inter-mission support, the involvement of regional
and subregional actors, and options for emergency
redeployment in crisis situations.
Emergency redeployment to tackle the situation in
South Sudan, which has involved missions in volatile
situations, can offer a valuable case study for the future.
Cases of inter-mission cooperation in West Africa and
the Middle East can also serve as examples, while
opportunities for greater cooperation at the regional
level are explored. At the same time, cooperation
should also be strengthened on the global level, notably
through the implementation of the Global Field Support
Strategy and the use of the capabilities available at
global and regional service centres.

Finally, let me touch upon the use of advanced
technologies in United Nations peacekeeping. Lately,
discussions at the United Nations have focused on
unmanned aerial vehicles, whose added value was
recently demonstrated at a Secretariat briefing on their
use in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. However,
the range of advanced technology that is or could
be used to enhance implementation of the complex
peacekeeping tasks of today is much wider. Global
positioning system technology in mission vehicles,
infrared capabilities on aircraft and helicopters, the
reduction of missions' ecological footprint through
water-saving equipment, and the use of cellular or
satellite communications as early warning mechanisms
by civilians in conflict areas are just some examples.

Technology can be employed not just to enhance
situational awareness and facilitate the decision-making
process, but also to bring peacekeepers closer to the
communities they are mandated to protect. It is also
important to reinforce the deterrence element, shrinking
the space in which perpetrators can act undetected and
with impunity. Finally, the use of advanced technology
could result in substantial resource efficiencies and
would allow the United Nations to optimize the use of
critical enablers.

At the same time, technology cannot replace troops
and police officers on the ground and should be seen
as only performing an enabling and supporting role.
Situational awareness without adequate troop capability
to act is of little use. The human factor remains crucial
in peacekeeping operations. Besides helping to better
protect civilian lives, a smart use of technologies in
peacekeeping would also help to protect the lives
of peacekeepers, as the toll of peacekeeper deaths is
becoming unacceptably high.

Only a short while ago, on 29 May, the United
Nations marked the International Day of United Nations
Peacekeepers. Let me conclude by paying tribute and
expressing our deep appreciation and respect for all the
peacekeepers, who put their lives at risk to protect the
lives of others and, at times, pay the ultimate price in
the line of duty.

