Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
We thank you, Mr. President, for having organized this
open debate, as well as for the concept paper annexed
to your letter dated 2 November 2009 (S/2009/567).
This, without a doubt, will guide our deliberations on
the protection of civilians in armed conflict. We wish
also to express our appreciation to Mr. John Holmes,
Under-Secretary General for Humanitarian Affairs, for
his informative briefing.

My delegation associates itself with the statement
just made on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement. At
the same time, we would like to address from a
national perspective certain aspects of special interest
to Guatemala. This interest derives not only from our
commitment to the universal values of the United
Nations Charter but also from our more specific
perspective of a country contributing troops to
peacekeeping operations. Indeed, on 23 January 2006,
eight of our troops lost their lives and another five
were wounded in an operation whose indirect purpose
was precisely to protect innocent civilians in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo from the hostilities
of the Lord's Resistance Army.

With that particular viewpoint, we, like many
other troop-contributing countries, struggle with the
dilemma of, on the one hand, limiting our presence in a
given country to keeping the peace, without exposing
our troops to offensive actions that place them in
harm's way, and, on the other hand, involving
ourselves in humanitarian efforts to protect the civilian
population as part of a broader mandate to restore
stability and normality in the day-by-day routine of the
inhabitants on the ground.

From a wider standpoint, we welcome the
continued willingness of the Security Council to
address the protection needs of civilians in armed
conflict. We believe that this is a timely opportunity to
thoroughly review the progress made and the
challenges we face. The fact is that despite the
numerous reports and resolutions, the wealth of
experience and the best practices accumulated over the
past decade, civilians still account for the majority of
casualties - and the risks they bear have only
intensified.

It is increasingly difficult to distinguish between
civilians and combatants, due in part to the

proliferation and fragmentation of non-State armed
groups that resort to strategies that flagrantly
contravene international law and strike against
civilians in order to shield military objectives. This is
also due to new technology that has produced long-
range artillery and missiles, thus expanding the conflict
zone and exposing larger numbers of civilians to
attacks. For that reason, conventional measures are not
sufficient to address these challenges and emerging
dangers. These circumstances go beyond the five core
challenges indicated in the Secretary-General's most
recent report on this issue (S/2009/277) and in his
presentation this morning.

Most certainly, we acknowledge this year's
update of the aide-memoire on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict (see S/PRST/2009/ 1, annex), which identifies key protection concerns in this
area. Nevertheless, we still seem to fall short when it
comes to the observance of international humanitarian
law and accountability for violations. For this reason,
we believe that the time has come to adjust some
norms of international humanitarian law in order to
fully comply with the requirements of distinction and
proportionality set forth by international humanitarian
law for the protection of civilians. Moreover, we must
avoid selective approaches to violations of
international humanitarian law and abide strictly by the
legal norms concerning the protection of civilians.

With regard to how this item is handled in
Security Council mandates, we should like, very
briefly, to point out the following points. First, the
protection of civilians cannot be treated in the same
way in all peacekeeping operations. The situation will
vary depending on whether we are dealing with a
mandate under Chapter VI or Chapter VII of the
Charter, as well as on the particular details and context
of each peacekeeping operation.

Secondly, there are limits on the action of the
United Nations and we believe that measures should
only be aimed at the protection of those civilians that
are at imminent risk or in imminent danger. The
Organization cannot assume responsibility in every
situation, given that its capacity to respond depends on
the mandate and on the availability of precise
information, appropriate logistical support, adequate
resources and political will.

Thirdly, mandates are established by the Security
Council, and while this body has expressed its

intention to ensure that they include clear guidelines
concerning what missions may and must do to protect
civilians, they should be formulated on the basis of a
realistic assessment of what is taking place on the
ground and in close consultation with troop-
contributing countries, as well as with the host country.
Subsequently, the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations should draw up a concept of operations
based on accurate information, which will serve as a
legal and operational framework for the rules of
engagement.

Finally, we consider that in order to improve the
protection of civilians in the field we must respect and
observe existing international humanitarian law
without selectivity, take into account the need to
promote the development of secure environments and
the restoration of the rule of law, and provide troop-
contributing countries with resources, equipment and
training prior to deployment.

