Mr. Ipo (Cote D'Ivoire) (spoke in French): Cote
D'Ivoire would like to thank the Bolivian presidency
for organizing this Security Council briefing to review
the report of the Secretary-General (S/2018/912) on the
evolving situation in Darfur and the implementation
of the mandate of the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID). We also thank
Mr. Jeremiah Mamabolo, Joint Special Representative
for Darfur and Head of UNAMID, for the quality of
his briefing.

Having read the report, my delegation has some
observations concerning the political and security
situation, humanitarian and human rights issues and
UNAMID operational environment.

With regard to the political and security situation,
my delegation commends the progressive stability in the
region of Darfur. However, we remain concerned about
the impasse facing the implementation of the Doha
Document for Peace in Darfur, which is the cornerstone
of the peace process. C6te D'Ivoire is convinced that
there is no alternative to a political settlement to the
crisis in Darfur. We therefore expresses our firm
support for the political process to resolve the current
crisis. We call upon all stakeholders, including the
non-signatory movements, to persevere in constructive
dialogue to definitively achieve the peace that the
peoples of Darfur have aspired to for so many years.
My country also calls upon the Sudanese authorities
to work towards developing consensus-based norms
that guarantee the transparency and credibility of the
elections planned for 2020.

On the security front, my delegation commends the
efforts undertaken by the Sudanese authorities to reduce
the level of violence and ensure security in Darfur.
However, we are worried by the sporadic clashes in
the Jebel Marra region, the intercommunal conflicts,
the growing tensions between herders and farmers and
militia attacks against civilians. We therefore call upon
the warring parties to immediately cease hostilities. My
delegation also calls on development partners to provide
multifaceted support to the Sudanese authorities in the
pursuit of solutions to the root causes of the conflict.

With regard to the humanitarian and human rights
situation, my delegation notes with concern the ongoing
food insecurity, which is exacerbated by the economic
crisis and climate hazards, as well as violent clashes
that have led to the destruction of houses and the mass
exodus of the civilian population. Moreover, the climate
of insecurity and heavy rains in some parts of Jebel
Marra have made it difficult to access areas where there
are substantial humanitarian needs. My delegation is
also worried by attacks against civilians, including
sexual violence in Darfur. Cote d'Ivoire invites the
international community to redouble its efforts to
provide appropriate responses to the deteriorating
humanitarian situation and human rights violations. In
that respect, my country asks that total access to all
conflict-affected parts of Darfur be granted to United
Nations agencies. We also invite stakeholders to work,
in close collaboration with United Nations entities and
humanitarian actors, to provide appropriate assistance
to distressed populations.

My country encourages the Sudanese Government,
in collaboration with all actors, to create the conditions
for the return of displaced persons and refugees in
safety and with dignity and for their resettlement
and reintegration. To that end, Cote d'Ivoire urges
the international community to support the Sudanese
authorities through a substantial contribution to
financing the 2018 humanitarian response plan for
the Sudan.

Concerning the operating environment for
UNAMID, Cote d'Ivoire congratulates UNAMID on
the work that is has done in often difficult conditions,
which is characterized by a surge in acts of violence
against its personnel. The presence of UNAMID in
Darfur is needed for the protection of civilians and
humanitarian workers, as well as for peacebuilding and
development in the Sudan. It is therefore essential that
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur be able to operate in an appropriate environment.

In conclusion, Cote d'Ivoire calls on the
international community to provide the financial and
technical assistance necessary for the establishment
of strong institutions that are able to overcome the
challenges related to establishing the rule of law, justice
and security in Darfur.

