Mr. Bessho (Japan): I thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this debate on Afghanistan. I also wish
to thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Mr. Tadamichi Yamamoto, for his informative
briefing and the tireless efforts of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan. Let me further
express my appreciation to Ms. Ghizaal Haress,
Mr. Yury Fedotov and Ambassador Kairat Umarov
for their briefings, as well as Ambassador Mahmoud
Saikal of Afghanistan for his valuable input.

Japan welcomes the successful convening of the
Geneva Ministerial Conference on Afghanistan, held
in November, co-hosted by the United Nations and the
Government ofAfghanistan. Japan attaches importance
to the fact that, in addition to reform and development,
reconciliation was formally put on the agenda for
the first time. Japan welcomes the formulation of the
Geneva Mutual Accountability Framework and will
support the efforts of the Afghan Government to move
forward with its reforms.

Japan would like to pay its deepest respects to the
citizens of Afghanistan for their determination and
courage in casting their votes in the parliamentary
elections of October, in spite of the difficult security
situation that they faced. We also express sincere
condolences to the victims of terrorist attacks and
their bereaved families. Free and fair elections are
the backbone of democracy, and Japan expects that
the Afghan Government will review the results and
challenges that surfaced at the parliamentary elections
and take every possible measure for the upcoming
presidential election, scheduled for next April.

Improving security is fundamental to the peace and
reconciliation process moving forward. While we have
recently seen efforts in the international arena regarding
peace in Afghanistan, Japan continues to support an
Afghan-led and Afghan-owned peace process.

Japan is highly concerned about the severe drought
affecting Afghanistan, where millions of people are
facing serious food insecurity and a humanitarian
crisis. The Government of Japan has recently decided to
extend new assistance of $13 million in response to that
devastating natural disaster. Moreover, understanding
the agricultural sector and rural development as key
sectors for Afghanistan's development and essential
for enhancing resilience to droughts, Japan provided
approximately $15 million this year to improve
irrigation infrastructure and water management.

I welcome the fact that the briefers and speakers
have stressed the important role of women and youth
in Afghanistan. In that connection, Japan has decided
to provide approximately $17 million to promote the
Maternal and Child Health Handbook and provide
immunization against infectious diseases, including
polio. I believe that those projects will contribute to
saving the lives of many Afghan children, who will
lead Afghanistan's progress in the future.

We are at an important and decisive juncture as we
near the halfway point of the transformation decade.
We should build on what has already been achieved,
and Japan stands ready to participate in and discuss
with the international community and, of course, the
Afghan Government, the way forward in order for
Afghanistan to become truly self-reliant.

