Mr. Mejdoub (Tunisia) (spoke in French): I shall
act according to your appeal, Mr. President. I thank you
for having organized this public meeting on the United
Nations Mission in Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL), and I
thank Ambassador Adeniji for having introduced the
tenth report of the Secretary-General. My delegation
would like to say how much it appreciates the report,
which in addition to being particularly exhaustive and
full of information, gives us an in-depth analysis of the
challenges to be dealt with in Sierra Leone and of the
strategy to be adopted in the short and medium term in
order to ensure success in the peace process in that
country.

Naturally, my delegation has, with some
satisfaction and relief, taken note of the significant
progress made in the implementation of the peace
process, as noted in the report of the Secretary-General.
This progress confirms the positive development of the
process since the Abuja meetings, held in May and the
beginning of June 2001. We cannot fail to agree with
the Secretary-General's conclusion that this two-track
approach, military and political, adopted by the
international community and the Government of Sierra
Leone has started to yield results.

However, we are not yet at a stage where we can
say with assurance that this positive trend is now
irreversible. The concerns expressed by the Secretary-
General clearly indicate that the peace process is still
fragile, and that vigilance should remain the order of
the day.

My delegation is certainly reassured that the
Secretary-General and UNAMSIL have already begun
to prepare for the critical next stages of the peace
process, particularly the third phase of the Mission's
concept of operations. We are also encouraged by the
steps already taken and planned by the Government of
Sierra Leone in order to advance this process,
particularly those relating to the political dialogue with
the Revolutionary United Front (RUF), the
implementation of the disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration programme, the restoration of State
authority and the recovery activities.

However, ongoing difficulties, which are
basically financial in nature, could derail the entire
process, especially since they affect such vital
activities as the disarmament, demobilization and, in
particular, reintegration of ex-combatants, displaced
persons and refugees; the restoration of State authority;
the organization of elections; and the development and
long-term economic recovery of the country.

We therefore urge the international community to
continue to support the people of Sierra Leone and to
give it all necessary political and financial assistance.
The considerable investments that the international
community, and the community of donors in particular,
have made over the last 10 years to promote peace in
Sierra Leone would be ultimately pointless if they were
not reinforced at this highly critical moment in the
country's peace process.

My delegation also believes that the political
track should remain a top priority in the quest for a
definitive solution to the conflict in Sierra Leone.
Tunisia associates itself with the appeal of the
Secretary-General to the Government of Sierra Leone
and to the RUF leaders to continue to work with
dedication and in good faith in this direction. My
delegation also believes that the concerns expressed by
the RUF about its security and its political future,
about the Truth and Reconciliation Commission and
about the Special Court should be taken into
consideration. The goal here is to reconcile the need for
the primacy of law with political demands in order to
prevent any risk of a reversal in the peace process.

We also believe that the situation in Sierra Leone
can be resolved definitively only if security is restored
to the region. In this regard, I wish to add my voice to
the appeal made by the Secretary-General and other
speakers to the leaders of the Mano River Union
countries, calling upon them to enter a political
dialogue under the aegis of the Economic Community
of West African States as soon as possible, in order to
reach a common and concerted solution to the alarming
security situation in the region.

I conclude by saying that my delegation awaits
with interest the next report of the Secretary-General,
which will include his recommendations on the
increase of the military component of UNAMSIL in
order, to enable it to implement the future phases of the
concept of operations. These phases will be critical
because they involve the deployment of the mission in
the diamond-producing areas and throughout the whole
of the country so as to facilitate the holding of
elections in Sierra Leone.

