Mr. Amin (Bangladesh): We are grateful to
Under-Secretary-General Jean-Marie Guehenno for
updating us on the current situation of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. We appreciate the detailed information
and analysis with which he provided us on the general
elections. This morning, we had an opportunity to
deliberate on this issue in plenary meeting in the
General Assembly. Our main focus was on the
economic development of the war-ravaged country. We
believe that that is the key to the future of the country.

In a few days, we will be observing the fifth
anniversary ofthe signing of the Dayton Peace Accord.
It was that Accord that allowed the establishment of
Bosnia and Herzegovina as a sovereign State. The new
leadership is therefore expected to pursue the Dayton
agenda, as our colleagues have said, with renewed
commitment and vigour. The peoples of Bosnia and
Herzegovina have worked hard in recent years to
restore their war-torn country to normalcy. Not all of
their efforts have been rewarded with success, although
some notable progress has been achieved.

Much of the slow pace at which the
implementation of the Dayton Peace Accord has
proceeded has been attributed to a lack of commitment
by the local leadership fl or, at least, by part of it i as
well as to the surrounding political environment. This
is now changing, or expected to change. We have
reasons to be optimistic that the Dayton
implementation process will now gather new
momentum and proceed at a faster pace. Our optimism
cannot but be guarded, however, as other speakers have
pointed out, in view ofthe disposition ofthe nationalist
forces.

With this backdrop in mind, we have several
points to make. First, with regard to elections, we
welcome the successful completion of general elections
on 11 November in Bosnia and Herzegovina. The
Bosniacs, Serbs, Croats and other minorities deserve
our praise for the peaceful conduct of the democratic
process. We also appreciate the efforts made by the
High Representative, as well as by the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) Mission,
in the holding of these elections. From the preliminary
information and assessment, it appears that political
pluralism in Bosnia and Herzegovina is putting down
roots. This is likely to usher in a new era in which,
hopefully, the leaders will rise above their ethnically
driven political agenda and be able to work for the
well-being of the common citizen. It will now be the
duty of all leaders representing their people at different
levels to work hard for political stability and the
economic development ofthe country.

Secondly, with regard to the political
environment, new leaders have emerged this year in
Croatia and the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. This is
likely to change the political dynamics of the region
and facilitate a resolution ofthe long-standing issues of
the return of refugees, detained and missing persons,
war crimes and other related matters.

Thirdly, with regard to the return of refugees and
internally displaced persons, there has recently been an
increase in the return of refugees to their pre-war
homes. The High Representative, in his briefing to the
Security Council last month, mentioned the return of
about 30,000 minorities this year. This relative increase
in the rate of return is a positive development, and it
should be sustained. The most important aspect of
these returns is that they took place in or near the
towns of Srebrenica and Foca, which are synonymous
with mass killing and wild destruction. Much credit is
owed to the tough measures taken by the High
Representative for implementation of property laws,
which have facilitated an increase in refugee returns.

Fourthly, on the issue of economic reform, we
started by saying that we put emphasis on the economic
reconstruction of the country. The new leadership must
create conditions for self-sustained economic growth.
The country must move beyond the legacies of the past
era and make the transition to a dynamic civil society
and a healthy, market-driven economy. The need for
continued support by the partners of the peace
implementation process is vital. This will set the stage
for success, despite the many hurdles that might be
erected by the obstructionist political forces.

Fifthly, attention should particularly be directed
to capacity-building, including the modernization of
the judiciary, strong and independent courts, the
training of police and border service personnel, and
support for key legislation projects.

The priorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina remain
in the areas of economic reform, the return of displaced
persons and refugees and the building of common
institutions - areas already identified by the High
Representative as the three main priorities. Although
progress has been slow, Bosnia and Herzegovina has
come a long way towards attaining these goals. We
applaud the peoples of Bosnia and Herzegovina for
their continued efforts to rebuild a well-functioning
sovereign State.

We are fully cognizant of the many obstacles
standing in the way of progress. The need for the world
to stand by the peoples of Bosnia and Herzegovina and
provide the necessary support, assistance and
encouragement is now greater than ever. We hope that
Bosnia will soon be on a definite course towards
economic and institutional recovery and that it will
register achievements which will pave the way towards
its ultimate integration into the rest of Europe.

