Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank Special Representative of the
Secretary-General De Mistura for his comprehensive
analysis of the situation in Afghanistan and for the
work undertaken by him and the Mission he leads. We
also thank the Permanent Representative of Turkey,
Mr. Apakan, for his detailed briefing on the Security
Council mission to Afghanistan and for his outstanding
leadership. We further thank the Government of
Afghanistan and the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) for their effective
assistance to the Security Council mission.

We support the efforts of the leadership of
UNAMA to constructively assist an Afghan settlement
in accordance with the mandate entrusted to it by the
Security Council. We believe that the main result of
international efforts in Afghanistan should be the
consistent achievement by the Afghan authorities of
sovereignty over the country's security and economic
development and a phased assumption of its principal
responsibility in these areas, including security, with
the assistance of the international community and
under the central coordinating role of the United
Nations.

It is in that context that we View the series of
forthcoming events, including the international Kabul
Conference and the parliamentary elections scheduled
for September, which must promote the further
building of a democratic Afghanistan and effective
State institutions. We also support the processes of
political settlement and national reconciliation in
Afghanistan provided that they do not run counter to
the interests of long-term stability and corresponding
Security Council efforts.

Dialogue is possible only with those who have
laid down their weapons, recognized the Constitution
of Afghanistan and genuinely severed all ties with Al-
Qaida and other terrorist structures. We believe in the
necessity of strict compliance with and the further
enhancement of the effectiveness of the sanctions
regime against Al-Qaida and the Taliban. It is a true
counter-terrorism instrument in the hands of the United
Nations and the international community. It is of
fundamental importance that the aforementioned
fundamental principles guide Afghanistan's leadership
and UNAMA in assisting a political settlement in
Afghanistan.

We continue to harbour serious concerns
regarding the security situation in Afghanistan. Of
heightened concern in that respect is the growing
negative trend in the northern regions of the country,
which have been relatively calm until recently, where
Taliban and other extremist incursions are on the
increase. We share the United Nations alarm at the
number of civilian casualties caused by the terrorist
activities of Al-Qaida and the Taliban. At the same
time, it remains urgent to ensure that the operations
undertaken by the international military presence in
Afghanistan be more targeted.

The Russian Federation is deeply concerned by
the situation in Afghanistan in the field of the
production and illicit traffic in narcotics, which have
evolved into a real threat not only to regional but also
international peace and security. We believe that such a
description of these challenges should be incorporated
into future Security Council decisions on Afghanistan.
Combating this phenomenon, which is directly link to
the spread of extremism and terrorism, requires a
comprehensive and systemic approach combining the
ongoing use of force, including in the eradication of
drug crops, and solving the social problems of Afghan
society, which would involve the elimination of
poverty, a transition to the cultivation of alternative
agricultural crops, and the fight against corruption.

It is clear to us that, given the scale of the Afghan
drug threat, the efforts of the Afghan Government
alone will be insufficient. There is a need for joint
action by the international community under United
Nations auspices and with the active participation of all
interested States and international and regional
organizations, including NATO, the Collective Security
Treaty Organization and the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization. These objectives would be
furthered by the forging of a broad counter-narcotics
coalition, with the involvement, beyond the
aforementioned structures, of civil society institutions.
We expect the contingents of NATO State members in
Afghanistan to cooperate even more actively on this
issue with the Afghan Government. More energetic
action is also needed to suppress the trade in
precursors, without which heroin cannot be
manufactured.

As a reliable partner to Afghanistan, the Russian
Federation is convinced that, through joint efforts
under the lead role of the Government of Afghanistan,
we will achieve a robust political settlement in that
country. Afghanistan's future must be determined by
Afghans themselves. The Russian Federation will
continue to strengthen its cooperation with Afghanistan
and a broad range of international partners for the
successful post-conflict reconstruction of that country
and the establishment of a viable State structure,
including police and counter-narcotics bodies.

