Ms. DiCarlo: I thank you, Mr. President, for the opportunity to brief the Security Council on the situation in the Sudan and on the planning for our new mission in the Sudan, the United Nations Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in the Sudan (UNITAMS). When I addressed the Council on the Sudan in April (S/2020/336), I highlighted the fact that the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) was compounding the political, economic and security difficulties the country was facing. This broad assessment remains valid. Nevertheless, there have been positive developments in recent weeks. There have also been new challenges. As the Secretary-General highlights in his report (S/2020/912), the Sudan's political transition continues to move in the right direction. In recent weeks, important legislative reforms were adopted to improve fundamental rights. Interim civilian governorswere appointed in all 18 states, including two women. These are very welcome developments. The most significant political development, however, was the initialling, on 31 August in Juba, of the peace agreement between the transitional Government of the Sudan, the Sudan Revolutionary Front alliance and the Sudan Liberation Army-Minni Minawi faction. The parties agreed on a transitional period of 39 months, effective from the date of signing, which is scheduled for 3 October. Furthermore, Prime Minister Hamdok and the Abdelaziz Al-Hilu faction of the Sudan People's Liberation Movement-North signed the agreement on principles in Addis Ababa on 3 September. All participating parties should be commended for having persevered with the peace process amid the range of other pressures brought on by the pandemic. Those who are absent from the ongoing peace efforts in the country should be encouraged to engage in dialogue and negotiations with the transitional authorities. It is not too late. As we embrace the recent progress in the peace process, we are also mindful of the significant work ahead. The various accords and respective peace agreements on regional issues must be moulded into a single, coherent framework. Additionally, the parties and the Government must form a joint vision on the way forward and uphold their respective commitments. At a time when all Governments face major economic constraints, it will be important to set realistic expectations of what can be provided to finance peace dividends. Participants in the High-Level Sudan Partnership Conference, held in Berlin, were generous in their support to the Sudan's transition, but signalled that the impact of COVID-19 could reduce donor capacity. The United Nations, in partnership with the African Union, will offer support, as requested by the parties and within its capacity and mandate, to the implementation of these and future agreements. On 10 September, the transitional Government of the Sudan declared an economic state of emergency after a collapse in the Sudanese pound. This announcement followed months of soaring inflation, a spiralling exchange rate and continuing shortages of basic commodities. Frustration with the state of the economy is growing, as evidenced by the re-emergence of protests across the country. Meanwhile, outstanding issues regarding economic management of the crisis leads at times to tensions between different components of the Government. Despite these immense challenges, the Government has been able to make progress in undertaking difficult economic reforms. These changes, such as the removal of subsidies on fuel, form part of an agreement with the International Monetary Fund on a staff-monitored programme, one of the steps necessary to move the Sudan closer to debt relief under the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries Initiative. Further, some of the financial assistance donors pledged at the Berlin partnership conference will help to offset some of the economic hardships Sudanese households are experiencing. The contributions will support the implementation of the World Bank-designed, but nationally led, social impact mitigation initiative, known as the Sudan Family Support Programme. The pilot for this initiative was launched with assistance from the World Food Programme this month. I call on all donors to make good on their pledges and release funds into the Family Support Programme as soon as possible. I also call on international partners to address impediments that prevent the Sudan's full integration into the international economic community. In that regard, I am encouraged by the recent indications of progress on delisting the Sudan from the United States State Sponsors of Terrorism list. Since the start of the rainy season in July, the Sudan has faced its worst flooding in decades, with over 800,000 people affected, of whom more 100 perished. Between June and September, the projected number of food insecure people rose to 9.6 million, owing in part to the impact of COVID-19, which has exacerbated ongoing inflation and price increases for food and other goods. Humanitarian organizations are working closely with the Government to respond, but further resources are required to meet the growing needs. The planning for the establishment of the new United Nations mission in the Sudan, UNITAMS, is progressing. Following the lifting of travel restrictions, the work of the planning team shifted in July from Headquarters to the Sudan. I thank the Government of the Sudan for providing a high level of cooperation and support to the team. The proposed structure and _ geographical deployment of the Mission are outlined in the Secretary- General's report. The design of the mission is intended to enable a new and innovative way of working, fostering maximum cooperation and integration among various United Nations entities, and we are working in partnership with the Government of the Sudan and the Sudanese people on this effort. The mission start-up team for UNITAMS will deploy to the Sudan next month to begin implementing the four strategic objectives mandated by the Security Council: assist the political transition; support peace processes; assist peacebuilding, civilian protection and rule of law; and support the mobilization of economic, development and humanitarian assistance. We will fulfil these objectives with full respect for the principles of national ownership. Gender issues are mainstreamed throughout the mandate of the Mission, which will have dedicated gender expertise, including at the senior level. We will implement our commitments to advancing gender equality and the women and peace and security agenda. We know of the significant role that women and civil society have played in the transition in the Sudan, and their voices must be heard in shaping the Sudan's future. During a visit to the Sudan last February, I met with many representatives of women's groups and of civil society, who are eager to play a constructive role. Our planning team, including Special Adviser Haysom, have engaged both groups over the past few months as part of their efforts to design a mission that meets the needs of the Sudanese. Regarding the protection of civilians, we recognize the existing challenges. As requested by the Council, UNITAMS will support the transitional Government in implementing its national plan for protecting civilians in order to establish a secure and stable environment in the conflict-affected areas. This will include contributing to the training and capacity-building of the Sudanese police on the protection of civilians. The Mission will also work closely with the United Nations country team and civil society organizations on protection and monitoring. We are conscious of the significant challenges before the Sudan in fully realizing the objectives of its historic transition. The solutions to these long- standing difficulties remain with the Sudanese, and UNITAMS is being configured to accompany them in their efforts. We attach the highest priority to the Sudan and to the speedy deployment of UNITAMS, including the appointment of a special representative. We look forward to working closely with the Security Council in this important endeavour.
