Mr. Esono Mbengono (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): We thank the delegations of Germany,
Kuwait and Belgium for calling for the convening of
this meeting, as well as Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo and
Mr. Mark Lowcock for their enlightening briefings.

Having listened to both of our briefers and given
careful consideration of the daily reports we receive,
it is an undeniable fact that we are witnessing a
humanitarian tragedy in Idlib that is worsening by
the day. The inaction of the international community
in response to the escalation of violence has caused
not only the largest wave of displaced persons since
the outbreak of the conflict 4 we are talking about
more than 200,000 people - but also an increase in
indiscriminate attacks targeting the civilian population,
public infrastructures and health-care facilities.

Faced with this terrible situation, Equatorial Guinea
wishes to underscore the need for a genuine international
awakening in order to spur on joint efforts to stabilize
the situation in north-western Syria, including effective
measures to neutralize terrorist groups in the area.
Moreover, in the framework of the Sochi and Astana
agreements, we call upon the parties to reaffirm their
commitments to avoid spoiler activities, guarantee the
safety of civilians and restore the ceasefire. In order to
ensure that these endeavours are successful, the Astana
guarantors must remain united and coherent in their
approach. Any hint of mutual pressure, provocation or
hostilities between them will serve only to undermine
coordination efforts to achieve peace, stability and a
ceasefire in the region.

We wish to pay special tribute to Turkey and
Lebanon, countries that are bearing the greatest
financial burden caused by the influx of millions
of refugees into their territories. In that connection,
it continues to be necessary to bolster the work of
humanitarian organizations and ensure the steady
flow of financial aid earmarked for refugees, who are,
in many cases, living in appalling conditions. In that
context, it is essential that United Nations agencies
and donor countries intervene immediately to address
the humanitarian crisis caused by the current wave of
bombings. It is the obligation of the Security Council
to ensure the implementation of this vital work on an
uninterrupted basis.

The conflict in Syria led to the collapse of norms
of international humanitarian law. At the end of
the twentieth century, the international community
agreed on norms and principles of behaviour, such as
the protection of the civilian population, a refusal to
condone torture, the condemnation of the use of certain
weapons and the desire to avoid, at all costs, the risk of
humanitarian disasters. This compendium of prohibited
activities was like a set of 10 commandments for the
modern world and, although they were not implemented
by all States, they did enjoy a certain degree of
consensus. Another of our obligations as members of
the Council is to ensure that those norms are upheld
in Syria.

In that regard, we reiterate our call for the parties to
act with restraint and ensure full respect for international
humanitarian law and international human rights
law. We also reaffirm the need for Russian-Turkish
cooperation to facilitate efforts to find the necessary
means to reduce tensions in the de-escalation zone
within the framework of existing agreements.

I wish to conclude my statement by underlining
once again the importance of diplomacy in achieving
a credible and lasting political solution to the conflict.
My country's Government will therefore continue
to support ongoing political negotiations aimed at
making significant headway in the establishment of the
constitutional committee, a country-wide ceasefire and
the implementation of confidence-building measures to
create a secure and neutral environment, as well as the
organization of free, transparent and inclusive elections.

