Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
wishes to thank the Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Lacroix, and the Special
Envoy for the Sudan and South Sudan, Mr. Haysom, for
their briefings.

The situation at present in the Abyei Area is
generally stable. There are obvious changes when
compared to what prevailed six years ago. China
appreciates the efforts ofthe Governments ofthe Sudan
and of South Sudan, the African Union (AU), the United
Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA)
and the international community.

A few days ago, the parties in South Sudan officially
signed the revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of
the Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan, which laid
an important foundation for ending the conflict and
achieving peace in South Sudan. The Agreement also
created favourable conditions for further improving
relations between the Sudan and South Sudan and for
properly settling the Abyei issue. China continues to
believe that a political solution to the Abyei issue is the
only way out. The Security Council and the international
community should strengthen coordination and provide
constructive help.

First, it is important to fully respect the leadership
of the Sudan and of South Sudan on the Abyei issue.
Those are the countries concerned. Furthermore, the
issue cannot be resolved without their cooperation and
coordination. The international community should
maintain the enthusiasm of the two countries in
committing themselves to a political settlement of the
Abyei issue, help consolidate their good neighbourly
relations, enhance their mutual trust and deepen their
pragmatic cooperation in the Abyei Area. Actions
contrary to the consensus of the two countries must
be avoided.

Secondly, it is important to let the AU and other
regional organizations act as the main channel
of mediation. The African Union High-level
Implementation Panel has long overcome many
difficulties, actively carried out good offices and played
an important bridging role in achieving reconciliation
between the Sudan and South Sudan. The international
community should continue to provide the necessary
support for the AU to carry out its work.

Thirdly, it is important to support UNISFA'S
continued delivery of its mandate which, in accordance
with the mandate of the Council, has supported the Joint
Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism and has
played a key role in stabilizing the border of the Sudan
and South Sudan. China supports UNISFA's continued
implementation of its mandate, for which China
hopes that the international community will provide
constructive help. China has noted that the Secretary-
General addressed a letter to the Security Council
(S/2018/778) a few days ago in which he proposed
reorganizing UNISFA and adjusting its mandate in
the light of the latest developments. Concerning the
relevant recommendations, we hope the Secretary-
General will further communicate and coordinate with
the Sudanese and South Sudanese Governments, the
AU and the relevant troop-contributing countries. We
also hope that he will fully heed their Views in order
to bring into better play the role of the peacekeeping
forces and to help advance the proper settlement of the
Abyei issue.

China has always attached great importance to
peace and development in Africa and has always
supported the solution of African issues by African
countries and with African methods. China is willing
to continue to work with African countries and the
international community to contribute to the promotion
of peace, stability and development in Africa.

