Mr. Strommen (Norway): We commend
Ambassador Chowdhury and the Panel of Experts on
their thorough work, and we welcome their report and
their recommendations on improving adherence to the
sanctions regime. The report is a vital follow-up to the
adoption of resolution 1306 (2000) last year, and it is
important that the report is discussed in an open
meeting like this, thus focusing publicly on the issues
of diamonds and arms as they relate to the conflict in
Sierra Leone.

The linkage between the illegal trade in arms and
diamonds and war of the Revolutionary United Front
(RUF) in Sierra Leone is well documented. The lasting
political tension and instability in Sierra Leone and
neighbouring countries have grave humanitarian
consequences, for instance, in the form of mass
movements of refugees and internally displaced
persons in the region. The conflict in Sierra Leone is
one of the most violent wars in recent African history,
and the physical and mental torture inflicted on the
civilian population has made the humanitarian needs
enormous.

The regional aspects of the conflict in Sierra
Leone are cause for great concern. Following the
ceasefire between the RUF and the Government of
Sierra Leone in November last year, we have seen
increased fighting in the border areas between Guinea,
Sierra Leone and Liberia. The fighting has forced
humanitarian workers to leave the area, and refugees
and internally displaced persons are moving deeper
into Guinea, to Conakry and back to Sierra Leone.
Tighter implementation of the sanctions and a general
improvement regarding the circulation of small arms in
the region would improve the security situation for the
civilian population and humanitarian workers.

We have carefully studied the recommendations
contained in the report of the Panel of Experts, and I
would like to comment on some of the more general
suggestions on how to improve the sanctions regime
established by resolution 1306 (2000) in particular, and
other United Nations sanctions and embargoes, in
general.

Before I go into the specifics, I would like to
make a few general remarks on the use of sanctions.
We think sanctions are an important tool for the
Security Council and the international community in
the efforts to protect international peace and security.
The conclusion of the recent report on Angola that the
sanctions against UNITA are hurting UNITA's ability
to wage war, exemplifies this. Sanctions should,
however, be used with caution, and they must be
shaped so that they target the real problem at hand.
Consequently, we must do what we can to prevent
sanctions from having unwanted side effects - for
instance, in the form of a negative humanitarian impact
on the civilian population that, indeed, we want to
protect.

In this connection, let me also stress the
importance of the general responsibility of Member
States to implement the obligations deriving from
United Nations resolutions establishing sanctions
regimes. Although countries neighbouring conflict
areas are acting in contempt of the United Nations
sanctions regime, countries in Europe and other
Western States must also pay heed to the fact that the
importation of illicit diamonds from Africa and the
exportation of arms from Europe to non-State actors,
fuel conflicts. Authorities must make all efforts to
prevent the sanctions from being eroded by curbing
shady businesses and practices.

However, as is also evident from the report of the
Panel of Experts, United Nations sanctions regimes are
not always followed up properly. We believe that, in
order to make existing and future sanctions more
effective, the recommendation from the Panel of
Experts regarding the establishment of a general
monitoring mechanism deserves further, serious
consideration. From the recent reports on sanctions
related to Sierra Leone and Angola, we see that both
regimes share many of the same problems and
weaknesses as regards the implementation and
violation of the sanctions. We also see from both
reports that monitoring is a key issue. The creation of a
central capacity within the United Nations system for
ongoing monitoring of adherence to Security Council
sanctions and embargoes could be a useful tool in
strengthening the implementation of sanctions. It could
also be a useful contribution to achieving the goals
already stated in the 1 December 2000 General
Assembly resolution on conflict diamonds. However,
the further details regarding the possible establishment,
mandate and shape of such an instrument is a question
that needs careful consideration.

Norway supports the idea of establishing, as soon
as possible, a standardized global certification scheme
for diamonds. As pointed out in the report, existing
control mechanisms in Sierra Leone are worthless as
long as there are no controls in neighbouring countries.
As a sponsor of the General Assembly resolution of 1
December 2000, Norway has already stated its
commitment to establishing a global certification
mechanism to reduce the trade in conflict diamonds.
Pending the establishment of a global certification
scheme, Norway supports the establishment of a
regional system covering all diamond-exporting States
in West Africa.

Many of the recommendations in the report and
the problems that they address are related to the
primary supporter of the RUF, namely, Liberia. Norway
shares the concern of the Panel of Experts that Security
Council resolutions on diamonds and weapons are
being broken with impunity. Norway shares the opinion
that the role played by Liberia in this conflict demands
concrete action from the Security Council. In our view,
it is now time to go to the heart of the matter and
impose sanctions on Liberia in an attempt to make the
country stop destabilizing the whole region through its
activities relating to, for instance, diamonds and
weapons. This conduct is a threat to international peace
and security, and the Security Council is currently
considering a draft resolution on sanctions against
Liberia. This work has Norway's full support.

