Mr. Temenov (Kazakhstan): We join others in
expressing our deep appreciation to Joint Special
Representative Mamabolo for his comprehensive
briefing on the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) and to Ambassador
Wronecka for her first 90-day report on the work of
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1591
(2005) concerning the Sudan. My delegation endorses the
outcome of the Secretary-General's report (S/2018/ 154)
and would like to offer the following observations.

Kazakhstan is encouraged by the continuing
improvement in the security and humanitarian situation
in Darfur, as well as the strengthened cooperation
between the Sudanese Government, the United Nations
and the African Union. We hope that the arms-
collection campaign, which positively contributed to an
improved security situation and an overall reduction in
criminal activities, will be inclusive and conducted in
respect of citizens' rights. We welcome the extensions
of the unilateral ceasefire by parties to the conflict and
hope that they will undertake the necessary measures
to invigorate an inclusive political process led by the
African Union High-Level Implementation Panel.
We hope that the recent meeting between President
Al-Bashir and the leader of the Sudan Liberation
Movement/Army-Second Revolution, Abu Al-Qasim,
will facilitate the implementation of the Doha Document
for Peace in Darfur and further contribute to ensuring
the voluntary return of internally displaced persons
(IDPs) and refugees. Kazakhstan is pleased to note the
timely conclusion of phase one of the reconfiguration
of UNAMID. We expect that its second phase will also
be successfully implemented in accordance with the
established timeline.

In View of the significantly improved security
situation, we now need to prioritize UNAMID's
peacebuilding mandate, including support for
capacity-building and quick-impact and community
stabilization measures. Such efforts should focus on the
implementation of the UNAMID Integrated Strategic
Framework for Darfur and the United Nations country
team for the period 2017-2019, which has identified
priorities related to bringing about sustainable peace
in Darfur. We express our support for the upcoming
visit by Ambassador Wronecka, Chair of the 1591
Committee, to Khartoum. We hope that the visit will
further contribute to the strengthening of constructive
cooperation between the United Nations and the
Sudanese Government.

In conclusion, we call on the international
community to provide the needed support to the
Government of the Sudan to address the root causes of
the conflict, including through providing basic services
in remote areas, finding durable solutions for IDPs and
making the arms-collection campaign a success.

