We are grateful to the Special Representative of the Secretary-General, Ms. Helen Meagher La Lime, for her briefing on the situation in the country and the work of the United Nations Integrated Office in Haiti (BINUH). The months-long increase in tension in Haiti raises the most serious concerns. The root cause of instability is the lack of progress in the internal dialogue between political forces and society, which has led to the de facto paralysis of the legislature. In turn, that has affected the ability of the State to effectively deal with urgent daily tasks, primarily that of ensuring the safety of the population. As a result, criminal elements have become more active. All this has been complicated by the coronavirus pandemic. Its second wave will soon present a new challenge to the health-care system, the state of which is not difficult to imagine given the deplorable economic situation in the country. The report of the Secretary-General (S/2020/944) gives us an ambiguous impression. On the one hand, the assessments it contains leave no doubt about the need to extend the United Nations mission to maintain international support in such a difficult period for the country. On the other hand, it is obvious that its key task of assisting in establishing a national dialogue remains unresolved. Haitians run the risk of taking the path of unilateral decisions, and that, as is known, only increases the risks of escalation. We see that the proposal to overcome the crisis by changing the basic law of the country received a mixed reception, including from the judicial branch of Government. Significantly, the Haitian Supreme Court refused to swear in the members of the provisional electoral council. Society has split. However, there are those who believe that the time is ripe for changes to the Constitution, and if the Haitians so decide, the United Nations invariably stands for compliance with the current legislation, no matter what country it is. All of this, of course, is an internal affair of the Haitians themselves, who must sit down at the negotiating table and overcome their differences. Therefore, we understand the position to those in Haiti who were outraged by the statement by a United States State Department official who threatened consequences for those who disagree with American ideas about democracy. In the United States, for some reason, it is considered normal to insist on elections in one country and to call on politicians to ignore the elections and demand the resignation of the legally elected head of State in another. With such double standards, it is no surprise that the number of crises around the world is on the rise, despite United Nations efforts to resolve them. The complex of problems that has accumulated in Haiti must be urgently addressed, starting with the main thing - political stabilization. That is possible only through dialogue based on current legislation, which should lead to elections and increase confidence and support from the general population. If that is not done, the country risks returning to its darkest past, and then recovery and development will be postponed for many years. We call on Haitians to urgently engage in internal dialogue to find a solution to the crisis. The United Nations mission should help with that. Port-au-Prince needs responsible international assistance in order to avoid further division of society and a slide into a humanitarian crisis of a regional scale. Russia, as a member of the Security Council, will continue to work to ensure that the United Nations international assistance results in genuine normalization of the situation in Haiti and the strengthening of its sovereignty and self-sufficiency.
