Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): First of
all, I would like to express our delegation's gratitude to
you and your entire delegation, Mr. President, for the
excellent work you have done. I would say that yours
has been an active and activist presidency. It was active
in that we worked at a laudable pace, and it was also
activist in that it brought to the Security Council and
the membership issues that, although of interest to all
of us, were of particular importance for Venezuela to
highlight.

Venezuela as President rightly pushed us to work
on these issues in the same manner as other members
of the Security Council who have the same rights, using
the mechanism "Other matters" to bring together all of
the points that are of concern to us because they were
considered relevant to deal with at this stage.

I am not going to touch on the various issues
that we covered, since you, Mr. President, in your
exhaustive summary, covered almost all of them, and
my colleagues have also made reference to the entire
list of subjects. What I would like to do is reflect on
things given the 57 days that my delegation has been
here in the Security Council, and highlight some themes
merely because I am new in the Security Council, and
they stand out for me. But I would like to stress that
we have had a busy agenda, heavy with horrors: the
humanitarian situations in the Middle East and the
Horn of Africa, which are truly depressing. But here
it is important to highlight and pay tribute to the role
being played by humanitarian bodies both in the United
Nations system and in the many non-governmental
organizations that are on the ground risking their lives.
Unfortunately we have seen reports about dozens of
humanitarian workers who have lost their lives in all of
these conflicts.

At the same time, I wish to highlight the sacrifice
being made by the troops and the forces deployed in
the many peacekeeping operations, who have also lost
many lives carrying out the tasks that have been given
them by the Security Council. So this leads me to say
that on the ground we have a large number of people
who are notjust carrying the flag but also paying for it
with their very lives.

I should also like to highlight the role being played
in many forums by the Special Representatives of the
Secretary-General. In many of the situations where they
are playing a role - I do not want to list any names so
as not to forget anyone, that would be unfair - we see
their perseverance, determination, efforts, dedication
and impartiality and objectivity. We deem that there
has been a positive balance in that which we have seen
over the 57 days that we have been in the Council.

I would also perhaps analyse how we have worked
over these 57 days. I am concerned that we have had
more than 75 meetings in 57 days; that is more than
one meeting per calendar day, so we have had many
meetings. But when I look at the outcome, there have
been very few results indeed. So far we have had six
resolutions, including five that are basically procedural,
"rollovers" as they say in English. One was that on
Colombia; it is really outside the scope of the Security
Council. Yes, excellent work was undertaken by the
Colombians themselves; they were well supported by
Cuba, Norway, Chile and Venezuela, but the origin
of the resolution was the result of work done outside
the Security Council. The Council did a good thing in
approving the resolution.

Other outcomes were numerous press statements. I
counted 21, eight of which are statements condemning
terrorist attacks, so they had to be issued, because we
are all against terrorism and repudiate it. So they are
almost a knee-jerk reaction. Then we had 13 press
statements of some substance. The problem is that in
one way or another we are responding to horrendous
situations on the ground with press statements.

On the other hand, there have been good
developments. I think it was Gerald who said that said
that we are maybe not pleased but relieved, with respect
to Syria, for instance. I would say that the progress
we have seen in Syria also is external to the Council
Chamber, if not to members of the Council. Ifthey have
played an important role, then we welcome them and
support them. The Security Council should support all
those activities and developments that could lead to
pacifying the situation and preparing the ground for
forward movement.

The negotiation process has taken place outside of
the Security Council. Perhaps that is the best it could
have been. But for me, as a new arrival in the Security
Council, I would point out as something of interest
that issues of this scale are dealt with more profitably
outside the Security Council rather than inside it.

Let me come back to something that we pointed
out our wrap-up; we make a distinction between
meetings and consultations. There is a difference
between plenary meetings and consultations. It makes
me think of the title of a poem by a Uruguyan poet,
Mario Benedetti, "Let us demystify the Milky Way".
It is a very lovely poem; I will not recite it here. But
the idea of demystification is so important; let us try
to demystify consultations. Frankly, in consultations,
no member of the Security Council, as far as I can see,
has said anything that could not have been said here in
this very Chamber, in front of the entire membership.
We could have done it here, but no. We go into that
little room over there, and we agree on certain things in
a narrower context, but having listened to things over
there in that little room. But the truth is that there was
nothing said there that could not have been said here. I
think this is the culture of the Security Council.

Speaking of the Council, I wish to pay tribute in

the following respect. The presidency is not the person
responsible for achieving all the outcomes, such as for
Syria and Yemen. It does not depend on the presidency.
But the Venezuelan presidency raised the issue of the
working methods of subsidiary bodies, particularly
the sanctions committees. It had an idea, made a
proposal and issued a presidential note - useful to the
Security Council, well elaborated by the presidency
and a concrete achievement by Venezuela that made a
contribution to our body of work.

Therefore, in line with what I have just said, I
would like once again to thank you, Rafael, and your
entire delegation. Next Tuesday we will welcome our
colleagues from Angola, to whom we wish the best of
luck.

