Mr. Rugunda (Uganda): We would like to thank
the Secretary-General for his report (S/2009/323). We
would also like to thank Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Kai Eide for his briefing on the
situation in Afghanistan.

We commend the central role that the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)
continues to play in coordinating international action
and assistance in support of the Afghan Government.
We welcome UNAMA's efforts to expand its presence
in the country in order to have a greater impact in
carrying out its mandate in Afghanistan.

We have noted, and are concerned about the fact
that, while there has been improvement in the security
situation in some parts of the country, such as Kabul
and neighbouring provinces, the number of security
incidents and the level of violence have increased in
comparison to the same period last year. The security
forecast for the next quarter raises even more concerns,
with an expected increase in the level of violence.

The elections scheduled for 20 August will be an
important milestone in the efforts to restore democracy
and achieve lasting stability and progress in
Afghanistan. However, as the country enters the
election campaign period, poor security conditions may
make it difficult for the people in affected areas of the
south and east of the country to freely exercise their
franchise. Those conditions could also provide cover
for election malpractice. It is therefore imperative that
progress be made in creating suitable conditions for a
successful election in Afghanistan, including in
addressing factors constraining the ability of Afghan
women to fully exercise their political rights. Failure in
providing those conditions could lead to further
disillusionment and apprehension among the Afghan
public as well, a situation that must be prevented.

Building strong institutions remains critical for
sustainable national development. We welcome the
planned increase in Afghan Government leadership and
ownership of the development process through the
civilian surge. Attention should also be given to the
speedy completion of the priority plan, as well as to
mechanisms for the implementation of the civilian
surge, which will facilitate the expansion of the
Government's presence around the country.

The success of national development efforts
critically depends on the availability of adequate and
predictable resources. While progress is being made to
align donor efforts behind the Afghan National
Development Strategy and priorities, we encourage
UNAMA to continue to work with the Government and
donors to ensure coherence in the allocation of goods
and resources to meet all development priorities,
especially those that are currently underfunded.

Stability in Afghanistan is in the interests of
Afghanistan itself, but also in the interests of the
countries of the region. Regional cooperation would
provide enhanced opportunities for dealing with
common challenges that cut across national borders
while also generating momentum for economic growth
in the country. In that regard, we welcome the various
efforts that have been undertaken in the past three
months to facilitate dialogue at different levels in -
Moscow, Ankara, Washington and Tehran. We note that
those efforts have underscored and encouraged serious
commitment to joint efforts and action at the regional
level to fight terrorism and counter the production of,
and trafficking in, narcotics. We encourage all
countries in the region to constructively work together
to foster sustainable development and peace in the
region.

The next few months will be complex and very
critical for Afghanistan's future, its stability and its
progress. The positive momentum that has emerged in
spite of the difficult situation must be maintained.
While there has been emphasis on capacity-building
programmes in the security sector, a more focused
strategy is needed where equal attention is given to
well-funded and effective programmes for building
civilian capacity and institutions in the country. The
Afghan Government must, for its part, do its utmost to
continue ongoing work with the support of UNAMA,
building on the existing momentum generated by the
election process.

The primary responsibility for peace and stability
in the country is, and will remain, with the people of
Afghanistan. However, support from the United
Nations, regional and subregional actors and the wider
international community will remain essential to
reinforcing national efforts. National capacity
development is an important element in that process. It
will require deliberate steps in utilizing and developing
existing national capacities.

We look forward to the finalization of the
benchmarks and indicators, as decided in resolution
1868 (2009), that will facilitate more effective
monitoring of the progress being made in the
implementation of UNAMA's mandates and priorities.

As this is the last debate of the Council under
your stewardship, Mr. President, I wish, on behalf of
my delegation and on my own behalf, to thank you and
compliment you on the invaluable contribution you
have made since Turkey joined the Security Council.
We have greatly valued your insight and frankness in
our deliberations during the past few months. And we
salute you for the excellent way you have steered our
deliberations as President. We wish you every success
in your future endeavours after more than four decades
of a distinguished diplomatic career.

