Mrs. Booto (Democratic Republic of the Congo) (spoke in French): First and foremost, allow me to
warmly congratulate you, Mr. President, on behalf of
my delegation for the effective manner in which you
are guiding the work of the Security Council during
this month of July. I wish to thank you in particular for
taking the initiative to organize this debate on the
report of the Security Council's mission to Africa,
which took place between 14 and 21 June 2007. That
mission took the Council to Addis Ababa, Khartoum,
Accra, Abidjan and Kinshasha in order to carry out an
exchange of views with African leaders on how best to
enhance relations between the Security Council and the
African Union, as well as with other regional
organizations regarding the maintenance of peace and
security in Africa.

My delegation is of the view that these regular
contacts will enable the Council to participate
effectively in the discussion on mechanisms for
establishing closer links between the United Nations
and the African Union in the areas of conflict
prevention, mediation, peacekeeping and
peacebuilding, as well as with regard to the means for
supporting and improving the resource base and the
peacebuilding capacity of the African Union. My
delegation also hopes that the Council will maintain its
commitment to work together with the African Union
towards establishing a more coherent partnership
through which the efforts to maintain peace and
security will be carried out in the context of more
formal relations between these two organizations and
which will allow for sharing best practices and
strategic analyses.

My delegation would like to thank Council
members for their work during their mission to Africa,
particularly the Permanent Representative of France for
his valuable contribution to the mission, which visited
my country, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, by
providing supplementary support to the efforts of the
international community to help my country restore a
lasting peace and ensure national reconciliation.

Coming after the Secretary-General's visit to my
country, the Security Council's mission was the eighth
to take place following the launching of the transitional
process, which, in spite of some incidents along the
way, has now taken significant steps, particularly the
organization of elections and the establishment of
democratic institutions. Security Council members
were able to use that opportunity to take stock of the
efforts by the new Congolese authorities for the
country's recovery. They also had the opportunity to
get an overview of the security situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, especially with
regard to security sector reform aiming at consolidating
the results of police reform and at achieving integration
of the army units, while also concluding the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration process.

My delegation shares the concerns expressed by
the Council with regard to the ongoing violence in the
Kivus, especially the violations of human rights and of
international humanitarian law committed particularly
by militia and other foreign armed groups. It is
important to stress that the situation in that part of the
country will not be resolved constructively except
through cooperation with neighbouring countries. That
is why my delegation wishes to recall that significant
quantities of arms and munitions, coming for the most
part from neighbouring countries, entered the
Democratic Republic of the Congo without restriction,
in violation of Security Council resolution 1698 (2006)
of 31 July 2006, on the arms embargo. It is those
weapons that the militia and other armed groups use to
commit the serious violations of human rights in the
country.

Given the magnitude of those acts of violence, in
particular sexual violence, our national institutions are
aware of the need to prevent and to severely sanction
such violations, especially acts of sexual violence, and
to ensure that care is provided for victims, whose
physical and moral integrity has been attacked. Thus
the bill on sexual violence was adopted by Parliament
and was promulgated by the President of the Republic
in August 2006.

I wish to conclude by stressing once again that it
is important for the Security Council to work to
strengthen the African Union, especially for a more
effective and efficient response in resolving conflicts
on the African continent. For its part, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo endorses the recommendations
of the Security Council and will spare no effort to
restore a lasting peace and to ensure reconciliation
throughout the population and to tackle the necessary
reconstruction work.

