Mr. Moustafa (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I would like to express my gratitude to
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Kosovo, Mr. Zahir Tanin, for his comprehensive
briefing on the work of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK). We wish
him every success. We also thank Mr. Ivica Daeie, First
Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Serbia, and Ms. Vlora Citaku for their statements.

Egypt welcomes the significant political developments
in Kosovo, including the election of the Speaker of
Parliament and the establishment of a new Government,
which has ended the impasse in the country since the
legislative elections in June. Egypt calls on the new
Government to continue to build on the reform efforts
and the progress achieved in many areas, among them
the rule of law and economic development, by adopting
policies that will generate employment and improve the
investment climate in the country.

Egypt hopes that the Government will begin to
consider a number of urgent issues, including border
demarcation with Montenegro, the normalization of
relations between Belgrade and Pristina and matters
related to strengthening integration into European
institutions, all of which will have a positive impact on
peace and security not only in Kosovo but in the entire
Western Balkans region.

We welcome the continuing dialogue between
Belgrade and Pristina at the presidential level in Brussels
and on the margins ofthe high-level general debate ofthe
General Assembly. Egypt reaffirms the fact that high-
level and European Union-facilitated talks between
the two parties remain the most appropriate way to
resolve all pending issues peacefully. In that regard, we
commend the mention in the report (S/2017/9ll) of the
two principal parties' increasing acknowledgement of
the importance of strengthening dialogue. We welcome
the agreement resulting from the consultations in
Brussels on 31 August on the most recent measures for
implementing the justice agreement. We call for the
full and immediate implementation of that agreement
and all previous agreements reached between 2013 and
2015 without delay.

Egypt has consistently called for abstention from
inflammatory rhetoric and hate speech, which further
fuels internal strife. We have therefore urged both
parties to show the utmost restraint and avoid any
unilateral initiatives that may heighten tension. The
broad participation of Kosovo Serbs in the recent
elections therefore gives us grounds for optimism and
increases the possibility of their involvement in the
political processes.

In conclusion, we are convinced of the need for
Belgrade and Pristina to build on their joint initiatives
in order to overcome their differences and agree on
consensus-based, fair and lasting solutions for peace
and stability in the region and the peaceful coexistence
of all parts of society. We also believe that regional
integration into European institutions should be
expedited in order to ensure its positive impact on the
stability of Kosovo and the region.

