Mr. Bouchaara (Morocco) (spoke in French):
Allow me to begin by thanking Mr. Farid Zarif, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Kosovo
and Head of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), for his exhaustive
briefing. I should like also to welcome His Excellency
Mr. Ivica Dacic', Prime Minister of the Republic of
Serbia, and to thank him for his briefing. We also thank
Mr. Thaci.

The period covered by the report (S/2012/603) of
the Secretary-General was characterized by relative
calm in spite of the incidents that took place in northern
Kosovo, where the security situation remains precarious,
as underscored by the Secretary-General. It is crucial
that an increased commitment be demonstrated with
respect to the management of the security sector, in
particular with respect to the protection of minorities,
their property and their cultural and religious heritage.
The period was most notably marked by the holding,
on 6 and 20 May last, of parliamentary and presidential
elections in Serbia, including the voting in Kosovo,
which took place in an orderly fashion thanks to the
responsible approach adopted by both parties, with
the support of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe, the European Union Rule of
Law Mission in Kosovo and the Kosovo Force.

We are pleased that several agreements were
signed between parties on a number of important
issues, including regional cooperation, freedom of
movement, the certification of diplomas, civil registry
books, cadastre records, the integrated management
of crossing points and the free movement of goods.
It is clear that the effective implementation of those
agreements, which will require a commitment by both
parties to rise above their differences of opinion, will
have a positive impact on the daily lives of the people
and will contribute to the easing of tensions and to the
strengthening of conditions conducive to dialogue, in
particular with respect to the most difficult issues.

We note also that during the reporting period, as
highlighted by the Secretary-General, dialogue between
the parties was suspended owing to electoral calendar.
The reaffirmation by the new Serbian President of his
country's commitment to honouring the obligations
undertaken with Pristina, and his statements in favour
of continued dialogue with the authorities of the latter,
are encouraging developments.

On another note, we welcome the progress made
in the investigation of allegations of illicit trafficking
in human organs, and we look forward in particular
to the start, on 3 September, of the trial of persons
accused of being involved in organized crime, human
trafficking and the illegal exercise ofmedical activities.
It is important that every effort be made to investigate
those allegations and that the perpetrators be brought to
justice. We thank UNMIK for its support for the parties,
which made it possible for progress to be achieved, in
particular concerning the issue of missing persons.

In spite of the fact that incidents continue to
occur, there are grounds for hope with respect to the
continuation of dialogue between the parties and
their commitment to respect previous agreements and
in particular to refrain from any actions that could
heighten inter-communal tensions. Indeed, a great
deal of progress has been made in improving relations
between the parties. That progress must continue.

It is important to continue, with the support of
the international community, to deploy the efforts
required to ensure a better future for the peoples of
the region and to reach compromise solutions, through
negotiation and dialogue, concerning the various issues
under consideration, in keeping with the provisions of
resolution 1244 (1999).

