Mr. Olhaye (Djibouti): I thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this open meeting on the crisis in Sierra
Leone. I am taking the floor in my capacity as
Coordinator of the Eastern Africa subregion.

Ostensibly, we are here today to urgently consider
the abrupt and shocking deterioration of the peacekeeping
effort in Sierra Leone. It is stunning to witness the blatant
attacks on peacekeepers and the capture of hundreds of
them and even to hear about the unconfirmed deaths of a
few. We express our deep sympathies to those families
and countries that have lost peacekeepers and to those
who are still looking for certain of their loved ones,
whether they are detained or cannot be accounted for. We
are, indeed, at the juncture of what I believe will be one
of the most important decisions of our age for the
international community. The standoff in Sierra Leone
represents an all too familiar test of wills between the
United Nations and yet another warlord. It remains to be
seen whether the United Nations will be able to contain
the actions of rebels who seem determined to unravel any
peace agreement that they have accepted. Given the recent
increase in peacekeeping commitments to Africa by the
United Nations, the outcome will have significant
meaning for Africa.

The peace pact in Sierra Leone must rest not only on
good intentions and trust but also on force. Sierra Leone
is in serious danger of being mired in violence again,
with the looming possibility that it will turn into another
Somalia, a State that for a decade now has been run by
bands of warlords. We cannot abandon Sierra Leone; to
do so would not only send the wrong signal to Africa but
would be untenable and, indeed, unacceptable to the
international community.

Later this year, the world will observe a Millennium
Summit held here at the United Nations, where we will
explore the themes of peace and security, including
disarmament, development, poverty eradication, human
rights and the strengthening of the United Nations. In
Sierra Leone, elements of each of these issues are in play
and, to an enormous extent, the manner in which we as

 

an international community resolve these immediate issues
in that wretched and frightening place will define the
relevance of these issues for a large segment of humanity.

In many respects, we might almost set our computers
to substitute, in each sentence, the word "Africa" for
"Sierra Leone", for it is unlikely that we will be prepared
to do much more anywhere on the continent than in that
country. For a myriad of reasons, Africa is currently
plagued by an infestation of criminal-minded warlords,
rogues for whom peace, human rights and lawful
government are viewed as illogical obstructions to their
self-interest.

This is clearly the case in Sierra Leone, Angola and
Somalia - and the list goes on. For nearly a decade, the
rebels have adopted a strategy of cruelty to frighten the
country into submission. With its limited resources, the
Government of Sierra Leone, at the behest of other
influential parties, has had little choice but to agree to a
peace accord. Despite years of crimes against humanity, a
legacy of atrocities that will characterize Sierra Leone in
the minds of the rest of the world for ages, and the virtual
destruction of the country's youth, the rebels were absolved
of punishment, given key ministerial posts in the
Government and a lifestyle which they could never before
have imagined. The only trade-off expected of the rebels
was that they would abide by the terms of the peace accord
and disarm, under the supervision of United Nations
peacekeepers. Unfortunately, these peacekeepers lack the
right mandate and are lightly armed, ill-equipped, poorly
coordinated and outmanned - a reflection of an attempt at
peacekeeping on the cheap that is tragically laughable when
set against the mammoth efforts in power, arms and
resources seen in Kosovo, East Timor or Bosnia. In
hindsight, it was clearly a mistake to agree to such an
accord and to attempt to appease the rebels at such a cost.
But what, it must be asked, was the alternative? Sadly, it
was not the first capitulation to warlords in Africa.

This is, in many respects, the situation we have seen
in Somalia. With its own decade of destruction at the hands
of its warlords, Somalia has not had a Government for a
long time. Yet now, when an overwhelming national
consensus is emerging, and when the vast majority of
Somalis have united for peace, the warlords continue to
obstruct peace and deny the country the peace and
development it so obviously craves and needs. There is now
a promising peace conference on Somalia under way in
Djibouti, yet somehow the warlords are tolerated while they
continue making noises against this clear progress and are
being supported in their endeavours by a nefarious few. The
international community must warn these warlords that
they must accept the peace which Somali civil society
clearly desires, or else face the consequences, and it must
take to task those who continue to assist them in their
unending adventures. Here again, their ill- gotten economic
gain in a lawless environment no doubt exceeds what they
perceive as being possible in a stable situation. That is
why, for them, the lawless environment has to be made
much worse than the prospects of a peaceful one.

As in Somalia, Angola, the Congo and elsewhere in
Africa, we are thus at a crossroad in terms of how we, as
an international community, are to respond in Sierra
Leone. To his credit, the Secretary-General has waged a
long campaign to re-engage the international community
in Africa's conflicts in the Central African Republic,
Sierra Leone, Guinea-Bissau and the Democratic Republic
of Congo. We all know how agonizing this setback in
Sierra Leone is to him. He is right: Africa must not be
marginalized and left on its own to solve its problems
without outside assistance. Sierra Leone is therefore a
signal of the level of international concern for peace and
security, including disarmament, in Africa. As is the case
throughout the continent, the eagerness to monopolize the
diamond trade stands in stark contrast to the pervasive
poverty in the country and its lack of development.

Africa is prepared to undertake a regional response
to this crisis in Sierra Leone, but, as all Council members
know, it lacks the resources to complete the task. At the
same time, as all members know, rebel units there have
the advantage of controlling the lucrative diamond mines
through which they are able to finance their hostilities. As
I said earlier, Sierra Leone is not alone in its difficulties
with hostile rebel groups, which require an effective
response to end the nightmare of suffering that the
common people of that hapless country have endured.

Finally, we must try to make the arms embargo
more effective and also promote regional peacemaking. In
the absence of Africa's imposing overwhelming strength
on its rebel forces that oppose democratic governance, it
must rely upon collective security, as enshrined in the
Charter, to bring about lasting peace.

