Mr. Takasu (Japan): I wish to thank Mr. Ian
Martin, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General and head of the United Nations Mission in
Nepal (UNMIN), for his dedicated work and his
comprehensive briefing this morning.

I would like first to congratulate the people and
Government of Nepal on their efforts in conducting the
successful election for the Constituent Assembly in
April. Credit for that success goes to the people
themselves, but UNMIN and the international
community also played a very helpful and
indispensable role. Japan joined other partners in
sending 24 electoral observers and two
parliamentarians to support that historic election and to
serve as witnesses to the new democratic governance
process in Nepal.

At the first session of the Constituent Assembly,
Nepal declared itself a federal democratic republic. We
commend all the parties who respected the will of the
people and carried out the transition in a peaceful
manner. The parties are now engaged in consultations
to formulate a new Government. That process of
political dialogue among all parties reflects the sound
state of the nation's new democracy.

We are also pleased to note that the political
dialogue among the parties is proceeding peacefully.
The people have proven their wisdom by
demonstrating that political differences can be
addressed through dialogue without resorting to
violence. We strongly urge all the Nepalese people to
maintain that strong momentum towards democratic
governance and to refrain from any type of violence.

We also highly appreciate the good offices efforts
made by Special Representative Martin, who, working
within his mandate, has spared no effort to move the
political process forward during this process.

We understand that Nepal needs some more time
to consider the future of the soldiers in cantonment,
which is a cornerstone to consolidating durable peace.
As this is a critical time in achieving lasting peace and
stability in the country, Japan supports the extension of
the mandate of UNMIN for six months, in line with the
request of the Government of Nepal. The arms
monitors, including those from Japan, have ably
carried out their duties. I am convinced that arms
monitoring will be effectively conducted under the
extended mandate. At the same time, the United
Nations cannot continue to monitor arms and soldiers
08-42878
indefinitely. We therefore strongly urge the parties to
come to an agreement on the future status of their army
as soon as possible, while the United Nations Mission
continues to monitor the activities for a limited
extended period.

As a peace-fostering nation, Japan is firmly
committed to supporting Nepal's peacebuilding efforts
to consolidate peace and democracy. Mr. Osamu Uno,
Japan's Vice-Minister for Foreign Affairs, visited
Nepal two days ago to convey Japan's commitment. As
part of our support, in cooperation with UNICEF, we
will address the issue of child soldiers and promote the
development of socio-economic infrastructure and the
reduction of poverty throughout the country.

