Mr. Briz Gutierrez (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish): Allow me to thank you, Mr. President, for
convening this open debate. We also thank Ms. Hoppe
for her briefing on the report of the Secretary-General.

This debate - which is not the first to be held by
Security Council on this topic - is of particular
importance in light of the upcoming Third Biennial
Meeting of States on the United Nations Programme of
Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit
Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its
Aspects. While the origin and nature of the Programme
of Action were an initiative of the General Assembly,
we see the participation of the Security Council with a
view to its success as necessary, given its function as
the body responsible for the maintenance of
international peace and security.

Since 1999, the Council has spoken out on the
impact of this phenomenon and the intensity and
duration of armed conflicts, and how they undermine
peace agreements, generate complications for
peacebuilding efforts and increase the vulnerability of
civilians. More recently it has spoken out on the
humanitarian consequences and their social and
economic implications.

In connection to the Recommendation 1 in the
report of the Secretary-General, the commitment of
Guatemala is shown through its participation in the
Central American small arms control programme,
which has a regional scope. One of the axes of its work
is the exchange of information for control and tracing.
This programme has facilitated the exchange of
information and cooperation among the member States
of the Central American Integration System and has
also helped in prevention, combating and eradicating
the illicit trafficking in small arms and light weapons at
the borders.

We are concerned that the nature and ambition of
the adopted international instrument on marking and
tracing of small arms and light weapons do not
correspond to the needs to the countries most affected.
We hope to be able to meet that goal later. We feel that
we should seek better results in other comprehensive
provisions of the Programme of Action that still need
to be addressed.
The proposal to create baseline inventories with a
view to having quantitative indicators for small arms in
order to establish measurable goals is timely.

We welcome the reference in the report of the
Secretary-General to the Geneva Declaration on Armed
Violence and Development. In April 2007, Guatemala
hosted the meeting of Latin American and Caribbean
countries to develop a strategy for the implementation
of the plan of action, which responds to the mandates
of the Geneva Declaration. That meeting was a
political effort to place on the development agenda of
countries the need for a comprehensive approach to the
general problem generated by the proliferation and
misuse of small arms.

Annexed to that Declaration was the adopted
Declaration of Guatemala on Armed Violence and
Development, which would serve as a base for national
and regional work to reduce armed violence from a
development perspective. Guatemala agreed to be the
first pilot country, and the preparatory work is already
being done to initiate implementation of the Geneva
Declaration on the ground.

The spirit of Recommendation 4 covers one of
the main areas of competence of the Security Council
in this regard. Accordingly, we believe that a
comprehensive approach will require not only decisive
and timely imposition of arms embargoes by the
Council, but also their strict monitoring. We appreciate
the efforts of the sanctions committees and their
monitoring machinery to supervise compliance with
the measures against the illicit trade in small arms. We
are sure that their future work will be strengthened
through the inclusion by Member States in their
national legislation of measures to prevent violations
of the embargoes imposed by the Security Council.

Furthermore, as indicated by the Secretary-
General in recommendations 6, 7 and 9, it is important
that the Council be able to include elements related to
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR)
programmes in the mandates of peacekeeping
operations, including the destruction of surplus
stockpiles. It is encouraging to see that this has already
been put into practice, and we welcome the fact that
the Council has noted the importance of applying broad
international and regional criteria incorporating the
social and economic aspects of DDR, including the
special needs of women and child soldiers.
At the national level, Guatemala has made a great
effort in the implementation of the Programme of
Action. In 2004, the National Commission for the
Eradication of Illegal Firearms was established with
the mandate to formulate, coordinate and implement a
national disarmament programme within our State civil
security policy. At the subregional and regional levels
important progress has also been made. Guatemala was
the venue for the preparatory meeting of Latin
American and Caribbean countries to review progress
on the Programme of Action. The Antigua Guatemala
Declaration was adopted at that meeting. It reflected
the views of countries to make progress in the
implementation of the Programme of Action and to
meaningfully address some topics that are not dealt
with adequately by the Programme of Action.
Unfortunately, the expectations of our Declaration far
surpassed the outcome of the 2006 review conference.

The Antigua Guatemala Declaration states that
arms and ammunition transfers through illicit brokers
pose one of the greatest risks for the diversion of small
arms and light weapons to the illicit market, including
to non-State actors. Guatemala therefore proposes the
adoption of a legally binding instrument on the
conventional arms trade. We welcome the
establishment and work of the Group of Governmental
Experts addressing this issue.

Finally, my delegation believes that the efforts of
the international community to address the problem of
small arms, as well as the momentum that has been
generated in the General Assembly, will be well
strengthened through this type of debate. We believe
that this will mean additional political thrust for the
implementation of the 2001 Programme of Action and
will ensure that the United Nations will continue to
play a key role in combating the illicit trade in small
arms and light weapons in all its aspects.

