Mr. Menagarishvili (Georgia): I am honoured to
have the opportunity to address the members of the
Security Council.

At the outset, I wish to express our gratitude to the
United Nations and the Security Council, to the Russian
Federation, in its capacity as facilitator, and to the Friends
of the Secretary-General for their vigorous attempts to
achieve a comprehensive political settlement of the
conflict in Abkhazia. In this regard, the personal efforts
of Mr. Kofi Annan and his Special Representative,
Mr. Liviu Bota, are particularly remarkable. We are also
grateful to the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe (OSCE) for its active engagement in the peace
process.

For five years now, we have been searching jointly
with the United Nations and the Security Council to find
peaceful ways to resolve the conflict in Abkhazia,
Georgia. For five years, a solution for Abkhazia has been
the subject of the Council's discussions. For five years,
the international community has poured huge resources
into monitoring the situation in Abkhazia, as well as into
humanitarian assistance to those who have suffered as a
result of this conflict.

Unfortunately, despite all these efforts, we must
confess that it is still premature to speak about serious
progress. Moreover, the recent tragic events in the Gali
district have clearly shown that the peace process is at a
critical point and requires a new and possibly
unconventional assessment of the present situation.

The latest events barely leave us grounds for
optimism, and I think that this situation is objectively
reflected in the report of the Secretary-General. Despite
the concrete proposals made by the Georgian side and
because of the intransigence of the Abkhaz leadership, an
agreement on the political status of Abkhazia has not yet

 

been reached and the fate of some 250,000 refugees and
displaced persons still remains unsolved. It is unclear when
these destitute people will return to their homes, given the
fact that the Abkhaz separatists continue their attempts to
legitimize the demographic changes that have occurred as
a result of the conflict.

This is the sombre reality we have to face. Each and
every one of us was instilled with hope when, through our
efforts and the personal initiative of the Secretary-General,
we started the Geneva negotiations under the leadership of
the United Nations and with the participation of the of the
Russian Federation as facilitator, the OSCE and the
members of the group of Friends of the Secretary-General.

Regrettably, the events that unfolded in the Gali
district during May 1998 also called the Geneva peace
process into question. In order to create an objective
impression about the events in the Gali district, I will bring
to your attention only several facts.

The introduction of the United Nations Observer
Mission in Georgia (UNOMIG) and of the peacekeeping
contingent of the Russian Federation into the conflict zone
had inspired hope in the refugees and displaced persons and
had prompted the process of their return. By May 1998
some 50,000 displaced persons spontaneously returned to
the Gali district. International humanitarian organizations
expended several million dollars for the reconstruction of
houses for the returnees and for their most urgent needs,
with a view to resettle the returnees in the Gali district and
to speed up the process of repatriation.

In order to stabilize the situation in the Gali district
and to step up the organized return of the population, on 24
October 1997 and 28 April 1998 the summit of the
Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) adopted
decisions on the expansion of the activities of the CIS
peacekeeping forces and on additional measures to improve
the security conditions in the zone.

The return of refugees and safeguards for their
security were on the agenda of the Geneva negotiations as
well. Despite all these measures, the Abkhaz separatist
regime continued to follow its policy of terror against the
population of the Gali district. By means of a unilateral
change in the territorial borders of the district, the Gali
territory had been artificially shrunk to half its normal size.
Punitive operations in the district had become systematic.
On the whole, during the last five years, about 1,200 people
fell victim to such violence.

The last punitive operation was carried out on 20
May 1998. That day, in the face of the negligence of the
peacekeeping forces, about 1,000 boyeviks were deployed
in the Gali district. The separatists plundered the peaceful
population, robbed their families and set fire to houses.
Those who dared to resist were executed on the spot. The
corpses of the murdered were even traded for a large
ransom. In the aftermath of this barbaric operation, the
majority of the population were once again forced out of
their homes.

Only the vigorous efforts of my Government made
it possible to prevent Georgia's involvement in a full-
scale war. Still, the results of these events are indeed
tragic. Since 20 May more than 60 peaceful civilians have
been killed in the Gali district and more than 40,000
civilians expelled from their homes. More than 1,400
houses were set on fire and ruined. It should be stressed
that the massive destruction of houses reached its climax
after the introduction of the ceasefire. The most
unforgivable fact is that, together with residences,
management buildings were also ruined, indicating the
real aims of the perpetrators: to destroy the prospect of
the return of refugees. Houses which had been rebuilt by
the international community were also set on fire and
levelled.

Unfortunately, violence still continues in the region.
Attacks on the villages located on the left bank of the
Inguri River, kidnappings for ransom, executions and
other serious crimes happen there on a daily basis.
Regardless of how tragic the results of this violence are,
we are worried by the fact that the Abkhaz side continues
to reject the implementation of its obligations regarding
the unconditional return of refugees expelled during the
events of May, as stipulated in the 25 May 1998
agreement. All this is nothing but a continuation of the
policy of ethnic cleansing and an attempt to legitimize its
results.

After we reached the 25 May agreement on the
ceasefire and separation of forces, our main goal was and
remains the maintenance of the peace process. In this
regard, the holding of the next round of the Geneva
negotiations, under the joint efforts of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, the Russian
Federation as facilitator and the Friends of the Secretary-
General, and the agreements that have been reached on a
number of issues are of extreme importance.

At the same time, the Geneva meeting, as well as
the analysis of recent events in Abkhazia, revealed

 

problems which require timely resolution; otherwise, the
peace process will have no prospects of success. It should
be noted that the punitive operations were carried out
within the lZ-kilometre security zone controlled by the
peacekeeping contingent. This clearly demonstrates the
fragility of the mechanism of the ceasefire regime in the
conflict zone.
Regrettably, our proposals on the expansion of the
mandate and functions of the peacekeeping operation were
flatly rejected by the Abkhaz side, whereas the international
organizations and other participants in the peace process
failed to be demanding enough during the adoption of such
an important decision.

Foreign mercenaries have been actively engaged in the
violence unleashed against the Georgian population. This
fact again highlights the acute problem of the illegal influx
of arms and aliens into the conflict zone. Unfortunately,
even our joint efforts aimed at the resolution of this
question are not sufficient.

The developments in the Gali district have proven that
the main problem we have to cope with is that of security
conditions, since it acutely affects both the returnees and
United Nations and other international personnel. The tragic
events in the Gali district indicate that, without the creation
of solid security mechanisms for the returnees, it would be
impossible even to start the new phase of the repatriation.
The time has come to think about activating mechanisms
that will prevent the punitive operations and help avert the
robbery, hostage-taking and killings. To this purpose, our
proposals include the creation, in the Gali district, of a
provisional joint administration and the establishment of a
system of patrols under its auspices.

The other serious problem is the massive laying of
mines. Security guarantees would be practically impossible
without comprehensive demining measures.

Regrettably, the Abkhaz side rejects these very
proposals, thus giving the lie to their declarations about
their readiness to promote the return of refugees.

We condemn any action directed against the civilian
population, peacekeeping forces and United Nations
personnel in the conflict zone. My Government will take all
possible measures against such action. At the same time,
we believe that, without international efforts and concrete
steps on the part of the United Nations, the resolution of
this problem will be impossible. We believe it necessary to
create a crisis-management mechanism in the conflict zone.
One of the elements of such a mechanism would be the
introduction of the United Nations self-protection unit. In
this regard, I wish to reiterate our support for the proposal
of the Secretary-General on the creation of such a unit.

I am confident that the Geneva process must become
more viable were the question of the political status of
Abkhazia to be addressed, fully respecting the territorial
integrity of Georgia, as repeatedly confirmed by the
Security Council. At the same time, we should not accept
any linkage between the discussions on the political status
of Abkhazia and the return of refugees, as has been and
continues to be advocated by the Abkhaz side. I repeat,
we should not accept that hundreds of thousands of
people be held hostage to political negotiations.

The effectiveness of the conflict-resolution
mechanism depends considerably on the monitoring of the
human rights situation. We should take into account the
fact that the Human Rights Office in Sukhumi is part of
UNOMIG and that its functions are one aspect of the
peace process. The Gali events have made it clear that the
Human Rights Office requires changes and serious
reinforcement.

All these facts persuade us that the peace process
requires a new impetus, first of all to overcome the non-
compliance of the Abkhaz side with the demands of the
international community. It is worrisome that the
separatists feel somewhat confident in the face of mere
reprimands and endless blandishments in response to their
total disregard of the resolutions of the Security Council,
of decisions of the Budapest and Lisbon summits of the
OSCE, and of agreements signed by the parties. I am
confident that the power, authority and prestige of the
Security Council are the only guarantee that the consistent
violation of agreements on the part of the Abkhaz side
will not go unpunished.

In closing, let me convey the appeal of President
Shevardnadze of Georgia that, at this point, the
international community adopt a decision which lives up
to the aspirations of the Security Council, reflecting the
real situation in the conflict zone and suggesting relevant
assessments and findings. Such a resolution must differ
from the previous 18 documents, contribute to the
decrease of tension and give new impetus to the
reinvigoration of the negotiations to reach a successful
outcome.

 

I am strongly confident that the decision to be adopted
by the Security Council today will meet this very appeal.

