The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, in which he requests to be invited to participate
in the consideration of the item on the Council's
agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, I
propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite that
representative to participate in the discussion, without
the right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Ileka
(Democratic Republic of the Congo) took a seat
at the Council table.

The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

After consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council condemns with the
utmost firmness the attack against a detachment
of the United Nations Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUC), which occurred
on 23 January 2006 in the national park of
Garamba, resulting in the death of eight Guatemalan
peacekeepers and the severe wounding of five
others. It offers its condolences to the victims'
families and to the authorities of Guatemala. It
commends the dedication of MONUC's personnel,
who operate in particularly hazardous conditions.

"The Security Council considers this
aggression to be an unacceptable outrage. The
peacekeepers were involved in an operation

against suspected elements of the Lord's
Resistance Army (LRA) reported to be present in
the park of Garamba. The LRA have conducted a
long-running and vicious insurgency in northern
Uganda which has caused the death, abduction
and displacement of thousands of innocent
civilians in Uganda, Sudan and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. The Council calls upon
the Government of National Unity and Transition
immediately to take all necessary measures to
bring to justice those responsible for this attack.

"The Security Council also condemns with
the utmost firmness the recent seizure of villages
in the area of Rutshuru, province of North Kivu,
by insurgent elements. It expresses its concern at
atrocities and human rights abuses which have
been reported in this context. It considers all such
actions to constitute a serious threat to the peace
process and to the transition, and demands that
these cease immediately. It stresses the need for
unreserved commitment to the integration process
of the armed forces, in the spirit of the Global
and All-Inclusive Agreement.

"The Security Council further underlines
the importance of the electoral process not being
disturbed and encourages in this regard ongoing
efforts for community reconciliation. It also stresses
in this context the importance of early adoption
of the electoral law under discussion in the
Parliament, and of respect for the timetable drawn
up by the Independent Electoral Commission.

"The Security Council reaffirms its
commitment to and respect for the national
sovereignty, political independence, territorial
integrity and unity of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. It expresses its solidarity with the
Congolese people and its support to the
Government of National Unity and Transition. It
calls for the prompt extension of State authority
throughout the Congolese territory.

"The Security Council reiterates its call
upon States in the region to deepen their
cooperation with a view to putting an end to the
activities of illegal armed groups, and reaffirms
that any recourse to the threat or use of force
against the territorial integrity of a State is
contrary to the Charter of the United Nations.

"The Security Council reaffirms its full The Security Council has thus concluded the
support for MONUC, and urges MONUC to present stage of its consideration of the item on its
continue to fulfil its mandate with agenda.

determination." .
The meeting rose at 12.20 p.m.

This statement will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2006/4.

