Mr. Prosor (Israel): At the outset, let me thank
the Portuguese presidency and you personally, Sir, for
convening this important debate, and President Cavaco
Silva for having presided over the meeting this
morning. I would like to thank the Secretary-General
for his remarks, and all others the speakers who set the
stage for today's discussion.

We sit here this afternoon in New York to discuss
the vital importance of protecting civilians in armed
conflict, as rockets continue to rain down on more than
1 million men, women and children in southern Israel.
There is no question that Hamas and other terrorists in
Gaza deliberately target civilians in these attacks. In
the past two weeks alone, many dozens of Grad rockets
and long-range missiles have been fired into the heart
of major Israeli cities, onto the playgrounds of our
kindergartens, and into the living rooms of our homes.

The pain caused by these attacks is permanent.
The scars are both physical and psychological. Less
than two weeks ago, a man was killed when a rocket
exploded on top of his car in a city called Ashkelon.
Many others have been injured in recent attacks. One
million Israelis were compelled to stay home from
work last week to ensure their safety, while 200,000
children were kept home from school.

These stories should shock and appal the Security
Council and all decent people. Yet, surprisingly, not a
single word of condemnation has been uttered by this
Council - not one word. The silence speaks volumes.
And as the rockets continue to roar out of Gaza, it is no
coincidence that silence also echoes from the Ramallah
headquarters of Palestinian Authority President
Mahmoud Abbas.

One of the most fundamental human rights is the
right of all people to live their lives without fear of
terrorist attacks. Day after day, Israeli citizens are
2

denied this right. Like any country, Israel has the
inherent right and responsibility to defend its
population. Yet, whenever we exercise our legitimate
right to self-defence, Israel goes to extraordinary
lengths to avoid harming civilians. Israel's Supreme
Court and other independent mechanisms oversee all
military operations, even during active combat, to
ensure that they comply with our laws, values and
obligations.

The contrast with the terrorists we face could not
be clearer. When Hamas is not deliberately attacking
Israeli civilians, it is oppressing and endangering its
own people. For Hamas, the people of Gaza serve as
permanent human shields. Schools have become
launching pads for rockets, homes have become
experimental weapons laboratories, and mosques have
become missile storage lockers. Entire residential
neighbourhoods have become bases for terror.

Hamas and other terrorists in Gaza show the same
blatant disregard for the safety of international
organizations. They abuse access privileges and
insignia, endangering international humanitarian
personnel and obstructing the movement of aid.

Underlying the violence that continues to
emanate from Gaza is a deeply rooted culture of
incitement. Just two weeks ago, Wafa al-Biss was
released from prison as part of Israel's exchange for
the release of our kidnapped solider, Gilad Shalit. She
had been serving a sentence for trying to blow herself
up in an Israeli hospital. Moments after arriving in
Gaza, she told a crowd of cheering schoolchildren at a
Hamas rally: "I hope you will walk the same path that
we took and, God willing, we will see some of you as
martyrs". These are the poisonous values that are being
fed to the next generation of children in Gaza. When
Israel looks at children, we see the future. When
Hamas looks at children, they see suicide bombers and
human shields.

Incitement is not confined to Gaza. It also
pervades the official institutions of the Palestinian
Authority in the West Bank and many other corners of
our region. In schools, mosques and the media,
generation after generation of children across the
Middle East have been taught to hate, vilify and
dehumanize Israelis and Jews. The international
community has a duty to end that culture of incitement.
We need education that promotes peace instead of hate,
11-5866]
tolerance instead of violence, and mutual
understanding instead of martyrdom.

In Syria, Bashar Al-Assad remains the world's
only ophthalmologist dedicated to cutting his people's
vision of hope and freedom. His regime is slaughtering
his people in the streets day after day. Yet, some
members of the Council remain blind to his brutality.
The Syrian people's cries must not go unheard.

The great Jewish philosopher Samuel ibn
Naghrela once said, "the truth can hurt like a thorn, at
first; but in the end it blossoms like a rose". It is time
for the Security Council to speak the complete,
unvarnished and sometimes difficult truths about those
who ruthlessly target and employ civilians in armed
conflict. The Governments and terrorist organizations
that display such callous disregard for human life
should find no refuge in this Chamber. Let us bring
new clarity to this debate, for the sake of our children,
our security and our common future.

