Mr. Caballeros (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like thank your Government, Mr. President, for
having convened this ministerial debate and to express
my gratitude to Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and
the Secretary General of the League of Arab States,
Mr. Nabil Elaraby, for their respective interventions.

I am pleased to again participate in a Council
debate, especially one that addresses such important a
topic as the one you proposed. This topic, in essence,
has two aspects. The first deals with peace and security
in the Middle East, and the second falls more under
developments in implementing Chapter VIII of the
Charter - in this case, in the relationship between the
Council and the League of Arab States.

Our delegation has spoken on many occasions in
this Chamber on the first aspect. Consequently, our
positions on various specific issues - such as the
situation in Syria, the conflict between Israel and the
Palestinian Authority, the situations in Lebanon and
Yemen, as well as the so-called Arab Spring - are
well known. We have also stated our concern over the
inherent risks of nuclear development in some countries
of the region, with the possibility of its eventual
military use. The International Atomic Energy Agency
has a crucial role to play in the elimination of that risk.

That having been said, despite the worrying
developments of the past weeks, which have the potential
to even further destabilize an inherently vulnerable
situation, we generally welcome the direction of the
changes under way in the Middle East, since they stem
the grassroots of society and pursue universal goals
that we can all share, such as freedom, justice, dignity
and greater well-being for all.

My own region, Central America, and my own
country, Guatemala, underwent important transitions
in the 19805 and 19905. The Guatemalan peace accords
furthered a more democratic and tolerant society,
respectful of human rights, with greater opportunities
for all and governed by the rule of law. For more than 25
years, we have been struggling to meet those objectives.
We have made very important achievements, but there
are still some gaps and shortcomings. We know how
difficult it is to foster change, but we will persist in
that task with regard to our own country. Therefore
we naturally desire the same for those nations in the
Middle East that have launched processes towards
more democratic, participative and inclusive systems
of governance.

In Latin America, we have seen that freely elected
Governments tend to resolve their differences, if they
have them, with their neighbours peacefully and through
negotiations. That is an important and encouraging
lesson for our friends in the Middle East. Another lesson
is that the intensity of potential conflicts diminishes
when economies offer greater opportunities of well-
being to their populations. Therefore, we believe that
democracy, development, justice and peace go hand in
hand.

One additional lesson is relevant to our discussion
today and it relates to the second area to which I
referred. We value the role played by regional and
subregional organizations. In our part of the world, we
have over 60 years of experience in benefitting from the
institutions of Central American integration to forge a
regional economic area and lay the basis for political
union. That is why we have supported the increasingly
broad alliances that the Security Council has built with
regional and subregional entities, both in Africa and in
the Middle East. We applaud the presence in this meeting
of the Secretary General of the League of Arab States,
whose partnership role in addressing the challenges of
the Middle East is increasingly significant. We hope
that role will deepen and broaden in the future, without
in any way diminishing the exclusive purview of the
Council. In cementing that partnership, the Council can
count on the support of Guatemala.

