Mr. Kumalo (South Africa): Let me congratulate
you, Mr. President, on assuming the presidency for the
month of December, and assure you of my delegation's
support. Allow me also to thank the Ambassador of
Indonesia for his sterling work in presiding over the
Council during the month of November. I also wish to
express my delegation's appreciation to the Prosecutor
for International Criminal Court for his statement
before this chamber and in particular for the important
work that he is doing.

South Africa is a member of the International
Criminal Court, and we remain committed to
supporting the important work of the Court. We see the
International Criminal Court as central to ending
impunity for international crimes and to establishing
conditions under which justice and the rule of law can
be maintained. The Court, through its ability to deter
further commission of international crimes, serves as
an advocate of adherence to the rule of law, and thus
we expect cooperation with its work.

We are acutely aware of the challenges facing the
Prosecutor, arising primarily from the fact that the
International Criminal Court does not have its own
police or army to serve its warrants of arrest, and
therefore depends entirely on the cooperation of States.
It would seem to us that there is a responsibility upon
the Security Council to demand the cooperation of
States, particularly in cases where the Security Council
has referred cases to the Court.

In resolution 1593 (2005), the Security Council
called upon the Government of the Sudan and all other
parties in Darfur to cooperate fully and to provide
necessary assistance to the Courts and the Prosecutor
pursuant to that resolution. The Council also
recognized in that resolution that, while the States not
party to the Rome Statute have no obligation under the
Statute, it none the less urged that all States and
concerned regional and other international
organizations cooperate fully with the Court. We urge
the Government of the Sudan, and other parties
involved in Darfur, to cooperate fully with the
International Criminal Court.

We believe that there can be no military solution
to the conflict in Darfur. A political process inclusive
of all parties should be vigorously pursued. At the
same time, we would hope that the African Union-
United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur will be
deployed on the ground as soon as possible to help stop
the ongoing carnage in Darfur. This is the least that the
people of Darfur would expect, as they are subjected to
persecution, abuses and violations of fundamental
human rights.

It is for this reason that we would support the
Council's issuing a declaration reaffirming its position.

