The President (spoke in Spanish): 1 shall now
make a statement in my capacity as representative of
Argentina.

At the outset, I would like to recognize, as others
have done before me, that today we are commemorating
World Humanitarian Day, and Argentina would like to
pay tribute to those who have given their lives while
helping others. I would also like to thank the Secretary-
General; the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights, Ms. Navanethem Pillay; Ms. Valerie
Amos, Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator; and
Mr. Philip Spoerri, Director for International Law and
Cooperation of the International Committee of the Red
Cross, for their participation in this meeting.

Argentina believes that it is necessary for the
Security Council to remain committed to the protection
of civilians in armed conflict by promoting full respect
for international law, in particular humanitarian
law, human rights law and refugee law, as well as by
combating impunity.

In his most recent report (S/2012/376), the
Secretary-General indicated that the situation of the
protection of civilians was abysmal. Although we hope
that the next report will show some positive change, the
Council continues to receive information on situations
where a lack of distinction between combatants and the
civilian population has led to civilian deaths, injuries,
displacement and to situations where there have been
various obstacles to and attacks against access to
humanitarian assistance.

In the light of that, it is imperative to recall the
obligtions flowing from the four Geneva Conventions
of 1949, its Additional Protocols of 1977, The Hague
Conventions of 1899 and 1907, human rights law and
refugee law, as well as those derived from customary
international law. It is also necessary to transform
obligations into tangible improvements on the ground.
In that regard, I would like to highlight the following
points.

The first basic challenge is to promote adherence to
norms. Last May, Norway, in cooperation with Argentina
and other countries, organized a global conference
on the protection of civilians under international
humanitarian law that included 300 participants and
94 States. The conclusions of the Oslo Conference are
in line with those contained in the Secretary-General's
latest report regarding the need to ensure that States and
parties to an armed conflict comply with international
humanitarian law.

In that regard, it is important that States remain
committed to the dissemination of international
humanitarian law. In Argentina, international
humanitarian law has become a salient part of
international law within the curriculums of several law
schools and in training courses for the armed forces.
In addition, one of the workshops organized in the
framework of the Oslo Conference took place in Buenos
Aires in 2011. It is important to highlight that one of the
objectives of those workshops was to promote, through
practical recommendations, the need to comply with
international humanitarian law.

It is also necessary to ensure that States comply
with international human rights and refugee law since,
regardless of whether an armed conflict exists, States
must respect all legal norms aimed at the protection of
civilians.

In terms of actions by the Security Council,
Argentina would like to highlight the need for
peacekeeping operations to abide by international
humanitarian law. In that regard, we recall the Secretary-
General's bulletin (ST/SGB/l999/l3)on the observance
of international humanitarian law by United Nations
forces. It is also necessary to continue to include
protection activities in the mandates of United Nations
missions in the field, that those are developed clearly
and that such missions are given all the necessary
resources in a timely and effective manner.

Argentina, in cooperation with the International
Committee of the Red Cross, has developed training
courses for the armed forces with a particular emphasis
on Argentine forces in United Nations peacekeeping
operations. In addition, Argentina's commission on
the application of international humanitarian law has
compiled a manual on international law in the context
of armed conflict for the conduct on how the armed
forces should conduct themselves in such situations, in
line with the norms of international humanitarian law.

With regard to humanitarian assistance, parties to a
conflict must do everything they can to ensure effective
and timely access to humanitarian assistance, including
cargo and materials. Under international humanitarian
law such assistance enjoys special protection. We are
therefore extremely concerned to hear about cases
of bureaucratic red tape in accessing humanitarian
asisstance or stories of it merely being rejected.

Fact-finding is also crucial. Impartial mechanisms
are essential for investigating facts on violations of
international humanitarian law and human rights laws.
In addition to possible ad hoc fact-finding commissions,
including those established by the Human Rights
Council, we also have the International Humanitarian
Fact-Finding Commission, provided for by Protocol I
to the 1949 Geneva Conventions. Let me highlight that,
in resolution 1894 (2009) and presidential statement
(S/PRST/2013/2), the Council acknowledged the
possibility of resorting to the Commision.

Moreover, Argentina recognizes the fundamental
importance of strengthening mechanisms for
accountability for those responsible of commiting
atrocities. Due to its tragic experiences in the 1970s,
following the restoration of democracy in 1983,
successive Governments in my country have adopted
important measures aimed at ensuring accountability
for the violations of human rights that took place during
the dictatorship. Over the past decade, many judicial
cases have been reopened throughout the country
and, to date, 1,053 people have been prosectuted, of
whom 475 have already been tried in accordance with
the guarantees of due process set out in our national
Constitution. Of those, 430 people have been sentenced
and 45 were acquitted.

As for the international community, the Council
has established two ad hoc international tribunals.
Today we have an international justice system for the
most serious crimes, with a permanent tribunal at its
centre, the International Criminal Court established by
the Rome Statute of 1998. Argentina firmly supported
its establishment and has been a party to the Statute
since 2001.

Due to the fact that the primary responsibility to
prosecute lies with States, it is important that parties
to the Rome Statute adopt the relevant norms for that
purpose. In 2006, Argentina enacted a law to implement
the Rome Statute. The law characterizes the acts that
the Rome Statute has criminalized and establishes
a regime for judicial cooperation with the Court,
including handing over indictees, judicial assistance
and the carrying out of sentences.

It is crucial for all States to cooperate with the
Court, particularly with regard to arrest warrants. The
Council, which committed to provide close follow-up
to referrals to the International Criminal Court in its
presidental statement S/PRST/2013/2) should put in
place a mechanism to that end as soon as possible.

I would like to conclude by reiterating that, under
international humanitarian law and the resolutions of the
Council, attacks of any kind directed against civilians
or other protected persons, as well as the recuitment of
child soldiers and obstacles to humanitarian assistance,
constitute violations of international law.

Finally, once again, I would like to urge full respect
for obligations arising from The Hague Conventions of
1899 and 1907, the four Geneva Conventions of 1949
and their Additional Protocols of 1977, international
human rights law, refugee law and the decisions of the
Security Council.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
Given the large number of speakers, I should like
to inform participants that I will not suspend this open
debate for a lunch break. For the same reason, I ask that
speakers limit their statements to a maximum of four
to five minutes in order for the Council to carry out its
work expeditiously. Delegations with lengthy texts are
asked to kindly distribute their statements in writing
and to deliver a condensed version in the Chamber.

I now give the floor to the representative of Brazil.

