Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): Allow me to congratulate you, Madam
President, as you begin your presidency of the Security
Council. We wish you every success in this crucial role.

We would also like to express our gratitude for
the solidarity shown in connection with the tragic
events in Saint Petersburg yesterday. We appreciate
the words of sympathy and support. The tragedy
once again underscores the need for the international
community to scale up its collective actions to counter
the terrorist threat.

We thank Joint Special Representative Mr. Mamabolo
for his briefing. We note the significant improvement in
the security situation in Darfur. Not a single incident
of clashes between the Government and the armed
opposition was reported in any of the five states. At
the same time, we are concerned about the ongoing
intercommunal conflicts, rampant crime and attacks on
internally displaced persons.

We welcome the measures taken by Khartoum to
implement the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur,
which includes the demobilization and reintegration
of combatants. We support the Government's plans
to organize the voluntary surrender of weapons, to
successfully conclude the work of the Darfur Regional
Authority, to create the general office for Darfur and
a number of specialized commissions. We hope that
the outcome of the work of the National Dialogue
conference will serve to ensure national consensus and
resolve the conflicts in Darfur, as well as in other parts
of the country.

We welcome the extension of the obligations under
the cessation of hostilities by the Government and
non-signatories of the Doha Document, as well as the
reciprocal release of prisoners in March. At the same
time, it is alarming that, despite the signing by the
Government of the Sudan and the armed opposition
of the Mbeki road map, the peace process remains at
a standstill. The Government can hardly be blamed
for this. It is no secret that the August negotiations
in Addis Ababa on the cessation of hostilities and
ensuring humanitarian access in conflict areas fell apart
because of rebels, in particular those who supported
the unacceptable conditions of the Sudan People's
Liberation Movement-North for the direct provision
of assistance from abroad. It is telling that even the
guarantees by the United States representatives on
the fair distribution of humanitarian assistance were
rejected by this armed group. In addition, we recall that
the leader of the movement, Abdul Wahid Mohamed
al-Nour has categorically refused any dialogue with
the Government.

We believe that the foreign sponsors of the
Sudanese opposition should more forcefully urge
their proteges to act in a constructive manner and to
give up their unrealistic demands. Effective means of
bringing pressure to bear on the intractable opposition
exist. Many of these individuals regularly travel to
and organize events in certain Western countries.
It would be a good idea to think seriously about the
introduction of Security Council sanctions against
these intractable groups.

We think it is impossible to achieve a full settlement
in Darfur without resolving the issues of the camps of
internally displaced persons. We note with concern the
increase in crime in two of the largest camps, Sortony
and Kalma. Furthermore, among the internally displaced
persons, there are many supporters of the radical
opposition and they are well armed. As members know,
the Sudanese police do not have access to camps and
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID) does not have a mandate to conduct
relevant activities there. As a result, robbers, murderers
and rapists go unpunished, and representatives from the
Hybrid Operation risk their own lives to protect one of
the parties to the conflict. We should think about how
this situation could be rectified.

We note breakthroughs in resolving the problems
facing UNAMID, including the issuance of visas and
customs clearance for contingent-owned equipment.
Progress has also been made in granting access. It
is our understanding that the Government of the
Sudan is approving the vast majority of requests and
negative responses are being given only when there is
a security threat to staff. In the case of incidents with
peacekeepers, blame could be laid only on Khartoum.

Recently, humanitarian workers were able to Visit
some areas ofJebel Marra. The Government issued new
directives on procedures for humanitarian assistance to
facilitate the movement of humanitarian staff. These
aspects must be considered when coordinating with
Khartoum. We also welcome the Government's decision
to open new humanitarian corridors from El Obeid to
the South Sudan area of Bentiu.

The work of the Tripartite Coordination Mechanism
is helping to clear the obstacles to UNAMID. We
call upon UNAMID and the Secretariat to continue
this cooperation in order to dispel any remaining
disagreements. With the positive trend in Darfur, we
think the issue of the drawdown strategy of UNAMID
is all the more relevant.

Progress in developing a UNAMID exit strategy
also determines its relationship with the host
country. Attempts to impede this process, let alone
using UNAMID to put pressure on Khartoum, is
unacceptable. Indeed, peacekeepers could be hostage
to this type of political game. In this regard, we note
the holding in early March of a joint strategic review of
the mission's activities, conducted with the Secretariat
and the African Union. We are pleased that this event
was coordinated with the activities of the specialized
joint working group. We stand ready to consider the
proposals in the joint report of the Secretariat and the
African UNion Commission for adapting the mission
given the changing situation on the ground.

