Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are pleased, Sir, to welcome you and to
congratulate you on the Republic of South Africa's
successful presidency of the Security Council. We
welcome the participation in today's meeting of leaders
of African and European States, other representatives
and Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon. Such high
interest in today's Council meeting reflects the
international community's commitment to meeting the
challenge of bringing stability to the situation in Africa
and ensuring sustainable development on the continent.

The threats that African States face today can be
overcome only through collective political and
diplomatic action and through unified efforts by
African countries and the international community that
supports them. The development of cooperation
between the United Nations and the African Union will
help to achieve that. The provisions of Chapter VIII of
the Charter provide a firm legal basis for the
implementation of African peacekeeping operations
sanctioned or supported by the Security Council.

Combining the efforts of the United Nations and
the African Union, taking account of the comparative
advantages offered by that important regional
organization, is proving its effectiveness. Today,
regional and subregional organizations in Africa are
participating actively in preventing and settling
conflict situations and are demonstrating increasing
willingness and ability to assume responsibility for
resolving African problems.

The potential of African countries to counter
crises must be developed in every respect to
comprehensively encompass the areas of crisis
prevention, crisis resolution and post-conflict
peacebuilding. It is essential that the conflict
prevention and settlement mechanisms created on the
continent begin to work at full strength. Russia has
consistently urged that the peacekeeping activities of
the African Union be appropriately bolstered by the
authority of the Security Council and by the world
Organization's logistical and technical capacity, on the
understanding that we are not talking about directly
financing such activities from the United Nations
budget.

It is essential to improve the practice of regular
reporting by regional bodies to the Security Council,
especially where their peacekeeping operations have a
mandate from this organ, with its primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security. It is our view that the main
responsibility for effective implementation of the
mandates of those operations rests squarely on regional
organizations and their members.

In the area of practical interaction between the
United Nations and the African Union (AU), the
impulse for which came from decisions of the 2005
Summit, there is already substantial accumulated
positive experience. Joint peacekeeping forces in
Darfur were established under the auspices of the
United Nations and the African Union and are making
efforts to advance the political process. In Chad and
the Central African Republic, we have established a
multi-component United Nations peacekeeping
presence, acting with support from the European Union
operations. It is important through these joint efforts to
ensure that innovative models of cooperation prove
their effectiveness.

On the agenda is the comprehensive
strengthening of the partnership between the United
Nations and African Union. We are in favour of
strengthening cooperation between the Security
Council and the AU Peace and Security Council.
Constructive dialogue between the two organs is taking
place on a regular basis. Provisions in the joint
communique issued at the end of the meeting between
the Security Council and the AU Peace and Security
Council in Addis Ababa have become an important
springboard for this process. We would expect that
tomorrow's second joint meeting of these two organs
will move this interaction forward.

The Russian Federation is enhancing its
contribution to the settlement of African conflicts. Our
country is actively participating in developing and
implementing programmes for international assistance
in Africa, including through the Group of Eight.
Specialized Russian educational institutions are
training African peacekeeping personnel. Russian
peacekeepers are engaged in all United Nations
operations on the continent. Furthermore, we are
planning an ongoing upgrade of our level of
participation in United Nations peacekeeping activity
in Africa as well as in other regions.

In conclusion, I would like to express the

willingness of the Russian delegation to support South

Africa's draft Security Council resolution aimed at

strengthening interaction with regional organizations
and especially with the African Union.

