Mr. Abdelsalam (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): I am
speaking on behalf of the Group of Arab States. I
should like at the outset to congratulate you, Sir, on
your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for this month. We thank you for having
convened this important meeting. We would also like
to commend your predecessor, the representative of
France, for his efforts last month. I would also like to
thank Under-Secretary-General Gambari for his
comprehensive briefing.

Israel, the occupying Power, is continuing to defy
the will of the international community. The most
recent manifestation of that defiance was its attempt
last week to insert soldiers deep within Lebanon, in
clear violation of resolution 1701 (2006). Furthermore,
Israel is arrogantly and recklessly continuing its acts of
aggression against the Palestinian people in the
occupied Palestinian territories. The number of victims
is growing daily, as is the degree of material damage.

In an unprecedented and provocative challenge to
law, legitimacy and legal norms, Israeli forces have
abducted and detained dozens of democratically
elected Palestinian officials, most recently the
Palestinian Deputy Prime Minister and the Secretary-
General of the Palestinian Legislative Council, who
have now joined ministers and other representatives of
the Palestinian people.

Israel's unprecedented violation of the principles
of international humanitarian law including the 1949
Geneva Conventions, its murder of unarmed civilians,
its targeting of women and children, its deliberate
destruction of Palestinian infrastructure and erosion of
Palestinian Authority institutions, its demolition of
houses and its displacement of persons, all give the
people of the world, who are observing those actions in
shock and sadness, the impression that the Council is
completely unable to perform its role of preserving
international peace and security. That erodes
confidence in the United Nations and can have dire
consequences for all the parties concerned and for the
entire region.

The continued flagrant and unjustified aggression
constitutes a violation of all relevant international
resolutions and international law. That will have a
negative effect on international peace and security and
lead to an escalation of tensions. Thus, it is incumbent
on the Council to act to achieve a lasting and just
settlement of the Arab-Israeli conflict - a settlement
based on resolutions of international legitimacy and the
principles of the peace process, under the full
supervision of the Council - by adopting effective and
specific mechanisms for the prompt resumption of
negotiations, a timetable for their completion and
guarantees for the implementation of their outcome.

Effecting a settlement of the Arab-Israeli conflict
in accordance with the terms of reference of the peace
process and relevant United Nations resolutions,
especially Council resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973),
1379 (2002) and 1515 (2003), the principle of land for
peace and the withdrawal by Israel from all the land it
occupied in 1967, including East Jerusalem, is the ideal
way for the Council to pursue the settlement of this
dispute and return stability to the region.

Such a settlement will never be achieved unless
the Council takes decisive and practical measures to
put an end to Israeli aggression in the Palestinian
territories, releases all prisoners and detainees and
starts direct negotiations based on resolutions of
international legitimacy, foremost among them the
resolutions of the Council.

