Mr. Mammadaliyev (Azerbaijan): At the outset,
I would like to thank you, Sir, for organizing this
important debate on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict.

Azerbaijan aligns itself with the statement
delivered today on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement. I would like to make a few additional
remarks in our national capacity.

Indeed, civilians continue to suffer from
inadequate protection in situations of armed conflict. A
defining feature of most, if not all, conflicts is still the
failure of parties to respect and ensure respect for their
obligations to protect civilians. The heightened
vulnerability of civilians in wartime - in particular
that of forcibly displaced persons, refugees, women
and children - brings an element of urgency to our
protection efforts and to the imperative of restoring the
rule of law.

Particular consideration must be given to the
protection of civilians in armed conflicts that have
been aggravated by population displacement and
foreign military occupation. There is an increasing
recognition of the need to address the impact of
conflict on housing, land and property, particularly in
relation to the return of internally displaced persons
and refugees.

More focused efforts are required in order to put
an end to illegal policies and practices in occupied
territories, including forced demographic changes,
destruction and appropriation of historical and cultural
heritage, and various forms of economic activity that
directly affect the property rights of the inhabitants
who are considering returning to their places of origin.

It is crucial that recognition of the right to return,
along with increased attention to its practical
implementation and concrete measures aimed at
overcoming obstacles that prevent return, be applied
more systematically by the international community.
Ensuring the right to return constitutes a categorical
rejection of the gains of ethnic cleansing and offers
important measures of justice to those who have been
displaced from their homes and land and deprived of
their property, thereby removing a source of possible
future tension and conflict.

Azerbaijan is of the view that the lack of
agreement on political issues should not be used as a
pretext to avoid addressing problems caused by
continued and deliberate disrespect for international
humanitarian and human rights law in situations of
armed conflict and foreign military occupation. The
fact that illegal situations persist due to political
circumstances does not mean they should be tolerated
and allowed to go on forever.

We therefore proceed based on the importance of
reaffirming, with regard to such situations, the
continuing applicability of all relevant norms of
international humanitarian and human rights law in
efforts to invalidate actions aimed at consolidating
military occupations; in initiating urgent measures to
eliminate the adverse effects of such activities; and in
order to discourage any further practice of the same or
similar nature.

In that regard, it is important to emphasize that
ending impunity is essential not only in order to
prosecute those responsible for war crimes, crimes
against humanity, genocide and other serious violations
of international humanitarian law and human rights
law, but also for ensuring sustainable peace, justice,
truth, reconciliation and the rights and interests of
victims, as well as the well-being of society at large.

Any steps aimed at advocating the culture of
impunity, including propagating wars of aggression,
glorifying perpetrators of the most serious international
offences or promoting odious ideas of racial
superiority, will contribute to further violations of
humanitarian law and human rights law, in particular
with respect to the uprooting of peoples from their
homes as a result of continued acts of foreign military
intervention, aggression and occupation.

