Mr. Jallow: I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, and the representatives before the
Council for their remarks and their support for the
work of the Tribunals. I only have a brief response to
the remarks of the representative of Kenya concerning
the case of Felicien Kabuga.

On numerous occasions, we have commended the
Government of Kenya for having assisted us in the
arrest and transfer of 14 fugitives. That is a fact, and it
is stated in the document distributed before the Council
(S/2010/259) that Kenya has collaborated with us in
the past in arresting and transferring that number. We
continue to be grateful for that. But it is also worth
noting that at the time those people were arrested,
Felicien Kabuga was also in Nairobi and was one of
those that should have been arrested and transferred at
the same time, but he escaped the net.

Briefly, last year I had a meeting with the
Minister of the Interior and National Security of
Kenya, whom the representative here represents. He
comes from his Office. That meeting was attended by a
representative of the Secretary-General. At that
meeting in Nairobi, we agreed on the information that
we requested.

First, as the Kenyans were saying that he had left
the country, which is an acknowledgement by them that
he had been in there, they should have provided us
with information concerning the circumstances of his
departure. Secondly, they should have granted access
by our investigators and the Kenyan police who are
members of the joint task force to specific Government
files containing information on Kabuga. They should
have affirmed that they would take further steps
concerning his property and bank accounts. That is
what we agreed at the meeting.

Since then, I have sent many requests for the
information. There has been no response. It has not
been provided. I have requested that I be told when our
investigators can go to Nairobi to work with the
Kenyan police and examine the records relating to
Kabuga, but there has been no response. As a matter of
fact, we sent our latest request in March for a meeting
with the Kenyan authorities - the Attorney-General,
the Minister of the Interior and the Minister for
Foreign Affairs. It was sent by way of a note verbale
channelled through the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of
Kenya. It was followed up with reminders, and none of
them have been responded to. I am therefore a little
surprised at the allegations that are now levelled at us.

Nonetheless, I welcome the statement of the
representative of Kenya that his authorities are open to
further discussion on this subject and that we are
welcome to go and discuss it with them in Nairobi. I
would like that invitation to become a reality and for us
to have a positive response from the Kenyan
authorities welcoming us to Nairobi, on a date to be
agreed, to discuss this particular issue with a view to
our being provided with the information on Felicien
Kabuga that they have promised to provide since last
year.

We have accepted the invitation that has been
extended to go to Nairobi, but we would like it to be
made definite, together with definite dates, so that it
can be arranged. I look forward to having such a
meeting, but clearly, with the evidence before the
Council, it is evident that Kabuga was in Kenya for a
considerable period of time. The fact that it is now
being said that he has left the country is an
acknowledgement of that fact in itself. His presence
there is also supported, as can be seen from the dossier
before the Council, by documentary evidence
concerning his visas, permits, business registrations et
cetera, and by the fact that last year, at our request, the
Attorney-General of Kenya had to go to court to try
and seize a property registered in Kabuga's name in
Nairobi. All this supports our statements that he has
lived in Kenya and has had business activities in that
country.

We now need to move forward to make sure that
the agreement that we entered into last year for the
provision of the information I have described is
implemented. I look forward to the Kenyan authorities
really implementing their decision to sit with us to
discuss it further.

