The President: I Wish to warmly welcome the
Secretary-General, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Croatia and the other ministers participating in today's
Security Council meeting. Their presence is an
affirmation of the importance of the subject matter to
be discussed.

I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite the representatives of those countries inscribed on
the list of speakers to participate in the consideration of
the item, Without the right to vote, in accordance with the
relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, the representatives
of the following countries took the seats reserved
for them at the side of the Council Chamber:
Afghanistan, Argentina, Australia, Azerbaijan,
Belgium, Brazil, Canada, Colombia, Czech
Republic, Denmark, Egypt, Estonia, Finland,
Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Guatemala,
Hungary, India, Indonesia, Ireland, Israel, Italy,
Kenya, Liechtenstein, Luxembourg, Republic of
Moldova, Morocco, Netherlands, Norway, Qatar;
Republic of Korea, Saudi Arabia, Slovakia,
Slovenia, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Sweden,
Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic, United Arab
Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay,
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela and Zambia.

The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. John Holmes,
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Emergency Relief Coordinator.

It is so decided.
In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under rule
39 of its provisional rules of procedure to Ms. Kyung-wha
Kang, Deputy High Commissioner for Human Rights.

It is so decided.

I should like to inform the Council that I have
received a letter dated 10 November 2009 from the
Permanent Observer of Palestine to the United Nations,
which will be issued as document S/2009/577 and
which reads as follows:

"I have the honour to request that, in
accordance with its previous practice, the Security
Council invite the Permanent Observer of Palestine
to the United Nations to participate in the meeting
of the Security Council which will be held on
Wednesday, 11 November 2009, regarding the
protection of civilians in armed conflict."

I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite the Permanent Observer of Palestine to
participate in this meeting, in accordance with the rules
of procedure and the previous practice in this regard.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite the Permanent Observer of Palestine to
take the seat reserved for him at the side of the Council
Chamber.

I should like to inform the Council that I have
received a letter dated 10 November 2009 from the
Permanent Representative of Austria to the United
Nations, in which he requests that His Excellency
Mr. Albrecht Freiherr von Boeselager, Minister for
International Cooperation and Humanitarian Affairs of
the Sovereign Military Order of Malta, be invited to
participate in the consideration of the item, in
accordance with rule 39 of the Council's provisional
rules of procedure.

If I hear no objection, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to His
Excellency Mr. Albrecht Freiherr von Boeselager.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite Mr. Von Boeselager to take the seat
reserved for him at the side of the Council Chamber.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
09-60204
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2009/582, which contains the text of a
draft resolution submitted by Austria, Azerbaijan,
Belgium, Benin, Burkina Faso, Canada, Costa Rica,
Croatia, Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Estonia, Finland,
France, Germany, Greece, Italy, Japan, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Mexico, the Netherlands,
Norway, the Republic of Moldova, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Sweden, Switzerland, the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, the United Republic of
Tanzania and the United States of America.

I should also like to draw the attention of
members to document S/2009/567, which contains the
text of a letter dated 2 November 2009 from the
Permanent Representative of Austria to the United
Nations addressed to the Secretary-General, transmitting
a concept paper on the item under consideration.

I should now like to make some introductory
remarks.

Ten years ago, the Security Council took the
unanimous decision to begin to address the protection
of civilians in armed conflict in a systematic manner.
Today, we are still facing tremendous challenges, and
civilians, more than ever, have to pay the price of war.
They have to flee their homes. They become victims of
violence, armed attacks and rape. In armed conflicts all
over the world, United Nations peacekeeping missions
and humanitarian organizations do their utmost to
alleviate the suffering of civilians, including women
and children. But more needs to be done to improve the
protection of civilians on the ground.

That is why, for Austria, the protection of
civilians is a key priority. It is why we took the
initiative to submit a draft resolution on the protection
of civilians on the occasion of the tenth anniversary.
This draft resolution aims to address existing gaps in
the protection work of the United Nations and sets out
concrete measures to improve the protection of
civilians on the ground.

I would like to take this opportunity to thank all
members of the Council for their constructive work in
recent weeks. We also highly commend the Secretary-
General for his latest report on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict (S/2009/277).
09-60204
We, the international community, have to do
better. We need to live up to our shared responsibility
to effectively respond to situations in which the safety
and security of civilians are in danger.

No conflict justifies breaches of international
humanitarian law. No conflict justifies the refusal of
access for humanitarian workers to civilians in need.
N0 conflict justifies impunity for those who have
committed serious crimes against civilians.

The Security Council has a key role to play. The
Council has a broad range of tools at its disposal to
ensure compliance by all parties with their obligations
under international law to protect civilians, to facilitate
access for humanitarian aid and to ensure
accountability for serious crimes against civilians.

Today, the protection of civilians is at the core of
United Nations peacekeeping. Since 1999, the Council
has mandated United Nations peacekeeping missions to
protect civilians from attacks. The presence of United
Nations peacekeepers generates global expectations, as
well as local aspirations to protect vulnerable
communities.

However, we still do not have a common
understanding of what peacekeepers can and should do
in the implementation of such protection mandates. We
believe that an operational concept, mission-wide
protection strategies and improved predeployment
training on the protection of civilians will help to close
this gap between Security Council mandates and their
implementation. It will also contribute to ensuring the
credibility of United Nations peacekeeping missions.
There is a need for clear and achievable mandates based
on accurate and reliable information and an assessment of
threats to civilians and peacekeepers on the ground. It
also requires an ongoing dialogue with troop- and police-
contributing countries throughout the process.

Today's debate and the draft resolution before us
provide an important opportunity to take stock of the
progress made so far and to send a clear signal of our
commitment to the protection of civilians. I hope that
discussions will provide further guidance as we fulfil
our obligation to better protect those in need.

In accordance with the understanding reached
earlier among members, the Security Council will take
action on the draft resolution (S/2009/582) prior to
hearing statements from the participants in today's
3
meeting. Accordingly, I shall put the draft resolution to
the vote now.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
A vote was taken by show of hands.

In favour:
Austria, Burkina Faso, China, Costa Rica,
Croatia, France, Japan, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
Mexico, Russian Federation, Turkey, Uganda,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America, Viet Nam.


The President: There were 15 votes in favour.
The draft resolution has been adopted unanimously as
resolution 1894 (2009).

I now invite the Secretary-General, His
Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon, to take the floor.


