Mr. Qin Huasun (China) (interpretation from Chinese): The purpose of implementing the oil-for-food
resolutions, resolutions 986 (1995) and 1111 (1997), is to
ameliorate the humanitarian situation in Iraq. It is
regrettable that, according to the report of the Secretary-
General, despite the implementation of those two
resolutions, the humanitarian situation in Iraq is continuing
to worsen. The Iraqi people continue to face serious
problems in nutrition and health care. A third of the
children under five years of age and a quarter of the men
and women under the age of 26 suffer from malnutrition
today.

The quantity of oil sales stipulated in resolution
1111 (1997) is far from being able to satisfy Iraq's basic
humanitarian needs. At the same time, owing to the slow
pace of the review and approval procedure, at the
conclusion of phase II there are still deliveries outstanding
under phase I, and the overwhelming majority of phase II
import applications have yet to be approved. Such a
situation, in which the import of humanitarian goods lags
far behind the export of oil, is unacceptable. China is
deeply concerned about it. We urge the parties concerned
to pay attention to this problem and promptly adopt
practical measures to solve it.

The Chinese delegation believes that, since the
current quantity of oil sales cannot satisfy the
humanitarian needs of Iraq, the Security Council needs to
increase the quantity of Iraq's oil exports in order to
guarantee the country's essential humanitarian needs. We
look forward to an early report by the Secretary-General
in this regard.

At the same time, I also wish to point out that if the
revenue from oil exports cannot be speedily used to meet
humanitarian needs, then, no matter how much oil is
exported, it will not ease Iraq's humanitarian plight. Such
a situation is not in conformity with the spirit of the
relevant resolutions. Therefore, we strongly urge the
parties concerned to speed up the review and approval
procedure so that humanitarian goods may be shipped to
Iraq as soon as possible.

Out of consideration for the continued
implementation of resolutions on oil for food in order to
ameliorate the humanitarian situation in Iraq, the Chinese
delegation will vote in favour of the draft resolution
before us.

