Mr. Hilale (Morocco) (spoke in French): At
the outset, I should like to thank you, Sir, for having
convened and selected the topic of today's debate
at a time when the Organization is going through
important change.

I should also like to thank the Secretary-General
for his statement, which confirms his unwavering
commitment to the cause of peace. I would like to
reassure him and the Security Council of Morocco's
full support in all their efforts to promote international
peace and security.

The growing number and complexity, changing
nature and disastrous consequences of conflicts force
us to reconsider the way in which our Organization
tackles them. It is clear that the three pillars of the
United Nations are interlinked. It is also recognized
that mediation and conflict prevention are underutilized
tools that undoubtedly hold significant promise. Taking
such an approach is necessary to realize the objective
of lasting peace, which is not a new aim but one that is
gaining ground daily. It is in this regard that we welcome
the reform process under way, including its important
focus on the need for a comprehensive approach. We
hope that the review process under way will not only
enable the Organization to work in a more effective
way, but will find a new way of working with greater
transparency and enhanced collaboration with Member
States and troop-contributing countries.

Some speakers have referred in detail to the various
underlying causes of conflicts and emerging challenges
to peace and security in the world. I will not therefore
cover the same terrain, but would like to focus on the
following five points.

First, Morocco is very active with regard to the
impact of climate change on peace. The most optimistic
projections predict major shocks that will deeply
affect our countries - desertification, migration and
coastal erosion, to name just a few. In this regard, we
welcome that the Security Council attaches growing
importance to these issues. We were among the
organizers of the Arria Formula meeting held last
Friday on the topic "Preparing for security implications
of rising temperatures".

Secondly, terrorism threatens international
peace and security in multiple operational contexts.
As experience has shown, peacekeeping operations
cannot fight against this scourge, especially if they
remain constrained within conventional peacekeeping
mandates. The question facing us now is how we should
respond to and address this scourge. The report of the
High-level Independent Panel on Peace Operations (see S/2015/446) recognized that peacekeeping operations
were not conceived for counter-terrorism activities and
that multinational forces would be more appropriate. In
this regard, Member States called for such operations
to be established when needed. The Group of Five for
the Sahel received the political support of the Security
Council. We must now ensure that it receives all the
logistical and financial support it requires.

Thirdly, other drivers of conflict, such as climate
change and transnational organized crime, demand
a tailored, holistic and coordinated response that
is inclusive, taking into account the specific needs
of young people and women. Multi-dimensional
peacekeeping missions have always been equipped with
comprehensive mandates theoretically to ensure that
they could tackle the root causes of conflict. It remains
to be seen, however, whether such multidimensional
missions have the material and human resources to
achieve their challenging tasks. Unfortunately, we must
recognize that to date this has not been the case.

Fourthly, mission planning remains a serious
problem, while it is difficult to grasp how after more
than 70 years of experience in peacekeeping that
we find ourselves in situations where a significant
proportion, if not the majority, of troops deployed to
the field lack adequate and appropriate uniform and
equipment. We must go beyond political calculations
and commit in good faith because we are all ultimately
working towards peace and stability in the world.

Fifth, coordination is another major factor.
Conflicts are no longer solved by a single actor as in
the past. Effective coordination among various United
Nations entities present on the ground is essential,
finally making the one United Nations concept a
reality. There is likewise a need to coordinate other
actors - regional and subregional organizations,
international financial institutions, and various
bilateral and multilateral partners. In certain cases,
there are more than 10 actors, each with its own agenda.
To address this situation, the United Nations must be
able to take the lead since it is the Organization with
greatest legitimacy and expertise to take on the role of
coordinator or, if necessary, designate a co-lead where
this would help settle the conflict.

In conclusion, I should like to share
two recommendations.

First, to deal with the recurrent problem of
resourcing shortfalls, it would be useful to be able to
quantify in financial terms the various tasks foreseen in
mandates. A detailed briefing on the costs ofthe various
aspects of a mandate before and during negotiations on
its renewal would undoubtedly be extremely helpful in
ensuring mandates are coherent and realistic. Secondly,
troop-contributing countries have a gained experience
and knowledge of conflicts that is clearly useful but
which remains to date lamentably unutilized. We are
working closely with all actors involved to revitalize
triangular cooperation, which we are convinced
has immense potential. We welcome the interest of
certain Council members in this issue and hope that
significant changes can be made to the way in which
the Security Council, troop-contributing countries and
the Secretariat interact.

