Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola): I would like to
start by congratulating you, Sir, on your assumption of
the presidency and by reiterating our full confidence in
the leadership you will continue to provide to our
Council during the month of April. I would also like to
commend Ambassador De La Sabliere for the very able
manner in which he presided over the work of the
Council during the month of March a very busy but
successful month. Let me express my gratitude to
Under-Secretary-General Guehenno for the substantive
briefing he has provided to the Council and to you, Sir,
for giving the Council a fuller account of the Berlin
conference.

The rebuilding of a nation - any nation
devastated and traumatized by a long war - is surely a
very slow and complex process. It is only possible
through strengthening international assistance, which is
as an essential component of the process. We in Angola
fully understand that. That is why we commend
Germany and the other organizers for the successful
outcome of the Berlin conference, which was, indeed, a
remarkable step forward and a great opportunity for the
international community to reaffirm its commitment to
the development of Afghanistan, its political future,
security and the consolidation of national
reconciliation. We join previous speakers in extending
our delegation's full support to the outcome of the
Berlin conference, especially the multi-year
commitments made and the $8.2 billion that was
pledged at the conference.

Since the Tokyo conference, the leadership and
ownership of the reconstruction process have been
progressively taken over by the Afghan authorities. My
delegation welcomes that development, as it is
essential for the sustainability of the entire process.
Afghanistan has reached a crucial stage in the
implementation of the Bonn process. By adopting the
new Constitution, Afghans have laid the foundations
for a State based on the rule of law and a just and
lasting process of national reconciliation.

Afghan authorities have announced the holding of
elections in September. We are pleased that the date of
the elections has been set, and we welcome the
readiness of the International Security Assistance Force
(ISAF) to assist in ensuring the conduct of the
elections. On the other hand, we consider that further
commitment by the international community is
indispensable for the achievement of such an important
goal.

However, despite impressive progress, much
remains to be done in the political reconstruction and
rehabilitation process of Afghanistan. As Mr.
Guehenno has reiterated before the Council, the
security situation has been comprehensively analysed
in the Security Council. The main factors contributing
to the deterioration of Afghanistan security have been
identified. In that connection, we stress the importance
of Security Council resolution 1510 (2003) and
NATO's commitment to expand ISAF's mission by
establishing additional provincial reconstruction teams
by the summer of 2004.

If the national State is to function effectively, it is
essential that the central Government's authority is
extended throughout the entire country. The presence
of such forces, together with the national army, instils
confidence among the local communities and provides
support to the legitimate organs of the State. This is an
essential requirement for providing stability throughout
the country and for ensuring that an effective
disarmament and demobilization process takes place.
We are pleased that the international community has
focused considerable attention on disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programmes. They are
complex and require considerable financial resources.

The serious threat posed by the resurgence of
extremist forces, including the Taliban, is another
ongoing danger. This is a problem that we still need to
deal with, along with the increased production and
trafficking of illegal narcotics. The tasks before the
Afghan Transitional Government and the international
community - especially those countries more directly
involved in countering drug trafficking - are
enormous. They require immediate action to prevent
poppy production from expanding and drug-related
organized crime from taking root. In addition, those
tasks require a long-term commitment to strengthening
the rule of law and promoting livelihoods that provide
an alternative to drugs. My delegation welcomes the
Council's adoption of the counter-narcotics strategy,
which has just been announced.

To conclude, I take this opportunity to commend
once again the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Afghanistan, Mr. Jean Arnault, as well as
the personnel of the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan, for their ongoing efforts to achieve
peace and stability in Afghanistan, and in particular for
the role they have played in the constitutional and
electoral processes. We are convinced that the
attainment of a democratic, stable and prosperous
Afghanistan is possible and is in the supreme interest
of peace and international security.

Finally, I convey my full support for the draft
presidential statement that has been submitted. I think
that the Council will be sending a very important
message by adopting that draft statement.

