Mr. Wlosowicz (Poland): One year ago, the
successful conclusion of the London and Paris

 

Conferences and the signing by the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro), Bosnia and
Herzegovina and the Republic of Croatia of the General
Framework Agreement for Peace in Bosnia and
Herzegovina began the process of restoration of peace and
security to the Balkan region. To assist the signatories of
the Agreement in its implementation, the Security Council,
by adopting resolutions 1031 (1995) and 1035 (1995),
authorized the establishment of the multinational
Implementation Force (IFOR) and the United Nations
Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina (UNMIBH).

In the course of one year the situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina has changed immeasurably. The end of the
bloody war, and the recognition by the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro) of Bosnia and
Herzegovina as a sovereign independent State within its
international borders, were among the most important
developments. During this year, much has been achieved in
the implementation of both the military and civilian aspects
of the Peace Agreement. The ceasefire continues to hold;
the parties to the Agreement have withdrawn their forces
from the zone of separation; the process of withdrawal of
heavy weapons, as well as the demobilization or quartering
of troops, has significantly advanced; most prisoners of
war - although, regrettably, not all of them - have been
released.

For lasting peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina, full
implementation of the civilian aspects of the Peace
Agreement is crucial. We welcome the progress made in
this direction. In particular, we would like to underline the
fact that, in spite of difficult conditions, the elections in
Bosnia and Herzegovina were held in September this year
in a calm and orderly manner. They laid the foundations for
establishing and developing common democratic institutions
in that country. Another sign of a positive tendency in the
implementation of the civilian aspects of the Agreement is
a noticeable increase in the frequency of movements across
the Inter-Entity Boundary Line, as well as the continuation
of training and restructuring of the Federation Police Force.
However, regardless of the progress already achieved, we
cannot forget that the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina,
and in the whole region, continues to be precarious. There
are some outstanding issues between the States of the
region that must be settled as soon as possible. Moreover,
there are provisions of the Peace Agreement that still
remain to be implemented or whose implementation must
be improved.

In the view of the Polish delegation, the voluntary
return of refugees and displaced persons to their places of
residence before the war remains a fundamental provision
of the Peace Agreement that still has not been
implemented. This question takes on key importance for
the future of the country, especially in the present
circumstances, before the local elections planned for
1997. The problem of refugees is additionally aggravated
by the severe shortage of housing space caused by
damage to housing stock and by the fact that previously
abandoned households are now occupied by refugees from
other regions. Delays in the implementation of this
particular part of the Peace Agreement has produced
further tension in Bosnia and Herzegovina, and remain a
source of possible conflict in the future.

Another problem that in our view is of paramount
importance to the peace process in Bosnia and
Herzegovina is the issue of cooperation of States and
Entities with the International Criminal Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia. Unfortunately, the parties to the
Agreement have not yet met their obligation to detain
indicted war criminals and turn them over to the Tribunal.
We reiterate our strong support for the work of the
Tribunal and stress the need for consistent prosecution of
war crimes committed during the conflict in the territory
of the former Yugoslavia.

It is our conviction that without the various forms of
the presence of the international community in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, the process of consolidation of peace would
not be possible. The Polish delegation is of the view that
the multinational Implementation Force and the
International Police Task Force (IPTF) in particular have
played an extremely important role during this year in
creating conditions conducive to a secure and durable
peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina. We therefore pay
tribute to all the women and men of IFOR and IPTF who
have dedicated their untiring efforts to performing their
tasks in an effective manner. Poland, together with many
other countries, contributed personnel to the multinational
Implementation Force and the International Police Task
Force. Today, we remain equally committed to the
consolidation of peace and stability in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, and wish to declare our readiness to use all
the means at our disposal to make a further contribution
to that cause.

It is our firm belief that, in order to ensure further
implementation of the Peace Agreement and, thus, the
consolidation of peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina, the
international community must maintain its presence in
that country. We therefore fully support the draft
resolution that is before us today and the decisions

 

contained therein, which will lead to the establishment of
the multinational Stabilization Force (SFOR) for a planned
period of 18 months, and to the extension of the mandate
of the United Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina
for an additional period of one year. The Polish delegation
is convinced that SFOR, as the legal successor of IFOR,
will fulfil the role specified in Annex l-A and Annex 2 of
the Peace Agreement. We are also confident that UNMIBH
will carry out its mandate with the same dedication as in
1996.

