Mr. Outlule (Botswana): Let me begin by stating
that the delegation of Botswana aligns itself with the
statement delivered by the representative of Tunisia on
behalf of the African Group. I also wish to thank you,
Mr. President, for organizing this important debate. It
is a welcome initiative, and we commend your
leadership. The debate should contribute to the
promotion of awareness and greater understanding of
how a combination of factors and individuals can
conspire to exploit natural resources in a manner that
causes conflict.

There are several questions that demand answers.
The delegation of Botswana wishes to submit that, in
our view, the debate is really about natural resources
and development. How can we ensure that natural
resources are exploited for the common good?

The conflict over natural resources is neither new
nor unique to Africa. Throughout history, there have
been many examples of conflict over land, wildlife and
water resources. The link between natural resources
and conflict probably began when humankind started
hunting and gathering. The scramble for Africa by
colonial Powers, for instance, entailed conflict with
Africans over their natural resources. The challenge we
face is how to eliminate this age-old evil of grabbing
and fighting over natural resources. The seeds of
conflict are sown when a group of people either grab
what does not belong to them or try to exclude others
from benefiting from their national heritage.

For most developing countries, natural resources
should really be a source of hope and opportunity for a
better future rather than a threat or a curse. Botswana
can indeed attest to the good that diamonds can do, for
instance. There can be no doubt however that, left
alone, diamonds cannot do anything. Positive and
innovative actions, policies and practices by people,
combined with good leadership, are critical to putting a
resource to good use.

Botswana fully supports the Kimberley Process.
It is a practical mechanism underpinned by General
Assembly and Security Council resolutions calling for
accountable and transparent internal controls and
systems at the national level, as well as international
measures to monitor and track the trade in rough
diamonds. Today, almost all international trade in
diamonds is processed through the Kimberley Process,
and diamonds have become a major source of funding
for social progress and economic development in many
countries, particularly in Africa. The Kimberley
Process continues to be a major success in curbing
production and trade in conflict diamonds.

There is agreement on the urgent need to
effectively prevent conflict over natural resources. In
doing so, we should not establish mechanisms that
create conditionalities for trade in natural resources
and place a heavy burden on exporting countries. That
would be unfortunate, as it would set new trade
barriers.

We must not demonize or stigmatize natural
resources. Natural resources do not cause conflict.
They simply do not. It is illicit trafficking in small
arms and light weapons, human greed,
mismanagement, corruption and exploitation that
generate conflict. The seedlings of conflict, I repeat,
are planted when the vast majority of citizens are
excluded from enjoying the wealth of their national
heritage.

There is no single way to address the issue of
conflict over resources. We call for equal
accountability for those who manufacture and export
arms and those who do not use the proceeds of the sale
of natural resources to produce food and provide
education, health care, clean water and
communications infrastructure, but rather subvert and
divert such proceeds to purchase and import arms in
order to perpetrate or fuel war on their populations.

We need a wise combination of measures to assist
Africa to urgently and effectively tackle the challenges
of underdevelopment. The phenomenon of natural
resources and conflict is common in Africa because of
the problem of underdevelopment. In the highly
industrialized countries, it no longer exists because the
economies are primarily dependent on science and
technology and on highly skilled services.

If natural resources are demonized, the result will
be that only natural resources from Africa would be
excluded from international trade. Mechanisms that
can have an adverse impact on the ability of African
countries to profitably exploit their natural resources
should be avoided.

Underdevelopment in Africa deserves urgent
attention. Strong partnership, assured support and
mutually beneficial cooperation in tackling this
problem are needed; they are key to resolving the issue
of natural resources and conflict.

