Mr. Al-Mouallimi (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic): I thank you, Mr. President, for convening this debate on the situation in the Middle East. The current situation is characterized by the fact that the occupying Israeli authorities continue to try to impose a fait accompli. Israel has announced its intention to construct many new settlements and to annex wide areas of occupied Palestinian territory in the West Bank, which prevents any settlement of the situation. It continues its intransigence by violating international law and relevant agreements to end the conflict, which is the main reason for the crises that afflict the region. Israel continues to adopt legislation and anti-Palestinian policies in order to legitimize its settlement policy and deprive the Palestinian people of their rights. We therefore once again call on the international community to compel Israel to respect the relevant international resolutions, failing which the region will continue to suffer the effects of this protracted conflict. The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia reiterates its steadfast position - that the Palestinian question is our country's central issue. We will continue to defend it and champion the rights of the Palestinian people until they enjoy their inalienable rights and establish their independent State within the June 1967 borders, with Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its capital, in line with the binding Security Council resolutions and the Arab Peace Initiative. It is also essential for Israel to put an end to its occupation of the Syrian Arab Golan and of Lebanese territory. My country categorically rejects all statements intended to legalize the settlements in the West Bank and all claims that they do not contravene international law. Israel's settlements violate international resolutions and international law and prevent the achievement of peace and security in the Middle East and the two- State solution. The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia also rejects foreign interference in Libyan affairs, which has led to the presence of extremist fighters on Libyan territory. This is a violation of relevant Council resolutions and has exacerbated military confrontations, leading to greater suffering for the brotherly Libyan people. The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia reiterates its position of support for the Libyan people and respect for their will. We recognize all the Libyan parties equally and call upon them to exercise restraint and prioritize the national interest while upholding the unity, integrity and sovereignty of Libya, which must be protected from foreign interference. We also support the efforts of the United Nations to put an end to the conflict and resolve the crisis through dialogue and political solutions. My country's Government condemns the recent escalation by the Syrian authorities in their assault on civilians in Idlib. We call for calm and dialogue through the Constitutional Committee, which for the Syrian people provides a glimmer of hope that the long-standing conflict may be coming to an end. Recent years have made it abundantly clear that a military solution - against the wishes of the people and in violation of their sovereignty - would mean nothing. We must save Syria through political dialogue and solutions, not foreign interference. We call for the withdrawal of all foreign armed militias from Syrian territory in order to safeguard the territorial integrity of Syria, as well as its security and stability. My country has always called for maximum restraint, calm and dialogue in the face of any conflict. The current levels of tension in our region can only be reduced through dialogue. Recent attacks in brotherly Iraq and the violation of its sovereignty are a very serious escalation that will, no doubt, have negative consequences. The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia condemns those attacks and violations of Iraqi sovereignty and we once again call for all parties to exercise restraint. We must prevent escalation if security and stability are to have a chance of succeeding in Iraq and more broadly in the Arab Gulf region.It is also essential for the international community to shoulder its responsibility to guarantee the security, safety and stability of the vital region of the Middle East for the entire world. The provocations and sabotage operations continuously undertaken by Iran in that region must be deterred. My country has shown maximum restraint in response to the terrorist attacks on our Aramco oil facilities in Abqaiq and Khurais on 14 September 2019. The Houthi militias in Yemen have claimed responsibility for those attacks; however, the United Nations and international investigations have made it clear that the attacks were not launched from Yemeni territory but rather from the north. Yemen has witnessed consecutive efforts at the regional and international levels to reduce tension and promote trust, leading to an improvement in the military, political and humanitarian situation during the recent period. The Riyadh agreement signed between the Government of Yemen and the Southern Transitional Council, which seeks to pave the way for the establishment of security, peace and development in Yemen, has now entered its second phase. Regrettably, we see the Houthi militias, supported by Iran, pursuing their practices, which are at odds with the relevant resolutions of international legitimacy, in particular resolution 2216 (2015). The most recent violation was the terrorist attack by the Houthi militias on a mosque in Ma'rib governorate. Dozens of people were killed and dozens more injured. We condemn that terrorist attack, which targeted a place of worship and led to the shedding of Yemeni blood. We reiterate the support of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and its sisterly States of the coalition for the people and territory of Yemen. Those abhorrent terrorist attacks are deliberate acts to undermine the quest for a political solution. In conclusion, the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia calls on the international community, and the Council in particular, to enhance its main role in maintaining international peace and security. We also call for de-escalation in the region so as to prevent international disasters. De-escalation, dialogue and maximum restraint are the main solution that will strengthen preventive diplomacy and prevent the outbreak of conflicts.
