Mr. Jenie (Indonesia): Mr. President, let me start
by thanking you for having convened this extremely
urgent meeting. I wish also to thank Special Adviser
Nambiar and Under-Secretary-General Egeland for
their valuable briefings.

The rapidly deteriorating situation in Lebanon
and Palestine has brought the region once again into a
situation of deep crisis and taken both countries to the
edge of a humanitarian catastrophe, with repercussions
far beyond the region. The Government and the people
of Indonesia are in full solidarity with the people and
the Governments of Lebanon and Palestine.

On television, on an hourly basis, we see the
faces of the hundreds of innocent civilians, many of
them children, who have fallen victim to the brutal
Israeli military campaign, and we are witness to
countless civil infrastructures being destroyed. We
strongly condemn this collective punishment, which
unfairly and unjustly holds hostage all innocent
Lebanese and Palestinians.

Yesterday, in his briefing to the Council,
Secretary-General Kofi Annan also underlined the
precariousness of the situation and proposed a package
of concrete actions to defuse the conflict. My
delegation wishes to express its appreciation to him for
his efforts and initiatives to resolve this crisis.

Israel's military action clearly constitutes a
flagrant violation of international law, the Fourth
Geneva Convention and other rules of humanitarian
law. My delegation strongly condemns this and urges
the international community to take action to
immediately halt it. We believe that a sense of urgency
is required in the Council, given the dire humanitarian
situation and the continuing loss of innocent civilian
life and destruction. In view of the scale of destruction
and the casualties resulting from Israel's indiscriminate
attacks and its disproportionate use of force, it is
difficult for my delegation to comprehend why the
Council - as the main organ responsible for the
maintenance of international peace and security - is
still unable to respond quickly and effectively.

In that connection, we join the call for an
immediate and comprehensive ceasefire as the most
critical step towards the speedy delivery of
humanitarian assistance, particularly to civilians, in the
conflict areas. Indonesia supports fully the
establishment of an international peacekeeping force,
under the auspices of the United Nations, to be
deployed immediately to monitor and enforce the
ceasefire. Indonesia stands ready to participate by
contributing a military contingent to the force.

We further observe that the mandate of the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) expires at
the end of this month. In view of recent developments,
this is a timely opportunity to extend and reconfigure
its mandate to respond to this complex situation,
including providing security for the channelling of
humanitarian assistance. We are pleased that the
Secretary-General reflected this important aspect in his
briefing yesterday. This is particularly important in
view of the need for security, not only for all the
peoples in the region, but also for the humanitarian
personnel who will be putting their lives on the line.

Another important aspect of this package of
solutions is the need for a reconstruction and
rehabilitation programme for Lebanon and Palestine. It
is the position of the Indonesian Government that this
reconstruction and rehabilitation must form part of the
peacebuilding process in the region.

Indonesia further wishes to reiterate its
commitment to peace in the Middle East and to the
creation of a viable and sovereign Palestinian State
under the two-State solution, as provided for in the
road map. We emphasize the urgency of reviving the
peace process in order to achieve a just solution to the
conflict, in accordance with United Nations
resolutions, the road map and the Arab peace initiative
of 2002. It is also important to support the Lebanese
Government in its efforts to maintain its political
independence, extend its authority over all of its
territories and exercise its full sovereignty over them,
and implement the 1949 agreement, which was
reaffirmed by the Lebanese in the Taif national accord.
We call on the international community to take
urgent steps to avert a wider humanitarian crisis and
further bloodshed, and we hope to see the path to peace
reopened as soon as possible. We appeal to the Security
Council to deliver a unified and constructive resolution
to immediately halt the atrocities and the cycle of
violence in the region.

