Sir Emyr Jones Parry (United Kingdom): I
would like to begin by thanking the colleagues who
accompanied us on the mission and the Secretariat for
all their support. As a written report has been presented
and we had an opportunity to deliver some personal
comments earlier, so I can be very brief.

The first point is to emphasize the value of such
visits. The fact-finding on the ground, the messages we
delivered, the manner in which the Security Council
2

wishes to cooperate and work with the Government of
the Sudan, in particular, and the way in which the
cohesion of the members of the Council was enhanced
by the experience all underline why such visits are
crucial.

I can only apologize that the schedule did not
turn out to be as measured as I would have liked. The
net result was that the pressures were, indeed, very
intense.

Three years ago, the Council debated whether or
not it was right to discuss the Sudan at all. Since then a
lot has happened, much of it good in terms of the
agreements reached on the ground. But there are now
in place a range of United Nations policies, working in
cooperation with the Government and the people of the
Sudan, aimed at trying to improve the situation there.
They cover a multiplicity of objectives. They involve a
range of actors. I would like in particular to pay tribute
to the work of the African Union on the ground, but I
would also note support from the European Union and
other bodies.

What we all understood clearly was how complex
the situation is and how interrelated are all the different
aspects in the Sudan. But we also understood how it
has to be set in a regional context.

All those things hang together. I believe one of
the things that the Council will be looking for is advice

from the Secretary-General about - in addition to
Darfur, which is very much on the agenda at the
moment - what we should be doing about the

situation in eastern Chad, the assistance we need to
provide there, and the wider issue of the relationship
between the two Governments. The absence of a real
relationship really does have a severe impact on the
situation.

Fundamentally, the Council members expressed
their support for the territorial integrity and
sovereignty of the Sudan. But I also wish to see a real
improvement in the politics, the humanitarian situation
and the security situation throughout the country. Our
support for the Comprehensive Peace Agreement and
the Darfur Peace Agreement was evident.

That is why I believe we came away reconfirmed
in our view that, as the African Union itself had
decided, it was right that the United Nations should
take over the peacekeeping operation in Darfur. That is
06-41082
the short-term objective; we debated it earlier this
week in another forum.

I will end by stressing the wish that we all kept
repeating and that is fundamental to policy: to see a
partnership with the Government and the people of the
Sudan. We cannot do that without the consent of the
Government; that is obvious. But I just want to get
across this simple message: our wish is to see an
improvement in all the aspects of the situation in the
Sudan. The United Nations should play its part,
working with that Government and its people to
provide the sort of future that we all want to see - the
sort of future that we would like to believe the
Government of the Sudan wants to see for all its
people.

