Mr. Dacie (Serbia) (spoke in Serbian; interpretation provided by the delegation): In my statement earlier
I said that Council members would hear a number of
lies from Pristina's representative. One can ascertain
from her statement how she perceives an ideal country.
Simply put: If it is such an ideal country, I wonder why
the migrants crossing through the Balkans do not go to
Kosovo. Why do its citizens flee Kosovo for Western
Europe? Next time, I could also inform the Council how
many Kosovar Albanians are in possession of Serbian
passports, and how our diplomatic and consular
representative offices in Western Europe every day
work with Kosovar Albanians.

What kind of country are we talking about? There
was mention of crimes, rapes and murders. Why was
no one accused? The Kosovo speaker, who represents
it now, says that the number of those indicted for those
crimes is zero. Well, that is their problem. Why did
they not charge anyone? Why did they not say that this
person or that person committed rape or murder? If,
as was said, Serbia has no jurisdiction in Kosovo, why
was nothing done about it in The Hague? Every one
of Serbia's police and military was questioned at the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia in
The Hague hundreds of times. It is impossible to bring
charges based on the representative's fictional accounts
recited here in the Security Council.

And what is going on with Oliver Ivanovic'?
Ms. Citaku says that we have arrested Kosovo's citizens.
She urges that our people should be indicted, but when
it comes to her citizens, everyone is innocent, right? So
if according to her whoever may have been convicted
is innocent, what is happening in the case of Oliver
Ivanovic'? He has been under house arrest for months.
Is there a single witness - Serbia has demanded to
see a list - who can confirm the allegations made
against him? The representative made a little mistake,
because that list was erased after 2000 by those who
bombed Serbia. But I have to declare here in New York,
before the Security Council, that the decision to bomb
Serbia was illegal and taken without the assent of the
Council. I believe firmly that many who were on that
list deserve to be tried, but the Tribunal found no legal
basis for instigating proceedings against those who
bombed Serbia. That was a judicial decision based on
no decision of the Security Council. Of course, that list
also includes people who were lauded by Kosovo - who
were employed, permitted to research mining resources
and given mobile phones.

Now the former Croatian Prime Minister Milanovie
turns to Kosovo. Is Wesley Clark now on the list of those
working in Kosovo, having borne witness to Bernard
Kouchner and William Walker claiming that Serbia
was bombed? He was the Head of the Mission to Serbia
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe, and before any statements were made by any
forensic experts, he said that those who died in Racak
were the victims of Serbs. Now he is a national hero.

Ms. Citaku speaks of colonialism. What is she
talking about? What are the countries that have been
liberated from colonialism? Does she have any idea at
all ofwhat colonialism is? The first capital of Serbia was
in Kosovo. The seat of the Serbian Orthodox Church is
in Kosovo. What kind of colonialism is that? Name any
Albanian cultural monument dating back to that time.
What is she talking about? She thinks that because she is
here in this meeting, supported by some major Western
Powers, that she can tell lies here. But in fact that
support does not strengthen Kosovo's position; rather
their support for the positions that Kosovo presents
here undermines their own reputations. Ms. Citaku
mentioned Mr. Ahtisaari. Was it the Security Council
that adopted the Ahtisaari proposal?

Ms. Citaku has presented the dangerous thesis that
everything in Kosovo belongs to Kosovo. The people
there are living under capitalism, so can she actually
tell them that everything located in Kosovo is the
property of Kosovo? There should be some law about
those rights. She does not even like Special Rapporteur
Karima Bennoune, who has spoken of200,000 displaced
Serbs. The number is not important - even if it is only
50,000, they should be allowed to return. According to
United Nations data, they amount to 1.9 per cent. Will
the Council remain silent on this and say that those
people do not have to go back? Is the Council going to
legalize ethnic cleansing? it has no right to do that.

Regardless of our country's small size, when it is
a question of our Church we will defend it. Ms. Citaku
claims that the church on the grounds of the campus
of the University of Pristina is problematic because it
was built under the Milosevic regime. But what about
the fourteenth-century church of Our Lady of Ljevis,
which Kosovo set on fire, and which was placed on the
UNESCO World Heritage List? When was that built?
Does that have anything to do with Milosevic? Where
was Milosevic in 1981, when there were demonstrations
demanding Kosovan independence? There was always
a plan for unification with Albania from the very start,
and that should be admitted. She is not Kosovar; she
is Albanian. Her country of origin is Albania. This is
not about colonialism; it is about a national minority
in someone else's country that has unilaterally
declared independence.

I should like to point out to those here, including my
friend from Japan, that this could happen to his country
tomorrow. The fact that his country has over 100 million
inhabitants does not give it more rights than Serbia.
We do not have a principle that says we lost because
Kosovo's unilateral declaration of independence was
permitted and because some countries accepted it. It is
really not nice that the United States has called on other
countries to recognize Kosovo's unilateral declaration,
thereby violating Serbia's territorial integrity. One
hundred years ago, the only foreign flag that flew in
front of the White House was Serbian, in recognition of
Serbia's sacrifices during the First World War, when we
lost a third of our population.

I am happy for the Ambassador of Japan and his
bottle of wine. In the fourteenth century, Serbia's
Tsar Dusan enacted a law protecting the quality and
geographic origin of Kosovan wine. At the time, he
was the only ruler owning 25 kilometres of vineyards
between Veliko Hoca and Prizren. Needless to say,
there is nothing that the representative of Pristina can
say about that, because at the time her people did not
live in Kosovo. We are therefore not colonizers, and
such terms should not be used in this principal organ of
the United Nations.

With regard to INTERPOL, of course Palestine was
also on its agenda and the United States was not inclined
to vote on that. Kosovo and Taiwan were on its agenda,
too - or perhaps Taiwan was not on the agenda, but it
was announced. Kosovo told everyone that it would be
participating in the INTERPOL meeting, so why did
it not submit its request? It did not submit it because it
knew it would lose.

I will end in the same way that Ms. Citaku began,
by quoting her fictional statement. Today we are in
2016, not 1999. That is correct. Of course, the world has
changed in the meantime. Today, those who bombed us,
and for whom monuments have been raised in Pristina,
are gone. The world has indeed changed. Today, those
who supported Kosovo's positions are gone. The world
has changed in the sense that people understand that this
is about the violation ofrights. Each and every violation
of international rights is of a universal nature and is
applicable to all. I respect the will of all, but we have
to start with the legitimate interests of our own people.

I do not know if the names of squares and streets in
Pristina will be changed, as the media has suggested,
but in any case we do not need the support of anyone
from outside. Let us resolve our problems by ourselves.
The representative of Kosovo is hiding behind big
brother. Let us talk and find a sustainable solution. No
one is going to drop a solution on Kosovo in the same
way they dropped the bombs in 1999. Unfortunately for
Kosovo, that time is over.

