Mr. Navarrete (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation is delighted that you, Sir, are personally
presiding over this open debate of the Security
Council. I also wish to congratulate the Permanent
Representative of Bangladesh for his conduct of the
work of the Security Council during the present month.
In particular, we are grateful for the convening of this
meeting to examine the report of the Secretary-General
on the prevention of armed conflicts.

The Charter of the United Nations refers to
prevention in Article 1, when it points out that the first
of its purposes is "to take effective . . . measures for
the prevention and removal of threats to the peace".
However, in the course of its history, the Organization
has devoted itself remedying conflicts more than to
preventing them. The change towards a culture of
prevention, proposed by the Secretary-General, is even
supported by popular wisdom; it is often said that an
ounce of prevention is worth a pound of cure. This
change therefore helps to restore logic to the priorities
of the Organization.

My delegation welcomes the report that is before
us today. The importance of its numerous
recommendations calls for careful analysis by
delegations and Governments. We therefore appreciate
the fact that the President of the General Assembly has
scheduled plenary meetings next month to consider the
report in depth. Today, I will limit myself to presenting
some initial reflections.

The delegation of Mexico fully shares the
Secretary-General's recommendation that the General
Assembly make more active use of the powers
bestowed upon it by the Charter. The General
Assembly, the most democratic and universal organ of
the United Nations, should recover the central role that
the Charter assigns to it, as recognized by our heads of
State and Government in the Millennium Declaration.

A first step to strengthen the coordination
between the two organs would be, as suggested in the
report, to increase the consultations between their two
Presidents, not necessarily at fixed intervals, but rather,
as often as the circumstances require. It becomes
increasingly necessary to define clearly the sphere of
competence of the Security Council vis-a-vis that of
the General Assembly.

The role that the Security Council can play in
conflict prevention is undoubtedly important,
especially in implementing the provisions of Chapter
VI of the Charter. However, for the United Nations to
be successful in conflict prevention, more effective
actions should be promoted through other bodies that
are directly responsible, such as the General Assembly,
the Economic and Social Council and the specialized
agencies of the system. One must wonder whether the
Security Council has the structural capacity to launch
major actions to address the root causes of conflicts
and thus prevent their eruption. What it can
undoubtedly do is to contribute to the prevention
process in the areas within its mandate. It is self-
evident that one of the most effective ways to prevent a
conflict is to address the causes that can trigger it. If
we bear in mind that poverty, discrimination and the
lack of economic prospects are among the most
recurrent causes of conflicts, it is not difficult to
conclude that prevention-related topics and actions
should be at the core of the General Assembly's and
the Economic and Social Council's work.

Economic and social problems such as the ones I
mentioned are not, of course, the only cause of
conflicts. However, as long as the Organization does
not strengthen its effectiveness in promoting
development in all its aspects, it will not be possible to
prevent the emergence of conflicts. In this regard,
Member States should be responsible for providing
reliable information on the progress achieved and the
limitations faced in meeting the most pressing needs of
their populations.
The role of the Bretton Woods institutions is of
great importance for the prevention of conflicts
inasmuch as they can help channel more resources
towards the promotion of development. The protection
of civilians must be understood in a broad sense,
including the implementation of development
programmes that ensure the well-being of populations.

Full respect for human rights and the fight against
the scourge of drugs and against transnational
organized crime also constitute fundamental pieces of a
culture of peace. We must recognize that the
consumption, traffic and production of drugs, as well
as the crimes associated with this phenomenon,
regrettably constitute an increasingly significant source
of conflict. The recommendations of the Secretary-
General to strengthen the work of the Organization in
these fields are therefore correct and timely.

My delegation has taken note with particular
interest of recommendations 14 and 15, on disarmament
issues. The Government of Mexico considers that the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and their
delivery vehicles constitutes the main topic of the
international disarmament agenda, because of its
implications for international peace and security. The
question of missiles should be the object of multilateral
negotiation to establish an international legal framework
conducive to the prevention of armed conflicts.

Mexico will continue encouraging the adoption of
measures aimed at consolidating the non-proliferation
of nuclear weapons, including the universalization and
full validity of the various international treaties on the
matter, as well as the negotiation of new bilateral and
multilateral agreements whose objective is the
complete elimination of nuclear weapons, as a step
towards the agreed goal of general and complete
disarmament under effective international control.

My country supports the recommendation of the
Secretary-General that measures be adopted to prevent
the misuse and illicit transfers of small weapons. The
forthcoming United Nations Conference on the Illicit
Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its
Aspects will provide an opportunity for the
international community to adopt an effective
programme of action to prevent, combat and eradicate
their production and illicit traffic. Mexico is committed
to the success of that Conference.

Fighting against impunity is a priority that the
Government of Mexico fully shares. As does the
Secretary-General in his report, we recognize the need
to strengthen the action of the International Court of
Justice and that the Statute of the International
Criminal Court must soon enter into force.

As pointed out by the Secretary-General, most of
the recommendations in his report have no financial
implications. However, in the current situation my
delegation is concerned by the proposal that prevention
measures be financed from the regular budget. My
delegation will participate in the debates that should
take place on this question in the relevant organs of the
General Assembly.

To conclude, I wish to commend the efforts of the
Secretary-General to design and to promote a "culture of
prevention", to which many have referred in the course
of today's debate. We must all persevere in the task of
transforming the United Nations into an Organization
able to face successfully the challenges before it in the
maintenance of international peace and security.

