Mrs. Dunlop (Brazil) (spoke in Spanish): I
commend Argentina for having convened today's
debate on the protection of civilians in armed conflict.

(spoke in English)

I thank the Secretary-General for his informative
briefing, as well as High Commissioner Navi Pillay,
Under-Secretary-General Valerie Amos and Mr. Philip
Spoerri for their comments.

Brazil associates itself with the statement to be
delivered by the representative of Switzerland on behalf
of the Group of Friends on the Protection of Civilians
in Armed Conflict.

Today, we commemorate the tenth anniversary of
the Baghdad bombing and the tragic death of Sergio
Vieira de Mello and other United Nations officials, a
fitting occasion for the Council to look at the challenges
ahead in its efforts to protect civilians under threat
of violence. Also today, the Brazilian Government is
hosting a seminar entitled "Ten Years Without Sergio
Vieira de Mello" in Rio de Janeiro. The event honours
Sergio and his work and addresses key aspects of the
international humanitarian agenda.

As we have heard in several interventions today,
the effective and timely protection of civilians in armed
conflict remains a critical challenge. A United Nations
firmly committed to, and demonstrably effective
in, protecting civilians in situations of conflict has
become a clear and global demand. It is our collective
responsibility to satisfactorily respond to that demand.
It is also our collective responsibility to do so in a
manner that reinforces the moral authority and political
legitimacy ofthe Organization, which requires ensuring
that our protection policies, strategies and decisions are
strongly anchored in international law and that they
are truly universal and non-selective in scope and free
from any undue politicization. Any failure on our part
to do so is detrimental to the very civilians we all want
to protect. The Security Council has a pivotal role to
play in our meeting both grave responsibilities.
The Council also has the responsibility to continue
to call for conflict prevention. As humanitarian and
human tragedies of the past 20 years have clearly
shown, it is quite difficult to stop Violence against
civilians when conflict has broken out. Putting the evil
genie of carnage back in the bottle is often a very tall
order, and if and when it is finally done, the death toll
may be simply terrifying. Therefore, we must repeat
that the most effective strategy for protecting civilians
is prevention.

Protection includes the promotion of sustainable
development, social inclusion and food and nutritional
security, as they contribute to conflict prevention in
many parts of the world. We must translate the political
agreement on the interdependence between security
and development into comprehensive prevention
strategies, in full respect of the different competencies
of the United Nations organs and agencies.

None of that is novel, but it must be repeated, as
there remain voices that continue to establish an almost
automatic link between the protection of civilians
and the use of force. As the Council will recall, the
concept of "responsibility while protecting" underlines
the fact that the use of force, even when its declared
goal is to protect civilians, often results in high human
and material costs, frequently contributing to the
deterioration of the situation of those such force sought
to protect. The use of force must truly be a measure of
last resort.

That is clear in the case of Syria, for instance. The
external supply of weapons will only lead to further
bloodshed - and not to peace, as a deeply flawed
argument being made by some would have us believe.
The supply of arms feeds the mistaken belief that there
is a military solution to the conflict. We continue
to firmly support the holding of a second Geneva
Conference so as to advance peace and therefore put an
end to Violence against civilians.

Similar reasoning applies to the situation in the
Democratic Republic ofthe Congo. As Brazilian Foreign
Minister Patriota recently stated in the Council, the
military component of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo must be part of a political strategy. What
will truly protect the Congolese people is dialogue and
peace.

That is true also in the occupied Palestinian
territories, where for far too long civilians have been
affected by Violence, including from settlers. Only
peace and the end of occupation will ensure their
protection. We firmly hope that the recent resumption
of direct final status negotiations will help the parties
to move forward towards such a goal for the benefit of
civilians.

The escalation of violence against civilians
demonstrating in Egypt is a source of grave concern.
Brazil has condemned the brutality of the repression
and associates itself with the statements made by the
Secretary-General and representatives of the African
Union. We call for dialogue and conciliation so that
the legitimate aspirations of the Egyptian people for
freedom, democracy and prosperity can be achieved
without violence, with respect for human rights and
with the full restoration of democratic order.

Ensuring humanitarian access is a political and
moral imperative. It is essential that the parties to
conflict allow and facilitate the immediate, safe, full
and unimpeded passage of humanitarian relief for all
civilians in need of assistance. Just as important is strict
respect for the principles of humanity, impartiality,
neutrality and independence, as provided for by the
General Assembly, especially because that is the most
effective manner for access to civilians in need to
actually be achieved.

Enhancing accountability for violations of
international humanitarian law and human rights law
is also a key part of our efforts to protect civilians,
including as a preventive measure, as impunity often
feeds further violence. At the same time, in each
specific situation, we must continue to seek to reconcile
the imperatives of peace and justice, with a view, first
and foremost, to stopping violence and saving lives
that are threatened by violence. We must avoid both
automatic gestures and impunity.

In conclusion, I am confident that the combination
ofidealism and realism that characterized Sergio Vieira
de Mello's life can serve as a model for us as we address
the challenges involved in protecting civilians. Brazil
remains ready to work with other States Members of
the United Nations as well as the Organization itself in
that regard.

