Mr. Ipo (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): As this
is the first time I have addressed the Council since the
Republic of Equatorial Guinea assumed its presidency,
while welcoming your presence here, Mr. President, I
would also like to congratulate your country and extend
to Ambassador Ndong Mba and his team my best
wishes for their successful leadership of the Council's
work during the month of February.

Cote d'Ivoire and Equatorial Guinea, like the other
countries of the Gulf of Guinea, have been dealing with
persistent maritime insecurity and acts of piracy for a
number of years. In View of the major importance of
the maritime sector to the economies of the Gulf of
Guinea States, it is clear that in addition to being a
threat to peace and security, acts of maritime piracy
undermine the tireless efforts of the countries of the
region to achieve economic and social development. It
is therefore for good reason that we welcome Equatorial
Guinea's choice of the topic of transnational organized
crime at sea, whose challenges are even more clear
thanks to the informative briefings from Mr. Yury
Fedotov and Mrs. Ukonga, whom we want to thank.

The steady drop in the number of attacks on ships
between 2013 and 2015 fuelled hopes that the Gulf of
Guinea was gradually ceasing to be a maritime risk area.
According to International Maritime Bureau (IMB)
statistics, attacks on ships in the region fell from 52
in 2013 to 41 in 2014 and 31 in 2015, declines of 21 per
cent and 24 per cent for the two periods. Unfortunately,
in 2018 such acts of piracy, mainly targeting merchant
ships, saw an upward trend in West Africa. According
to the latest annual report ofthe IMB's Piracy Reporting
Centre, the number of acts of piracy recorded between
Cote d'Ivoire and the Democratic Republic of Congo
more than doubled, reaching 82 of the total of 87
recorded around the African continent. The area also
has the highest concentration of violent acts during the
year, including 100 per cent of the six ship hijackings,
13 of 18 incidents involving firing on boats, 130 of 141
hostage-taking incidents and 78 of the 83 kidnappings
for ransom worldwide.

Acts of piracy are a serious concern for those
States, especially since they now affect the safety and
security of their port infrastructures, which are the
lifeblood of local economies. In order to keep these
threats in check, the States of the Gulf of Guinea
have recognized the urgent need to provide effective
and sustainable responses to them. With the adoption
of resolution 2039 (2012), which encouraged them to
develop a regional strategy to combat piracy and create
a multinational and transregional mechanism for the
entire Gulf region, those States developed a common
strategy for fighting maritime insecurity in the Gulf of
Guinea, adopted on 25 June 2013 by the Heads of State
and Government of the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS), the Economic Community
of Central African States and the Gulf of Guinea
Commission at the Yaounde Summit. The Summit
also enabled them to approve a code of conduct and a
memorandum of understanding on maritime security
in the Gulf of Guinea establishing an Interregional
Coordination Centre in Yaounde designed to cooperate
with the Regional Centre for Central African Maritime
Security in Pointe-Noire, in the Republic of the Congo,
and the ECOWAS Regional Maritime Security Centre
in Abidjan, in Cote d'Ivoire. This institutional network,
perfectly aligned with 2050 Africa's Integrated
Maritime Strategy for oceans and seas, has been
boosted by the implementation of subregional counter-
strategies such as the ECOWAS Integrated Maritime
Strategy, adopted on 29 March 2014 in Yamoussoukro.

The resurgence in acts of piracy demands that
the Council address the urgent need to strengthen the
logistical and operational capacities of the States of the
region and further promote subregional cooperation.
Cote d'Ivoire remains convinced that subregional
and regional strategies can be effective only when
based first and foremost on strong national strategies
and capacities, since the primary responsibility for
ensuring peace and security lies with each State. With
that in mind, and with the support of its bilateral and
multilateral partners, my country has therefore adopted
a national strategy for State action at sea aimed at
creating a secure, adequate and sustainable maritime
space for Cote d'Ivoire that serves economic prosperity
and human development. In order to implement the
strategy, we have acquired four patrol boats and opened
maritime operations centres in our two main ports in
order to enable our navy to better identify and prevent
threats, protect our maritime resources and share data
with neighbouring countries. My delegation would
like to take this opportunity to reiterate the gratitude
of the Government of Cote d'Ivoire to its bilateral and
multilateral partners for their multifaceted support in
implementing our State action at sea and building our
national capacity for tackling the challenge of maritime
insecurity. With regard to subregional cooperation, my
country's hosting of the Regional Maritime Security
Centre for West Africa and the Interregional Institute
for Maritime Security is a clear reflection of its
commitment to combating maritime insecurity.

Cote d'Ivoire welcomes the efforts of the States
of the Gulf of Guinea to strengthen their national
capacities in synergy with the African Union and all
its international partners. We believe that in order to be
effective, the Gulf of Guinea States must act according
to the three rules of cooperation, coordination and
collaboration. We must strengthen the coordination
among our national institutional actors, including
navies, coastguards, port police, customs officers and
legal authorities. Ultimately, that coordination should
result in a single space within which States' police,
customs and legal institutions can share information
and where the right to prosecute the perpetrators of acts
of maritime piracy on sea and on land is recognized.

Furthermore, finding sustainable solutions to
acts of maritime piracy must be conducted within the
framework of a holistic approach that integrates the
fight against poverty and unemployment, two scourges
that foster the recruitment of many young people by
maritime crime networks. In that regard, my country
would like to emphasize the important role of the
United Nations, in particular the Security Council. We
commend the work of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime in providing its technical assistance
in building the capacity of West African States.

In conclusion, I would like to affirm my country's
belief that building national capacities and strengthening
cooperation among States, regional and international
organizations must be the basis for our action if we are
to effectively combat maritime insecurity and piracy in
the Gulf of Guinea.

