Mr. Wehbe (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): We are pleased to see you, Sir, once again,
within two weeks, presiding over an important
meeting. We would also like to thank you for your
initiative, which led to putting this item on the agenda
this month, in view of its importance in many parts of
the world, and especially West Africa. It is our pleasure
to welcome the Ministers and the representatives of the
regional organizations who are with us today.

Today's meeting is one in a series of important
meetings held by the Security Council on the
proliferation of small arms and light weapons and the
phenomenon of mercenaries, in view of their negative
effects on West Africa. In that context, we would like
to confirm the need to respect international law and the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations, in particular respect for national sovereignty,
non-interference in the internal affairs of Members
States, the right to individual or collective self-defence
as stipulated by Article 51 of the Charter, the right of
peoples to self-determination and the right of Member
States to develop their own defence systems to
guarantee their national security.

The international community's adoption of the
Programme of Action of the United Nations
Conference on the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and
Light Weapons in All Its Aspects in July 2001 was an
important step forward in dealing with one of the most
urgent problems confronting international peace and
security: the tragedy of the unruly and excessive
proliferation of small arms and light weapons and the
illicit trafficking of them. Those are among the most
important reasons for the continuation and the fanning
of conflicts all over the world. The illicit trade in small
arms, especially in West Africa, adds to the violence
and contributes to the displacement of innocent people,
spreads the culture of violence and undermines the
stability of societies. It also undermines the efforts at
peace and negotiations, victimizes children, women
and vulnerable groups in particular, and creates a
climate propitious to the looting of valuable minerals,
especially in West Africa.

My delegation believes that the way to deal with
this question in general, and in West Africa in
particular, lies in encouraging measures designed to
restore peace, security and confidence among countries
so that resorting to weapons is made less necessary; in
promoting measures to prevent conflicts and seeking
negotiated solutions; and in taking all necessary
measures to control the circulation of small arms and
light weapons and their possession, use, transfer and
stockpiling. A mechanism must be established to stop
the exportation of small arms to non-State entities,
such as combatants and mercenaries, and sanctions
must be imposed on manufacturers, arms traffickers
and middlemen who do that.

We need to give financial and technical support to
national programmes aimed at reintegrating the
demobilized combatants and those illicitly possessing
small arms.

With respect to the question of mercenaries, my
delegation believes that armed conflict, illicit
trafficking and covert operations by third countries
lead, inter alia, to an increase in the demand for
mercenaries in the international market. It is part of
supply and demand. The recruitment, financing,
training and use of mercenaries are part of this. It is a
great cause of concern to all countries. It is also a
violation of the purposes and principles of the Charter
of the United Nations.

The General Assembly and the Security Council
have adopted many resolutions condemning the use of
mercenaries as a form of external interference in the
internal affairs of States in cases where the purpose is
to undermine the stability of such countries and to
violate their territorial integrity, independence and
sovereignty. The relevant United Nations resolutions
have emphasized the need to prevent the training,
financing and recruitment of mercenaries and their
being sent from one country to another. They also
underline the need not to offer them any facilities,
including financing, in order to equip them and to give
them the opportunity to go to other countries. Those
resolutions describe the use of mercenaries against
national liberation movements struggling against
colonialist domination or other forms of foreign
occupation as a crime.

The political problems and disputes among
neighbouring countries, especially in West Africa, have
led to armed conflicts, and the presence of mercenaries
is a recognized fact in all these conflicts. That has led
to barbaric actions and the continuation of wars.
Although the phenomenon of mercenaries is not
limited to West Africa, Africa is the continent where it
has continued and has done the most harm. We have
heard many ministers and representatives confirm that.

Many armed conflicts in Africa are the result of
extended political instability and the presence of
valuable natural resources that other foreign entities try
to control by encouraging and arming their allies
within those countries so that they can take power.
Later, such acts are carried out by mercenaries who
have the individual military skills or by what are called
military security companies, which use well-organized
small armies of mercenaries in order to calm the
situation in any of those countries. It is wrong to think
that such private military security companies can help
in managing the affairs of the countries in which they
operate.

The problem of the proliferation of small arms
and light weapons and the use of mercenaries threatens
peace and security in West Africa and other parts of the
world. My delegation believes that discussion of this
problem in its general framework definitely applies to
this important part of the African continent. There is no
doubt that we should follow up the question closely
and draw the necessary lessons from what has
happened in those lands.

Finally, we believe that cooperation with regional
and subregional organizations is essential for the
achievement of the United Nations objectives of peace
and security in West Africa, in all parts of Africa as a
whole and in the entire world.

