Mr. Trullols Yabra (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): We thank Ambassador Pedersen for his
briefing and renew our full support for his efforts to
bring about greater rapprochement, reconciliation and
dialogue among the Syrian Government, the opposition
and civil society. We recognize the significant obstacles
and challenges that have been overcome in order to
reach the current situation. We urge him to continue,
without wavering, along that path - sometimes with
very sharp curves - towards broad political renewal in
the Syrian Arab Republic in order to restore hope of a
better future to a people beset by nine years of conflict.

We are grateful for the participation of Ms. Altalli,
whose perspective as a woman and an activist confirms
the important role that women can and must play in the
political process in Syria.

The Dominican Republic regrets that it has not
been possible for the small group to reach an agreement
on the agenda for its deliberations in the framework of
the second meeting of the Constitutional Committee.
We hope that, in the not too distant future, both parties
will be able to agree on common points to guide their
discussions and proceed with a new round of meetings.
We support the points just made by Ambassador
Pedersen as immediate steps to be taken to that end.

We are fully convinced that this process must be
Syrian-led and -owned. We therefore understand that,
as the guarantor of the implementation of resolution
2254 (2015), the Security Council has the responsibility
to continue to urge the parties to show the greatest
possible degree of commitment and flexibility in order
to promote its full implementation. After so many
years of waiting, and so much mutual distrust, it is
essential that both the Government and the opposition
participate in those meetings empowered to carry out
their functions with the understanding that the current
situation is a point of no return in the Syrian peace
process. They need our robust support.

I would like to highlight some very specific aspects
with regard to the issue we are considering today.

First, we reiterate our conviction that the only
way to resolve this very complex conflict is on the
basis of dialogue and political negotiation. There is no
military solution that can open the door to sustainable
national reconciliation.

Secondly, as the political process gains momentum
and moves forward, it is critical to build intra-Syrian
trust and confidence with concrete gestures from all
the parties involved. Respecting ceasefire agreements,
ending all arbitrary detentions, including those of
health workers, and releasing arbitrarily detained
persons are some of the measures that must continue
to be implemented. We recognize the achievements of
the working group within the framework of the Astana
guarantors, and we urge them to aim for more ambitious
outcomes in this area.

Thirdly, my delegation believes that all refugee
returns must be voluntary, safe and dignified, and
take place within the framework of internationally
established guidelines. Refugees should be allowed to
return to their places of origin or of choice, have their
basic subsistence and documentation needs met and be
offered prospects for a better future in their country.

As this is the last meeting scheduled in the December
programme of work, I would like to express my deepest
gratitude to the delegations of Cote d'Ivoire, Equatorial
Guinea, Kuwait, Peru and Poland for their excellent
work as non-permanent members of the Council and
for their spirit of collaboration and fellowship, and to
the President for conducting our work in a professional
and transparent manner. I thank and congratulate one
and all.

