Mrs. Duda-Plonka (Poland): I thank you, Sir,
for convening today's debate. As requested by the
presidency, my contribution to the discussion will be
concise. We have identified three issues with respect
to the Security Council's working methods that we
consider to be of utmost importance and would like to
highlight today.

First, we note the advantages of the penholdership
system, with special emphasis on the effectiveness of
the work of the Council. We are, however, concerned
that by allowing the de facto monopolization of the
drafting of documents, we voluntarily give up some of
the advantages of diversity and creativity. All members
of the Security Council, including non-permanent
members, should engage in the drafting process at all
stages and contribute to issues of interest to them. In
this context, we refer to note S/2014/268 and call for
change of the arrangement so as to ensure more equal
division of the penholder responsibility.

Secondly, building on the debate held in February
2016 on the working methods of Security Council's
subsidiary organs (see S/PV.7633), as well as previous
debates on this issue, we would like to urge the members
of the Security Council, including the Chairpersons
of the subsidiary bodies, to continue to work on the
implementation of notes S/20l2/937, S/2014/393
and S/2016/170. We believe that a more balanced,
transparent, efficient and inclusive procedure, as well
as the earlier appointment of the Chairpersons of the
subsidiary organs, will benefit us all. We also see the
value of continuity in the work of the Security Council's
subsidiary bodies, ensured by informal briefings and
meetings organized by the outgoing chairmanship.

Thirdly, while most of us agree that the focus of
the work of the Security Council should shift more
in the direction of conflict prevention, we still see a
shortage of effective instruments serving that purpose.
In this context, we would like to call on the Security
Council and the Secretariat to revive the format of
horizon-scanning briefings by the Department of
Political Affairs on issues of concern.

As we approach the start ofthe process ofconsidering
candidacies for the post of Secretary-General by the
Security Council, I also take this opportunity to appeal
to Security Council members to maintain the level of
transparency, openness and inclusivity and the spirit
of dialogue that have prevailed so far in the process of
selecting the Secretary-General.

There are many more points that we would wish
to make today. We trust, however, that that they will
be brought to the attention of the Council by other
speakers. I would therefore like to conclude by thanking
Japan and other able chairs of the Informal Working
Group on Documentation and Other Procedural
Matters throughout the years for their outstanding work
and contribution to a more effective, transparent and
accountable Security Council.

