Mr. Bessho (Japan): I would like to begin by
expressing our sorrow for the passing of Mr. Shimon
Peres, who engaged tirelessly in the Middle East peace
process during his long political career. While we mourn
his loss, we are deeply troubled by the developments in
the region that undermine the prospects for the peaceful
solution that Mr. Peres supported.

Japan is alarmed by the continued violence towards
civilians, terrorist attacks and incitements to violence.
They are fundamentally incompatible with a peaceful
solution. We also express our deep concern over the
continuing policy of settlement expansion, which is
in violation of international law. The expansion of the
settlements steadily erodes the viability of a two-State
solution and raises questions about Israel's support
for such a solution. The dire humanitarian situation in
Gaza remains an urgent challenge to be addressed by
the international community.

More than two years have passed since the current
impasse in the Middle East peace process began. We
have seen a vicious cycle of violence and increasing
mistrust and frustration between the parties. We must
stand firm and continue to encourage the resumption of
meaningful negotiations so as not to lose sight ofa two-
State solution. Leaders on both sides must show serious
commitment to the peace process and take concrete
steps towards peace. Today, I would like to stress the
importance of confidence-building between the parties.

In the year 2006, then Prime Minister Junichiro
Koizumi of Japan visited Israel, Palestine and Jordan.
Mr. Koizumi met in Israel with Prime Minister Olmert
and Mr. Peres, who was then Deputy Prime Minister.
Mr. Koizumi stressed the need to achieve peace through
dialogue. Prime Minister Koizumi asked Mr. Olmert
and Mr. Peres for their support and cooperation on a
new Japanese initiative called the Corridor for Peace
and Prosperity. That initiative is an effort to support
economic and social development in Palestine through
regional cooperation among Palestine, Israel, Jordan
and Japan. The following year, Mr. Peres visited Japan
and took part in the launch of the ministerial meeting
of the initiative, at which the four partners agreed
to cooperate.

It is Japan's belief that in order to achieve a two-
State solution, we need to assist Palestinians in realizing
sustainable economic development. Such medium-
to long-term effort underpins the coexistence of the
parties in peace and prosperity. The cooperation among
the parties through the initiative helps to build mutual
trust, creating an atmosphere that is more conducive
to peace.

This year marks the tenth anniversary of the
Corridor for Peace and Prosperity initiative. The fifth
ministerial meeting was held in September. Today, three
Palestinian companies have commenced operations in
the Jericho Agro Industrial Park, which is the flagship
project of the initiative. Thirty-four other companies
have signed lease agreements. The project now creates
jobs. The products made in the Agro Industrial Park
are now available in local grocery shops, contributing
to the local economy. The project has not been an easy
one; the achievements were possible only because each
party has strived to overcome its concerns in the spirit
of cooperation. We envisage that products made in the
Agro Industrial Park will be exported through Jordan to
countries ofthe region and beyond in the years to come.
We hope that the Park will grow to become a pillar
of the Palestinian economy. We believe that a more
prosperous Palestine will contribute to the stability of
the region.

We must not let pessimism stall the Middle East
peace process. We must continue to move forward.
Reversing the negative trend remains an urgent task,
and efforts to build confidence between the parties
must continue ceaselessly, regardless of the situation
we face.

In closing, I would like to stress that Japan, as a
member of the Security Council, will continue to
actively engage in achieving peace in the region, in
close cooperation and coordination with the United
Nations and the international community.

