Mr. Aliyev (Azerbaijan): At the outset, I thank
the Chinese presidency for convening this important
open debate with the timely and topical theme of
strengthening multilateralism and the role of the
United Nations. Azerbaijan associates itself with the
statement made earlier today by the representative of
the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela on behalf of the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries. I would like to
share some additional remarks in my national capacity.

The challenges facing the world today and the
increasing instability give rise to the need to strengthen
the international legal order and to rekindle faith in
multilateralism and confidence in the United Nations.
The United Nations is a critical pillar of multilateralism
and the purposes and principles of its Charter constitute
the foundational normative framework in international
relations. There is no alternative to the commonly
agreed rules and their universal application. It is our
common duty to promote and support a reformed,
reinvigorated and strengthened multilateral system.
Azerbaijan commends the Secretary-General's
strong commitment to reform and fully supports his
determination to genuinely contribute to preventing
wars, sustaining peace and making the United Nations
more integrated, effective and efficient.

First and foremost, all States must strictly comply
with their international obligations, particularly those
relating to respect for the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of States and the inviolability of their
internationally recognized borders. The objective of
ensuring a peaceful, just and prosperous world is hardly
achievable if the universally accepted fundamental
values, norms and principles are overtly disregarded so
as to whitewash aggressions and other illegal actions.
The established principle ofthe inadmissibility ofthe use
of force for the acquisition of territory and the ensuing
obligation of non-recognition of situations resulting
from serious violations of international law must be
applied and enforced universally and unconditionally.

Needless to say, the implementation of resolutions
adopted by the principal organs of the United Nations, as
well as accountability, acquires significant importance
in that connection. Apparent disregard of Security
Council resolutions containing binding demands
cannot constitute an accepted practice in the Security
Council's discharging of its primary responsibility for
the maintenance of international peace and security.

The faithful implementation of international
treaties is also among the key prerequisites ofthe global
system of harmonizing international relations and of
individual and collective efforts towards confronting the
threats and challenges to peace, security and stability.
Important progress has been achieved in recent years in
enhancing cooperation between the United Nations and
regional partners under Chapter VIII of the Charter of
the United Nations across a full range of areas - from
the maintenance of international peace and security
and humanitarian assistance to development and the
protection of human rights.

However, serious challenges remain. While
regional organizations are normally well-positioned to
understand and address the causes and consequences of
armed conflict and crises, not all of them are capable
of ensuring Member States' compliance with their
statutory commitments. In some instances, regional
arrangements are evidently misused by the violators
of international law as a shield for consolidating
military gains and undermining efforts aimed at
achieving solutions to regional conflicts and other
security problems.

The United Nations, which was established to
prevent war and human suffering by binding all its
Members through a common rules-based order, plays a
central role in ensuring that all involved in addressing
peace and security concerns uphold the uniform
application of the purposes and principles of the
Organization. Support for that role of the United Nations
and for safeguarding its collective security, political
and humanitarian mechanisms is crucial in maintaining
peace, stability and sustainable development.

Coherent global responses and common efforts,
with the United Nations at its core, are the most
effective ways to address conflicts, fight climate change
and global terrorism, manage forced displacement
and migratory flows and achieve the goals of peace,
inclusive sustainable development and human rights
for all.

