Mr. Martirosyan (Armenia): At the outset, I
would like to thank you, Sir, for organizing this timely
debate on an important and topical subject. Armenia
and the South Caucasus as a whole are facing a number
of challenges stemming from the lack of regional
security arrangements and a deficiency of existing
arms control and regulation mechanisms.

The experience of the decades after the Second
World War testifies that collective security
arrangements are viable and can stand the test of time
if they are based at the very least on consensus and a
common perception of security threats. The European
security architecture was established on the basis of the
political realities of the cold-war era. Since that time,
the geopolitical situation in the Euro-Atlantic area has
undergone dramatic changes. New threats have
emerged, and therefore some valid questions about the
relevance and efficiency of pan-European security have
arisen over the past two decades.

It was no accident that the idea to convene a
summit to discuss the future of the European security
system emerged during the discussions at the recent
European Union-Russia high-level meeting. We concur
with those who believe that, before convening such a
summit and undertaking steps towards improving the
existing security mechanisms, members of the Euro-
Atlantic community should rather refrain from any
radical actions that might complicate the current
security environment.

Regrettably, the South Caucasus is a region where
a number of unresolved conflicts still exist in the
absence of regional security arrangements. In such
circumstances, the Treaty on Conventional Armed
Forces in Europe has been playing an instrumental role
in the maintenance of peace and stability in the South
Caucasus. However, in our region that pivotal
agreement is being challenged. Over the past few
years, the ceilings for conventional weapons
established for the countries of our region have been
violated by one State of the South Caucasus.

In addition, over the past few years we have
witnessed a relentless arms race, along with the
unprecedented growth of military expenditures, in the
countries of the South Caucasus. Those dangerous
developments are taking place against the backdrop of
belligerent rhetoric. The lack of trust among
conflicting parties, coupled with the current absence of
confidence-building measures, is threatening the
overall security situation in the region. The recent
events in Georgia were the grave consequences of such
developments.

Thus, we strongly believe that before a
comprehensive security arrangement is forged, the
countries of the South Caucasus need to commit
themselves to the non-use of force in the settlement of
unresolved conflicts. In that context, the joint
declaration on Nagorny Karabakh signed on
2 November in Moscow by the Presidents of Armenia,
Azerbaijan and Russia can play a promising role.

Having mentioned the necessity of a
comprehensive security treaty for the region, I would
like to point out the recent proposal on a Caucasus
security platform made by the Prime Minister of
Turkey. The initial reaction from the leaders of the
States concerned was encouraging. We hope that
countries of the region and other interested parties will
be more consistent in ensuring that this proposal is not
as futile as analogous proposals previously presented
by regional and external actors have been.

In speaking about general regulation and control
of arms, I would like to commend the initiative on an
arms trade treaty introduced by the Government of the
United Kingdom two years ago. The scope of support
for the resolution on this issue (General Assembly resolution 61/89) brings hope for the establishment of
an effective global regulatory mechanism for arms
transfer.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate Armenia's
firm commitment to contributing to the efforts of
strengthening present international mechanisms on
arms control and global security as well as to
participating constructively in future deliberations.

