Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (interpretation from Russian): I take sincere pleasure in welcoming to the
Security Council Chamber the delegation of States members
of the Southern African Development Community (SADC):
the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of Angola, Botswana,
Zimbabwe and Mozambique, and the representative of the
Republic of South Africa. Their active participation in
today's meeting, like that of other delegations, shows the
growing aspiration of countries, including the countries of
the southern African region, to promoting through joint
efforts the establishment of a lasting peace in Angola.

The Russian Federation, as a member of the troika of
observers of the Angolan settlement, is actively
participating with a view to the successful conclusion of the
peace process, and is supporting the tireless efforts of the

 

Secretary-General and of his Special Representative to
achieve this goal.

Overcoming the many years of conflict in Angola
would not only be a major blessing for a country which
is friendly to us, for its people and for other States in the
region of southern Africa, but would also be a substantial
success for the peacemaking efforts of the United Nations
and of the international community as a whole, which
have invested significant human, material and financial
resources in support of the Angolan peace process.

Unfortunately, there have recently been serious set-
backs in this process. Many key provisions of the Lusaka
Protocol have not yet been fulfilled. The implementation
of such key political and military aspects of the settlement
as the demobilization of combatants, the establishment of
a unified Angolan armed forces, and the establishment of
a single parliament and a Government of National Unity
and Reconciliation has been stalled.

The events of the last three months have shown
quite clearly that responsibility for the situation lies
primarily with UNITA, whose leadership is evading
compliance with pledged commitments on various
pretexts. We also believe such activities by UNITA to be
unacceptable because they undermine confidence in the
peace process and run counter to the key interests of the
Angolan people.

We note with satisfaction the constructive actions of
the Government of Angola in complying with its
obligations under the Lusaka Protocol and the Libreville
accord. It is obvious that the time has come to send
UNITA an extremely clear signal on the international
community's readiness to take harsh measures to combat
attempts to obstruct the peace process.

We believe that the draft resolution to be adopted by
the Security Council should set forth a strict time-frame
for UNITA's compliance with a specific list of the most
urgent tasks to be carried out to help strengthen trust
between the two Angolan parties, and to a give fresh
impetus to the peace process. We must also issue a clear
warning to the leaders of UNITA that if they undermine
the implementation of that timetable, the Security Council
will very soon consider again imposing additional
sanctions against UNITA.

We trust that the UNITA leadership will finally take
a sober look at the situation and embark upon a path of
forthright compliance with the provisions of the Lusaka

 

Protocol and constructive political dialogue, which is the
only way to settle problems as they arise.

We hope that the second anniversary of the signing of
the Lusaka Protocol - which we are to commemorate on
20 November - will take place in a climate of optimism,
and of confidence in a future of lasting peace for the people
of Angola. As this has not yet happened, we find fully valid
the proposal made in the report of the Secretary-General
that we extend the mandate of UNAVEM. III for a short
two-month period.

We agree with the views set forth in the report of the
Secretary-General on an orderly and phased downsizing of
the United Nations Mission, bearing in mind, of course,
further progress in the implementation of the provisions of
the Lusaka Protocol. We also support the intention of the
Secretary-General to submit in his next report a schedule
for the drawdown of formed military units of UNAVEM. III
and his recommendations regarding the role of the United
Nations in the further consolidation of the peace process.

