Mr. MacKay (New Zealand): New Zealand
welcomes the opportunity to address the Council as it
considers the Secretary-General's proposals and
recommendations for a post-independence United
Nations presence in East Timor. I would like to
compliment you, Sir, on Ireland's presiding over the
Council and to express our strong appreciation for the
Secretary-General's report on East Timor, introduced
this morning.
There could be no more compelling arguments for
why the United Nations must finish the job it has
started than those put forward by Mr. Alkatiri on behalf
of the people of East Timor, the world's newest
democracy. Great progress has been made during the
past two years to help East Timor prepare for
statehood, with the date for independence now set for
20 May next year. These are indeed impressive
achievements, and we should celebrate them as a
reflection of the commitment and determination of the
people of East Timor working in partnership with the
United Nations community. New Zealand, for its part,
congratulates the people of East Timor and those who
have assisted their progress.

New Zealand is in excellent company in voicing
our strong support for an ongoing United Nations role
in East Timor after independence. It is a particular
pleasure to be able to speak in support of Mr. Alkatiri
and the Secretary-General's Special Representative,
Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello. There have been many
eloquent presentations today, and I intend to speak
plainly and briefly about New Zealand's position.

New Zealand clearly and unequivocally endorses
the Secretary-General's report on the United Nations
Transitional Administration in East Timor (UNTAET)
and all of its recommendations.

We consider the recommendations for an
UNTAET successor mission comprising military,
police and civilian components as a logical and
necessary next step in fulfilling the mandate agreed by
the Security Council and detailed in resolution 1272
(1999). We consider it essential that the core military,
police and civilian components of the United Nations
successor mission be funded from assessed
peacekeeping contributions.

Establishment of an effective government
administration, as mandated under resolution 1272
(1999), is as integral to the maintenance of East
Timor's future security as the development of an
effective military and police force. Assessed
contributions funding from the peacekeeping budget, in
our view, is not only necessary but is clearly justified.
On the civilian side, the further contributions sought by
the Secretary-General are minimal compared to the
overall investment of the United Nations in East Timor,
but are essential to securing that investment.

The scale of the downsizing proposed is
significant, but it is appropriate and realistic. We would
certainly caution against seeking to trim the numbers
further or to speed up the timetable. The Secretary-
General's rigorous but flexible approach provides for
further adjustments on the basis of developments on
the ground, and we support this.

New Zealand has contributed to the United
Nations effort in East Timor since the preparations for
the popular consultation in 1999, and we can verify
first-hand the conclusions of the Secretary-General's
report. It is a careful and measured assessment of need
based on the advice and experiences of the East
Timorese and those who have witnessed and
contributed to progress made. We have spoken before
of the need to provide assurance to the people of East
Timor and to maintain necessary levels of support at
this crucial time at which progress should be
consolidated. These are critical points for us as a
regional neighbour - and those other regional
neighbours that have also spoken - and also as a troop
contributor and Member State of the United Nations, as
well as for the new nation of East Timor.

Funding the successor mission from assessed
peacekeeping contributions will provide financial
security for core functions identified by the Secretary-
General in ongoing consultation with the Constituent
Assembly, donors, the World Bank and the United
Nations Development Programme. It will also provide
assurance to the people of East Timor and to the
international community of the collective political will
to complete the job mandated in 1999.

Two years ago, the Security Council set out a
vision for assisting East Timor to become a secure and
viable independent State. The Secretary-General's
report confirms how far East Timor has come. His
recommendations set out the road map by which the
Security Council's vision and mandate will be fully and
finally achieved. We urge the Council to endorse the
Secretary-General's report and recommendations in
unequivocal terms.

Today's debate provides an opportunity to
reaffirm the United Nations strong commitment to
international security and stability. The pursuit of these
goals forms the core of the United Nations - its
inception, its Charter and the obligations inherent in
membership of this Organization. We encourage the
Security Council to take this opportunity to celebrate
the successes of UNTAET and provide a strong
message about its commitment to East Timor.

