Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Abou Moussa for his briefing and Ambassador Antonio
and the Secretary-General of the Economic Community
of Central African States for their respective
statements.

At present, the situation in Central Africa as a
whole is stable, but many challenges still exist in
connection with maintaining and consolidating peace
and achieving the sustainable development of the
economy. The volatile situation in neighbouring
regions has negatively affected regional security
development and the humanitarian situation.
Transnational organized crime and the proliferation of
small arms and light weapons constitute a grave threat
to regional security.

Piracy in the Gulf of Guinea has seriously
affected regional economic activities and navigational
safety. China expresses its concern in that respect. We
are in favour of regional countries strengthening their
cooperation in a joint effort to address the threats and
challenges.

Since its creation, the United Nations Regional
Office for Central Africa (UNOCA) has actively
carried out the Security Council's mandate by
strengthening communication with the affected
countries and regional organizations and improving
coordination within the United Nations system,
working actively to maintain regional peace and
security and promote economic and social development
in the countries of the region. China expresses its
appreciation in this regard.

We hope that UNOCA will build upon the
activities it has carried out so far, formally seek and
respect the views of the affected countries; keep up the
good work in the area of communication and
coordination; and enhance the relevant efforts of the
United Nations system, the countries of the region and
regional organizations so as to create synergies and
make the necessary contributions to lasting peace and
stability in the region.

Recently the LRA has repeatedly crossed over the
borders between the affected countries to commit
atrocities, committed violations against the safety and
security of civilians and created a grave humanitarian
crisis. China expresses its grave concern in this regard.
We strongly condemn the LRA for its attacks on the
Government forces of the affected countries and its
Violations against civilians. We call on the LRA to lay
down its arms immediately, cease all violence and
hostilities and accept disarmament.

The ultimate resolution of the LRA problem will
require close cooperation among countries of the
region, the support of regional organizations, and the
vigorous assistance of the international community. We
welcome the African Union's efforts to formulate an
integrated strategy to resolve the LRA problem, and
appreciate the practical measures and cooperation
undertaken by the countries of the region.

China calls on the international community to
maintain its support of the efforts of the African Union
and countries of the region to combat the LRA. We
appreciate the Secretariat's dispatch of a mission to the
affected countries to assess the situation on the ground.
We expect the Secretary-General and the relevant
United Nations agencies to maintain their practical
support to the affected countries in order to help them
to build their own capacities, promote economic and
social development on the ground, improve the
humanitarian situation and play a positive role in the
due resolution of the LRA problem.

