Mr. Palihakkara (Sri Lanka): My delegation
wishes to thank you, Mr. President, for convening this
meeting on a subject that is very important to my
country. Allow me to take this opportunity to express
our appreciation for your very able leadership of the
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict.

In situations of armed conflict, children are the
most vulnerable and deserve every form of protection
possible. We are only too aware of this in Sri Lanka, as
we deal with the Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE)
terrorism and its related violence. We appreciate the
role of the Secretary-General and the valuable
contribution of his Special Representative,
Ms. Radhika Coomaraswamy, and her team under her
mandate to address this important issue.

As a party to the Convention on the Rights of the
Child, Sri Lanka has enacted progressive legislation
providing for the protection of children and has
established institutional mechanisms to promote and
create a protective environment for them.
Notwithstanding these measures taken as a State party,
non-State actors continue to use innocent children for
violent purposes, disregarding repeated censure on the
part of the Government and, of course, of this Council.

We are conscious that the primary responsibility
for the protection of children and promotion of their
welfare lies with the State. It is imperative for the State
to ensure that children are not in danger and to prevent
them from being used as accessories to violence. We
have consistently rejected in the strongest possible
terms the recruitment and use of children in armed
conflict as unjustifiable under all circumstances. In
fact, the Council will recall that Sri Lanka voluntarily
submitted to the Working Group the case of a terrorist
organization, the LTTE, using children for combat. We
have been steadfast in advocating that this practice
stop.

Sri Lanka was among the first Member States to
volunteer to set up a national task force, in accordance
with resolutions 1539 (2004) and 1612 (2005), to
monitor and report on the activities of the LTTE. We
support this Council imposing the strongest possible
measures against those who perpetrate such crimes.

In this context, Sri Lanka reiterates its continuous
policy of zero tolerance for child conscription and all
other grave violations against children. We strongly
believe in addressing issues of children and armed
conflict in the terms set out in resolution 1612 (2005).
The Council must consider this issue with a view to
supporting peacebuilding and security in conflict-
affected societies, in order to enable States to protect
their children from non-State actors who violate
children with impunity.

The Secretary-General's report (S/2009/158)
refers to the recruitment of children as young as
14 years old by the LTTE, which used to operated in an
area in the north of Sri Lanka. The report shows that
recruitment by this group has intensified in recent
months. The Secretary-General has listed the LTTE as
a persistent violator since its first listing in 2003. In
that regard, we call upon the Security Council to
consider deterrent action against such persistent
violators. The breakaway faction of the LTTE, now
registered as a political party, has entered into a
tri-partite action plan with UNICEF and the
Commissioner General of Rehabilitation in December
2008, and has released most child conscripts. It is in
the process of accounting for the remaining children,
most of whom have returned to their families. UNICEF
has reported substantial progress, but more work
remains to be done. We appreciate the valuable work of
UNICEF in that regard.

The transformation of a terrorist group into a
political party, thereby allowing it to enter the
democratic process, is a difficult and at times perhaps
imperfect process, but that must be acknowledged as a
positive step. The LTTE's release of former child
conscripts into a process of rehabilitation must be
welcomed and encouraged. In his report, the Secretary-
General encourages the Council to insist that

"parties in situations of armed conflict .
implement concrete time-bound action plans to
halt the recruitment and use of children . . . ."
(S/2009/I58, para. 164)

We are pleased that we have already initiated such a
process with one of the groups that was responsible for
using children for combat in our country.

The Secretary-General in his report urges the
Council

"to consider means by which targeted measures
may be applied against persistent perpetrators of
grave violations against children" (Ibid., para. 1 67).

The LTTE in Sri Lanka falls well within that category
and deserves stronger targeted measures. In line with
the Secretary-General's recommendations, our
Government has launched successful disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programmes and
established rehabilitation centres with assistance from
UNICEF and we remain fully committed to the
reintegration process. As recommended by the
Secretary-General, we hope that programmes for the
effective disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration of children will receive timely and
adequate resources and funding.

We condemn in the strongest possible terms rape
and other grave acts of sexual violence committed
against children in armed conflict, referred to in the

report. There can be no place for such grave violations.
We must find effective means to ensure that all actors
abide by those principles. Any expansion of the
mandate can be effective only when non-State actors
are held to account through deterrent measures. Even
on the core issue of the recruitment of children, we
have hardly been able to make any change on the
ground with the obduracy of groups like the LTTE.
This will not inspire confidence in the process
undertaken by the Council.

For instance, it is now over a decade since the
LTTE publicly undertook to cease the recruitment and
use of children as combatants and to release children
within its ranks. That commitment was never
implemented by the LTTE, which has continued to
dramatically step up its recruitment and use of children
as combatants. That continued long after the Council
adopted resolution 1612 (2005) urging entities like the
LTTE to cease such practices forthwith, release
children within their ranks and enter into action plans.

Member States must deploy all efforts to find
ways and means to make such non-State actors fall in
line. The initiative by the Security Council to address
the issue of children in armed conflict and subsequent
efforts by the Working Group must be made to focus
more on the real underlying issue of the recruitment of
children. Tangible international action as opposed to
mere expressions of concern is needed.

There is a need to encourage and guide former
members of armed groups who have renounced
violence and demonstrated a commitment to release
children and cease child conscription. There is equally
a need to take collective measures, including targeted
sanctions, against those who continue to repeatedly
violate resolution 1612 (2005), so as to demonstrate the
Council's serious commitment to ending the use of
children in armed conflict.

As the LTTE terrorism in Sri Lanka nears its end,
the main priority for the Government is to care for and
protect the children and people affected by that conflict
in general, and especially, those who suffered as a
result of the LTTE's persistent and deplorable practice
of using child soldiers and human shields - a
sentiment that was expressed by many delegations,
including the Special Representative this morning.

The Government has comprehensively briefed
Council members at several interactive discussions
concerning the measures it has taken in that regard.
