Mr. Lowcock: I am going to start today with
eastern Ghouta, about which the Security Council has
had many discussions and we have provided many
briefings over the past five months, not least in respect
of resolution 2401 (2018). After it regained control of
the area, the Government of Syria asked the United
Nations to provide assistance to local people. I released
$16 million for that from the Syria Humanitarian Fund,
for which I am responsible. The United Nations asked
for visas for additional staff to work on the problems of
the area, some of which were granted. Over the past two
months, local, national and international humanitarian
organizations have worked in sites in neighbouring
areas that are hosting people displaced from eastern
Ghouta. We are providing food, water, shelter, medical
services and protection.

The collaboration that underpinned that effort must
now extend into eastern Ghouta itself, as people there
begin to try to rebuild their lives. We are providing
assistance through the Syrian Arab Red Crescent, but
the United Nations itself has received authorization to
visit eastern Ghouta only once since mid-March. That
was for a visit to Sagba and Kafr Batna on 14 May.
During that visit we observed the resumption of some
services, with electricity, education and health facilities
starting up, for example, and a limited number of
businesses and markets reopening, but it was clear that
there are huge unmet needs and extensive destruction
of civilian infrastructure.

The authorities report that more than 10,000 people
have returned to eastern Ghouta from rural Damascus
over the past two weeks. That, and the needs of almost
200,000 people believed to have remained throughout
the violence, makes access to the area even more critical.
The Government has already approved an inter-agency
convoy to bring assistance to 70,000 people in Douma
as part of the current bi-monthly plan, but that convoy
has not gone, because facilitation letters have not
been provided. Therefore, I reiterate our request to
the Government of Syria to facilitate access to eastern
Ghouta, so that needs can be assessed and assistance
and protection scaled up.

The humanitarian situation in and around Afrin
remains highly complex. The United Nations and others
continue to provide assistance, including food, nutrition,
shelter, water, sanitation, hygiene and protection
services to people displaced from Afrin to Tell Rifaat
and elsewhere. Inside Afrin, humanitarian assistance
provided from across the border has been critical for
many people. Findings from a recent needs assessment
tell us that most health facilities in rural areas remain
closed, many medical personnel have fled and many
schools, markets and bakeries are not functioning. We
are still concerned about reports that people are being
prevented from leaving areas of displacement in Tell
Rifaat, although we hear that some may have been able
to return to Afrin in recent days.

Yarmouk camp and surrounding areas in southern
Damascus saw fierce fighting in the past month,
resulting in the loss of life and the displacement of an
estimated 6,000 people - most of them Palestinian
refugees. Last week, combatants and civilians began to
be evacuated from Yarmouk. The United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East (UNRWA) reports that as few as 100 refugees may
now remain in the camp. Humanitarian organizations
have not been able to access Yarmouk, but UNRWA
was allowed to carry out a rapid needs assessment in
neighbouring Yalda yesterday. An inter-agency convoy
to the area is now a key priority. I ask the Government
to issue facilitation letters for that convoy.

On Rukban, discussions continue on how to deliver
aid safely. That long-running issue is still not resolved.
Humanitarian agencies are working closely with the
Syrian authorities, the United States, the Russian
Federation and the Syrian Arab Red Crescent to get
agreement on a convoy.

In Raqqa, the United Nations and its partners
continue to provide assistance, including monthly food
rations, household items, water trucking, psychosocial
support for children and primary health-care services.
However, while 135,000 people are now reported to have
returned to Raqqa city, safety remains a very serious
concern owing to high levels of explosive hazards.

The situation in Idlib is alarming, with air
strikes, clashes between armed groups, overcrowding
and severely stretched basic services deepening the
suffering of both displaced people who have fled to
Idlib and host communities. More than 80,000 newly
displaced people have arrived in Idlib since March.
Keeping pace with the increase in needs in Idlib has
involved redirecting resources from other activities.

Many of the recent new arrivals in Idlib have come
from northern rural Horns. Some 35,000 people were
evacuated from that area earlier this month, after a
significant escalation. An inter-agency convoy - the
first in more than two months - is due to go to northern
rural Homs tomorrow with assistance for nearly 93,000
people, following the receipt of facilitation letters on
Sunday

During last week's open debate on the protection
of civilians in armed conflict (see S/PV.8264), the
Secretary-General spoke about medical facilities being
routinely attacked and about medical personnel being
targeted or prevented from carrying out their duties
around the world. Violence against health-care and
health personnel remains a grim hallmark ofthe conflict
in Syria. Ninety-two attacks have been documented
over the first four months of this year. Those involved 89
deaths and 135 injuries. We are investigating a number
of cases of medical facilities being attacked shortly
after having been deconflicted. I want to emphasize
how concerned I am about that. It is an issue on which I
may have to come back to the Council.

I want to say finally a few words about the
humanitarian response and the number of people we are
helping despite all these problems.

In Syria we are running one of the world's largest
humanitarian operations, and it continues to save lives
every day. A nationwide immunization awareness
campaign took place from 22 to 30 April. Initial results
indicate that nearly 325,000 children were vaccinated
against measles and 1.3 million children under five
years old were vaccinated against polio. United Nations
convoys approved by the Government of Syria in
those parts of the country under Government control
provided food assistance for more than 2 million
people last month. Cross-border deliveries, mandated
under resolution 2393 (2017), provided food for nearly
850,000 people. We are, incidentally, due to present to
the Council the review commissioned in that resolution
next month.

There are still more than 2 million people in hard-
to-reach areas. Those 2 million people, in places like
northern rural Horns, Douma and southern Damascus,
are some of the most desperate in the country. Just
six inter-agency convoys have reached those areas so
far this year, helping 169,000 people. That is less than
20 per cent of the people we would like to be reaching.
I again ask for the support of Council members for our
efforts to ensure safe, unimpeded and sustained access,
so we can help people like those in hard-to-reach areas
who are in the greatest need.

