Mr. Mizushima (Japan): Japan highly appreciates
the initiative taken by China, Angola and Senegal in
convening this important meeting. I would also like
to join others in thanking Mr. Taye-Brook Zerihoun,
Assistant Secretary-General for Political Affairs, for his
informative briefing. Japan also welcomes the adoption
of the presidential statement on piracy and armed
robbery at sea in the Gulf of Guinea (S/PRST/2016/4).

Since ancient times, humankind has benefited
from the many blessings that the sea provides and
maritime transportation has connected the world. It is
our significant common interest to maintain a maritime
order based upon the universally recognized principles
of international law.

Piracy is a threat to the safety of sea lanes around
the world, and countering piracy is an issue vital
to all of us as we benefit from maritime trade. The
international community as a whole should address
that issue. For its part, Japan has actively contributed
to the maintenance and stability of maritime order,
including through efforts to counter piracy and armed
robbery in the Straits of Malacca and Singapore and off
the coast of Somalia. We have seen a substantial drop
in the number of piracy cases off the coast of Somalia
recently; however, that of the Gulf of Guinea remains
high.

Resolutions 2018 (2011) and 2039 (2012) have
played an important role in raising international
awareness about the issue of piracy and armed robbery
in the Gulf of Guinea. Since 2012, the Group of Seven
(G-7) has stressed the importance of the issue. The
Group of Seven Foreign Ministers, in their statement on
maritime security issued earlier this month, expressed
their determination to cooperate through capacity-
building assistance in the area of maritime security and
safety in order to help coastal States deal with their own
vulnerabilities. They also recognized the importance
of the framework of the G7++ Friends of the Gulf of
Guinea, within which the countries concerned, together
with international organizations and the shipping
industry, exchange views about regional challenges and
needs.

We believe that coastal countries should have
primary responsibility for addressing issues in the Gulf
of Guinea, including through such regional frameworks
as the Yaounde' Code of Conduct Concerning the
Repression of Piracy, Armed Robbery against Ships,
and Illicit Maritime Activity in West and Central
Africa. On the other hand, the funds and manpower
are lacking for implementing the Code of Conduct
and the maritime security strategies of the Economic
Community of West African States and the Economic
Community of Central African States. It is therefore
important that the international community support the
efforts of regional frameworks and countries to counter
piracy and armed robbery at sea in the region.

In that regard, Japan is supporting projects for the
implementation of the Yaounde Code of Conduct, making
the largest contribution to the International Maritime
Organization's West and Central Africa Maritime
Security Trust Fund. In December, Japan also provided
equipment and materials to the Regional Academy of
Maritime Sciences and Technologies in Abidjan, with the
aim of enhancing navigation technology and maritime
safety capacity for its students, and thereby creating
synergy with the assistance that France is providing to
the Interregional Maritime Security Institute in C6te
d'Ivoire. Japan is also considering providing assistance
to enable an extraordinary African Union summit on
maritime security and safety and development in Africa
to be held in Lome in October.

I would like to conclude by reaffirming Japan's
determination to work to counter piracy and armed
robbery at sea in the Gulf of Guinea, together with
the international community, including the Security
Council. Japan will also focus on the issue at the
Sixth Tokyo International Conference on African
Development, which this year will be held in Africa for
the first time, in Kenya in August.

