Mr. Annabi: Since it is late, I will try to be brief.
There were essentially two questions, one on the
situation of the Falintil and what could be done to
improve it, and one on what might be done regarding
the refugees in West Timor.

As regards the Falintil, some members are
serving as security officers in UNTAET; some others
are serving in liaison functions, liaising between
UNTAET and the local population. They were, of
course, given the option of applying for participation in
the new East Timorese police force, but chose not to do
so for reasons that are well understood. A significant
number have gone on leave, some on extended leave,
returning to their homes and families. As a result of all
this, the number of Falintil in the cantonment in Aileu
has fallen from over a thousand people to under 500.
UNTAET has been considering various options for the
reintegration into civilian life of those members of
Falintil who will not join the proposed defence or
security force, either because they do not wish to do so
or because they would not qualify. We feel that the
recommendations to be prepared by the ongoing King's
College study on the possible establishment of a
security or defence force in East Timor will enable
UNTAET to move forward on some of these options. In
the meantime, of course, those Falintil members who
are still in the cantonment in Aileu have received food
supplies, and efforts have been made to improve their
accommodation and their general living conditions, in
addition to the grant that was provided from the
consolidated East Timor budget, as I mentioned in my
statement.

As regards what can be done to improve the
situation of the refugees in West Timor and what
measures may be taken, I think they are quite well
known; some have been mentioned by members of the
Council. To summarize, what is required is unhindered
access to the refugees; guarantees for the security of
the refugees and the humanitarian workers; separation
from the refugees of former soldiers, police officers
and civil servants; and the conduct of a credible
registration exercise which would enable UNHCR to
confirm the exact numbers of those present in the
camps, as well as to ascertain their wishes. A
commitment on the part of the Government of
Indonesia to pay pensions to former civil servants,
including beyond independence, would also help to
remove an obstacle to return of the refugees. Finally, of
course, the Government of Indonesia should be
encouraged, as I mentioned in my statement, to ensure
that the activities of the militias in the camps are
brought to an end.

The Council may wish to address these issues in
the proposed presidential statement that it will be
considering in the coming days, but Council members
may also wish individually to engage the Government
of Indonesia to see how these steps could be taken and
what could be done to ensure that they materialize.

