Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): It has
been 20 years since the Council first mandated the
United Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western
Sahara (MINURSO). As the Secretary-General notes in
his report (S/2011/249), the situation on the ground has
changed dramatically in those 20 years. For the United
Kingdom, the status quo is unsustainable in the longer
term. If the Security Council does not work actively to
resolve this issue, it will get worse.

We support the tireless efforts of Ambassador
Christopher Ross, but it is clear that no progress has
been made on the substance of the dispute. This
stalemate is regrettable, and we should not pretend
otherwise.

The United Kingdom wants to see greater
efficiency in all peacekeeping missions. We approach
MINURSO no differently. This resolution requests the
Secretary-General to keep MINURSO's operations
under close review and to pursue a rigorous and
strategic approach to its deployment, and calls for an
examination of the existing challenges to MINURSO's
operations to reflect more closely the situation on the
ground.

The core issue under dispute in relation to
Western Sahara is one of territory and sovereignty. This
resolution does not affect the position of the parties in
that respect. But the human rights situation in Western
Sahara and the Tindouf camps is frequently raised by
both parties and is an important issue in itself. The
United Kingdom has said for a number of years that the
Security Council should address this matter. We are
pleased that it has now done so in this resolution. The
Council has welcomed Morocco's proposals and those
of the Frente Polisario as a meaningful step forward on
human rights, but has also set expectations for
implementation, delivery and further progress.

The political future of Western Sahara will be
determined only by a concerted effort from both
Morocco and the Polisario, with the support of the
international community. Each party must demonstrate
political will towards a solution by expanding upon
their discussions of the other's proposals and
considering innovative approaches to the negotiations.
Unless and until the political will can be found by the
parties, we will be no closer to the realization of a
substantive political solution.

