The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the United Kingdom.

We share the concerns set out today by our
briefers - I am grateful to the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Burkina Faso for his briefing - and set out
in the Secretary-General's report (S/2019/868) about
the continued deterioration of the security situation
across the Sahel and the fact that violence appears to be
spreading southwards to coastal West African States.

We commend and support the continued efforts of
the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5) and the broader
region to combat instability. In particular, we welcome
the G-5 Joint Force's recent operations in the Gourma
region and the important commitment made by the G-5
and wider West African States at September's summit
of the Economic Community of West African States to
fight this growing insecurity.

The United Kingdom is scaling up its own efforts
in the region to address instability, including through
our deployment to the United Nations Mission in
South Sudan (MINUSMA) next year, but it is vital that
countries in the region play the leading role. In this
regard, I underline three points.

First, there is a need for continued close cooperation
with other actors in the region. It is only through strong
partnership with MINUSMA and Operation Barkhane
that the Force will be able to deliver effect.

Secondly, the G-5 should respond to current
dynamics by focusing efforts on the tri-border region
of Mali, the Niger and Burkina Faso.
Thirdly, I stress the importance of full compliance
with human rights and international humanitarian law.

The United Kingdom reiterates the Secretary-
General's calls on the Burkina Faso authorities to
investigate allegations of violations committed by
Joint Force personnel and urges the Malian authorities
to conclude their investigations into allegations
within their contingent. The steps already taken to
operationalize the human rights compliance framework
are welcome, and full implementation and adherence
to the framework is vital to ensure the integrity and

longevity of the G-5 Sahel Joint Force.

The United Kingdom calls on all stakeholders to
meet the commitments made to the G-5 Sahel. The
United Kingdom notes that it contributed more than
$20 million through European Union and bilateral
funds to the G-5 Sahel Force in this financial year,
and that is against the backdrop of a United Kingdom
contribution of $116 million in bilateral development
funding, in addition to what is provided through
multilateral organizations.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

There are no more names inscribed on the list
of speakers.

I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on this subject.

The meeting rose at 5.25 pm.
