Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I
should like to thank Ambassadors Urbina and Vilovie,
and you, Mr. President, for today's briefings.

International terrorism remains one of the
principal threats of our time. The appalling attack on
United Nations personnel in Kabul on 28 October was
a tragic reminder of the threat faced daily around the
world by the Organization and its personnel. We offer
our condolences to their families and friends.

We welcome the progress made by the Counter-
Terrorism Committee under the leadership of
Ambassador Vilovie and with the strong support of
Mike Smith and his team. The current stocktaking
exercise is an opportunity for dialogue with States
whose implementation of resolution 1373 (2001) is
inadequate. This is not just a bureaucratic exercise. It
should be used to focus on specific challenges
identified by the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate (CTED). Linked to this,
preliminary implementation assessments should be
made more user-friendly, so that they can better focus
technical assistance. We are pleased that focused visits
have given CTED greater flexibility and allowed it to
conduct more and better targeted visits, focusing on the
main issues of concern. This has allowed CTED to
draw out examples of good practice to share more
widely. We also welcome the strengthening of relations
between CTED and the Counter-Terrorism Action
Group, including through more focused local donor
meetings.

Ambassador Urbina's leadership of the 1540
Committee will be much missed when he steps down
as chairman. We welcome the Committee's work on the
comprehensive review of resolution 1540 (2004). It
was useful to hear views from the wide range of States
and international organizations at the open meeting of
the review, and we look forward to its final outcome
document, which should contain practical
recommendations for improving implementation. We
want to see the emphasis now shift further towards
effective implementation in those States with more
serious deficiencies. Improving the delivery of
assistance will be critical. We were pleased that the
first meeting of the working group on assistance took
place earlier this month, and hope this will create
momentum for a more effective 1540 assistance
strategy. The effective organization of the
comprehensive review, and the improving work on
delivering assistance, show the benefits of the new
1540 Committee working group structure.

Through the United Kingdom's Global Threat
Reduction Programme, we have committed up to $750
million towards countering the spread of weapons of
mass destruction, in support of the objectives of
resolution 1540 (2004). We have undertaken work in
18 countries on projects covering physical protection
work, improving the security of materials, contributing
to the reduction in chemical weapons stocks, and
supporting sustainable employment for former
weapons scientists. We also continue to support the
IAEA Nuclear Security Fund, and we have doubled our
2009 contribution to $6 million.

We welcome the substantial advances that
resolution 1822 (2008) made to the 1267 Al Qaida and
Taliban sanctions regime. The Counter-Terrorism
Committee continues to work hard to ensure that the
resolution is implemented efficiently and effectively,
and I would like to pay tribute to the Monitoring Team
and you, Mr. President, for the work done in this
regard. But the Committee has more to do to help make
the regime more robust and sustainable. In particular,
we need to safeguard the fundamental rights of those
designated on the list, and work on improving the
credibility of the overall list. As you pointed out in
your report, Mr. President, the key to this is the
de-listing procedure. We must be able to demonstrate
that it is possible for those designated to come off the
list when they no longer pose a threat to international
peace and security. That process needs to be more
transparent and merit-based. Individuals should be
provided with clear, reasoned and timely responses to
de-listing requests.

The United Kingdom remains committed to
working with our Security Council partners on the
forthcoming resolution to address these issues and we
hope to see a stronger and more effective sanctions
regime as a result.

