Mr. Ging: On behalf of Ms. Valerie Amos, Under-
Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Emergency Relief Coordinator, I would like to deliver
the following statement on the humanitarian situation
in Ukraine.

One year ago Ukraine had no displaced people; now,
as a result of the conflict, there are almost 1.1 million
people registered as internally displaced, more than
100,000 of them displaced in the last month. More than
670,000 people have fled to neighbouring countries.
Displacement continues, as pauses in the fighting in
some locations has allowed people who are trapped to
flee. More than 2 million people are living in conflict-
affected areas, the majority of them with limited access
to basic services. Only 180,000 people now remain in
the city of Horlivka, as compared to 276,000 before the
conflict. Only 8,000 people remain in Dokuchaievsk,
as compared to 30,000 before the conflict. And in
Debaltseve, where the re-conflict population stood at
over 25,000, fewer than 7,000 people remain - 5,000
of them are estimated to be living underground in
basements and improvised bunkers.

Fivemillionpeopleacrossthecountryarenowinneed
of humanitarian assistance - 1 million in Government-
controlled areas and 3 million in non-Government-
controlled areas. Approximately 1.4 million people have
no access to health care. Those remaining in conflict-
affected areas, in particular in densely populated urban
areas, face ongoing security threats due to military
activities. Lives have been lost, basic life-saving
services have been disrupted, access to banking and
cash services is limited, food and non-food items are
increasingly scarce and expensive and there is an
upsurge in lawlessness across the country.

We welcome the package of measures for the
implementation of the minsk agreements, but continue
to urge all parties to the conflict to adhere to the
15 February ceasefire and to protect civilians. The
ceasefire remains fragile but, where observed, has
allowed a limited increase in humanitarian access.
Most recently, on 19 February, 62 tons of humanitarian
aid was delivered to Donetsk city by United Nations
convoy. Supplies included essential hygiene items,
warm clothes, blankets, condensed milk powder,
drinking water and medicines.

Despite limited humanitarian access to affected
areas due to insecurity and administrative obstacles,
by the end of 2014 humanitarian actors had provided
health kits to 2.6 million people, vaccinations for
30,000 people, clean water and sanitation facilities for
more than 100,000 displaced people and food supplies
for 100,000 people. Despite those efforts, needs still far
outweigh the combined capacity of the humanitarian
community and the Government of Ukraine to respond.
It is imperative that humanitarian actors be able to
reach those in need with life-saving assistance. We call
on all parties to the conflict to facilitate the safe and
unimpeded passage of aid and aid workers and to lift
any administrative obstacles to such passage.

The Humanitarian Coordinator, Mr. Neal Walker,
is coordinating the humanitarian response of United
Nations agencies and national and international
non-governmental organizations to ensure that
assistance reaches those who need it most in an
effective, efficient and timely manner. Coordination
structures, including sector-specific clusters, have been
put in place in Ukraine. The Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs is present in the six key areas
across the country.

Additional funding to address the immediate
humanitarian needs of those affected by this conflict
is urgently needed. Ukraine's humanitarian response
plan, launched on 24 February, calls for $316 million to
reach 3.2 million people in the most dire humanitarian
need. To date, only 13 per cent of that appeal - a mere
$42.2 million - has been either received or pledged. We
thank those Member States that have contributed, with
the largest financial contributions so far coming from
the United Kingdom, the United States, the European
Commission, Germany and Denmark. Several Member
States, most notably the Russian Federation, have
provided significant material assistance.

It is essential that the millions of civilians caught up
in this conflict, many of whom have been traumatized
by violence and severe hardship, be able to return to
their homes and be given access to basic, life-saving
services is restored. We call on all parties to the conflict
to respect the ceasefire and put an end to the violence.

