Mr. SomaVia (Chile) (interpretation from Spanish):
We are grateful to the representative of Rwanda for his
statement, and particularly for the conviction with which he
told us of his country's determination to overcome the
legacy of the tragedy it has suffered in recent years.

One of the most difficult decisions that the Security
Council faces in the course of its work relates to the
timeliness of taking action: when it should be involved in
an issue, or withdraw, and how it is to do so - what in
English is called "timing".

Unfortunately, Rwanda has acquired in the eyes of
international public opinion the image of one of those
occasions when action was taken too late to prevent
genocide, which the whole world grieved over. We hope
that the decision we are about to take, at the request of the
Government of Rwanda, is the right one.

The Secretary-General in his report of 29 February
1996 refers to the situation in Rwanda, stating that calm
and stability have continued to prevail throughout the
country, with the exception of areas bordering Zaire. He
adds that since the end of the war various economic and
social indicators have improved substantially, which in
principle gives the Security Council confidence in its
decision last December to put an end to the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Rwanda (UNAMIR) today. We
congratulate Rwanda on this development.

UNAMIR's mandate does indeed end today. This
should be a source of satisfaction to the people and
Government of Rwanda, and to the international
community, since the conclusion of a United Nations peace-
keeping operation should indicate that its mission has been
fulfilled and that the situation in the country is returning to
normal. The Government of Chile sincerely hopes that this
is the scenario for Rwanda.

As UNAMIR concludes its mandate we must pay
public tribute to those who have been part of it: to the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Shaharyar Khan; to General Romeo Dallaire, General
Guy Tousignant and Brigadier-General Shiva Kumar, who
recently commanded the peace-keeping force; and to the
troops, observers and other personnel of UNAMIR from
various countries, among which India, Ghana, Nigeria and
Malawi stand out, because of their numbers. We do not
forget Canada, which withdrew a short time ago, and
Belgium, which suffered serious losses.

UNAMIR has assisted the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) in
the repatriation of refugees; provided protection to the
International Tribunal for Rwanda; and helped to restore
the basic infrastructure and to rehabilitate essential sectors
of the economy. The Secretary-General reports that in
addition UNAMIR by its presence has provided a sense
of security and confidence to the personnel of the
different agencies working in the country.

None the less, the Secretary-General also reminds us
that some important problems remain to be resolved. The
main one - undoubtedly the most serious, the most
complex and the one which could bring the most
problems in future - is that of the 1.7 million refugees.
It is also noteworthy that much remains to be done in
order to achieve major national reconciliation.

Taking into consideration the expressed desire of the
Government of Rwanda and the points made by the
Secretary-General in his report, the Security Council is
about to adopt a draft resolution that Chile supports.
Before referring to some aspects of it, I would like to
thank the United Kingdom delegation for the submission
of its draft and for the broad consultations on the draft
resolution now before us.

With the aim of continuing the United Nations
presence in Rwanda, and continuing to cooperate with the
Government of Rwanda in carrying out the difficult tasks
that are still outstanding, the Security Council encourages
the Secretary-General to maintain in Rwanda a United
Nations office, to be headed by his Special
Representative, for the purpose of supporting the efforts
of the Government of Rwanda to promote national
reconciliation, strengthen the judicial system, facilitate the
return of refugees and rehabilitate the country's
infrastructure, and of coordinating all the United Nations
efforts in Rwanda to that end.

 

I believe it is important to mention here an explicit
reference by the Secretary-General to the problem of
refugees. We should remember that the Government of
Rwanda and the UNHCR will no longer have the support
of the UNAMIR contingent in the return of refugees. An
appeal is therefore made to all the States and agencies
concerned to provide humanitarian assistance to the
refugees and displaced persons, and to facilitate their early
safe, voluntary and organized return to their own country.

There is another aspect which we feel is of special
importance. It must be borne in mind that one agency that
could cooperate in this process is the Human Rights Field
Operation in Rwanda (HRFOR), which is doing
commendable work and is deployed in 10 of the 11
prefectures. If coordination with the United Nations office,
the UNHCR and the Government of Rwanda is to continue
with the efficiency that has existed so far, the Human
Rights Field Operation must have the necessary resources.
This is reflected in the draft resolution.

I wish to conclude by saying that Chile is pleased to
support this draft resolution. It would be major progress if
the situation in Rwanda ceased to be on the Council's
agenda and if instead there were a significant strengthening
of the commitment to Rwanda by the rest of the United
Nations system and other intergovernmental and non-
governmental agencies, in the framework of an agenda for
the country's development.

Making this a reality will be in the good hands of the
people and leaders of Rwanda.

