Mr. Kassem: It is a great, great pleasure for me
once again to address the Council and its members.
Permit me to begin by thanking Miss Mignonette
Patricia Durrant, the previous President of the Council,
for her assistance in arranging the informal
consultations last month. I should like also to express
my gratitude to the new President, Ambassador Moctar
Ouane, for his assistance in preparing for today's
consultations. Let me also thank all of the members of
the Council for the invaluable support and assistance
they have provided.

I should like once again to express our deep
appreciation to Presidents Pierre Buyoya, Frederick
ChiIuba, Joseph Kabila, Paul Kagame, Robert Mugabe,
Yoweri Museveni and Sam Nujoma for meeting with
the Panel during its stay in the region. Permit me also
to extend our special thanks to the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUC) and the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, and to the offices of the representatives of
the Secretary-General in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, as well as the offices of the United Nations
Development Programme in the region, for their help.
In addition, the Panel wishes to thank the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations at the Secretariat for its
continued support.

As I told the Council earlier, the exploitation of
the natural resources of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, for the enrichment of a wide range of actors,
continues unabated. Not surprisingly, the Congolese
people do not figure among the beneficiaries of this
unfettered and increasingly systematized exploitation.

The August 1998 war introduced a new group of
beneficiaries, both foreign and Congolese. They come
from the ranks of the military, governing and ruling
party elites, the leadership of the rebel groups and their
sponsors. The new beneficiaries also include a host of
intermediaries and investors, some legitimate and some
linked to criminal elements. At an institutional level,
profits have flowed to military budgets and political
parties. This web of interests has ensured that the war
became and remained, even now, a self-financing and
self-sustaining affair.

Although the security concerns of neighbouring
States helped spur the outbreak of the war, three years
later these concerns appear to have been overtaken by
the desire to maximize control over expanses of
territory, their vast resources and the substantial profits
derived from them.

While its mandate and composition emphasize
the technical nature of its work, the Panel has never
lost sight of the need to integrate its work into the
broader framework of the peace process and to
contribute to advancing that process. The Lusaka
Ceasefire Agreement sets out many necessary
preconditions for reducing the exploitation of
resources. However, additional measures will be
needed. The implementation of the Panel's
recommendations and the implementation of the
Ceasefire Agreement should thus be understood as
complementary and mutually reinforcing courses of
action, each strengthening and completing the other.

For example, the results of the Panel's fact-
finding in the field highlight the fact that the Ceasefire
Agreement, signed in July 1999, did not address the
issue of the economic profits derived from the
occupation of the territory of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. Yet both the Panel's report and its
addendum illustrate the links between the exploitation
of natural resources and the continuation of the
conflict. Laying the foundation for lasting peace in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo will necessarily
require progress in drastically curbing the increasing
exploitation of resources and redirecting the use of

S/l'V.4437

 

these resources to the purposes of peaceful
development for the benefit of the Congolese people.

Through the establishment of a monitoring body,
the United Nations can continue the international
community's scrutiny of the exploitation activities,
including the mechanisms for channelling profits that
have been put in place. A lack of follow-up in this area
would send a message to the traffickers and profiteers
that they can continue illicitly exploiting Congolese
natural resources with impunity. It would also signal to
the concerned parties that they can continue stalling on
taking the actions needed to move the peace process
forward, thereby further entrenching the status quo.

Member States should establish a moratorium on
the purchase, transit and import of high-value
commodities from regions of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo where foreign troops are present. By
stemming the profits from the exploitation of
resources, the moratorium would reduce what has
become a powerful incentive to continue to fuel the
conflict and thus legitimize the presence of thousands
of foreign troops and the strengthening of rebel armies.
It should be viewed as a means to curb existing and
future exploitation that is linked to the continuation of
the conflict and, in this sense, contributes to furthering
the peace process.

The Panel believes that a moratorium imposed on
selected and easily detectable products, such as coltan
and timber, would not have a significant impact on the
Congolese population, who themselves have been
ruthlessly exploited by opportunistic operators. The
same monitoring body mentioned earlier would report
to the Council on a periodic basis regarding which
areas are no longer under the control of foreign troops
in order to clear products originating from them for
purchase and import. Practices aimed at weakening or
circumventing the moratorium would also be the
subject of monitoring and reporting. The effectiveness
of such a moratorium would be heightened by a strong
media campaign and continued international press
coverage.

It would be the responsibility of the Security
Council to decide whether this moratorium should be
implemented on a voluntary or a mandatory basis. By
incorporating it into their national legislation,
individual countries could make a voluntary
moratorium binding. This would permit them to
prosecute violations occurring within their jurisdiction.

Alternatively, a mandatory moratorium could be
enacted by the Council through a resolution under
Chapter VII of the Charter.

However, both voluntary and mandatory
moratoriums are similar in their intent to target
commodities. The main difference between a
mandatory moratorium and a sanctions regime is that
sanctions target States, forbidding exports from them.
A mandatory moratorium targets commodities. It
would establish a ban on the import by United Nations
Member States of commodities produced in a specific
area in which exploitation is known to fuel the conflict.

Institutional reforms are critical to ensuring a
strong State administration with the capacity and
authority to safeguard and regulate the territory of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and its riches. To
this end, the Panel has recommended that the
international community assist the Democratic
Republic of the Congo intensively in this area. This is a
process that will require a systematic and sustained
effort on the part of the international community,
including the United Nations. This recommendation
meshes with the provisions of the Ceasefire Agreement
concerning the inter-Congolese dialogue and the re-
establishment of the State administration throughout
the territory once the dialogue has been concluded.

However, to help break the link between the
conflict and the exploitation of resources, the Panel
believes that it is urgent to begin making modest,
though tangible, progress in institution-building,
strengthening the rule of law and re-establishing State
authority. In the short term, this will be crucial to
confidence-building and to increased stability. Certain
actions in this direction have already been undertaken
with the help of the international community. These
include the drafting of a new mining code and the
development of a national budget implementation plan.

The renegotiation of all commercial agreements,
concessions and joint ventures enacted since 1997
should be considered an intrinsic part of any
institution-building process. While it may be perceived
as diverging from the framework of the Ceasefire
Agreement, this action is crucial to freeing the
Congolese State from the undue influence that certain
parties have been able to exert over it. With the goal of
eliminating unfair profits and contractual terms
obtained under the extreme pressures of wartime, this
measure should be viewed as complementary to the

Sll'V.4437

 

Panel's proposed moratorium. While the Commission
of National Experts of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo suggested that this could be included in the
agenda of the inter-Congolese dialogue, the timing and
modalities must be determined in consultation with the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and other sectors.

The risks to the peace process posed by the
continuation of a low-intensity conflict in the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo - in areas where
many valuable resources are extracted, traded and
routed for export - are considerable. Consequently,
the Panel has underscored in its recommendations the
importance of the disarmament, demobilization,
reintegration and repatriation or resettlement process, a
key element of the Ceasefire Agreement, now being
undertaken by MONUC. In addition, the Panel has
expressed its support for the diplomatic initiatives
within the framework of the Ceasefire Agreement
aimed at encouraging the parties to intensify their own
confidence-building efforts.

Consistent with these initiatives and the
modalities for the implementation of the Ceasefire
Agreement, the Panel has called for the parties to the
conflict to assume the primary responsibility for
solving their respective security concerns by reaching a
consensus on comprehensive measures and
implementing them in a coordinated manner.

In closing, I would like to emphasize that the
Panel's recommendations are intended first and
foremost to protect the Congolese nation's greatest
wealth - its people, its human resources. Their long-
term interests and hopes for peace are being sacrificed
to easy profiteering. The toll in human lives and
suffering exacted by this war and the related trafficking
in natural resources has been enormous and continues
to mount. Such human losses are quite simply
irreparable, and their impact will inevitably be felt for
decades to come. However, today, in this Chamber,
nothing could serve as a more eloquent reminder of the
need for the Council to take decisive action - action
to halt the exploitation of natural resources in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, which,
increasingly, is both the means and motive for
sustaining the conflict.

