Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Special Representative of the Secretary-General J an
Kubis for his briefing. My thanks also go to Ambassador
Zair Tanin of Afghanistan for his statement.

Thanks to the joint efforts of the Government
and people of Afghanistan and the support of the
international community, preparations for the 2014
election in Afghanistan are moving ahead steadily. The
building of the Afghan National Security Forces is on
track and they will assume overall responsibility for
national security.

While working actively to develop the economy and
improve lives, Afghanistan is also actively working to
develop close international relations and cooperation.
China welcome the positive progress achieved in
the peace and reconstruction process. At present,
Afghanistan faces complex challenges and finds itself
in a critical transition stage. That requires that the
Afghan Government and the international community
adopt an integrated strategy. In that connection, China
supports an Afghan-led and Afghan-owned peace and
reconstruction process as part of a continued effort to
promote peace and reconstruction and achieve lasting
peace, stability and development at an early date. I wish
to emphasize the following four points.

First, a successful election in 2014 is essential to
strengthening Afghanistan's peace and reconstruction.
China welcomes the positive progress achieved in the
preparations for the election and hopes that all Afghan
parties will put the interests of the nation above all else
by properly settling their differences with regard to
electoral law, so as to guarantee the smooth conduct
the election. We appreciate the assistance provided
by the parties concerned for the election and hope
that the international community's support will play a
positive role to ensure a smooth transition process in
Afghanistan.

Secondly, a stable security situation is key for a
smooth transition in Afghanistan. The recent frequent
terrorist attacks have increased civilian casualties.
China expresses its concern in that regard. All parties
should comply with international humanitarian law
and other relevant international law and carry out their
responsibilities for the protection of civilians. When
handing over responsibility for security, the parties
concerned should adopt a responsible, prudent and
progressive approach and give priority to the capacity-
building of the Afghan security sector.

Thirdly, national reconstruction must be led by
the Government and people of Afghanistan. China
has always supported national reconciliation led and
owned by all Afghans, and we welcome the positive
progress achieved in that regard. At the same time,
the international community should respect the
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Afghanistan, on the basis of respect for the will of the
Government and people of Afghanistan, continue to
provide the necessary assistance for reconciliation and
work together to achieve an Afghanistan governed by
Afghans at an early date.

Fourthly, in order to achieve lasting stability and
development, the international community must provide
sustained attention and support. The relevant parties
in the international community should honour their
commitments to providing assistance to Afghanistan,
support the country in an effort to implement a national
development strategy and improve Afghans' own
capacity for development.

China supports Afghanistan in an effort to develop
good neighbourliness with countries of the region and
to work together to respond to regional threats and
challenges. China supports the efforts of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)
to improve communication and coordination with the
Government of Afghanistan and hopes that UNAMA
will continue to play a central coordinating role in
helping Afghanistan.

China has always been a good neighbour to
Afghanistan and committed itself to developing good
neighbourliness. China places great importance on, and
takes an active part in, peaceful reconstruction. China
is ready to join the rest of the international community
in its continued effort to provide all assistance within its
capacity and to play a positive role in achieving lasting
peace, stability and development in Afghanistan.

