Mr. Mohamed (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): I
would like to congratulate you, Sir, on your country's
presidency of the Security Council this month. I would
also like to thank Senegal for convening today's open
debate on the theme of water, peace and security.

The world's growing population, the increasing
water consumption due in part to increased urbanization
all over the world, especially in developing countries,
climate change, drought, desertification and other
factors have resulted in a scarcity of this vital resource
and pushed some some States to the brink of water
poverty. That has led to competition over water within
States in some cases and between States in others. Such
competition could develop into conflicts that negatively
affect national, regional and international security.

The Sudan, concerned about water resources
and the role they play in inter-State relations, almost
two decades ago established a department for the
management of water and natural resources at the
Ministry for Foreign Affairs in order to coordinate
regional and international cooperation efforts on
this important issue and lead State efforts in water
diplomacy. Our multidirectional national efforts have
produced very positive results at the regional level,
the most important of which was the conclusion of
an agreement on principles among the three States of
the eastern Nile basin, namely, Ethiopia, Egypt and
the Sudan, on the Ethiopian Great Renaissance Dam,
signed in Khartoum on 23 March 2015 following
eight rounds of negotiations, which also took place in
Khartoum. That resulted in an atmosphere conducive
to cooperation among the three States, within the
framework of this and future projects.

In the light of the growing interest in water issues,
my country's delegation would like to confirm that the
Sudan is determined to strengthen the role it plays in the
area of water diplomacy. It hopes that the international
community will step up its efforts to assist the Sudan to
overcome the challenges that impede the achievement of
that objective. Among them would be intensified efforts
for peace in the Sudan so as to redirect resources wasted
on conflicts towards efforts to implement sustainable
development programmes, including on water issues, in
addition to helping the Sudan benefit from the Heavily
Indebted Poor Countries Debt Initiative, and lift the
unilateral sanctions against it.

Given the recognition by African and Arab countries
of the role of the Sudan in water diplomacy, in October
2015 we chaired the meetings of the countries of the
eastern Nile basin, through a unanimous agreement
among participating countries. We also chair the Arab
Water Council. Internationally, in October 2016 a
Sudanese expert, Professor Seifeldin Hamad Abdallah,
head of the technical body for water resources, received
the UNESCO-IHE Alumni Award for his expertise in
water resources. In the past, the Sudan chaired the
international conference on Arab waters under Israeli
occupation. All this is proof of the acknowledgment of
the positive role played by the Sudan in this vital area.

The Sudanese delegation is convinced that the
United Nations can play a pivotal role in guiding
international efforts aimed at implementing sustainable
development programmes on water and ensuring that
this vital resource will be an element of cooperation
among States and not a source of disputes between
them, through broader use of preventive diplomacy.

We are also convinced that there have been a
number of positive developments in today's world that
could make regional and international cooperation
on matters relating to water into a tangible reality,
freeing this important resource away from the spectre
of conflict. The most important of these developments
is the tremendous scientific and technological progress
made, which has helped humankind to accomplish
things that had been unimaginable in previous
generations. That technological revolution could result
in an increase in water resources and greater efficiency
in the use of water.

In another dimension, the universal trend towards
emphasizing preventive diplomacy, as reflected in the
recommendations of the report (see S/2015/446) of the
High-level Independent Panel on Peace Operations and
those in the report the Independent Commission on
Multilateralism, opens wide the door to international
cooperation in the area of water. This trend makes this
vital resource a bridge for cooperation among peoples
and States, rather than a source of disputes and wars.

The goal of ensuring that water serves as a means
of cooperation among States is both possible and
essential, but that will happen only if we show the
necessary determination to avoid any and all conflict
over water in future. That could be achieved through
the following steps.

First, we need to increase the attention accorded to
the issue of water resources in the United Nations and
to promote cooperation among United Nations agencies
and programmes in that regard.

Second, cooperation among developing countries
on water resource management and its sustainable use
should be strengthened.

Third, we need to increase the level of financial
resources spent on research and development in areas
related to greater water production, such as desalination
and increasing the efficiency of use of aquifers.
Four, the transfer of technology on water resources
to developing countries should be facilitated on
concessional terms.

Five, the framework for institutional cooperation
on water resources should be supported, especially in
developing countries.

Six, we should support regional climate projects
that contribute to the fight against desertification and
increase level of precipitation -for example, the Great
Green Wall, in which 11 African countries participate,
stretching from Djibouti in the east to Senegal in
the west.

Seven, we should strengthen international
cooperation in scientific research into the effective use
of water - for example developing drought-resistant
crops, reducing the use of water in construction and
industrial applications, minimizing water evaporation,
waste-water treatment and dealing with polluted water.

Eight, we can establish a platform or a mechanism
within the United Nations for those countries suffering
from water scarcity to help them strengthen coordination
and cooperation among themselves and to encourage an
exchange of experiences and expertise.

Nine, we must intensify efforts aimed at helping
those States that suffer from internal conflict to achieve
peace and security and redirect resources consumed
by war towards sustainable development programmes,
including plans related to water.

My delegation is of the view that it is inappropriate
to mention the so-called International Criminal Court
in today's concept note (S/2016/969, annex). That is
because the Court has no relationship whatsoever to the
issue we are discussing. It is not even a body affiliated
with the United Nations. More than 60 per cent of the
inhabitants of the world are outside its jurisdiction.
There are other mechanisms that are perfectly sufficient
to achieve the desired goals in order to avoid prejudicing
installations and water resources - for example, the
Convention on the Law of the Non-Navigational Uses
of International Watercourses, adopted by the General
Assembly in May 1997.

We noticed a regrettable tendency by States that
support the Court to promote it and to attempt to
forcibly and arbitrarily make it a part of the United
Nations system by inserting paragraphs in United
Nations draft resolutions that have nothing to do with
the Court. Such actions are controversial and have led
to profound polarization. Given the growing number
of disputes among States relating to transboundary
watercourses, we could have understood a reference to
the International Court of Justice, since that is a legal
body that is part of the United Nations and is entrusted
with peacefully and legally resolving conflicts
between States.

Finally, my delegation believes that, despite the
current challenges presented by water resources, there
are many opportunities to ensure that water becomes
a positive element in regional and international
cooperation. The ball is now in the court of developed
countries to implement this lofty vision. The United
Nations can play a leading role in guiding meaningful
international efforts in that regard. My delegation
hopes that the international community will make the
right decision here and act within the framework of
preventive diplomacy firmly, before it is too late and
before water becomes a source of conflict in future.

