Major-General Khalid: Questions were asked of
me by the representatives of the United States and
Lebanon. I think that inter-mission cooperation is of
paramount importance. I say so because the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO) has
no reserve, and with the number of missions across the
globe, they do not have enough forces to deal with
every unforeseen eventuality.

Let me tell the House that I am going to speak to
the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations
(C-34) tomorrow on the same topic, which has been
given to me by DPKO, and I will be touching in detail
upon that issue in my speech tomorrow.

But just to reply in brief with respect to the
lessons learned: we sent an infantry battalion and Mi-8
helicopters to the United Nations Operation in Cote
d'Ivoire (UNOCI) in November. The infantry battalion
came back in January, the utility helicopters came back
in June; the gunship helicopters were sent in March
and are still there. I am glad to tell you that both
UNOCI and the United Nations Mission in Liberia are
making use of those Mi-24 gunships for joint tasking
and joint border patrolling.

Turning to lessons learned, they come, in effect,
under four major headings, or concerns: legality,
logistics, military capabilities and coordination. I will
touch on each of these very briefly.

By legality, I mean saving time at the last minute
regarding the apprehensions of the troop-contributing
countries. This should form part of the memoranda of
understanding.

Turning to logistics, missions should cater for,
coordinate and perhaps even at times deal with
dumping of rations or fuel prior to the launching of
missions so that incoming troops do not face any
problems. At the level of the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations at United Nations
Headquarters, a comprehensive strategy must be
applied - and I am sure this is the case. It must be
reviewed periodically in consultation with all missions
which have been tasked with inter-mission cooperation.
There may not be a giant border in all cases of inter-
mission cooperation, and road conditions may not be
good or there may not be any roads at all, so this must
be catered for by land, air and sea so as to avoid any
unnecessary delays at the last minute, which is
normally a critical stage. The logistics must be clearly
defined.

For better coordination, all such missions must
have inter-mission coordination cells, which should
maintain contact with a view to achieving better
coordination and remaining up to date with the latest
developments.

Last but not least, in cases where different
languages are spoken in the missions and countries
concerned, a team of interpreters must be present to
ensure that forces encounter no problems upon arrival
and that they are put to effective use.

