Mr. Starcevie (Serbia): It is a pleasure to see the
representative of friendly Azerbaijan in the chair of the
President of the Security Council. At the outset, allow
me to welcome Mr. Valentin Inzko, High
Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina, and to
thank him for his report (see S/2012/307).

On this occasion too, I wish to point out the
consistent respect of the Republic of Serbia for the
Dayton Peace Agreement as the basis of stability in
Bosnia and Herzegovina and the whole region of the
Western Balkans. Serbia is committed to the territorial
integrity and sovereignty of Bosnia and Herzegovina
and to non-interference in its internal affairs. We shall
support any agreement on the change of the internal
system defined by the Dayton Agreement so long as it
is reached by full consensus between the two entities
and the three constitutive peoples.

We expect that the recently completed process of
the establishment of all governmental bodies in Bosnia
and Herzegovina will make an additional contribution
to stabilization in Bosnia and Herzegovina and give
impetus to its faster European integration.

Serbia welcomes the decisions adopted recently
in Bosnia and Herzegovina and deems them important
steps forward on that country's road to the European
Union. We believe that additional, concrete
encouragement from the European Union is needed to
further stabilize the situation in the country.

We appreciate and are very pleased by the fact
that Belgrade was the destination that Bosnia and
Herzegovina's Foreign Minister Zlatko Lagumdiija
Visited on his first trip abroad. On that occasion, the
two countries reiterated the importance they attach to
bilateral relations and expressed their desire to promote
further comprehensive advancement of their relations
and cooperation. We are ready to continue to promote
cooperation with Bosnia and Herzegovina in the
exchange of experiences and in rendering reciprocal
support with respect to European integration in order to
achieve our common goal of joining the European
family of nations.

In our opinion, sustainable solutions can be
achieved only through dialogue and compromise
between the two entities and the three constitutive
peoples. We believe that the international community
should treat relations between the three constitutive
peoples of Bosnia and Herzegovina with great care and
respect for their interests. Serbia encourages all sides
in Bosnia and Herzegovina to invest additional efforts
in reaching sustainable solutions on all outstanding
issues.

We consider it counterproductive to criticize one
of the entities and to label it as anti-Dayton when the
representatives of the people of that entity are
sometimes vocal in their reactions to situations that
they consider detrimental to the rights of their people.
Further detailed analyses are needed in such situations
in order to find proper solutions. The unilateral use of
such situations in an attempt to effect potentially
punitive measures will certainly not help to build
confidence or to improve the functioning of institutions
in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

Serbia has demonstrated its full readiness to
confront the past and to contribute to the better future
and well-being of the region. It has done everything
necessary in that respect. In our view, all war crimes
committed in the territory of the former Yugoslavia
must be prosecuted in order to establish lasting
stability and reconciliation in the region.

We believe that steps should be taken towards
closing the Office of the High Representative and
terminating the so-called Bonn powers, because the
legitimately elected representatives of all peoples and
entities have the ability and capacity to take over the
responsibility for independently managing the affairs
of the State.

Serbia is developing its relations with the
Republika Srpska on the basis of the Agreement on
Special Parallel Relations, but we are concentrating at
the same time on strengthening relations with the
Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina. By actively
participating in and chairing numerous regional
initiatives, the Republic of Serbia has confirmed its
commitment to regional cooperation. Successful
cooperation with Bosnia and Herzegovina within,
among others, the South-East European Cooperation
Process, the Central European Initiative, the Regional
Cooperation Council and the Adriatic-Ionian Initiative
contributes to further strengthening good-neighbourly
relations and to the common European future.

Serbia is fully committed to the achievement of a
just, comprehensive and sustainable solution to the
problem of refugees. We commend the excellent
organization of the International Donors Conference on
Durable Solutions for Refugees and Internally
Displaced Persons, organized in Sarajevo on 24 April.
The Conference fulfilled the expectations of all
participants and is a good example of the successful
cooperation of the four countries of the region -
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia, Montenegro and
Serbia - in achieving lasting housing solutions for the
most vulnerable refugees, with the assistance of
international organizations and the donor community.
This will no doubt contribute to the promotion of good-
neighbourly relations and the achievement of lasting
stability and reconciliation in the region.

