Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank the Special Coordinator for the
Middle East Peace Process, Mr. Serry, for his detailed
assessment of the situation in the Middle East. We
welcome the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the State
of Palestine, Mr. Malki, who is taking the floor for
the first time in this Chamber in his new capacity
as representative of the observer State to the United
Nations.

We carefully listened to the statement by the
Permanent Representative of Israel, Mr. Prosor. I will
be frank - we do not understand everything that
Mr. Prosor said to the Security Council today, but we
recognize that, at this stage, the Security Council, for
well-known reasons, has not been able to reach a unified
position allowing for true progress in the Palestinian-
Israeli settlement.

The solution to the Palestinian-Israeli conflict
has long been at a deadlock. The attempts made in
2012 to establish contacts for negotiation between the
Palestinians and Israelis, with the assistance of the
Middle East Quartet and other interested in parties,
were unsuccessful. In spite of the ongoing calm in the
Gaza Strip after the November clashes, the military and
political situation on the whole remains far from stable.
The situation is exacerbated by continuing Israeli
settlement activities. There has been an unprecedented
surge in those activities, and that is a matter of concern.
According to Israeli non-governmental organizations,
in 2012 alone the building of 7,000 housing units was
approved, while one year earlier that number was 1,770
and, in 2010, 570 units were approved.

The recent events surrounding the so-called
E-l area demonstrate that unfortunately, in spite of
the strong appeals of the international community,
the Israeli authorities do not intend to review their
settlement policy. This distances us even farther from
the prospects of a peaceful solution to the Palestinian-
Israeli conflict; it represents an outright violation of
the Security Council resolutions and the road map and
undermines the possibilities ofa settlement on the basis
of two States.

An already difficult situation is exacerbated
by heavy-handed financial pressure on Palestinian
authorities, from whom Israel has withheld tax and
tariff revenue. This exacerbates complex social,
economic and humanitarian problems in the Palestinian
territories. Additional steps are needed to clear the
way for a full economic exchange between the Gaza
Strip and the outside world. We are convinced that the
longer the current alarming status quo continues, the
worse its effect will be on the process of resuming the
negotiations.

The path to breaking through the stalemate and
easing the tensions in the Palestinian-Israeli conflict is
well known. There is a need to cease unilateral actions
and to rebuild trust between the parties in the interest
of resuming dialogue on the agreed bases, including
resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973), 1397 (2002),
1515 (2003) and 1850 (2008), the Madrid terms of
reference, the road map and the Arab Peace Initiative.
Going forward, this would allow for a discussion of
the pressing final status issues, including borders,
Jerusalem, refugees and water.

Along those lines, we welcome the critically
important and timely appeal - made in December
2012 at the summit of the Ministerial Committee of the
League ofArab States on the Arab Peace Initiative - for
a resumption of the negotiating process on the basis of
well-known international legal provisions. The final
goal of such dialogue would be an end to the Israeli
occupation and the establishment of an independent,
viable and territorially integral Palestinian State, living
in peace and security with Israel. We hope that the new
Israeli Government, as soon it is established, will duly

take into account the need to move beyond mistrust and
to re-engage in a substantive negotiations process.

A crucial factor for implementing any agreement
with Israel is the establishment of inter-Palestinian
reconciliation. We hope for practical results as an
outcome of the agreements achieved between the
leaders of Fatah and Hamas in Cairo last week.

For its part, Russia, bilaterally and in international
forums, including first and foremost the Quartet
of international mediators, continues to assist in
overcoming the stalemate in the Palestinian-Israeli
situation by relaunching the negotiating process to
achieve lasting peace between Palestinians and Israelis.
In that context, we call, among other things, for a speedy
convening of the ministerial meeting of the Quartet and
more active participation by the League of Arab States
in its work.

The recent exacerbation of the situation of
Palestinian refugees in Syria, in particular in the
Yarmouk camp outside Damascus, was a striking
reminder of the harmful deadlock in the Middle
Eastern situation. Clashes between pro-Government
and opposition forces led to the movement of many
Palestinian refugees to Lebanon, further destabilizing
an already difficult situation in that country. In that
respect, we note the affirmed Palestinian position of
non-intervention in the internal affairs of Arab States,
including in the Syrian conflict.

With respect to the situation in Syria as a whole,
Russia advocates a continuation of collective efforts to
find a solution to the conflict in that country on the
basis of the Geneva communique of the Action Group
(S/2012/523, annex). In that context, we are providing
necessary support to the activities of Joint Special
Representative Brahimi. We feel that a solution to the
crisis must be political and attained through Syrian-led
dialogue on the basis of the principles of international
law. In that connection, all parties to the conflict must
cease all violence and be guided solely by the greater
interests of the Syrian people and the task of ensuring
their security and the democratic and free development
of the country.

While the international community bears significant
responsibility for resolving the Syrian crisis, in the
final analysis it must be a Syrian-led process. In that
connection, we regret that the Syrian opposition has not
taken steps to engage in dialogue. We are convinced
that the time has come for such a step, in particular as
the Syrian Government has conveyed a willingness to
negotiate with a broad section of the opposition forces.

