Mr. Gomes (Guinea-Bissau) (spoke in Portuguese; English interpretation provided by the
delegation): Allow me, first of all, in the name of the
Government of the Republic of Guinea-Bissau and in
my own name, to greet all those present and to thank
the Council for the opportunity and the honour given
me to address the members of the Security Council. As
this is the first time that I participate in a Security
Council meeting, I would like to underline the special
appreciation I have for the role played by this body in
the maintenance of international peace and security.

My country recognizes and is grateful for the
efforts of the United Nations to promote stability and
peace through its permanent representation in Bissau,
which provides the Secretary-General with pertinent
information on the evolution of the situation.

This meeting is taking place at a very specific
moment in our national life, with the beginning of
consultations with the European Union, in the context
of article 96 of the Cotonou Agreement, to discuss
commitments related with human rights and the rule of
law. As a prelude to these conversations, the
institutions of the Republic and civil society
considered it important to carry out information and
sensitization measures in relation to some actors and
development partners, thus creating bridges for
dialogue to help our Government overcome the
difficulties that characterize our current relations with
some of our domestic and foreign partners.

It is in this context that I recently visited the
neighbouring Republic of Senegal, where I shared
some of my preoccupations and reflections with the
representatives of friendly countries. And it is in this
context that I must place this statement, in which I will
deal with some of the recent political and economic
developments and share with the Council our vision
and perspectives for the future and the possible options
for us to overcome together the difficult challenges that
face our country.

Allow me then to talk about the efforts that the
people and Government of the Republic of Guinea-
Bissau have undertaken to promote the changes that are
taking place in the country and which have contributed
in an irreversible manner to the achievement of peace
and stability.

The political context in Guinea-Bissau during the
present legislature was negatively affected by the
various manifestations of instability that occurred in
2009 and 2010, in spite of the positive signs that we
saw at the beginning. The November 2008 legislative
elections led to the establishment of a parliamentary
majority, demonstrating a certain return to governing
stability. With the formation of a new Government in
January 2009, since the middle of this year Guinea-
Bissau has demonstrated that it has made a true break
with the past, showing its readiness to govern
effectively and efficiently and guarantee progressive
improvement in its people's living conditions.

However, the tragic events of 1 and 2 March
2009, which led to the deaths of two of the country's
high-ranking figures - the President and the Chief of
Staff of the armed forces - and later of two important
politicians, had a devastating effect on the country's
image and illustrated the fragility of the political
situation and of the state of national development. It is
important to note, however, that the Government's
determined efforts mitigated the impact of those events
so that they affected neither the constitutional order nor
the economic and administrative reforms. The
successful holding of early presidential elections
renewed hopes for a new political cycle with strong
institutional stability, based on a genuine majority and
a Government and President backed by this
demonstration of political force.

However, the military uprising of 1 April 2010,
the arrest of the former Chief of Staff of the armed
forces and the naming of a new military leadership put

the issue of political instability on Guinea-Bissau's
agenda, provoking the concern of the entire
international community. The violence and political
instability of these events showed that the democratic
process in our country has not been completely
consolidated. It is clear that to guarantee the rule of
law it is not enough to have a progressive constitution
that lays out the principles and rules of the democratic
process, or to hold successful elections.

It is in that context that we had to deal with a
number of questions: for instance, how to overcome
successive political and military crises; how to restore
a minimal social equilibrium; whether the military
officers involved in the uprising should be part of the
solution or the problem, or be marginalized in the
dialogue; and the consequences that might arise from
this or that position.

As the Council no doubt understands, the answers
to all of these questions in a fragile State, with a
precarious defence and security system, cannot be
answered by the Government alone. The Government
has no doubt of the urgency and necessity of reform in
the areas of defence, security and justice. In truth, there
is now a national consensus that reforming defence and
security would be a good way to resolve the problems
we have encountered in this sector, because it involves
ipso facto a vision and strategy for the modernization
and transformation of the security and armed forces
into actors for peacemaking and consolidation of the
rule of law. In the specific circumstances under which
we had to take decisions, it seemed to us important to
strengthen dialogue between the actors in order to
reduce fear and uncertainty. That was and continues to
be done, both at the level of military units and in
society in general.

However, it is not enough to have political will
and the capacity to identify and diminish the risks that
threaten the climate of peace and stability in the
country; it is necessary to act with determination. In
that context, the lack of financial resources, or their
conditionality, has been one of the main obstacles
negatively affecting the dynamic of the process. It does
not seem to us legitimate to try to achieve reform
without the active participation of those who will
benefit from it, and even less legitimate to make it
conditional on strategies or realities that are not
relevant to Guinea-Bissau. It is important to state
firmly that it is Guinea-Bissau that must conduct the
processes of reform, because only with Guinean
ownership of those processes can reform succeed and
achieve its goals.

In spite of the difficulties I have mentioned, the
Government has successfully carried out significant
reform measures. In 2008, it conducted a biometric
census of the armed forces, and a year later completed
a census of the volunteers fighting for liberty and
security. The Government finalized and adopted the
priority plan for reform of the security and defence
sectors and its corresponding operating plan, which
will give reform greater impetus. Beyond the physical
rehabilitation of barracks as a way to dignify our
military and police's living conditions, these efforts
include measures that will help boost retention and
professionalization in our military forces and the
creation of a pension fund and associated programmes.
This has made possible a review of the legal
framework for the new mission and mandate of the
defence and security forces; the official launch, in June
2010, of a national awareness-raising campaign on the
reform of the defence and security sectors; and the
establishment of a special pension fund that will ensure
immediate payments for military officers reaching
retirement age. The fund, which is based on the
voluntary contributions of development partners and of
the Government itself, will be independently managed
by a financial institution through a competitive public
process, which has already begun, in order to ensure
transparency and security.

The National Popular Assembly has been
provided with a documentation centre in order to
improve the technical capacity of its special committee
on defence and security with a view to allow it to
better track the reform process and improve political
and democratic control over that process. Utilizing
domestic resources and with the participation of
military engineers, we have rehabilitated the Amura
fortress in Bissau, as well as some barracks. We have
also rehabilitated barracks in Gabu and Quebo using
foreign resources. And we have established a training
centre for security forces as a prelude to setting up a
future police academy, whose installations have
already been delivered to the Ministry of the Interior.

A national computer laboratory and training
centre has been officially up and running since 2010.
The centre's goal is to augment training for agents
working on internal security and criminal investigation.
The centre has already graduated 380 members of the
Public Order Police, the Judiciary Police, the Security
and Information Service and the Migration Service.
Training for the security forces in Bafata and Gabu has
been conducted to help deal with child trafficking and
the eradication of violence, especially gender-based
violence.

We have also created and deployed a model
police squad, in the context ofa new policing paradigm
based on citizenship and community policing. We have
begun the process of registering, selecting and
certifying security agents, in an effort to reshape and
develop the capacity of those forces. And we have set
up units for surveillance and investigation to combat
drug trafficking and transnational crime. All of these
activities demonstrate the Government's commitment
to implementing reform and making clear our desire to
respect the commitments we have made with our
development partners.

Our lack of resources was partially addressed,
and received an important boost from, the help
provided to our Government - including significant
technical, material and financial contributions - from
the Government of Angola, the Economic Community
of West African States and the Community of
Portuguese-speaking Countries. As the Council is
aware, the Republic of Angola, our brother and friend,
is demonstrating in practice the solidarity it has shown
on the political level, ensuring that we can take reforms
forward. It is important to note, however, that the
financial resources provided, although significant and
relevant, are not yet enough to cover all the
subprogrammes I have mentioned.

Another factor threatening social stability is the
weak capacity of our justice sector to deal with crime.
This leads to the perception that our country has
become a place of impunity. We are aware that the
State has a diminished capacity to punish owing to the
lack of prisons, the continuing disobedience of certain
groups and corruption. An ongoing issue in that regard
pertains to delays in investigating and carrying out
arrests in crimes involving high State officials. This
generates suspicion and uncertainty about the State's
true attitude towards such crimes.

I wish to reiterate that the Government I lead will
continue to make every effort, as is its obligation, to
carry out its functions, within the material, technical
and financial means available to the national
prosecutor's office. It is important to mention here that
the Government continues to wait for the support that it

requested from the international community after the
tragic events in March. Those requests - made
through the Secretary-General, the African Union,
ECOWAS and the Community of Portuguese-speaking
Countries - are intended to help investigations avail
themselves of the technical support of international
experts, as occurred in the Republic of Guinea, our
neighbour.

It is also important to underscore the sweeping
institutional changes currently under way to reform the
judicial system and improve its functioning in line with
full respect for democratic principles, especially the
separation of powers. Like security and defence sector
reform, the judicial reform outlined in the recently
approved national plan for the justice system is based
on human resources and training and focused on
respect for the rule of law, so as to build a new justice
system where impunity has no place.

Another destabilizing factor is the use of our
country as a transit point for drugs. That is an abuse of
our country, which we condemn and which poses a
grave threat to the peace and security of our subregion.
However, it is important to note that our country does
not reap profits from drugs, nor does it produce drugs.
On the contrary, it has combated the scourge of drugs
with all the capacity that it possesses. The
rehabilitation of prison facilities and technical training
of the police are part of this endeavour, which will gain
greater momentum with the entry into force of the
ECOWAS plan and the West Africa Coast Initiative. In
this context, our country has just created another unit
to combat transnational crime that includes the
involvement of the ministries of justice, the interior
and finance.

Recent drug seizures, with the help of the
military, the confiscation and public auction of
airplanes used in drug trafficking, the destruction of
landing strips and the physical destruction of drugs,
ammunition and explosives are concrete signs of our
efforts and evidence that they are producing positive
results. Of course, the success of this effort to combat
drug trafficking requires financial, material and
technical support on a more consistent basis and on a
larger scale.

In our view, the strategy outlined by our
Government and presented at the International
Conference on Drug Trafficking in Guinea-Bissau, held
in Lisbon in 2007, must be reviewed and strengthened

so that it can incorporate the phenomenon of terrorism,
which is today closely linked with drug trafficking.
Terrorism has been increasingly felt in our subregion,
owing to the fragility of our States, their lack of control
over vast areas of their territory and the protection and
support that terrorists receive from drug barons and
drug cartels. For that reason, countries such as Guinea-
Bissau, which are involved against their will in the
drug trafficking cycle, deserve special attention from
the international community, because the risks from the
possible infiltration of terrorist networks in their
territory are extremely grave, with unpredictable
consequences for regional and world security.

In that context, the agreements to combat drug
trafficking that we have signed with the United States
of America and Venezuela must be implemented
swiftly, in particular with a more active presence by the
African command recently created by the American
Government. As I have said before, Guinea-Bissau is
not a narco-State and it does not have the resources
necessary to successfully confront drug trafficking and
terrorism on its own.

Lack of dialogue has also been identified as an
obstacle to social stability and is being addressed with
the creation of bridges of dialogue among Guineans. In
August 2010, an initiative of the National Popular
Assembly, with the support of the President of the
Republic, began the process of dialogue and listening
to society in general and to members of the Assembly
in particular. A large number of initiatives have been
launched, among which I wish to highlight the holding
of a national peace and reconciliation conference that
brought together all of the country's stakeholders.

Finally, institutional cooperation among the
various branches of Government has been strengthened
through a permanent dialogue and joint action between
the President and the Prime Minister on the main issues
facing the country. Concrete results include greater
alignment on foreign policy issues, which has served to
stabilize foreign relations.

Recent developments in the economic sphere are
very promising. The gains that we have made can be
expanded if the continued engagement and support of
the international community can be assured. The
country has just been granted a significant forgiveness
of debt - about $1.2 billion - as a result of the
progress achieved in macroeconomic stabilization, the
implementation of economic reforms and the
improvement in the business environment. With regard
to the management of public finances, the reforms have
led to improved fiscal performance and helped to
reduce the primary deficit. The increase in internal
revenue and budget support will allow the Government
to stabilize some payments, especially salaries of
public employees and payments on the internal debt,
thereby contributing to a recovery in economic
confidence, liquidity of the banking system and the
easing of social tensions.

With regard to improving the business climate,
reforms aimed at reducing bureaucracy, simplifying
and facilitating the creation of companies and licensing
entrepreneurial activity have been instituted. With the
objective of attracting foreign direct investment, a vast
restructuring programme has been started in certain
sectors, including energy, telecommunications and
ports.

In the social sector, there is slow improvement in
health and education indicators and the country still
faces great challenges in addressing the Millennium
Development Goals. Life expectancy is still low, as are
health and education indicators. And poverty still
afflicts a large part of the population. In spite of the
progress that we have made and the internal dynamics
that have given a great many opportunities for
Guineans, the country is still caught in the trap of
poverty. Tragically, poverty continues to affect over
60 per cent of the Guinean population. Poverty is at the
root of great social ills, instability, tension and crime.
The chronic privations that affect certain segments of
our society are the cause of behaviours that undermine
peace and stability. Guinea-Bissau, because of its small
territory, its small and young population and its strong
economic potential, has more than enough potential
resources to eliminate poverty.

Given the development challenges faced by our
country, with our strengths and weaknesses, the
Government has reviewed its global poverty reduction
strategy. Under our second national poverty reduction
strategy, in the next five years we will continue to
focus on modernization and policies that seek to
improve access to social services, as well as strengthen
sectors with the greatest growth potential, such as
agriculture, agro-industry, fisheries, tourism and
mining. The strategy seeks to generate rapid and
durable growth through the diversification of sectors
and the opening up of the economy to regional and
international trade and foreign investment. This

requires significant expansion of the private sector and
improved transparency in the investment climate.
Success depends on effective support of the
international community - particularly in social
sectors, rehabilitation and building basic infrastructure
that was in large part destroyed during the political-
military conflict.

The country's economic success depends on
political stability and peace. Therefore, reforms in the
defence, security, justice and public administration
sectors will continue to be our priorities. It is clear to
me that the forward and backward steps of the process
of consolidating democratic governance may cause
reservations in some partners' decisions to continue to
provide support to Guinea-Bissau. However, I want to
draw attention to the fact that some people fear change
due to a lack of knowledge or information. Such fear
was evident among the military class, who considered
that reform would lead to negative consequences for
their social standing and their quality of life. The
intensive sensitization campaigns and strategic debates
of the reconciliation process have led to positive
results in this regard.

Instability and cyclical crises must not be
considered as destiny. Guinea-Bissau is not a failed
State. We recognize the fragility of our institutions, but
we are determined to proceed with broad, strategic and
structural reforms, intensify the fight against drug
trafficking and promote durable, sustainable economic
growth. We have a very ambitious agenda for our
country. Its concretization depends on a number of
factors, including internal and external efforts.

The Government continues to stress the need for
greater involvement of the international community.
My country has received encouraging signs from some
States that, while concerned about the problems that
we face, believe that if Guinea-Bissau continues the
course that generates peace and progress, it has
immense opportunities to take the path to development.

The European Union is a global actor, central to
the development of peoples. We believe it should
continue to carry out its actions in the country, which
are very positive and contribute to changing the lives
of the people for the better and make it possible to
promote the changes that we all desire.

We count on the support of all members of the
Security Council in the consultations that we will soon
begin with the European Union. The quality of the

report just presented to the Council (S/2011/73) is
unequivocal proof that Council members follow
closely the events in our country and that Guinea-
Bissau's efforts and commitment deserves the
Council's trust.

Taking advantage of our participation in this
important meeting, we cannot but manifest our concern
over the events that occurred following the presidential
elections in Cote d'Ivoire, as well as the recent
demonstrations in Tunisia and in Egypt -
repercussions of which remain to be seen in other
countries in North Africa and in the Middle East. As a
country in difficulty, one that has known the
consequences of war and violence, we exhort the
United Nations and all peace-loving countries to
mobilize in order to find rapid solutions, avoiding
further catastrophes the impacts of which could be
devastating for the future of our democracies and of the
world in general.

To conclude, I would like to reiterate our
appreciation to all members of the Security Council
here present and to express my satisfaction at this
meeting, which in my opinion has been valuable in
bringing us closer at such a crucial moment in the
political and economic life of my country.
