I would like to thank Special Coordinator Nickolay Mladenov for his briefing on the current situation in the occupied Palestinian territory. I also take this opportunity to express my deepest condolences on the passing away of Saeb Erekat, a tenacious negotiator and a prominent voice of the Palestinian cause. It is truly a great loss, not only for his family and the Palestinian people but for the international community. Sadly, peace did not come during his lifetime. Our job is to ensure that it is not too late for millions of Palestinians. On that note, I would like to share three pertinent points. First, we must continue forging the path to peace based on international consensus. It is important that the international community remain committed not only to a credible multilateral process but to protecting the internationally agreed consensus concerning Palestine. Indonesia therefore reiterates its support for convening an international peace conference and for a resumption of talks with all the relevant parties on the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. In addition, Indonesia reaffirms the importance of the intra-Palestine unity talks, while underlining the unity of Palestinians in overcoming the challenges facing their cause and in creating an environment conducive to achieving a negotiated peace. Secondly, the expansion of illegal settlements must stop. The Israeli authorities continued their path of violations and complete disregard for international law earlier this month by approving yet another illegal settlement expansion. According to the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, this illegal settlement expansion 1s the largest in the forced displacement operation of Palestinians in more than four years. Although there is little need to say it, these settlements are illegal and in flagrant violation of international law and the relevant Security Council resolutions, including resolution 2334 (2016). Despite Israel's promise to suspend the annexation and of a new era of peace and development in the region, it is obvious that, in practice, its creeping annexation remains as active as ever, as does the inhumane and degrading treatment to which Palestinians are subjected. We continue to urge the international community to reaffirm the illegality of the settlements and underscore the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people to self-determination, statehood and independence, within the pre-1967 borders, and with East Jerusalem as the capital of the State of Palestine. Thirdly, we must continue to support the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA). We welcome the renewal of the Agency's mandate and the international community's unequivocal support for its important work. In this challenging and difficult time, UNRWA continues to work on the front lines of the crisis, providing education, health and social services. However, the Agency continues to confront the dire financial crisis that jeopardizes its ability to provide services and assistance to the region. Indonesia therefore again appeals to the international community to extend its full support to UNRWA's vital work and to match its political commitment with sufficient and predictable financial contributions. Once again, we have found ourselves discussing the Palestinian question. But we are here discussing it because of continued violations by Israeli authorities and the systemic impunity that allows it. The late Saeb Erekat once said that international law is the civilized means to achieve our goals, our independence and our freedom. International law and United Nations resolutions on the status of Palestine are very clear, and yet the Israeli authorities continue to violate them and deprive the Palestinian people of their homes, their rights and their dignity. The Security Council needs to stand with the Palestinians and with international law.
