Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank Ms. Nakamitsu, Under-Secretary-
General and High Representative for Disarmament
Affairs, for her very informative and valuable briefing.

On 2 August, a very sad and important event
took place - the United States withdrew from the
Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces (INF) Treaty,
which, in no small measure, played a key role in building
both the regional and global security architecture.
Talks on the Treaty were held during the Cold War
in a context of complex international relations.
Nevertheless, at that time the leaders of the Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics and the United States were
able to reach an agreement. The INF Treaty was crucial
for international detente. Along with other steps taken
at that time, it greatly contributed to creating a climate
of trust that led to global changes that the international
community now deems essential. For the first time in
decades, humankind had the opportunity to move away
from confrontation and to address pressing development
issues whose resolution would make life better for all.

For a time, the INF Treaty was conscientiously
implemented by both Russia and the United States.
However, with time, it became increasingly clear that
the Treaty, like other disarmament and arms-control
agreements, had become inconvenient for our American
partners, who were convinced of their exceptionalism
and became increasingly determined to impose their
inequitable unilateral schemes of international relations
on others. The first victim of Washington's ambitions,
in 2003, was the Treaty between the United States of
America and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics
on the Limitation of Anti-Ballistic Missile Systems
(ABM. Treaty), which Russia had actively fought
to maintain since the late 1990s. Immediately after
that, the Americans announced plans to deploy ABM
launchers in eastern Europe, allegedly to counter the
Iranian threat. In response to our concerns, we were
told that those facilities could never be used against
Russia. However, when the first launcher was deployed
in Romania, it became clear that it could easily be
converted to launch Tomahawk missiles, which is not
allowed under the INF Treaty. We immediately drew
attention to that. It is now absolutely clear that we were
right. On 18 August, just two weeks after withdrawing
from the INF Treaty, Washington carried out a test
launch of a medium-range missile using an MK-4l
launch system
Since August, there are no restrictions on the
development and deployment of such systems. Thus,
following the denunciation of the ABM. Treaty, yet
another pillar of the arms-control architecture was
toppled - an architecture that enabled the drafting and
signature of the New Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty
(New START), which will expire in February 2021
and is also at risk. Key figures in the current United
States Administration have repeatedly, both publicly
and privately, made it clear that they have no interest in
maintaining the New START in its current form.

In parallel, almost from the very first day after their
withdrawal from the INF Treaty, American officials
began making threats and statements that leave no doubt
that Washington had intended to do exactly this and had
been consistently and deliberately violating the Treaty
for a long time. Otherwise, how could the Secretary
of Defense, Mark Esper, have announced, in early
August, the possibility of deploying intermediate-range
and shorter-range ground-launched missiles in just a
few months? It would be impossible to produce such
weapons in such a short period of time.

We did not convene this meeting to accuse our
American colleagues of hypocrisy. Today it is obvious
to any non-biased disarmament expert that what we
have presented is incontrovertible fact. No matter
how much Washington insists today on the old mantra
that it was Russia's actions that undermined the INF
Treaty, its most recent steps are eloquent evidence
to the contrary. But that is no longer the issue. To be
frank, today it is not our American partners that we
are primarily addressing, because their Views are clear.
But we are very surprised by the stubborn position that
is being adopted by our European colleagues, as their
stubbornness would be much more helpful if applied in
a different way.

The Council may recall that, as recently as last
December, Russia proposed a General Assembly draft
resolution supporting the INF Treaty. It contained no
criticism of the United States but only urged support
for diplomatic efforts to address challenges affecting
the security and national interests of all States
Members of the United Nations, without exception.
We unequivocally warned them then that the demise
of the INF Treaty would not only undermine the
implementation of article VI of the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons but would also
lead to a new nuclear arms race. Many partners listened
closely to us, but Washington's European allies did not.
Here I have a question for them: are they happy today
that in December they chose to press the red button? Do
they not understand that their playing along with the
Americans at every step is bringing back that bygone
era when missiles could target European cities from
various sides?

We will not be the first to do that. However, given
that our American colleagues are clearly itching to and
want to flex their muscles, the situation that I have
just described may be at hand. Are they aware that,
because of the geopolitical ambitions of the United
States of America, we are all just one step away from
an uncontrolled, unregulated arms race? For our
part, unlike our American colleagues, we are deeply
concerned at this state of affairs. In any case, according
to President Trump, America is prepared for an arms
race, as it is supposedly capable of surpassing any of
its potential rivals in terms of finance and technology.

That rationale, inspired by the best American
westerns, is backed up by the numbers: according to
publicly available data, the United States military
budget is about $700 billion, while the budget ofNATO
amounts to $1.4 trillion. These are just approximate
figures. For reference, the military budget of Russia,
which is allegedly a threat to us all, is about $60 billion,
that is, more than 20 times lower than that of NATO.

Obviously, following the risky undertakings by
the United States of America, all these figures may
increase; the United States President has already made
that very point. We would note here that expenditures
on the development of weapons prohibited by the INF
Treaty had been included in the United States military
budget long before the Treaty was sentenced to death.
And, as always, Russia is to blame.

Just think about how much we could have done
if the money that our Western colleagues have been
allocating for military purposes had been spent to
achieve the Sustainable Development Goals and help
less developed and developing countries. Moreover, our
American partners continue to bargain on the budget of
peacekeeping operations and to follow their established
practice of postponing until the very last moment their
contributions to the United Nations budget, the total
amount of which is less than $10 billion this year. All
that seems notjust petty but also disrespectful to all the
Members of our world Organization. We are not afraid
to say it to their faces. What about other members? Are
they going to deny that they are partly responsible for
what is happening, echoing Washington and pointing to
a perceived threat from Russia and from China as well?
Will future generations forgive them for this?
Despite everything I have said, we continue
to believe that, as concerns our Western partners,
common sense and the instinct of self-preservation
will eventually prevail. After all, the very existence of
humankind is at stake. The only question is how much
money and effort will have been wasted by then and
how many opportunities for progress and cooperation
we will have missed.

For our part, we have always been ready to engage
in any serious dialogue aimed at ensuring strategic
stability and security. If it were up to us only, we would
never have come close to a line so dangerous as the one
the world is approaching now.

However, we remain realistic. It is easier to
dismantle than to build. As history has shown, it can
take years, if not decades, to launch a more or less
sustainable and effective new format for discussing
issues of strategic stability and arms control. However,
there are some problems, including those arising from
the irresponsible actions taken by Washington, that
must be resolved today.

