Mr. Leon Gonzalez (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish): We
support the statement made by the representative of
Iran on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.

The conflict in the Middle East is an issue of
concern for all States Members of the United Nations. A
just and lasting peace is the only option for the peoples
of that region, and we should focus all of our efforts
on achieving that goal. The year 2014 was marked by
negative developments for Palestine and Syria, whose
peoples suffered the vicissitudes of aggression and
war. Cuba reaffirms its unequivocal solidarity with the
Palestinian people and its robust and decisive support
for all efforts aimed at promoting the recognition of the
State of Palestine based on the pre-1967 borders, with
East Jerusalem as its capital, as well as the right of the
State of Palestine to become a full-fledged Member of
the United Nations.

Cuba reiterates its demand for an end to the
prolonged and illegal Israeli occupation of Palestinian
territories and other Arab lands, and the immediate,
complete and unconditional lifting of the cruel and
illegal blockade of Gaza, including the opening of
border crossings and control points, in order to enable
the free access of humanitarian assistance, supply of
goods, and the transit of persons to and from the Gaza
Strip on a permanent basis. The building and expansion
of illegal Israeli settlements, the separation wall in
occupied Palestinian territory, the destruction and
confiscation ofPalestinian land and property, the forced
displacement of hundreds of thousands of Palestinian
families, and the transfer of settlers to occupied
Palestinian territory are unacceptable. We demand an
immediate and complete halt to all Israeli settlement
activities in Palestinian territories and respect for the
right to return. We also demand an end to reprisals
against and blackmailing of the Palestinian Authority,
and respect for agreements signed between it and the
State of Israel. The colonial policies and practices
of Israel against the Palestinian people should end.
Israel must once and for all end its provocations and
incitements to hatred and terror, crimes of aggression,
arbitrary detention and mass imprisonment, and the
genocide against that people.

The Cuban people and Government are proud of the
fact that Cuba was one ofthe first countries to recognize
the Palestinian State, following its proclamation in 1988.
The number of recognitions has continually grown over
the past 26 years. This is an unstoppable process that
the Security Council should have supported long ago.
Cuba demands without further conditions or delay the
acceptance of the request for recognition as a State
Member of the United Nations submitted by Palestine.
The Security Council also has the responsibility to
take specific measures to prevent the assassination of
innocent Palestinian civilians and the destruction of the
legacy of that heroic people, which has, despite all the
tests imposed upon it, struggled to defend its legitimate
right to self-determination.

Cuba supports the draft resolution (S/2014/916)
that the Arab Group submitted for the consideration
of the Security Council, and we denounce the inability
of this organ to ensure respect for international law
and to defend truth and justice. The Security Council
must honour its obligation to promote a negotiated
settlement to the Israeli occupation of the State of
Palestine. It should establish a definite timeline to end
that occupation and turn the resolve of the international
community to see the peaceful coexistence of two
independent States into reality. The anti-democratic
right ofveto in the Security Council, which has allowed
impunity with regard to the actions of Israel, must end.

It will not be possible to end the Syrian conflict or
establish a true and lasting peace that is acceptable to
its people and Government will not be possible under
the precepts of the regime change policy that has been
promoted and publicly supported from the outside. Cuba
reiterates its concern for the loss of innocent life as a
result of the Syrian conflict, and condemns once again
all acts of violence taking place in that country against
the civilian population. The supposed protection of
human life and the struggle against terrorism cannot
be used a pretext for foreign intervention. The Security
Council must adopt measures that would genuinely
promote a solution to the conflict and combat terrorism
against the Syrian people. Its members should reject
without hesitation the illegal trafficking in arms to
non-State actors in Syria and any other action that
prolongs the violent conflict affecting that country.

The sovereignty of the Syrian people should
be respected as they exercise their right to self-
determination. We pay tribute to the efforts of the
Russian Federation to come up with a negotiated solution
to the conflict, and we appeal to other interested parties
to adopt a similar attitude. All peoples of the Middle
East have the right to live in peace and enjoy progress.
Cuba reiterates its condemnation of all forms and
manifestations of terrorist acts, methods and practices,
including State terrorism, wherever they take place and
by whomsoever they may be perpetrated.

As a peace-loving country committed to the
elimination and prohibition of weapons of mass
destruction, Cuba reiterates its support for the
establishment of a zone free of nuclear and other
weapons of mass destruction in the Middle East, and
demands that a conference on the establishment of such
a zone be convened without further delay, pursuant to
the conclusions and recommendations adopted at the
2010 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons.

Cuba reaffirms its willingness to cooperate in
achieving a peaceful, just and lasting solution to the
conflicts in the Middle East. It is our hope that in 2015
we shall achieve the desired peace in that region and
make the Security Council a genuinely effective organ
in achieving fair and concrete results leading to the
well-being of all peoples of the Middle East.

