Mr. Cervenka (Czech Republic): Let me start by
thanking the United States presidency for scheduling
this important debate, Deputy Secretary-General
Jan Eliasson for his dedication to the protection of
journalists, and the media representatives for their
moving briefings. The Czech Republic aligns itself
with the earlier statement made by the European Union.

Journalists and other media workers play an essential
role in informing the public and the international
community about current events, both in conflict
and in non-conflict situations. The Czech Republic is
therefore deeply worried about continuing restrictions
of free expression and independent journalism by State
and non-State actors in some countries, as well as by
escalating trends of harassment, arrests, torture and the
persecution of journalists worldwide.

The protection ofjournalists in armed conflict is
of vital importance in order to ensure their safety as
well as the freedom of information. We therefore highly
value the recent efforts of the Human Rights Council in
this regard, especially the adoption of resolution 21/12
on the safety ofjournalists in September 2012, which
the Czech Republic co-sponsored. Furthermore, we
commend the progress achieved by UNESCO and the
Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights in
this area.

In recent years, we have witnessed unprecedented
violence against journalists in some countries,
especially in the Middle East and northern Africa.
By the end of 2012, attacks on journalists in these
countries escalated significantly, making Syria in
particular one of the most dangerous places in the
world. Unfortunately, this negative trend continues in
2013. Violent attacks on journalists indicate a serious
deterioration of the freedom of expression in the region
and highlight violations of the right to publish and
exchange information and views.

In this context, the Czech Republic believes that it
is absolutely crucial for United Nations Member States
to respect and ensure respect for the applicable rules of
the international humanitarian law on the protection of
journalists. Article 79, the key provision of Additional
Protocol I to the 1949 Geneva Conventions, clearly sets
out that journalists engaged in dangerous professional
missions in areas of armed conflict shall be considered
as civilians, and that they shall be protected. The
Council itself unanimously stressed this principle in its
landmark resolution 1738 (2006), recently recalled in the
presidential statement of 12 February (S/PRST/2013/2).

In conclusion, the Czech Republic would like to take
this opportunity to recognize, honour, and underscore
the essential role of independent media and civil society
in protecting freedom of expression and democratic
principles. I should like to pay tribute to the work of all
fearless journalists who dedicate their lives, sometimes
at great personal cost, to this cause. We would like to
express our solidarity with all those who have lost their
lives in the fight for freedom of expression and the
promotion of democracy in the world.

