Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I normally begin
my statements in the Council with the words "Thank
you, Mr. President". I cannot do that today, because
today we have seen the fifth veto of a vote on Syria
in five years from you, Mr. President - a veto that
has once again stopped the Council from creating the
unity needed to give the people of Syria any hope of
respite from their suffering; a veto that has once again
denigrated the credibility of the Security Council and
respect for it in the eyes of the world; a veto that is a
cynical abuse of the privileges and responsibilities of
permanent membership. I simply cannot thank you for
it. Nor can the thousands on thousands of innocent men,
women and children trapped in Aleppo. Tonight they
will endure another night of fear and pain, and another
night of wondering whether they will live to see the
morning. One hundred thousand of them are children.

The current tactics being used in Aleppo under
the alibi of countering terrorism are turning a
humanitarian crisis into a catastrophe, and your veto
today, Mr. President, has only confirmed what we
have known for a long time. Russia's actions in recent
weeks have exposed just how hollow its commitment
to the political process is. Today we have seen that
commitment for what it really is - a sham. Instead of
investing energy in peace and diplomacy, Russia has
supported, facilitated and cooperated with the Syrian
regime in order to retake and destroy areas standing
against Al-Assad, literally killing off those who
want a moderate, peaceful and pluralistic future, free
from both the barbarism of Al-Assad and the horrors
inflicted by Da'esh and other terrorists in Syria. And
it is Syrian civilians who continue to bear the brunt of
that cruelty and Russia's complicity. Civilians, medics,
White Helmets are under direct attack from barrel
bombs, cluster munitions and incendiary weapons, and
that is even before we mention the continued barbaric
use of chemical weapons by the regime.

I echo the words of the Archbishop of Canterbury,
who described the destruction of Aleppo as the absolute
contempt for the human spirit and for the dignity of
the human being. The Security Council cannot stand by
while such misery is meted out on the people of Aleppo,
and yet, thanks to you, Mr. President, that is exactly
what we are doing.

This text that you vetoed, Sir, was not unreasonable.
It called for sensible, overdue steps that would have
saved lives, starting with the complete end of the
bombardment of Aleppo. There can be no military
justification for aerial attacks that indiscriminately hit
civilians and their homes and their hospitals. The text
called for full and unhindered humanitarian access. It
is despicable that the regime continues to refuse access
to besieged and hard-to-reach areas. It is despicable
that the violence is so extreme that the safety even
of humanitarian convoys cannot be assured, as seen
through the strike on a United Nations aid convoy last
month, for which the evidence is clear that Russia was
responsible.

Further, this text called for the full implementation
of resolution 2268 (2016) and the resumption of the
cessation of hostilities. We see every day in Aleppo that
there simply can be no military victory in this conflict.
There can only be losers. We also see every day that
obligation after obligation, set by resolution after
resolution of the Security Council, are being flouted.
We need Council unity to end this war, and that unity
will only come when Russia changes its policy and
stops the aerial bombardment.

This has been a strong week for Council unity,
and yet we have ended on sadly familiar ground. We,
the whole Council, stood with you, Mr. President, on
Wednesday, as you announced the next Secretary-
General. Thanks to your actions today, Sir, Antonio
Guterres' job will be even harder. And worse still,
thanks to your actions today, Syrians will continue to
lose their lives in Aleppo and beyond to Russian and
Syrian bombing. Please stop now.

