Mr. Levitte (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Hans Haekkerup for his briefing. Our heartfelt
encouragement goes with him in the successful conduct
of his mission.

The position of the European Union will be stated
later by the Permanent Representative of Belgium. I
wish to complement it with a few national comments.

The preparation for the 17 November elections is
clearly the priority of the United Nations. We welcome
the efforts of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) and
KFOR to ensure the success of the elections through
painstaking preparation and the establishment of
effective security arrangements.

The elections will mark an important stage in the
implementation of resolution 1244 (1999). They will
open the way to the implementation of the provisions
for the Constitutional Framework for substantial
autonomy promulgated by Mr. Haekkerup last May.
The Kosovars will thus enjoy substantial autonomy
within the context set forth in resolution 1244 (1999).
As to the elected leaders, as Mr. Haekkerup has
stressed, they will be able to exercise important
responsibilities, particularly regarding the management
and day-to-day administration of Kosovo. We look
forward to the elections. Naturally, they are not tied to
the question of final status. The Kosovar leaders must
fully comply with the provisions of the Constitutional
Framework. The Special Representative of the
Secretary-General will retain the authority conferred on
him over the full implementation of resolution 1244
(1999).

Broad participation in the elections by all
communities should be encouraged. Through their
votes, the inhabitants of Kosovo will shape the
political, economic and social choices made by the
elected institutions of provisional self-government. The
interests of no ethnic group are furthered by non-
participation in the decision-making process. Each vote
will count on election day.

In this respect, the participation of the Serb
community remains a source of concern. Thanks to the
support of the Yugoslav authorities, many Kosovo
Serbs have registered on the electoral rolls, as
Mr. Haekkerup stressed, but they now need to be
convinced to vote on 17 November. The Yugoslav
authorities, who have commendably supported the
registration process, can make another decisive
contribution by sending them a clear message along
those lines. Massive participation by members of the
Serb community will enable them, through their elected
representatives, to assume their full place in the future
organs of provisional self-government.

Like the Secretary-General and his Special
Representative, France welcomes the developing
dialogue between UNMIK and the democratic
authorities of Belgrade. The nomination of Mr. Covic'
to head the Joint Coordination Committee for Kosovo
has accelerated that development. On 17 September,
the Security Council witnessed this at the meeting in
which Mr. Covie and Mr. Haekkerup participated
jointly. The intensification of that dialogue should lead
to progress in the development of cooperation between
UNMIK and Yugoslavia. This could have favourable
repercussions, including for the integration of the
Kosovo Serbs into the structures established by
UNMIK.

I would be grateful if the Special Representative
could outline his views on the avenues that could be
explored to promote progress in these areas. What are
the prospects for cooperation between UNMIK and
Yugoslavia, for example in education, health care or
culture?

Turning to the question of returns, in addition to
actions already under way in Osojane and Leshtar,
what are the prospects for 2002? What assistance could
the Yugoslav authorities offer the Serbs who have
returned to Kosovo in an environment that remains
difficult? What progress has been made in recruiting
members of the minority groups into the judiciary and
the Police Service in Kosovo? What obstacles have
been encountered?

It is well known that France is committed to
anything that might be conducive to confidence-
building in Kosovo. It was in that spirit that we decided
to give more than $2 million to the UNMIK voluntary
contribution fund. This contribution will help in the
development of 14 inter-ethnic projects, particularly in
Mitrovica.

Finally, security and stability are priorities for all
of us, as is the fight against organized crimes and
extremism. These are our ongoing objectives. UNMIK,
under the leadership of Hans Haekkerup, and KFOR,
which has been led by General Marcel Valentin since 3
October, are working to that end despite the many
challenges they still face. Political leaders and civil
society in Kosovo must, however, take full cognizance
of their responsibilities. During the lead-up to the
elections, they must speak out more than ever before
against acts of violence and cooperate actively with the
international community to isolate and punish the
perpetrators.
