Mr. Roet (Israel): The threat that the world faces
today from the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction to non-State actors is greater than ever.
Advances in science and technology, combined with the
evolving nature of terrorism, present challenges never
seen before.

For the people ofIsrael, the scale ofthe danger posed
by the combination of terrorism and weapons of mass
destruction is not an abstract notion. Israeli citizens
have lived under conventional and unconventional
threats for decades, and continue to face the threat of
terrorism on a daily basis. Therefore, Israel understands
the grave nature of that threat and views the prevention
of the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction to
non-State actors as a matter of paramount importance.

The situation in our troubled region is further
aggravated by the reckless actions of certain States that
increase the threat of terrorists acquiring weapons of
mass destruction. For its part, Iran continues to promote
subversive activities throughout the region through
its support for terrorist organizations, which includes
supplying weapons, financial and political support and
military training, while in Syria the Al-Assad regime
continues its unrelenting use of chemical weapons,
brutally attacking and maiming its own population. The
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons-
United Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism
concluded that the Syrian regime was responsible for
four chemical weapons attacks on civilians.

The Joint Investigative Mechanism report (see S/2016/738) shows a persistent and worrying pattern of
using chemical weapons. Let us be clear - the Syrian
regime's use of chemical weapons is neither an isolated
incident nor an aberration of conduct. Those are not the
actions of an unruly individual; chemicals are a weapon
of choice for the regime and reflect a modus operandi
of the Syrian authorities, which have set up specific
military units for those purposes. The systematic
tactical use of chemical weapons by the Al-Assad
regime has been emulated by terrorist organizations and
incentivized non-State actors to obtain the material and
know-how required for the production and use of those
horrific capabilities. The Joint Investigative Mechanism
report's findings leaves no room for mistake. It should
be clear to everyone sitting in the Chamber today that
the primary responsibility for the widespread use of
chemical weapons in Syria lies squarely at the feet of
the Al-Assad regime.

We have all seen the full extent of the vile actions
of that regime. In the past few days, Al-Assad's troops,
supported by Iranian-backed militias, have been cold-
bloodedly executing innocent women and children
in Aleppo and preventing frightened civilians from
escaping to freedom. Throughout the past five years,
the Al-Assad regime has been committing unspeakable
atrocities all across Syria - executing, starving and
besieging its own people, with the help of Iran and its
terror proxy, the terrorist organization, Hizbullah.

The dire consequences of Al-Assad's actions are
clear. Not only are they responsible for the erosion of
the absolute prohibition against the use of chemical
weapons, but they also create further incentives for
others to violate that prohibition. The international
community must unequivocally condemn the use of
chemical weapons in Syria and act with resolve in order
to address that issue.

Against that troubling backdrop, now more than
ever it is imperative for the international community
to step up its efforts to prevent the spread and use of
weapons of mass destruction. Israel views resolution
1540 (2004) as an essential tool in our collective
efforts. Each country's implementation of resolution
1540 (2004) will help protect other countries from
potential proliferators, including terrorists, by
ensuring that they do not have access to the world's
most dangerous weapons. In the reality we are facing
today, in which States and terrorist organizations alike
use weapons of mass destruction, we have a shared
duty to increase efforts to better monitor weapon-of-
mass-destruction-related materials and ensure the full
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004).

Israel is committed to the implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004) and co-sponsored resolution
2325 (2016), adopted here today. As detailed in the
reports submitted by Israel to the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) in 2004 and in 2012,
Israel has taken wide-ranging legal and practical steps
intended to curb proliferation. Israel will continue to act
determinedly to support global efforts to eradicate the
threat of proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
to non-State actors.

