Ms. Mustapha: My name is Nujeen Mustapha. I am
a 20-year-old Kurdish girl from Aleppo, Syria. I have
cerebral palsy and use a wheelchair to move around. It
is a privilege today to share with the Security Council
my insights on the humanitarian situation for people
with disabilities in Syria.

I will start by posing a question. What does it
mean to be a person with a disability in Syria? For me,
it meant not being able to go to school, hang out with
friends or go to the cinema. It was almost like house
arrest. Having a disability in Syria means that you are
hidden away, confronted by discrimination, and that
you are pitied. I was fortunate, however. My family was
very supportive and I did not have any fears until the
war broke out. I quickly realized that I was the main
obstacle standing in the way of my safety for my family.
We lived in a tall building with no lift. If we needed to
evacuate, I would need to be carried down five flights
of stairs.

For weeks, I heard military helicopters buzzing
over our neighbourhood, ready to drop bombs at any
moment. My mother would carry me to the bathroom
and stay with me there until the bombs passed. Every
day, we would hear of relatives and friends who had
been killed. Every day, buildings in our neighbourhood
were bombed and people left trapped beneath the ruins.
Every day, I feared that I could be the reason my family
was one or two seconds too late. My brother even
called us the "walking dead". It took the bombing of a
funeral in June 2015, where some of my relatives died,
to convince our family that we needed to flee our home
and leave our home and everything we knew behind.

In Syria, I did not have a wheelchair, so I had to
be carried out of the country by my siblings, but many
people with disabilities cannot depend on their families
to help them reach safety, often because their family
members have been killed or have already left. Being a
woman and having a disability makes it doubly difficult.
For example, a man can ask for help from a male friend,
but in a society like Syria's a woman cannot do that.
She cannot just ask a male friend to carry her.

While living in a country at war is daunting for
anyone, it is particularly challenging for someone with
a disability. The support system on which people with
disabilities rely breaks down in conflict situations,
leaving them with a higher risk of exposure to violence
and making it more difficult for them to get assistance,
especially if they are women.

Many people with disabilities have developed
different tricks for coping with daily life. For example,
I had my independence at my home in Aleppo. I could
easily reach my bed or the toilet, gracefully managing
the two steps up, without anyone's assistance. A
blind person may know how to manage in her own
environment, but can Council members imagine what
it must be like to navigate rubble and debris strewn
across her path to safety? Someone who is deaf may not
realize that there are gunshots or warnings to evacuate
and may end up in danger. If one has an intellectual or a
psychological disability, leaving what is familiar behind
can be very confusing and a source of great anxiety.

However one looks at it, one is at greater risk
just because one has a disability. That is why it is so
important and heartening that members of the Security
Council are taking the time to listen to the perspective
ofa young woman with a disability from Syria. But this
is not just my story 4 it is the experience of thousands
of Syrians with disabilities, who struggle to survive
because of the limited services still functioning in
the country, the lack of accessibility and the constant
threat of violence, especially against women and
girls. And if one becomes disabled as a result of the
conflict - according to UNICEF, there are 1.5 million
such persons still living in Syria - one faces stigma and
exclusion within one's community and one suddenly
finds oneself having to deal with having a disability.

I would like to leave Security Council members
with three insights.

First, the crisis in Syria has a disproportionately
high impact on people with disabilities. The use of
landmines and cluster bombs has had devastating
human consequences. Thousands of Syrians have lost
their limbs to those dreadful weapons, which have
rightly been banned by most Governments because of
the immense harm they do to civilians. The conflict has
had a significant psychological impact, too. Even in my
case, I still jump when I hear a loud noise, a reminder
of those hours hiding out in the bathroom.

In the current situation in Idlib, there are more than
175,000 people with disabilities, many of whom now
have disabilities because of the conflict. Residents fear
military action because it could result in large numbers
of civilian casualties since Idlib is densely populated.
The Council cannot allow Idlib to be another Aleppo,
with hundreds of thousands forced to flee. Half of the
people living in Idlib have already been displaced by
war, like my family, except that this time they do not
have anywhere to go.

All humanitarian programmes - many of which
are funded by Governments represented around this
table - should include specific programmes to reach
people with disabilities to ensure that they can get things
like health services, assistive devices and psychological
support, which are essential for people with disabilities
to feel like they are a part of their communities and
recover some sense of normalcy.

Secondly, the well-being of people with disabilities,
like the well-being of women and girls, seems to be an
afterthought. The humanitarian response in Syria and
neighbouring countries largely overlooks the needs of
people with disabilities. Independent organizations like
Human Rights Watch have documented that people
with disabilities cannot even access basic services such
as sanitation, health care and education - something I
myself experienced when I fled. On my way to Germany,
I did not find many accessible bathrooms along the
way - and that is especially hard for a woman.
There is very little data on how many people with
disabilities live in Syria or have fled to neighbouring
countries and what our needs are. And without that
data, the programmes and policies just do not meet our
needs. We are invisible. People with disabilities are
forgotten in times of peace. What do Council members
think we expect in times of war? But that does not make
it right. The international community needs to count
us, because we count too. United Nations agencies and
humanitarian non-governmental organizations need to
systematically collect data categorized by disability,
age and gender and to monitor and report on people with
disabilities so that Council members can understand
the full impact the conflict has on us. Otherwise, we
will continue to remain invisible.

The Security Council'sjob is to protect all civilians,
including people with disabilities. "No one left behind"
should not just be words that members say.

Thirdly, people with disabilities are a resource,
not a burden. We know best what risks we face and
what we need, so ask for our input, involve us in
aid planning and reach out to us to report on the
challenges we face - nothing about us, without us.
That means ensuring the meaningful participation and
representation of people with disabilities, including
women and organizations of people with disabilities, in
all parts of the Security Council's work. I might be the
first person with a disability to address the Council, but
I hope I will not be the last.

This should not be just another meeting where we
make grand statements and then move on to the next
item on the agenda. Council members can and should
do more to ensure that people with disabilities are
included in all aspects of their work. We cannot wait
any longer. I understand that there are many competing
priorities in this conflict and in the response to it, but
the Council needs to address the needs of people with
disabilities, particularly women. That is not a favour.
That is not charity. That is our right.

I am very grateful for the chance to brief the
Council today. My hope is that people with disabilities,
especially women and girls, can one day live in a world
that protects, respects and values us.
