Mr. Kim San-hoon (Republic of Korea): My
delegation appreciates this opportunity to participate in
this open debate. I also would like to thank
Ambassador Denisov and Executive Director Ruperez
for the briefings they gave this morning.

The Republic of Korea shares the view that the
international community should redouble its concerted
efforts to combat terrorism, which is sadly becoming
bolder and more savage day by day. My delegation also
shares the view that the Security Council should
assume central authority in those endeavours.

We believe that resolution 1373 (2001) and the
Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC) have played a
key role thus far in providing and coordinating a legal
and institutional framework for international, regional,
subregional and domestic undertakings in that regard.
We greatly appreciate the CTC's ongoing assistance to
individual countries to enhance their counter-terrorism
capacity, particularly in the domains of law and
administration. Those efforts should be further
strengthened and upgraded through the full-fledged
operation of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate. My Government has been, and
will continue to be, active in cooperating with the
CTC.

Along with the revitalization of the CTC, we
attach great significance to the adoption of resolution
1566 (2004) earlier this month. My delegation
commends the unity and solidarity that the Security
Council has shown on that crucial matter. We followed
closely the process of negotiating the text of the
resolution, listening attentively to what Council
members had to say. We believe that the effort to find
common ground for defining terrorism and terrorists is
an important exercise. The attempt to develop a
consolidated list of terrorists throughout the world is
also vital, even if the task is extremely challenging.
The international community must come together on
this issue. We cannot afford even the slightest crack in
our united front against acts of terrorism.

The Republic of Korea looks forward to the
establishment of a new Security Council working
group, which we believe will broaden and enhance the
capabilities of the international community to deal with
terrorism.

In that context, we reiterate the importance of
coordination and cooperation among the relevant
subsidiary organs of the Security Council, including
the Counter-Terrorism Committee, the Al Qaeda/
Taliban sanctions Committee, the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) and the
new working group, as well as between those groups
and other international, regional and subregional
entities that are involved in combating terrorism.

Each country must do its part in the global
campaign against terrorism. In that regard, the
Republic of Korea has taken a number of practical
measures. Domestically, we have created a National
Committee on Counter-Terrorism under the Office of
the Prime Minister, which will coordinate all of our
Government's counter-terrorism activities, reviewing
and strengthening our legal and administrative
framework. At the regional level, we have promoted
international cooperation, most recently by hosting the
Association of South-East Asian Nations Regional
Forum (ARF) seminar on cyber-terrorism, which we
co-chaired with the Philippines. That was the first time
that the ARF had gathered to discuss this matter. In
addition, we continue to pursue bilateral agreements on
judicial mutual assistance, and we are already party to
the 12 terrorism-related international conventions and
protocols.

In closing, we believe that the United Nations
must continue to promote cooperation by leading the
way with bold ideas, and also by disseminating the
ideas generated within regional and subregional
groups. Only through concerted action at every level
can we defeat the scourge of terrorism.

