Mr. Simoes (Brazil): I would like to begin by
congratulating the Government of Colombia on its
timely initiative of convening the Security Council for
an open debate on the situation in Haiti. It is an honour
to participate in this meeting, presided by His
Excellency President Juan Manuel Santos Calderon.

It is also a pleasure to see here high-level
representatives from Latin America and the Caribbean,
as well as representatives from various quarters of the
globe who have lent their best efforts to support Haiti's
struggle for a better future. Let me acknowledge in
particular the presence of President Rene Preval, who
is leading his country through times of great historic
significance with an unwavering commitment to
democracy.

(spoke in French)

His two mandates as executive Head of State in Haiti
have contributed to the creation of a central political
equilibrium in that country that has depolarized the
system. President Preval has defused the mechanisms
of violence in Haitian politics and has guaranteed
freedom of expression and of the press. Thanks to his
work, Haiti will see for the first time in its history a
peaceful transfer of power to an opposition candidate.
We can hope that this will be the beginning of the end
of the winner-takes-all culture.

(spoke in English)

We are all united by the important task of
contributing to the stability and development of Haiti.
Brazil has been firmly committed to Haiti from the
outset on three different levels, namely, the
multilateral, bilateral and regional. On the multilateral
level, as the main contributor of troops to the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH)
and as the country responsible for commanding its
military component, we are proud of the harmonious
and constructive interaction our men and women in
uniform have managed to develop with the local
population, which has been made possible, to a large
extent, by our shared historical roots and cultural
affinities and by the positive footprints that our
peacekeepers have sought to leave in the country.
Haitians often refer to Brazilian troops as "bon bagay",
the Creole expression for good people. This close
relationship, to which the implementation of quick-
impact projects is a key contribution, has important
consequences when it comes to implementing
MINUSTAH's mandate and maintaining a secure and
stable environment.

On the bilateral level, Brazil has consistently
offered Haiti different modalities of cooperation, in
agriculture, health, energy, job creation and institution-
building, among other areas. As recently as last
February, Ambassador Antonio de Aguiar Patriota,
Minister of External Relations of Brazil, had the
opportunity to visit Haiti and personally convey to the
Haitian authorities the readiness of the Government of
President Dilma Rousseff to renew our engagement on
all those fronts.

At the regional level, the Union of South
American Nations (UNASUR) has been implementing
a cooperation programme with Haiti that was approved
by our region's heads of State and Government in
2010. A $100 million pledge to support its
implementation has been approved, in addition to the
newly established UNASUR office in Port-au-Prince.
Brazil is confident that, in line with the commitment to
Haiti expressed here today by His Excellency President
Santos Calderon, UNASUR Secretary-General Maria
Emma Mejia of Colombia will help us to advance
Haiti's cooperation agenda.

It is Brazil's belief that the active engagement of
Latin America and the Caribbean in Haiti is not only a
demonstration of solidarity towards a sister nation, but
also a powerful message as to the willingness and
capacity of our societies to live up to their international
responsibilities. In that context, let me express Brazil's
gratitude to the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General to Haiti, Ambassador Edmond Mulet
of Guatemala. His remarkable knowledge and
understanding of the characteristics and specific needs
of our sister nation of Haiti have allowed him to make
a critical contribution to the country. We should also
mention at this juncture that the Organization of
American States has played a decisive and effective
role in supporting the electoral process that is about to
be concluded. We would also like to praise the
effective work of Mr. Colin Granderson in supporting
the Haitian authorities in the electoral process.

This open debate is taking place on the heels of
the announcement of the provisional electoral results in
Haiti. In spite of a number of difficulties, the
democratic determination of the Haitian people has
prevailed. We look forward to the successful
completion of the electoral process, which will lead to
strengthened institutions and more inclusive
governance. With a new Government in Haiti, the stage
will be set for reconstruction efforts to move forward,
in keeping with the urgent needs of Haitians. We trust
that, with the final results of the electoral process and
the transfer of power to the new Government, we will
be able to concentrate our efforts on reconstruction
tasks that will pave the way for Haiti's development in
an environment of sustainable peace and political
stability.

It is true that much progress has been made to
date. Key structures are in place and technical
assistance is being provided. But major challenges
remain unmet. Those challenges include the need for
more financial aid from the international community.
The resources disbursed so far represent only
approximately 30 per cent of the pledges made for the
2010-2011 period. Brazil urges donors to redouble
their efforts. We need the necessary financial means to
do what it takes to promote Haitian reconstruction and
development. We advocate for resources to be
channelled primarily through the Government of Haiti,
whose ownership of the reconstruction process is of the
essence.

This is an especially appropriate occasion for the
Security Council to reaffirm its commitment to Haiti.
This commitment, as emphasized in the debate Brazil
had the privilege to chair last February (see S/PV.6479), should take into account the
interdependence between peace, security and
development. This is why Brazil and others have, since
the beginning, advocated a truly multidisciplinary
approach for MINUSTAH, with parallel actions aimed
at promoting security, reconciliation and development.

Stability and security are paramount to attracting
investment and sustaining growth. The promotion of
the rule of law and social and economic progress are
mutually reinforcing parts of our work in Haiti. For
Haiti to attract investment and generate critically
needed jobs, it must be able to provide energy that is
clean and conducive to sustainable development, as
expressed by Special Envoy Clinton here today.

In that context, Brazil considers the construction
of the Artibonite 4C hydroelectric plant to be a key
element in generating a virtuous cycle of stability and
prosperity in Haiti. The basic project developed by the
Brazilian Army, an undertaking of $5 million dollars, is
ready. The full project has already been approved by
the Interim Reconstruction Commission and
recommended to receive $40 million funding from the
Haiti Reconstruction Fund. We encourage additional
sponsors to join us in this endeavour.
The promotion of the sort of the multidisciplinary
approach that is needed depends on our capacity to
achieve better coordination at all levels. In that
connection, allow me to highlight the positive
prospects stemming from joint efforts by MINUSTAH
and the Interim Haiti Recovery Commission. Enhanced
cooperation between these two bodies can and will
generate greater benefits for Haiti. We will continue to
support the work of the Interim Commission towards
its goal of converting it into a national development
agency.

This is the time for the international community
to convey a message of confidence in all Haitians. This
is the time for us to reiterate our readiness to lend
continued support to Haiti, including through
MINUSTAH, and always in accordance with the very
priorities established by the country's democratically
elected Government.

(spoke in French)

In conclusion, I wish to express my admiration
for the Haitian people, their courage and their dignity
in the face of such adversity. The nation of Haiti can
always count on the solidarity and support of Brazil.
Together we have before us a historic opportunity in
this veritable national reconciliation process, which
will create stable conditions for the just and sustainable
reconstruction of the country. Long live Haiti.

