Mr. Lucas (Angola): Angola is very honoured to
co-sponsor, with China and Senegal, this open debate
on piracy and armed robbery at sea in the Gulf of
Guinea. The insights provided by Assistant Secretary-
General Taye-Brook Zerihoun were most valuable in
outlining the subject matter we are considering in this
important debate.

The Gulfoquinea and waters beyond play a crucial
strategic role in the Atlantic. They are at the centre of
the main waterway connecting Europe and Africa and
towards the western hemisphere. Historically, they
were the key factor in the establishment in the sixteenth
century of the first economic globalization, with deep-
seated consequences. The roots of the problem we are
discussing today - piracy and armed robbery in the
Gulf of Guinea - took hold in the region for a long
period of time. In the pathway of world trade that fed
the markets of the Americas with a labour force and
supplied Europe with precious goods from the New
World and from the East, piracy emerged at that time
as a side effect of the intense trade across the region
and as a very profitable economic activity, frequently
sponsored by States.

Since that time, a strategic and organic link has
been established between the two shores of the Atlantic.
Centred in the Gulf of Guinea, it has gained renewed
prominence in recent decades with the emergence in
the region of security threats and transnational crime
and criminality - a reality requiring an integrated and
collective response from States bordering the South
Atlantic. In fact, the countries of the eastern shore of
the South Atlantic, besides being the source of transit
of criminal activities, most notably drug trafficking,
that resonate in the Gulf of Guinea and beyond, also
face impending threats of the possible disruption of
trade routes.

The Gulf of Guinea is the main access to the world
for the countries at its shores, as well as for landlocked
ones behind them, in access to the Atlantic for the
import and export ofgoods and services. The seas ofthe
Gulf of Guinea currently face serious security threats.
Vulnerable maritime routes and porous land borders
allow an increase in transnational crime, piracy, armed
robbery, illegal fishing, human trafficking, illegal
immigration, the smuggling of drugs and environmental
crimes. In the current decade, such activities have
caused enormous losses to the African maritime sector,
hindering trade and the continent's development.

Given the complex ramifications of maritime
insecurity, it is imperative that the international
community mobilize and harmonize its efforts to find
lasting solutions. By today's adoption of presidential
statement S/PRST/2016/4, on the issue of piracy and
armed robbery in the Gulf of Guinea, the Security
Council is sending a strong signal of the international
community's concern and resolve to address the
threat posed by such a phenomenon to international
navigation, security and the economic development of
the countries of the region. With respect to the potential
links with terrorists groups in West Africa and the
Sahel, and the conditions necessary for the durable
eradication of such a scourge - namely, the attainment
of regional peace and security - we need to strengthen
State institutions, promote economic and social
development, respect human rights and the rule of law,
and coordinate international assistance in support of
national and regional efforts to assist Member States in
addressing such threats.

Countries bordering the Gulf of Guinea have joined
efforts. In 2009, the Economic Community of Central
African States (ECCAS) adopted a maritime security
strategy, establishing information-sharing, community
surveillance and asset-management mechanisms, while
strengthening national legal frameworks and training.
ECCAS set up a Regional Centre for Maritime Security
for Central Africa in Yaounde, dividing its maritime
space into zones and instituting joint patrols. However,
the limited capacity ofECCAS to respond to the growing
insecurity challenges remains a major constraint.
In 2012, a new maritime zone was established under
ECCAS supervision in order to upgrade the capacity to
face the threat.

Angola, with a long maritime coast that is vital
to its security and economic development, is deeply
committed to the African Union 2050 Integrated
Maritime Strategy. Designed to be operative until
2050, the strategy recognizes the potential of the
maritime sector to promote economic development,
boost trade and improve the living conditions of more
than 700 million Africans in the continent. Through its
representation in international maritime organizations,
Angola has been actively involved in discussions and
in the implementation of measures adopted by the
International Maritime Organization (IMO) to enhance
maritime security, particularly in the Gulf of Guinea.

Moreover, Angola has joined a number of
arrangements dealing with the issue, including
within the framework of ECCAS, the Gulf of Guinea
Commission and the Southern African Development
Community. Angola signed the Declaration of the
Heads of State and Government of Central and West
Africa on Maritime Safety and Security in Their
Common Maritime Domain. It is also a signatory State
of the memorandum of understanding among ECCAS,
the Economic Community of West African States and
the Gulf of Guinea Commission on maritime safety and
security in Central and West Africa, and is a signatory
to the Code of Conduct Concerning the Repression
of Piracy, Armed Robbery against Ships, and Illicit
Maritime Activity in West and Central Africa, adopted
at Yaounde. In line with resolutions 2018 (2011) and 2039
(2012), in March 2015 Angola and the IMO organized a
regional meeting to advance the implementation of the
Yaounde Code of Conduct.

Still translating the importance it attaches to that
issue, Angola organized, in cooperation with other
partners, the International Conference on Maritime
and Energy Security, in October 2015. The meeting
focused on capacity-building and a holistic approach
in implementing African maritime security strategies
and highlighted the importance of integrated and
complementary strategies among the countries of the
region through sharing information and establishing
closer regional and international cooperation. As the
Conference's outcome, a declaration on maritime and
energy security was adopted, in which the participants
emphasized, inter alia, the importance of establishing
partnerships at the regional and international levels,
including technical assistance, training, joint exercises
and the adoption of feasible strategies and plans
of action.

Although tangible measures to enhance maritime
security have been adopted, much more needs to be done
by the countries bordering the Gulf of Guinea, which
still face huge challenges. We believe that, by working
in a spirit of cooperation and solidarity, it will be
possible to overcome the challenges of piracy and other
security threats affecting the Gulf of Guinea. Angola
stands ready to work with countries of the region and
with regional and international organizations towards
such endeavours.

We are pleased to note the African Union's plan to
hold an extraordinary summit on maritime security this
year in Lome with a View to establishing an African
strategy on maritime security. Angola advocates and
promotes the adoption of maritime security strategies
consistent with the prevailing situation in the Gulf
of Guinea and Southern Africa and in response to its
international repercussions.

Finally, we are of the view that the Security
Council's adoption of the presidential statement on
peace consolidation in West Africa and on piracy and
armed robbery at sea (S/PRST/2016/4) and the points
of View expressed in this debate by the larger United
Nations membership will positively resonate with the
aspirations of the peoples of the region for well-being
and development.

