Baroness Ashton: Thank you very much,
Mr. President, for inviting me to address the Security
Council today. Allow me to congratulate the Republic
of Lithuania on its assumption of the presidency of
the Council and its membership of the Council - the
first time that it serves on this organ. I also wish to
congratulate Chad, Chile, Jordan and Nigeria on their
election to the Security Council.

Let me also pay tribute to Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon, a good friend and a good partner. The
European Union (EU) has always supported his
leadership, his efforts to reform the United Nations and
make it more effective and the use of his good offices
to mediate, engage and achieve progress in conflict and
crisis situations that are of concern to us all.

By doing that, I want to reiterate the strong
commitment of the European Union to support and
work for effective multilateralism, with the United
Nations at its core, in search of lasting solutions to
critical international peace and security challenges.
Our contribution is threefold: our direct involvement in
international negotiations on behalf of the international
community, our capacity to implement a comprehensive
approach and use a wide range of tools to solve crises
and our close work with our international and regional
partners, where only collective efforts can deliver
results.

In my role as High Representative for Foreign
Affairs and Security Policy of the European Union, I
am responsible for leading on the Iranian nuclear issue.
Based on the mandate I received from the Security
Council and with the collaboration of the E3+3
Governments, we are engaging in intensive diplomatic
efforts to seek a negotiated solution that meets the
international community's concerns about the Iranian
nuclear programme.

Our strength and credibility derives from the unity
ofthe E3+3/5+l group, but also from the support received
from the international community. I am grateful for the
constant support of the Security Council, and I also
appreciate the progress that has been achieved between
Iran and the International Atomic Energy Agency.

We are now implementing the joint plan of action
agreed in Geneva last November, which is the first
confidence-building step in addressing the most urgent
concerns about the Iranian nuclear programme. But it
is only the first step, and we will start discussions next
week in Vienna aimed at achieving a comprehensive
and final settlement.

I feel proud of our work last year aimed at
facilitating the dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina.
Historic progress was made in the normalization of
relations between the two sides. The Council had the
opportunity to hear Prime Minister Dacie and Prime
Minister Thaci when they addressed it on Monday (see S/PV.7108), and it knows from their statements how
important and positive that work has been for their
people and for the stability of the Western Balkans
region and for its European future. Since the beginning
of the dialogue, I have facilitated 22 meetings between
the Prime Ministers, meetings that have lasted in total
226 hours. The latest meeting took place just two days
ago. It has been a process with concrete results that
have changed people's everyday lives on the ground.

The First Agreement of Principles Governing the
Normalization of Relations, reached last April, was
a turning point in their relations. Its implementation
included the successful holding of Kosovo-wide local
elections, including, for the first time, elections in
northern Kosovo, and the integration of all security
and justice structures into the Kosovo legal framework.
Because of that progress, the European Union was able
to respond by opening accession negotiations with
Serbia and launching negotiations for a atabilization
and association agreement with Kosovo. In future, the
dialogue will become more and more part of the EU
integration process for both parties.

But the message to Pristina and Belgrade today is
that it is crucial that the dialogue continue and that they
maintain the same commitment. The European Union's
and my own commitment remain as strong as before.
Apart from the clear benefits for each side, we hope that
the dialogue can and will be an inspiration, as it should,
for positive changes and for a new momentum in other
parts of the Western Balkans. I think particularly of
events in Bosnia and Herzegovina today.

A particular strength of the European Union
is its ability to use a broad toolbox of instruments
and policies that we - collectively with our States
members - have at our disposal. We strive to put
into practice, in close cooperation with international,
regional and local partners, our work on all phases of
conflict, from prevention and early warning to conflict
management, post-conflict transition and sustainable
development. That comprehensive approach has been
best exemplified in dealing with crises in Africa, where
our cooperation with the United Nations and the African
Union has been instrumental in achieving results.

In Somalia, we work with our partners and make
use of a wide range of tools and resources in support
of stability, security and development. With the help
of the EU Atalanta mission, piracy has dropped by
about 95 per cent in about three years. We are now
helping to build up maritime capacity and train Somali
security forces. We are deeply engaged diplomatically
and politically, and, as Somalia's biggest donor, we
are a key partner for development assistance. The
"New Deal" that the European Union, Somalia and
partners set out in September 2013 forms the basis of
our engagement with the country so as to accompany
Somalia's transition. We continue to be a steadfast
supporter of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Somalia. I also urge everyone to continue to support
the African Union Mission in Somalia and the Somali
national armed forces as they step up their operations
against Al-Shabaab.

One thing is certain: as we seek to empower Somalia
politically, we must do so by empowering its institutions
and its people across the country. That means we have
to link together political processes, security and justice
systems, economic growth and service delivery, so that
we empower and enable the Somali Government to
carry out its sovereign functions.

I want to thank the Secretary-General for his
personal commitment to the Sahel region, and I welcome
the United Nations Sahel strategy. The Secretary-
General's mission to Mali, in which my colleague,
EU Development Commissioner Andris Piebalgs, also
participated, was an important signal. So, of course,
was the visit of the Council earlier this month.

We have demonstrated, from the beginning of the
crisis, our willingness to help Mali and the countries in
the wider Sahel-Sahara region. We have provided up to
€550 million in humanitarian assistance to Mali in 2013
and 2014. We have pledged €1.28 billion in development
aid to the country, which has already started to be
committed.

Our two crisis-management missions in the Niger
and Mali have delivered encouraging results, but it
will take time and determination to build capacity. A
complementary civilian mission is under preparation
that will help to provide support to the internal security
forces of Mali as they fight terrorism and illegal
trafficking, while contributing to the reform of the
security sector at large.

As the Secretary-General has said, we remain
deeply concerned about the heavy civilian casualties,
massive displacements of people, human rights
violations and worsening of the humanitarian situation
in the Central African Republic. It is imperative for
the international community to act to enable a lasting
solution to be found. African countries and France
have responded swiftly through the deployment of the
forces of MISCA and Operation Sangaris. We will play
our part in helping the Central African Republic by
sending a crisis-management mission to contribute to
stability on the ground and the protection of civilians
in the Bangui area. Our aim must be to ensure that
humanitarian aid can reach those most in need.

To re-establish the rule of law, a gendarmerie
component will be embedded in the European force,
which will facilitate cooperation on the ground. In
parallel, we are setting up programmes aimed at the
swift reinstallation of the judiciary system, while
fully respecting local ownership. That is a crucial
component that will help us sustain local progress on
ending impunity for perpetrators of violations and on
enabling reconciliation.

I believe the task is immense. We will work very
closely with MISCA and the French forces and provide a
bridging operation towards a proposed hand-over to the
African Union, with which we have established good
continuing cooperation. Should the Council decide
that a full United Nations peacekeeping operation
is best suited to take on that task, we will be happy
to work with it in order to ensure a well-coordinated
international support operation. More and more, the
most difficult challenges to international peace and
security require that we join forces. We are therefore
working very closely with international, regional and
local partners.

The disastrous conflict in Syria continues. We
are determined to support the efforts to try and
find a way out of that terrible situation. The Geneva
negotiations - and I pay tribute to Mr. Lakhdar
Brahimi - are a crucial first step if we are to see
confidence built around tangible results and relief
for the population. It will be challenging. As Valerie
Amos reminded the Council the day before yesterday
(see S/PV.7109), with 9.3 million Syrians in need of
assistance, half of them children, we are reaching the
limits of what the international community can do.
The neighbouring countries are sheltering close to
3 million refugees. We will continue to support them,
but the dangers for Lebanon and Jordan, as well as the
threats to the territorial integrity of Iraq, are real and
increasing.
At the recent conference hosted by Kuwait, we
pledged an additional €550 million for the relief effort,
raising our overall contribution to €2.6 billion. Yet the
unprecedented fundraising appeal of the United Nations
to collect €6.5 billion - of which only a third has yet
been reached - clearly shows the urgency of settling
the conflict in order to move forward. We will persist
in our humanitarian efforts and continue to press all
the parties to allow the delivery of humanitarian aid
and medical care countrywide and to allow civilians to
evacuate.

We are deeply concerned that there are delays in the
transfer process of the chemical weapons out of Syria,
and we are strong supporters of the Secretary-General's
efforts. We and our States members have provided
significant contributions to the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons, with armoured
vehicles and contributions to the special trust fund.

Sustainable peace has often proved elusive in the
Middle East. We want to commend the leadership shown
by President Abbas and Prime Minister Netanyahu,
and we fully support the tireless efforts of United
States Secretary of State John Kerry. We stand ready
to support and contribute substantially to post-
conflict arrangements to ensure the sustainability and
implementation of a peace agreement.

In December, the EU decided to offer an
unprecedented package of European political,
economic and security support to the Palestinians and
Israelis in the context of a final status agreement. That
includes the special privileged partnership with the
EU, aiming, among other things, to increase access to
European markets and to promote closer cultural and
scientific links, the facilitation of trade and investment
and stronger business relations - all in the event of
a final peace agreement. It is a genuine and tangible
European offer, and we look forward to a strengthened
relationship between ourselves and the two parties to
help to develop a positive interdependence and a new
mutually beneficial, peaceful relationship.

The role of other regional actors is essential. I want
to reiterate, in that connection, the strategic importance
of the Arab Peace Initiative in securing a wider peace.
However, for the negotiations to succeed, there needs
to be an increase in mutual trust between the parties.
Any violence must be avoided at all costs. Violence
in the occupied territory, continuous rocket fire into
Israel, the deteriorating humanitarian situation in Gaza
and incitement and actions that undermine the status
quo of the holy sites push agreement further away. In
that context, I must of course deplore the continuing
Israeli expansion of settlements. They are illegal under
international law and constitute a significant obstacle
to peace.

There are many other issues of concern to the
European Union that may not be at the top of the
Council's agenda but are at the top of mine, and I would
be remiss not to mention just a few of them here. At the
moment, we are especially worried about the situation
in our own neighbourhood, especially in Ukraine and
Egypt. We feel a special responsibility to help those
countries find a way out of their current difficulties.

I have been to Ukraine three times in the past two
months and have seen people who have been standing on
the streets of Kiev for the last 85 days in support of the
country's modernization and progress. I commend the
peaceful nature of the demonstrations, and I strongly
condemn the expressions ofviolence that have occurred
and continue to occur in the country. Those who have
committed violence need to be brought tojustice. Those
who carry the responsibility to protect the Ukrainian
people's right to free speech and assembly need to
ensure that those rights are safeguarded, in compliance
with Ukraine's own international commitments.
We hope that a negotiated way out of the current
political crisis can be found soon. The elements for
that are in place. We stand ready to work with all the
parties in Ukraine and with the relevant international
organizations to facilitate a solution. However, that has
to be a Ukrainian-owned and Ukrainian-led process.

Democracy-building in Egypt requires hard
work, commitment and compromise. The aim is to
achieve democratic, transparent and accountable
institutions that protect all the citizens of Egypt and
their fundamental rights. Three years have passed since
Egyptian women and men from all walks oflife rose up
calling for freedom, human dignity, social justice and
better economic conditions. Throughout that period,
the European Union has stood by the Egyptian people.

We have followed with great concern the
violent events and loss of life before and during the
constitutional referendum and on the occasion of the
third anniversary of the Egyptian revolution. I have
condemned in the clearest possible terms all acts
of violence as well as terrorist attacks. I have also
condemned the disproportionate use of force and
supported the call for an investigation into such acts. We
are concerned about the detention of political dissidents
and journalists. Freedom of expression, assembly and
peaceful protest must be safeguarded.

We believe that the ratification of the new
Constitution by the referendum is a positive step in
implementing the road map, especially the human
rights chapter, including freedom of expression and
assembly and women's rights. The Constitution should
be applied in a way that ensures full civilian control
over the branches of Government. But the process was
flawed by the lack of a truly representative drafting
process and the lack of political space for dissenting
opinion.

We welcome the announcement of elections, which
should lead to a democratically elected President and
a fair representation of different political views in the
future parliament. We have been invited to observe
the upcoming elections, and a EU election observation
mission will be able to assess whether conditions
are conducive to inclusive, transparent and credible
elections.

We are also concerned about the deteriorating
economic situation in Egypt. Economic justice and
a better life for all Egyptians is a prerequisite for a
stable and prosperous country. We will continue to
provide socioeconomic support to the poorest and most
vulnerable groups of society, and we will assist Egypt's
vibrant civil society. We stand ready to work with the
people of Egypt into the future.

This will possibly be the last time that I address
the Council as High Representative. I thank you very
much, Sir, for the honour of being able to do so. I am
very proud that we are a reliable partner of the United
Nations and of the Council.

