Mr. Kubis (Slovakia): It is indeed a great honour
for me to address the Security Council today for the
first time in my capacity as Foreign Minister of
Slovakia. It was not too long ago that I was sitting here
at similar events behind another name plate, when I
represented the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) as its Secretary-
General, and before that, as the Special Representative
of Secretary-General Kofi Annan and head of one of
the peacekeeping operations.

On behalf of my delegation, I would like to
congratulate the Greek presidency of the Security
Council for the excellent concept paper that further
develops this important topic. I would also like to
acknowledge the excellent work of Romania when it
served on the Council, which resulted in the unanimous
adoption of resolution 1631 (2005) during the
Romanian Council presidency in October of last year.

Slovakia aligns itself with the statement that will
be delivered later today by my Finnish colleague on
behalf of the European Union. Therefore, I will limit
myself to just a few comments from our perspective.

As a member of the European Union, NATO, the
OSCE and the Council of Europe, and at the same time
serving as a non-permanent member of the Security
Council, Slovakia realizes how important it is that our
joint efforts and endeavours are well prepared,
synchronized and coordinated. We fully share the
Secretary-General's vision of a regional-global security
partnership. On the practical level, we welcome the
launching of working groups in 2004 and of the
standing committee in 2005.

Calls for mechanisms that would provide for a
more flexible, effective and regular flow of topical
information between the United Nations and regional
organizations are not new. The goal is to establish
efficient partnerships that would be based on proven
comparative advantages of each organization involved
in conflict prevention and peacekeeping. In fact, this
line of thinking is fully compatible with the two major
challenges in cooperation identified by the Secretary-
General: clarification of roles, and assistance in
building the capacity of partner organizations.

United Nations cooperation with regional
organizations is of particular importance and value in
the conflict areas that the Security Council tackles on
an everyday basis. These days, that applies especially
to Africa, and notably to the cooperation between the

United Nations and the African Union, which has
become the United Nation's major partner in
mediation, conflict resolution and promotion of peace
and security on the African continent. An important
role is often also played by subregional organizations,
for example, the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS). This engagement represents
one of the most efficient embodiments of the idea of
local ownership. Moreover, we fully agree that yet
more of our attention and efforts needs to be focused
on further assisting Africa in building its own
capacities in areas such as early warning, conflict
prevention, peacekeeping and crisis management. Also,
the ten-year capacity-building plan for the African
Union, envisaged in the Summit Outcome Document,
deserves our urgent attention.

The most pressing current African security and
humanitarian crisis - the Darfur catastrophe - has
highlighted the importance of such cooperation. Close
cooperation between the United Nations and the
African Union, whose work we highly commend, as
well as between the United Nations and other regional
organizations, has been essential. Let me emphasize
here the important meeting between the United Nations
Security Council and the African Union Peace and
Security Council that was held in Addis Ababa during
the most recent Security Council mission to Africa.
Such cooperation plays a major role in confidence-
building and in guaranteeing sustainable solutions -
all in the best interest of the Sudanese people.

We also highly commend the constructive role
that the relevant regional organizations - in particular,
the African Union, the League of Arab States and the
Organization of the Islamic Conference - have been
playing in actively engaging with the Sudanese
Government in relation to obtaining its consent for the
necessary transition from the African Union Mission in
Sudan to a United Nations-led operation.

Regional and intergovernmental organizations
also have an important role to play in combating
terrorism and in preventing the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction. With respect to the 1540
Committee, which deals with the non-proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction, Slovakia, as Chair of the
Committee, very much counts on cooperation with
regional organizations, especially in areas such as
facilitating reporting and assisting States to implement
national legislative and regulatory measures to prevent

the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, their
means of delivery and related materials.

Active participation on the part of relevant
regional and subregional organizations was essential
for the success of the recent United Nations regional
seminar on the implementation of resolution 1540
(2004) held in Beijing. That will also be the case for
two other regional seminars, to be held in Ghana and in
Peru later this year. Consultations are underway for the
OSCE to hold a 1540 workshop in Vienna. Many of
these activities would not be possible without the
constructive involvement of regional organizations,
including their financial contributions.

We have also noted with satisfaction that many
regional and intergovernmental organizations have
expressed their readiness to work closely with the
newly established Peacebuilding Commission, which
we think may substantially enhance the Commission's
effectiveness and help it become a truly result-oriented
body, especially when dealing with individual cases
and situations.

Recently, in our work to enhance the Security
Council's working methods, we have agreed to further
strengthen the Council's interactions with regional and
subregional organizations and make them more
systematic and more frequent. Such efforts - which,
among other things, strengthen Security Council
legitimacy - have always enjoyed Slovakia's full
support, and we will continue working hard on early
and full implementation of all such measures.

In conclusion, let me once again reiterate that
while the role of regional organizations in peace
operations has been growing, their capacities for
sustainable operations are often limited, particularly in
developing regions of the world. Therefore, Slovakia
supports efforts to build capacity for peacekeeping,
peacebuilding or crisis-support operations, including
financing mechanisms, both in the United Nations and
in regional organizations. That involves both capacity-
building for operations and steps and measures that
would ensure their success after the operations have
been withdrawn.

As a part of these efforts, Slovakia would like to
draw attention to a particularly important component of
peacebuilding activities that to a large extent
determines their sustainable success - security sector
reform. Slovakia has made this topic its specific
thematic priority during our membership in the

Security Council and plans to organize a series of
round tables that should eventually contribute to
developing a comprehensive policy framework for
security sector reform. As a part of this effort, we plan
to organize a special round table with regional
organizations in December in New York. In our
opinion, all that should lead to a thematic debate
during our presidency of the Security Council early
next year.

