Ms. Guadey (Ethiopia): I would like to start
by thanking Under-Secretary-General Feltman; the
Facilitator for the implementation of resolution 2231
(2015), Ambassador Cardi; and the observer of the
European Union, Ambassador Vale de Almeida, for
their briefings on the implementation of resolution 2231
(2015).

We have noted from the reports before us today
(S/2017/495 and S/2017/537) that the International
Atomic Energy Agency continued verification and
monitoring of the implementation of the nuclear-
related commitments. The continued implementation
by the Islamic Republic of Iran of its nuclear-related
commitments under the Joint Comprehensive Plan of
Action (JCPOA), as well as the fact that the Secretary-
General and his predecessor have not received any
reports on the supply, transfer or exports of nuclear
and dual-use items, materials, equipment, goods and
technology to Iran, is encouraging.

We have noted that five out of the 10 additional
proposal submitted to the procurement channel were
approved, which indicates that the procurement channel
continued to work very well. In that regard, we welcome
reports on the growing confidence by Member States
and the procurement channel. We also welcomed the
smooth cooperation between the Security Council and
the Joint Commission as indicated in third six-month
report of the Facilitator on the implementation of
Security Council resolution 2231 (2015). The planned
outreach activities concerning the implementation of
resolution 2231 (2015) by the Facilitator during the
second part of his mandate, as well as the continued
engagement by the Procurement Working Group, is
commendable. Such activities contribute to fostering
awareness, as well as the enhanced participation of
Member States in the activities set forth in paragraph 2
of annex B of resolution 2231 (2015).

As we have stated in our previous meetings on the
implementation of resolution 2231 (2015), the JCPOA
participating countries, including the Islamic Republic
of Iran, deserve to be commended for demonstrating
strong commitment under the Plan of Action.
Nevertheless, we also recognize that challenges and
difficulties, including the ones included in the report,
may be encountered in the implementation of resolution
2231 (2015). It is therefore important that the JCPOA
participants continue to address those challenges and
contribute to the full implementation of the JCPOA
and resolution 2231 (2015) so as to bring the issue to
a satisfactory conclusion. In that regard, we join the
Secretary-General in welcoming the commitment
by the JCPOA participants to its full and effective
implementation in April.

With regard to the launching of ballistic missiles,
we reiterate our previous position that such launches
will impact the implementation of the JCPOA and
resolution 2231 (2015). We concur with the Facilitator
that all parties need to continue to maintain an attitude
conducive to building trust and continue to implement
the terms of the JCPOA and resolution 2231 (2015).
We therefore join the call by the Secretary-General
in his report on the Islamic Republic of Iran to avoid
ballistic-missile launches, as they have the potential to
increase tensions. We note with concern the findings in
the report of the Secretary-General in connection with
the arms shipment from the Islamic Republic of Iran
bound for Somalia and subsequently seized by France,
because such actions entail regional consequences.

