Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): As this
is the first time I am taking the floor in the Security
Council during the month of September, allow me to
begin by warmly congratulating the United Kingdom
on its presidency of the Council in August and wishing
every success to the United States presidency. It can
rest assured ofthe resolute support of France and on my
support, in particular.

First of all, I would like to thank our two briefers,
Mr. Gonzalo Koncke, Chief of Staff to the Secretary
General of the Organization of American States, and
Mr. Felix Maradiaga, former Secretary General of
the Ministry of Defence of Nicaragua, for their very
insightful briefings. I would also like to welcome the
Nicaraguan Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr. Denis
Moncada, to the Council.

Since last April, there have been more than 300
deaths and 2,000 injuries in Nicaragua as a result of the
violent suppression of demonstrations and numerous
incidents. Once again, the Council faces a crisis with
potential regional consequences, in particular in
terms of the movement of people, including refugees.
It is clear that the Council has the responsibility to
support and assist conflict-prevention diplomacy in
this and other crisis situations, while maintaining a
watchful eye on the situation, without ideology and
in full respect for the principles of the Charter of the
United Nations. France has had the opportunity, either
in public or in private face-to-face meetings with the
Nicaraguan authorities, to express its expectations for
a peaceful settlement of the current situation. Today, I
will focus on three aspects of the crisis that deserve our
full attention.

Thefirstandperhapsmosturgentissueisanendtothe
repression. France calls on the Nicaraguan Government
to put an end to arbitrary arrests, the excessive use
of force and all pressure exerted on demonstrators,
human rights defenders and persons critical of the
Government, including through violent groups. In that
regard, we strongly condemn the violence perpetrated
by paramilitary units, in particular the kidnapping on
20 August of attorney Carlos Cerdenas Zepeda, and
the intimidation and arrests of representatives of trade
unions and human rights organizations. It is the primary
responsibility of the Government to ensure the safety
of its people and respect for their rights. All judicial
proceedings against persons who have been arrested
must be conducted according to the rule of law. If
they are not, the Nicaraguan authorities will gradually
lose all legitimacy and the stability of the Nicaraguan
State will ultimately be undermined. More than ever,
France believes that respect for fundamental rights is
the cornerstone of legitimacy and political stability in
Nicaragua and elsewhere.

My second point concerns national dialogue.
France calls on the Nicaraguan Government to preserve
the national dialogue process, which was launched
under the auspices of the Episcopal Conference of
Nicaragua. The national dialogue is essential to a
peaceful and negotiated resolution to the current crisis
and to progress in discussions on democratization
and justice. We deplore the fact that it has stalled. It
should be noted that the Civic Alliance for Justice and
Democracy has officially requested the resumption
of such dialogue and the Episcopal Conference has
recently expressed its readiness to pursue its mediation
work. It is now up to the Nicaraguan Government
to take this opportunity to start a credible national
dialogue process, without preconditions, with the aim
of resolving the crisis peacefully.

Thirdly, a lasting improvement in the situation
in Nicaragua will depend on close cooperation with
multilateral organizations, primarily the Organization
of American States and the United Nations. In that
regard, France deplores the decision of the Nicaraguan
authorities to request the departure of the mission of
the Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights
following the publication of its report on the situation
in Nicaragua. We call on the Nicaraguan authorities
to reconsider their decision and cooperate with the
Office of the High Commissioner, in accordance with
its mandate and independence. Such cooperation is
essential to identifying those responsible and bringing
them to justice.

France has therefore expressed its support for
the establishment of an autonomous and independent
international investigation mechanism, as
recommended by the Inter-American Commission on
Human Rights. The Special Monitoring Mechanism
for Nicaragua, which was established in June, must,
under the supervision of the Interdisciplinary Group of
Independent Experts, shed light on issues of extreme
gravity. We also welcome the establishment of the
Verification and Security Commission - to include
12 members of the national dialogue, representatives
of the Church, the United Nations, the Organization of
American States the Inter-American Commission and
the European Union - to verify the establishment of
conditions for peace in the country.

It is true that mechanisms for resolving the crisis not
only exist but are within reach. We therefore strongly
encourage the Nicaraguan Government to use them in
order to return Nicaragua to the path of prosperity and
political stability to which its people aspire.

