Ms. Haq: Thank you, Madame President, for the
opportunity to introduce the report of the Secretary-
General (8/2011/32) on the United Nations Integrated
Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT), which covers the
period 21 September 20l0 to 7 January 2011.

I would like to acknowledge the presence in the
Chamber of Prime Minister Kay Rala Xanana Gusmao.
Under his leadership, as well as that of President Jose
2
Ramos-Horta and other leaders, Timor-Leste has
continued to make progress, both in advancing peace
and stability and in promoting development. I would
also like to acknowledge the presence of Vice-Minister
for Foreign Affairs Alberto Carlos and of Secretary of
State for Security Francisco Guterres.

The Secretary-General's report notes that the
security and political situation in Timor-Leste
continues to be stable. With the responsibilities of the
Policia Nacional de Timor-Leste (PNTL) gradually
increasing, overall crime rates have remained low and
do not indicate any politically related violence, thus
reflecting a general desire for peace, stability and unity
at all levels of society. While the Alliance for a
Parliamentary Majority Government coalition and
opposition parties have their differences, as is common
in any multiparty democracy, they continue to channel
those differences through established democratic
institutions and processes. Timorese leaders at the
national, district and community levels and across the
political spectrum, while recognizing that there are still
significant challenges ahead, including the presidential
and parliamentary elections planned for 20l2, are
optimistic that the current peaceful situation can be
maintained through the end of 2012 and beyond.

I share this optimism that Timor-Leste's progress
can be maintained if all political leaders and the
broader public continue to act in a responsible manner
and the security situation remains stable. This is a
sentiment that I hear voiced by people residing in the
neighbourhoods of Dili, as well as in villages outside
the capital. They have concerns, of course, particularly
regarding unemployment and poverty, which remain
high and widespread. But there is hope that ongoing
socio-economic development efforts will help tackle
those conditions. Meanwhile, the capital, Dili, has
become a city bustling with commercial activity, which
is in stark contrast to just two or three years ago. I
would like to congratulate the leaders and people of
Timor-Leste for these positive developments.

With regard to policing, the completion of the
resumption of primary policing responsibilities by the
PNTL in all districts and units is on the horizon. I am
confident that this process can be finalized in the
coming months, given the continuing commitment of
the Government and the PNTL. Since the report's
closing date of 7 January, the joint Government-
UNMIT team that reviews the readiness of districts and
units has recommended for resumption the districts of
11-24004
Bobonaro and Covalima, as well as three additional
units, including the Department of Justice, which is
responsible for police disciplinary investigations. Only
Dili district, which continues to face challenges in
meeting the mutually agreed criteria, and three other
units are pending further assessment.

Once the PNTL has resumed primary policing
responsibilities in all districts and units, responsibility
for the conduct and the command and control of all
policing operations in Timor-Leste will move from the
UNMIT Police Commissioner to the PNTL General
Commander. That will signal a new phase in the
development of PNTL - the beginning of the
reconstitution phase, during which UNMIT police will
primarily focus on further institutional strengthening
and capacity-building of the PNTL. This phase will be
critical to ensuring the readiness and ability of the
PNTL to guarantee public security throughout the
country in advance of the eventual withdrawal of
UNMIT. The reconstitution phase will be governed by
arrangements set out in an exchange of letters, the
broad principles of which have been agreed to and
which will be signed by the Prime Minister and myself.

As I mentioned earlier, the reconstitution phase
will mark a shift in the responsibilities of the UNMIT
police. One of the critical tasks for UNMIT will be to
help ensure that the PNTL establishes itself as a
professional and impartial national police service that
enjoys the trust of the Timorese people and is capable
of guaranteeing public security, with due respect for
human rights and the rule of law. The performance of
the PNTL during the reconstitution phase, including
the crucial period of national elections in 2012, and
future assessments will determine when full
reconstitution can be declared.

It is indeed promising that, to date, there have
been no significant spikes or increases in incidents of
violence in districts where PNTL has already resumed
its role. However, I remain concerned about the
continued high levels of domestic violence and
sporadic fighting incidents among youth groups and
martial arts groups in the country. As the report of the
Secretary-General notes, UNMIT and the country team
are actively supporting the efforts of the Secretary of
State for the Promotion of Equality and others to raise
awareness of the law against domestic violence among
all segments of society. We also continue to emphasize
the importance of a community policing approach in
addressing these issues.
11-24004

Working jointly with PNTL counterparts and
relevant Government authorities, UNMIT police are
already planning for the reconstitution phase to ensure
that its support focuses on the five priority areas for
further strengthening outlined in the strategic
development plan of the PNTL for 2011-2012. Those
are legislation, training, administration, discipline and
operations. As I conveyed in my address to the
Security Council on 19 October 2010 (see S/PV.6405),
I once again appeal to and encourage police-
contributing countries to provide officers to UNMIT
who can effectively transfer skills to PNTL
counterparts in those focus areas. With regard to the
additional 19 civilian expert posts within the UNMIT
police component, I am pleased to report that 18
candidates have already been selected.

One concern noted in the report of the Secretary-
General regards the final certification of the 199 PNTL
officers with pending criminal or disciplinary issues.
The report notes that, in a letter of 28 December 2010
to the Prime Minister and the Minister for Defence and
Security, the Secretary of State for Security
communicated his decision to certify those 199
uncertified PNTL officers, a significant number of
whom face serious disciplinary and criminal charges.
While the letter also stated that those officers would
not be exempt from any criminal or disciplinary
liabilities if found guilty at the outcome of the
proceedings, I submitted a letter to Prime Minister
Xanana Gusmao on 3 February in which I expressed
the concerns of the United Nations about the
Government's decision, noting its possible negative
impact on the overall integrity of the PNTL. I also
urged the Government and judicial authorities to take
the necessary measures to resolve expeditiously all
outstanding cases involving suspicions of human rights
violations or criminal conduct. In making those
appeals, I am convinced that the Government of Timor-
Leste and UNMIT share the same goals for a
professional PNTL that operates with due respect for
the rule of law.

The Falintil-Forcas de Defesa de Timor-Leste
(F-FDTL) also continued to make further progress in
the development of their human resource and
institutional capacities, as reflected in the draft
F-FDTL force development plan for 2011-2015 and the
new F-FDTL force structure, which envisages the
recruitment of an additional 600 members, which is
currently ongoing. The F-FDTL has also reached an
3
understanding with the Government of Portugal to
deploy officers to serve as part of a future Portuguese
contingent to peacekeeping operations. Similarly, two
PNTL officers have been selected for deployment to
the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in
Guinea-Bissau. Those are laudable commitments by
Timor-Leste to contribute to United Nations work to
ensure peace and stability in other parts of the world.
In addition, the UNMIT Military Liaison Group will
continue to provide support to the F-FDTL in preparing
officers for future liaison officer assignments.

One of the three F-FDTL members granted
commutations of sentences relating to involvement in
the 2006 shooting deaths of eight PNTL members
resigned in January. I am concerned that the remaining
two continue to serve. Now that the F-FDTL plans to
participate in international peacekeeping, it has an even
greater responsibility to ensure the integrity and
accountability of the force.

With regard to the wider security sector, Timor-
Leste, as a sovereign country, continues to make
advances in further developing the overarching
legislative and policy framework for the sector, as well
as various regulations. Subject, of course, to further
discussions with the Timor-Leste Government and the
concurrence of the Security Council, I propose that,
over the next two years, UNMIT concentrate on
supporting the further strengthening and development
of security institutions, in particular with regard to
training on human rights and gender issues, technical
legislative drafting, strengthening disciplinary
mechanisms and facilitating sharing of best practices. I
propose that continued assistance be provided to
support civilian oversight institutions, which are
responsible for ensuring that the sector meets the needs
of the people of Timor-Leste, such as the National
Parliament, the Ministry for Defence and Security and
the Office of the Provedor for Human Rights and
Justice.

In the context of the joint transition process,
UNMIT and the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP) are also exploring, together with
the Government, possible joint programmes to support
various areas of the security sector, which would
depend on funding becoming available.

On 28 January, the National Parliament approved
the 2011 State budget after two weeks of debate, which
was attended in its entirety by the Prime Minister. It
includes various amendments proposed by members of
Parliament and totals $1.3 billion. After having
referred the proposed budget for judicial review and a
Court of Appeal opinion upholding its constitutionality
and legality having been issued, the President
promulgated the State budget law on 12 February. The
$1.3 billion budget represents a nearly lO-fold increase
over the budget for the 2005-2006 fiscal year.

The increasing amounts available to the State
from its petroleum resources are one of the most
striking changes that Timor-Leste has experienced over
the years. They are a huge State resource available for
investment in the future of the people of Timor-Leste.

However, as the State budget increases, there is a
need to ensure adequate governance practices to ensure
effective budget implementation, including in such
areas as procurement and auditing. It is also important
that adequate resources are allocated in critical social
sectors, such as education and health, and for
vulnerable groups, including women and children.
Investment in human capital, particularly in young
people, will improve the lives of the population and
provide greater economic dividends down the road.
Adequate investment in rural areas, where about 80 per
cent of the population resides, and a focus on
increasing employment opportunities for young people,
will bring more equitable benefits and increased
stability.

I welcome that the National Parliament increased,
by $1 million, allocations to the 2011 State budget for
various initiatives to combat domestic violence,
including support to vulnerable persons and victims of
domestic violence. The Government readily agreed to
these proposed increases, demonstrating the widely
shared commitment to addressing this troubling issue.

The Government is aware of the challenges
associated with an expanding budget and continues
efforts to address them. I hope that new and ongoing
initiatives, such as the National Development Agency
and programmes focused on district-level development,
will further Government efforts to guarantee
responsible spending. I also hope that investment in
social and rural sectors will be taken into consideration
by the National Parliament when it examines the draft
National Strategic Development Plan. Increased focus
on these areas will also facilitate achievement of the
Millennium Development Goals (MDGs). This year,
the Government will initiate the MDG suco fund, an
11-24004
innovative approach of delegating to and empowering
people at the village level to assist in achieving the
MDGs. Preparations are under way for the next
national MDG steering committee meeting scheduled
for early March.

I hope that these measures will contribute to
enhancing strategies to meet MDG targets, particularly
those relating to nutrition, child health and maternal
mortality. At the same time, significant progress has
been achieved in other areas, with Timor-Leste having
already met MDG targets for a reduction in infant and
under-five mortality and to ensure antenatal care
coverage. The country is also on track to achieve the
MDGs in such areas as primary school enrolment, the
proportion of births attended by skilled health
personnel and access to safe drinking water.

As already mentioned, some of the main political
challenges ahead are the national presidential and
parliamentary elections in 2012. Electoral management
bodies have demonstrated increasing capacity over the
years. However, the Government has indicated that it
would require continued United Nations electoral
support through the 2012 elections, although less
support would be needed than in 2007. The nature and
extent of this support was reviewed by a needs
assessment mission conducted by the Department of
Political Affairs Division of Electoral Affairs and
UNDP from 7 to 17 February. Continued electoral
support through the integrated UNMIT and UNDP
election support team will contribute to credible
elections, as has been discussed in the context of the
joint transition strategy. Such assistance will require
further donor support.

On 14 February, the National Parliament once
again voted to postpone discussion of the two draft
laws on reparations and on a follow-up institution to
the Commission for Reception, Truth and
Reconciliation (CAVR) and the Commission of Truth
and Friendship (CTF), to be called the institute of
memory. I encourage Parliament to resume discussions
on these important initiatives as soon as possible. In
that connection, I note that the Working Group on
Enforced or Involuntary Disappearances, which
concluded an official mission to Timor-Leste at the
invitation of the Government on 14 February, referred
to these draft laws as important steps in the
implementation of the CAVR/CTF recommendations. It
also considered the proposed establishment of the
1 1-24004

institute of memory as a major step forward in truth
recovery.

On 27 and 29 January, Timor-Leste successfully
hosted the fifth meeting of the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations (ASEAN) Regional Forum of Experts
and Eminent Persons, co-chairing the forum with
Thailand. In his keynote address to the meeting, Timor-
Leste's Foreign Minister indicated that the country was
in the process of making a formal application to
become a member of ASEAN. Indonesia's support for
Timor-Leste's desire to join ASEAN during its
presidency in 2011 reflects the continuing good
relationship between the two countries. I would also
like to recognize the continuing contribution of the
international security forces of Australia and New
Zealand, with which UNMIT continues to enjoy good
cooperation.

On 1 February, the meeting of the High-Level
Committee on Transition, hosted by the President, was
attended by UNMIT and Government delegations, led
respectively by the Prime Minister and myself. The
Government designated the Deputy Prime Minister as
its overall focal point for the transition, as well as its
other focal points for the seven technical working
groups. As agreed at that meeting, a transition plan is
being jointly drafted with the Government. Discussions
at that meeting focused on justice, the rule of law and
human rights, as well as on the economic impact of
UNMIT's withdrawal and on training programmes that
UNMIT established for its national staff. The
Committee agreed on the technical assistance from
UNMIT desired by the Government over the next two
years.

The Government also agreed that a session of the
next Timor-Leste development partners' meeting in
July will be devoted to a discussion of the transition
plan. This will be an important opportunity for bilateral
and multilateral partners to present their views on the
plan as well as to obtain further information on Timor-
Leste's requirements through the transition period and
following UNMIT's departure, which can feed into
their own assistance plans.

The focus of the transition period is on capacity-
building and other measures to support the further
strengthening and development of Timorese
institutions, particularly with regard to the priority
areas of UNMIT's mandate - democratic governance,
the rule of law, justice and human rights, the security
sector and socio-economic development. UNMIT is
also redoubling its efforts to further develop the
capacities of its own national staff and staff in key
offices within State and Government institutions to
further enhance their capacities to make continued
meaningful contributions to the development of Timor-
Leste. Given the strong commitment of the
Government of Timor-Leste to the transition, our aim
is ensure a smooth and successful UNMIT withdrawal,
which hopefully can also serve as a best practice for
other peacekeeping missions.

Let me recap by saying that Timor-Leste is now
entering a period that will be an important indicator of
the durability of advances made since 2006,
particularly in the security sector as PNTL becomes
responsible for its own command-and-control
arrangements. However, there will also be other tests in
the run-up to the 2012 elections. Leaders of political
parties will need to continue to responsibly express and
deal with their differences through democratic
institutions and processes. Access to the justice system
needs to improve so that all segments of the population
will be able to benefit, especially those in rural areas
and women. The Government will have to continue
efforts to ensure effective and transparent use of the
increased budgeted resources available to it. All
institutions and leaders will need to continue to show
that progress to date results from measures, processes
and commitments that can be sustained in the long
term. Considering current circumstances, I am hopeful
that, with the combined efforts of the Government, all
political parties and leaders and all communities and
people of Timor-Leste, these remaining challenges can
be met.

In conclusion, let me thank my two deputies, Finn
Reske-Nielsen and Shigeru Mochida, and all of the
United Nations personnel in Timor-Leste. I would also
like to thank the leadership of Timor-Leste and, again,
Prime Minister Gusmao, with whom I am here today.
Finally, allow me to pay tribute to and to thank the
people of Timor-Leste for their resilience and
determination to establish a stable and enduring peace
and sustainable development for their country.

