Mr. Assaf (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I wish to thank His Excellency Mr. Radmanovie
for his statement. We also thank the High
Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Mr. Valentin Inzko, for his comprehensive briefing. We
commend his efforts to promote the political process
under the Dayton Peace Agreement.

We support the efforts of Bosnia and Herzegovina
to complete the implementation of the Dayton accord
and to achieve the goals of the Steering Board of the
Peace Implementation Council, which will ultimately
lead to the closure of the Office of the High
Representative. We welcome the progress achieved by
Bosnia and Herzegovina on several issues, in particular
the stabilization of the security situation, the holding of
free and fair elections in October, and the fulfilment of
the European Union conditions concerning visa
liberalization.

However, several daunting challenges remain.
The pre-election circumstances overshadowed the
situation and led to the interruption of important
reforms. We regret the rhetoric used to attack the
Dayton Peace Agreement and the sovereignty,
legislation and competencies of the State in the course
of the election. We therefore urge all parties concerned
to reach a timely understanding on the formation of a
progressive Government and to engage in open
dialogue to achieve reconciliation and embark on the
path of reform that will ensure real progress for all
citizens, irrespective of their ethnicity.

It is imperative to create an environment
conducive to achieving progress on many issues,
particularly constitutional and economic reform, the
resolution of issues concerning State property,
particularly defence property, and the filling of key
public positions. The sustainable return of refugees is
Vital to achieving lasting peace. We support the role of
the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia in
establishing justice in the region in order to avoid the
recurrence of past tragedies.

We believe that the international community
should continue to support Bosnia and Herzegovina in
its efforts to overcome its political difficulties and to
strike a balance between centralization and
decentralization. Fifteen years after the Dayton Peace
Agreement, we cherish the hope that Bosnia and
Herzegovina will make firm strides towards the
prosperity and stability to which all its citizens aspire.

