Mr. Ignacio Ybafiez (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
Allow me to commend you, Sir, for organizing this
open debate and for the adoption of an important new
resolution on children and armed conflict (resolution 2225 (2015)), of which Spain was a sponsor. The
resolution is the tangible result of Malaysia's excellent
work as head of the Working Group on Children and
Armed Conflict, which we applaud. I would also
like to express our gratitude for the briefings by the
Secretary-General and by Ms. Lelia Zerrougui, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict, Ms. Yoka Brandt, Deputy
Executive Director of UNICEF, and Ms. Eunice Apio,
Director of the Ugandan non-governmental organization
Facilitation for Peace and Development.

I am joined today by a delegation of Spanish
parliamentarians led by the President of the Senate.
Their presence underscores the interest and importance
that Spain accords the work of the Security Council in
promoting peace, security and the rights of children,
in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations.
Spain considers it a national priority to contribute to a
world that will be more just, safer and more prosperous
as a legacy for today's youth and future generations. In
that spirit, we accept the responsibility conferred on us
by the mandate of the Council and with that attitude we
actively participate in negotiating texts and in debates
such as the one that brings us together here today at the
initiative of the Council presidency.

The issue of children and armed conflict has
continued to expand since it was first placed on the
Council's agenda, 10 years ago, at the initiative of
France. The emergence of new conflicts and global
threats made 2014 an especially tragic year - the most
horrifying - for millions of girls and boys. Despite
some progress, reports such as the one before us today
(S/2015/409) highlight the need for the Council to
continue its firm pursuit of that agenda. Along with
the numerous and execrable acts of violence committed
against girls and boys in armed conflict - beginning
with the recruitment of child soldiers - the abduction
of minors has become a routine occurrence in many
conflict zones. Mass abductions are a new tactic
employed in particular by non-State armed groups to
terrorize civilian populations. Abduction is only the
beginning of a far greater horror that generally ends
in forced recruitment, sexual abuse, child trafficking,
slavery, mutilation and murder. In that context,
girls are especially vulnerable to being abducted for
sexual purposes. Boko Haram in Nigeria, the Lord's
Resistance Army in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Uganda, South Sudan and the Central African
Republic, and the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria/
Daesh embody those cruel and evil practices aimed at
overwhelming all possible resistance through the use
of terror.

The primary goal of the resolution just adopted
is, in fact, to incorporate the abduction of children as
grounds for inclusion on the Secretary-General's list
of grave crimes against children in armed conflict by
countries or armed groups that fail to comply with the
measures of prevention and protection it provides. We
welcome this substantive and far-reaching advance.

With the aim of furthering that agenda, I would like
now to focus on five key areas: respect for international
humanitarian law; the role of peacekeeping operations;
peace agreements and the reintegration of children into
civilian life; accountability; and the mobilization of
public opinion.

We will not cease to insist on the absolute
importance of respect for the most basic tenets of
international humanitarian law. Schools and hospitals
must be respected and safeguarded. On 29 May, in
Oslo, Spain signed the Safe Schools Declaration along
with 37 other countries, We trust that, with the support
of a growing number of Member States, progress
will be made in protecting schools from military use.
Unfortunately, well into the twenty-first century, it
is still necessary to point out that the use of certain
explosive devices, such as anti-personnnel mines or
cluster bombs is utterly reprehensible, as they affect the
whole civilian population, inflict inhuman damage and
martyr a high number of children. In that regard, I want
to speak out on behalf of Spain against the use of barrel
bombs in Syria, which constitutes a flagrant war crime
that must not go unpunished.

The latest report of the Secretary-General refers
extensively to the shelling in densely populated areas.
Those actions are difficult to justify in the light of
international law and result in a number of child
victims so high that they can only lead to outrage. The
rocket attack in Aleppo on Monday, which resulted in
dozens of deaths, including many children, is another
example of indiscriminate attacks, which we strongly
regret and condemn. War is an ideal breeding ground
for the commission of mass crimes; hence the need to
put an end to the hostilities and aggression in order to
be able to work on the difficult task of building and
consolidating peace.

I would also like to address the role of
peacekeeping operations. They contribute significantly
to international peace and security by helping countries
in post-conflict situations to create the conditions that
make sustainable peace possible, one in which the
protection of children is a key element. Therefore,
I would like to reiterate the opinion expressed by
Spain in March (see S/PV.7414) on the importance of
strengthening the mandates of peacekeeping missions
with regard to child protection. We also believe that
the countries listed by the Secretary-General that have
not adopted an action plan to put an end to possible
violations and abuses against children committed by
members of their contingents should not contribute
troops to those types of operations.

It is crucial to ensure the presence of child
protection advisers in peacekeeping missions and to
ensure adequate training for contingents on child-
protection issues. All that is essential in order to be able
to contribute to moving forward, in an increasingly
decisive and effective way, on protecting children on
the ground, which is a basic responsibility of States.
Spain recalls the importance of continuing to fully
apply the zero-tolerance policy of the Secretary-
General on sexual violence and abuse and the need to
ensure accountability for those involved in such acts.

I would also stress the importance of prominently
incorporating the needs of children into peace
agreements. Spain would like to see mechanisms
that address those needs in the same way that we
have encouraged the participation of women in the
negotiation and implementation of peace agreements.

In that respect, peace agreements cannot omit
three important factors: the protection, rehabilitation
and reintegration of child victims of armed conflicts.
Affected States should ensure the existence of
mechanisms that satisfactorily address those three
issues. A good reintegration mechanism is provided
by education and training programmes established to
promote the interests of children and respect their status
as victims. I recall, as an example of good practices,
the figures provided by Colombia at the open debate
of 25 March (see S/PV.7414): through the establishment
of an intergovernmental commission that included
23 Government agencies, more than 4,000 minors
recruited by the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de
Colombia and the Ejercito de Liberacion Nacional have
been reintegrated in the past 10 years.

In terms of accountability, we will continue to
advocate for strengthening national judicial systems,
and the cooperation of the Security Council with the
International Criminal Court. The fight against impunity
not only restores the dignity of the victims, but acts
as a deterrent. However, we must distinguish between
perpetrators and victims, as it would be a paradox to put
in detention children who are soldiers but who are, first
and above all, victims of armed conflict. Therefore,
in line with the recommendations of the Secretary-
General, we are in favour of studying alternatives to
criminal proceedings aimed at rehabilitation and social
reintegration, always in the interest of the child. That
does not mean that we cannot attribute responsibility to
those responsible for their recruitment.

Finally, with regard to the mobilization of public
opinion, Governments, international organizations and
civil society must continue to work side by side to raise
awareness among all stakeholders - from armed groups
to the victims' families - of the large-scale challenge
posed by all that remains to be done. The Office of
the Special Representative for Children and Armed
Conflict and UNICEF have done an excellent job with
the "Children, Not Soldiers" campaign in collaboration
with countries such as Chad and Afghanistan. Together
we can help promote that agenda so that the words
"child" and "soldier" are antithetical in every corner of
the planet. The "No Lost Generation" campaign lead by
UNICEF directed at Syrian refugees, with the support
of the European Union and Turkey, is yielding good
results. On 19 May, during the holding of the second
open debate of the Peace and Security Council of the
African Union on children and armed conflict, there
were notable examples of good practices, even in very
difficult situations, such as in the Central African
Republic.

I would like to conclude by thanking you,
Mr. President, once again for convening this important
and timely debate, which has allowed us to adopt a
resolution that strengthens the fight against the cruelty
that affects the youngest and most innocent members
of the human race. We cannot remain indifferent to
the manipulation of lives that are just starting and
have the right to develop without being forever marked
by violence and hatred. Debates and resolutions like
today's are morally and politically imperative. When
it comes to the protection of children, no effort is too
great, given the size of the challenge. The international
community and the Council can count on Spain to
relentlessly address this challenge.

