We want to thank the briefers for the information provided today. Peacekeeping operations are a vital and indispensable tool in the maintenance of peace and security. We attach high importance to the work carried out by peacekeepers. There is an undeniable link between capacity-building, security and the protection of peacekeepers, taking into account the fact that they are deployed in deteriorating and complex political and security environments, while facing asymmetrical threats. We believe that resolution 2518 (2020) has set an important precedent in enhancing their safety and security. We take this opportunity to extend our deepest condolences to the families and colleagues of the two peacekeepers in Mali who recently lost their lives due to the coronavirus disease (COVID-19). This sad news highlights the importance of closely monitoring and assessing the impact of the pandemic on peacekeeping operations, particularly on the protection of civilians, which requires prioritizing, readapting and, likely, expanding resources, while emphasizing that the response to the pandemic should not be solely their responsibility but that they should instead support and collaborate with national authorities in this regard. As humankind faces one of its greatest threats, common sense would indicate the need to heed the call by the Secretary-General for a ceasefire in all conflicts so as to allow and facilitate the provision of immediate assistance to those in need and mitigate the impact of the pandemic. However, in the case of Mali, despite progress on some fronts, the number of attacks against security forces and peacekeepers as well as intercommunal violence continue to be alarming. In that respect, we would like to pose a question to General Gyllensporre. Some reports point to an increase in the number of sexual violence cases amid the pandemic and the measures imposed to contain it. Could he please share with us the actions being taken to address this issue? We are also concerned about the expanding threat posed by COVID-19 to the population of South Sudan. We welcome the measures put in place by the United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) to limit its spread, deal with existing vulnerabilities and find creative ways to implement its protective mandate in the field. We commend the decision by UNMISS to coordinate with local authorities and to support nationally led efforts to create a mobile awareness campaign, in partnership with the World Health Organization, throughout densely populated areas, dispelling rumours and ensuring that citizens are accurately informed. In that regard, we would like to ask General Tinaikar two questions. How successful does he think this campaign has been, and what else can be done to make it more efficient? How can we as a Council support UNMISS in the continuation of its proactive response to COVID-19 while protecting its own personnel and safeguarding the communities it serves at this critical juncture? With regard to the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force (UNDOF), we commend the mission's efforts to implement an awareness plan designed to maintain operational capability and limit the potential spread of COVID-19 in the mission. The Dominican Republic highlights the importance of UNDOF being able to carry out its operations without facing any administrative obstacles. All parties involved must continue to facilitate the enforcement of the mission's plans for an incremental return to its primary operations and positions in the area of separation to fully ensure that the mission can implement its mandate effectively. It is important that the design, planning, implementation and review of peacekeeping operations be gender-responsive and that missions implement resolutions 2250 (2015) and 2419 (2018) within their respective mandates. The deployment of gender, women protection and child protection advisers is paramount, and these must be fully funded and given the appropriate seniority. In that regard, we would like to ask the Force Commanders how the mandates of peacekeeping operations could be reinforced to implement resolutions 1325 (2000) and 2250 (2015), including to ensure closer collaboration with local communities, especially with youth and women. To conclude, the Dominican Republic remains committed to the Declaration of Shared Commitments on United Nations Peacekeeping Operations and reiterates the critical role that peacekeeping missions play. Only through joint willingness and efforts will we one day successfully achieve a lasting and sustainable peace in conflict-affected countries.
