Sir Jeremy Greenstock: It is now six months
since the establishment of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1373
(2001) concerning counter-terrorism (CTC) and the
Council agreed that it would review the structure and
activities of the Committee at this point.

I shall not go into detail about the CTC's
achievements so far because that information is already
well known to Council delegations and to the wider
United Nations membership through my regular
briefings, but let me briefly set out the latest statistics.
We have received 143 reports from Member States and
others. We have reviewed and responded to 62 States
and we are working hard to finish by the end of May
the review of the remainder of reports received. We are
following up with the 50 States that have not yet
submitted reports.

This is a significant achievement and I should
like to thank the Vice-Chairmen of the Committee for
leading the work in the subcommittees so intensively
and thoroughly. I should also like to thank the
Secretariat for the excellent support it has given to the
CTC and its sub-committees and I pay tribute to our
team of experts, sitting behind us, who have so ably
risen to the challenge set by the Counter-Terrorism
Committee. All of them - all of us - are developing
a deeper expertise as we move forward.

Delegations are familiar with the work
programmes that we issued for the first and second 90-
day periods. Council members will find before them
the work programme for the next, third, 90-day period
in document S/2002/318, but let me outline in a little
more detail how the CTC sees its work developing in
the next phase.

The Committee is unanimous in the view that it
should continue to perform properly and thoroughly on
the basis of transparency and even-handedness the
tasks set for it by the Council, so that the capacity of
all Member States to deal effectively with terrorism in
their jurisdiction should be genuinely enhanced. In the
course of monitoring the implementation of resolution
1373 (2001) in all States, the CTC will check the facts
of the legislative picture, the administrative action
taken and the way in which these tools are being used
to prevent the territory of each State being abused by
terrorists. We will continue the excellent dialogue
which we have begun with all Members of the United
Nations until the Committee is confident that each
State has taken action on all the issues covered by
resolution 1373 (2001).

Reaching that point of confidence does not equate
to the CTC's declaring any Member State 100 per cent
compliant. We do not believe that the Committee can
sign off with any State. Against a constantly evolving
background, there may always be further work to do to
meet the objectives of 1373 (2001), so the CTC will
preserve the potential for dialogue with all States,
although this will vary in intensity according to the
capacity developed by the State concerned.

During the coming 90-day period, the CTC will
complete its preliminary review of the reports it has
received and, from 7 June, it will embark on its second
review as the second round of reports begins to arrive.
We intend to be more direct in the second phase in
identifying potential gaps and in asking States what
action they intend to take to address the issues of
concern. The Committee will also need to be
professional with States that require assistance. The
CTC expects the experts to recommend what assistance
might be needed and where the State might go to find
the help it needs.

As we go forward under the terms of our
mandate, the CTC will remain aware of the interaction
of its work with human rights concerns, inter alia,
through the contact the CTC has developed with the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights.

There is also an agreement in principle around
this table, reflected in our informal discussion on 2
April, that the CTC and the Council will, if necessary,
consider what action is needed to address failures to
meet the requirements of resolution 1373 (2001) where
these affect the comprehensive implementation of that
resolution.

I should like to encourage the 50 countries that
have not yet submitted a report to get in touch with the
Committee. We understand that putting together a full
report may be difficult for countries that have little
experience of dealing with terrorism or for which the
preparation of such a report is a significant strain on
their government machinery. But it is extremely
important that all States be in dialogue with the CTC
and we believe that this is the best way in which we
can help States to find the assistance they might need
to implement resolution 1373 (2001). Whatever the
difficulty, it is essential that all States should have
begun their written exchange with the Committee
before 31 May 2002.

The Committee intends, in the process of
reviewing the reports, to identify issues of cross-
cutting concern where the professional work of other
bodies interconnects with the implementation of
resolution 1373 (2001). We intend to continue to make
contact with other international organizations with a
view to encouraging them to take action on issues that
fall within their area of expertise. As an example, we
have a close interest in the Financial Action Task
Force's work on the funding of terrorist networks.
There may also be a need for the International Civil
Aviation Organization to look with fresh eyes at
aviation security or for the International Maritime
Organization to consider how the issuance of travel
documents could be improved to prevent abuse by
terrorists. As we proceed, we may have to contract in
specialist expertise in these areas.

The CTC further intends to deepen its contacts
with regional organizations. It is in the interests of all
States that their neighbours have proper safeguards in
place to deal with terrorism and regional organizations
have a key role to play in ensuring that action is taken
across the region. It will add impetus to our work if
countries of similar geographical and cultural identity
cooperate proactively to keep terrorism out of their
region.

11 September posed a new challenge for the
United Nations. The Organization has risen to the task
of acting to raise the capacity of all Member States in
counter-terrorism, thus catalysing global action to
counter a global threat, but in doing so, we should
recognize the added burden which this activity has
placed on the Secretariat. The translation service has
done a phenomenal job in producing hundreds of pages
of documentation every month to enable the CTC to do
its work, but the pace of our work is being constrained
by the speed with which the translation service can
produce documents. I have discussed this issue with the
Secretariat and shall continue to do so with a view to
reducing demand wherever possible, but I call on
Member States, in the Council and beyond, as a whole
to recognize the heavy translation demands we place on
the Secretariat and to reduce these demands wherever
possible.

We are doing the same within the Committee, but
I am concerned that, as a new operation, the CTC tends
to be allocated the resources that are left over when
everything else has been covered. That does not reflect
the urgency with which we need results from our
counter-terrorism work. I should be grateful for
everyone's help in resolving the administrative
problem the CTC has posed for the Secretariat, because
I am not yet getting the response I need on this issue.

I thank the Council for placing its confidence in
me and the Vice-Chairmen to continue to direct the
work of the Counter-Terrorism Committee. We look
forward to doing so with equal determination over the
next six months. I welcome the intention of the Council
to conduct a further full review in early October.

I shall be very glad to respond to comments and
to answer queries in this debate.

