The President: I shall now make a statement in
my national capacity as representative of Viet Nam.

I join the others who spoke before me in thanking
Mr. Lynn Pascoe, Under-Secretary-General for
Political Affairs, and Mr. Craig Boyd, Director of
United Nations Support Office for the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), for their insightful
briefings and for sharing their perspectives on the
situation in Somalia.

We agree with the Secretary-General that the
situation in Somalia is at a turning point. The
Transitional Federal Government (TFG) has made
significant progress in fostering national reconciliation,
sustaining dialogue with opposition groups, building
capacity for local governance, integrating human rights
into various aspects of the peace process and building a
national security apparatus. My delegation commends
and supports President Sheikh Sharif Sheikh Ahmed's
initiative to launch a commission for security and
pacification, which is tasked with reforming Somalia's
security forces and all law enforcement agencies. We
welcome his commitment to fully implement the
Djibouti Agreement in order to find lasting peace in
this war-torn country.

The main challenge facing Somalia is to maintain
the political momentum that started a few months ago.
We are encouraged to note that the cooperation
agreement signed between the TFG and Ahlu Sunna
Wal Jama'a in June has already shown results. We call
upon the opposition groups which remain outside the
Djibouti Agreement to lay down their arms, renounce
violence and join the reconciliation process.

While long-term security rests with the TFG and
the Somalis themselves, the United Nations, the
international community and regional organizations
should redouble their efforts to assist the TFG to repel
the onslaught of extremist forces that are intent on
destroying the Djibouti peace process, and enable the
Government to exercise its authority countrywide for
the sake of the Somali people.

We remain troubled by reports that the
humanitarian situation in Somalia continues to
deteriorate dramatically, with more than 250,000 people
being displaced and some 3.7 million people in dire
need of humanitarian support due to intensified
fighting in Mogadishu, growing insecurity in much of
southern and central Somalia and drought.

The current alarming security and humanitarian
situation in Somalia requires immediate and concrete
international support, both political and financial, to
enable the TFG to accelerate the development of the
Somali National Security Force and the Somali Police
Force in the framework of the Djibouti Agreement and
in line with a national security strategy. We welcome
the efforts of donors to disburse pledges made in
Brussels last April.

Viet Nam supports the efforts of the African
Union and AMISOM. troop-contributing countries to
maintain stability and security in and around Mogadishu
under hazardous circumstances. We welcome and
support the decision of the African Union to increase
AMISOM's strength to its mandated troop levels and
its call for the international community to continue its
support of AMISOM's deployment and operations.

We also support the incremental approach set out
in the Secretary-General's April report, which requests
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, in
consultation with the African Union, to continue its
effort to develop and refine existing contingency plans
that will allow for an eventual transition from
AMISOM. to a United Nations peacekeeping operation
if security conditions on the ground permit. To ensure
that this effort succeeds, we call for close cooperation
and effective partnership between the United Nations
Political Office for Somalia, the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development, the African Union and the
League of Arab States in dealing with the situation in
Somalia with a View to bringing about lasting peace
and security in the region.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Somalia.

