Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): I thank
the President for organizing today's important
dialogue between the Security Council and the Force
Commanders. I would also like to thank Under-
Secretary-General Jean-Pierre Lacroix and the three
Force Commanders present for their clear and concise
briefings. We think it is very useful for the Council to
speak to the military staff who have to implement in
dangerous circumstances what we in the Council agree
around this safe table.

We have witnessed an alarming increase in hostile
attacks against peacekeepers over the last few years.
The Force Commanders of today's missions face
numerous challenges and threats to the security of
their forces - we have just heard three of them speak
about this.

Too many peacekeepers are killed on mission. The
Kingdom of the Netherlands pays tribute to all United
Nations peacekeepers who have lost their lives in the
cause ofpeace. Our hearts reach out to the families and
loved ones they left behind.

The changed operational environment of
peacekeeping operations calls for action by the Security
Council, by the United Nations and by its Member
States. We therefore see today's debate as being closely
linked to the open debate on organizing peacekeeping
operations of 28 March 2018, which was presided over
by my Prime Minister, Mr. Mark Rutte (see S/PV.8218).
Thanks to the leadership of Secretary-General Guterres
and Under-Secretary-General Lacroix, we are all giving
a quality push to peacekeeping this year.

In that context, we think it is also important that the
Council show leadership and take up its responsibility.
We look forward to the high-level seminar on
peacekeeping intelligence in July and to the high-level
event on peacekeeping in September. We pay tribute to
the important work done by Cote d'Ivoire as Chair of
the Security Council Working Group on Peacekeeping
Operations, and we look forward to its presidency in
December in this context.

The Kingdom of the Netherlands fully supports
the Secretary-General's Action for Peacekeeping
initiative. We applaud the tangible progress made in the
implementation of the action plan based on the Santos
Cruz report, entitled Improving Security of United
Nations Peacekeepers.

Working together, we must change the way we
do business. As Major General Deconinck said, we
must change our mindsets. And we must become
more capable to act decisively. Working together, we
must make peacekeeping more effective. To protect
peacekeepers and support them in implementing the
mandates they are given by the Security Council,
peacekeeping operations have to become more robust.

I will focus on three issues relating to making
peacekeeping more effective, and with each issue I will
have a number of questions for the Force Commanders:
fisst, mission performance reviews; secondly, the
importance of an integrated approach; and, thirdly,
improving actionable intelligence.

With respect to my first point, on mission
performance reviews, since 2017, peacekeeping
operations have been reviewed comprehensively
since 2017. We especially focus in our discussions
in the Security Council on such issues as resource
constraints, performance and the cost-effectiveness
of mission components. In our opinion, those reviews
provide an important opportunity for stock-taking and
can provide the basis for much-needed adjustments to
mission mandates.

When we review a mission, however, we must also
focus on the operational needs on the ground. Mission
success depends, on the one hand, on the availability
of appropriate resources, and, on the other hand, on
having realistic expectations. In that regard, in our view,
proper force generation remains essential and needs our
continued attention. We welcome the rotation-scheme
system that the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
is developing. In that regard, my questions to the Force
Commanders are as follows: Are their operational
needs currently fulfilled? Can they plan ahead when
it comes to the military they work with? And are the
troops Force Commanders receive well trained when
they are deployed under their command?
As to my second point, the need for an integrated
approach, we feel very strongly that we need an
integrated approach that combines three elements,
namely, diplomacy, defence and development.
Diplomacy serves to get a political solution, defence
serves to achieve security and development serves to
provide hope for a better future for civilians. Only if
those three dimensions come together can peacekeeping
operations be effective, which also means that the
pillars of the United Nations must work better together.
We are therefore a strong proponent of the Secretary-
General's reform of the peace and security architecture.
My questions to the Force Commanders are as follows:
Do they have the impression that the development pillar
of the United Nations is working closely enough with
them? What could be improved? If they see a need for
a quick-impact project - for instance, with regard
to water supply 4 do they call a colleague from the
United Nations Development Programme to do that and
make it happen?

As to my third point, situational awareness,
we see a clear need in missions for integrated and
systematic information- and intelligence-gathering
and information- and intelligence-sharing among the
various actors on the ground. Missions should improve
their understanding of the local environment and of the
threats that the mission and civilians face. Actionable
peacekeeping intelligence is the key to success in
the complex environments in which today's missions
operate. It is also key for the protection of civilians.
Peacekeepers need eyes and ears on the ground to
build and maintain situational awareness. I would like
to be blunt: better peacekeeping intelligence helps to
save lives, in our opinion, which brings me to my last
questions: Do the Force Commanders currently have
enough early-warning capacity when it comes to the
asymmetrical threats they face? Could the Commanders
share the key challenges in their missions? How
could the Security Council help them to overcome
those challenges?

We look forward to the answers of the
Force Commanders.
