Mr. Khare: I thank you, Sir, for the opportunity
to introduce the sixth report (S/2009/504) of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Integrated
Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT), covering the period
from 21 January to 23 September 2009. I would also
like to acknowledge the presence of the Deputy Prime
Minister of Timor-Leste, Mr. Jose Luis Guterres.

Let me begin with developments since
23 September. On 7 October, the Council of Ministers
approved the draft law on the 2010 State budget, which
totals approximately $636.9 million. The Government
realizes that it must diversify engines for economic
growth and job creation while retaining a focus on
addressing extreme poverty, unemployment,
infrastructure creation and rural development. The
Government has also invited the United Nations World
Tourism Organization to send a technical assistance
mission, scheduled for 10 to 21 November, to conduct
a detailed review of that sector. President Jose Ramos-
Horta, endeavouring to increase international interest
and tourism in Timor-Leste, organized the inaugural
Tour de Timor, a hugely successful cross-country
bicycling race in which almost 300 riders from
throughout the world participated from 24 to
28 August. On 12 October, he announced the inaugural
International Sports Fishing Competition, which will
take place in late November.

On 9 October, Timor-Leste successfully held
elections for community authorities in a generally
peaceful atmosphere with the United Nation police and
the National Police Force of Timor-Leste (PNTL)
providing security throughout the country. The
provisional results indicate that about 67.75 per cent of
registered voters cast ballots. These elections were
more complicated and challenging than the national
elections of 2007, since each local community required
a unique ballot.

The ability of the electoral bodies of Timor-Leste
to successfully organize the elections demonstrated
their increasing capacities and the public's continuing
faith in democratic electoral processes. In comparison
to the 2007 elections, UNMIT helicopter support was
minimal, and it is expected that, by the 2012 national
elections, such support might be needed only for
emergency situations. There were a few minor
incidents of violence, but far fewer than in 2007.

I compliment the Timorese electorate, which
during practically all electoral rallies identified
communal peace, water, electricity, roads and other
infrastructure, as well as education, as its primary
concerns. In at least one local community, the issues of
carbon dioxide emissions, global warming and the
ozone hole were also avidly debated. The integrated
United Nations electoral support team, established by
us and comprised of staff members of UNMIT and the
United Nations Development Programme, enabled the
provision of coordinated advice and support through a
single window as One United Nations, and has
provided important lessons for the future.

On 13 October, the National Parliament debated a
motion of no confidence submitted by FRETILIN, the
single largest party, and its ally, the Klibur Oan Timor
Asuwain party, because of their opposition to the
release of Maternus Bere. The motion was defeated by
a vote of 39 to 25, with only one member of Parliament
absent on the day of the debate. Prime Minister Kay
Rala Xanana Gusmao took part in the day-long debate,
which was aired on national radio and television. This
debate was a positive step towards ensuring that
critical issues of national interest be channelled
through the National Parliament, with meaningful
participation from the opposition. Of course, the legal
issues surrounding the case can be properly dealt with
only in a competent court. I was delighted to note that
Prime Minister Gusmao said in his intervention that the
"parties that make up the Alliance for a Parliamentary
Majority have no special interest in an amnesty law".

I trust that all necessary steps, as recommended
by the Secretary-General in paragraph 55 of his report,
will soon be initiated. UNMIT stands ready to provide
its assistance and support, including to the National
Parliament. My Human Rights and Transitional Justice
Section, along with the Serious Crimes Investigation
Team, organized a workshop on 7 October on
international criminal law, particularly as it relates to
the situation in Timor-Leste, at the request of
Committee A of the National Parliament. President of
the National Parliament Fernando "Lasama" de Araujo
has also indicated to me that the reports of the
Commission for Reception, Truth and Reconciliation
and the Commission of Truth and Friendship, as well
as their recommendations, may be discussed by
Parliament following its debate of the draft law on the
2010 State budget in December.

Another important and positive development in
relation to the 2006 cases recommended for
prosecution by the Independent Special Commission of
Inquiry took place on 9 October, when two defendants
found guilty of assault and illegal carriage of firearms
were sentenced to two years and eight months and one
and half year of imprisonment, respectively. However,
they were acquitted on counts of homicide, threatening
violence and unlawful deprivation of liberty. It is my
hope that fair trials will take place in the remaining
cases upon the conclusion of the investigations.

I have consistently made clear in various forums
with Timorese political leaders and civil society the
United Nations firm position that there can be no
amnesty or impunity for serious crimes such as
genocide, war crimes and crimes against humanity.
UNMIT continues to conduct investigations into
serious crimes committed in 1999, as mandated by
resolution 1704 (2006), in a highly cost-efficient
manner. I agree with President Ramos-Horta that such
investigations should also lead to the further capacity-
building of Timorese investigators, in particular in the
area of forensics, and will continue to make further
efforts to closely involve Timorese nationals in the
investigative process.

Strengthening the rule of law will require
sustained efforts by the Timorese, with continued
assistance from international partners.

I would like to commend the work of the four-
person team led by Judge Phillip Rapoza in producing
an independent comprehensive needs assessment of the
justice sector. I have shared their report with the
President, the President of the National Parliament, the
Prime Minister and the Deputy Prime Minister, who is
here with us today. The report was also forwarded by
UNMIT to the Council of Coordination, which is
comprised of the President of the Court of Appeal, the
Minister for Justice and the Prosecutor-General. In
conjunction with the strategic plan for the justice
sector, the recommendations of the independent
comprehensive needs assessment should be utilized as
a contribution to a coordinated and considered
approach to justice-sector reform. It should also
facilitate the identification and provision of the
assistance that is most needed from the international
community.

The resumption of primary responsibility for the
conduct of police operations by the Policia Nacional de
Timor-Leste (PNTL) will continue with Viqueque
district in the later part of November. As part of its
efforts to support security-sector reform, UNMIT is
also continuing to support the Falintil-Forcas de Defesa
de Timor-Leste (F-FDTL), most recently through a
media mentoring exercise conducted from 6 to
8 October for a select group of F-FDTL soldiers and
civilians from the Secretariat of State for Defence, as
well as through a training-of-trainers course conducted
with national and international human rights bodies
from 12 to 14 October.

I now seek the Council's indulgence in reflecting
on a few issues from my perspective of the past almost
three years in Timor-Leste that require consideration
and guidance from the Council.

The dictum that there should be no strategy
without an exit is well known. However, the reverse -
namely, that there should be no exit without a
strategy - is equally true. President Ramos-Horta and
other leaders of Timor-Leste do not wish to be
continually dependent on the presence of a Security-
Council-mandated operation or on the deployment of
international security forces. I also believe that the
long-term sustainability of Timor-Leste's efforts
depends on the ability of its own institutions to operate
in a democratic, responsible and effective manner. At
every step of the way, UNMIT and the United Nations
country team have consciously endeavoured to work in
a manner that enhances the capacity and credibility of
the institutions of this young nation.

Nevertheless, our success in supporting the
institutions of Timor-Leste, instead of taking the lead
in any activity, can occasionally give the appearance
that support is non-existent or irrelevant. That
approach also means that progress is not linear, but
depends on the pace at which institutions develop.
Therefore, sudden improvements or deterioration
should not be a cause for elation or undue
despondency, respectively. What is required is a stable
and steady approach.

The touchstone for success in Timor-Leste is not
whether or not crises occur, but how future crises are
met and resolved. The goal should be to ensure that
they are handled in a responsible manner that does not
threaten the State and that, instead, provides an
opportunity for enhanced social cohesion and
development.

The upcoming technical assessment mission to
Timor-Leste should engage extensively with the
national authorities, who are conducting their own
review of the presence of the United Nations and
international security forces, as well as with political
parties and civil society members from across the
spectrum. The future presence and role of the
international security forces needs to be carefully taken
into account in planning any modification of the
composition and strength of UNMIT. The United
Nations and the Government of Timor-Leste should
jointly agree on the criteria for each step in the process
of downsizing the UNMIT police and modifying the
composition and strength of the Mission. It should be
clearly agreed with the authorities, in advance of each
stage, what support the United Nations will and will
not be able to provide. No false promises should be
directly or implicitly made to the Timorese authorities
and people.

At the same time, cooperation with long-term
providers of bilateral and multilateral assistance to
Timor-Leste must continue to be consciously
promoted. Unfortunately, I do not have time to present
an exhaustive list of important bilateral and
multilateral assistance, but I would like to refer to a
few recent examples.

The Australian Government overseas aid
programme's assistance to Timor-Leste has doubled in
the past four years, providing, for example, over
$9.2 million for water and sanitation projects this year
alone. During the reporting period, the United States
dispatched a unit of naval engineers to support the
development of the F-FDTL's engineering capabilities
and to execute humanitarian projects, in particular
school rehabilitation and construction. The Millennium
Development Goal Achievement Fund Joint
Programme (S/2009/504, para. 43) is fully funded by
Spain. The European Commission remains one of the
most important partners, providing, for example, funds
totalling more than $5.5 million to United Nations
agencies to support projects that promote social peace
and stability. Portugal's largest project anywhere in the
world is in Timor-Leste. It entails the deployment of
120 trainers in all 13 districts, who have trained more

09-573 62
than 3,000 primary school teachers and 2,000
secondary and pre-secondary teachers in the
Portuguese language.

I must also acknowledge the critical importance
of Cuba's medical assistance and adult literacy
programmes, as well as the bilateral assistance of many
Asian countries, in particular the member States of the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations. Japan, a major
provider of assistance on infrastructure and rural
development, recently supported the suco or subdistrict
entity elections with financial grants. Just two days
ago, Prime Minister Xanana Gusmao announced
China's additional contribution of 30 million yuan for
the refurbishment of various elements of the
infrastructure. Coordination by the United Nations with
bilateral and multilateral donors, based on a strategic
and measured approach, will be imperative in ensuring
a common understanding of respective roles and
responsibilities.

Timor-Leste, as a small and young island State,
also has to grapple with the challenges of
environmental protection. The environmental footprint
of international assistance should, therefore, be as light
as possible. UNMIT has been making continuous
efforts to reduce energy consumption and to protect the
environment. Those efforts have resulted in a reduction
of 7.8 per cent in the use of generator fuel, which
represents a savings of approximately $285,000, as
well as a 15 per cent reduction in photocopier paper
use over the one-year period ending in August 2009, as
compared to the previous one-year period.

As I prepare to complete my tenure as Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Timor-
Leste, allow me to thank the people and leaders of
Timor-Leste for the gracious manner in which they
have welcomed me amidst them. I have been touched
by the kindnesses of President Jose Ramos-Horta,
President of the National Parliament Fernando
"Lasama" de Araujo, Prime Minister Xanana Gusmao,
former Prime Minister Mari Alkatiri, leaders of all
political parties and ordinary Timorese from all walks
of life in Dili and in the far-outlying and inaccessible
villages. I owe them a debt of gratitude for reinforcing
my faith in the words of our Charter - better
standards of life in larger freedom - that they
constantly seek.

I would also like to thank Deputy Special
Representatives of the Secretary-General Finn Reske-
Nielsen and Takahisa Kawakami, as well as all the
women and men of UNMIT and the United Nations
country team, who, every single day, demonstrate their
commitment to the high ideals of the United Nations
and to supporting the people of Timor-Leste. Similarly,
the support of men and women of the international
security forces has been critical to our work.

Finally, I wish to thank the Security Council for
its constant support and guidance. I also wish to thank
the Secretary-General for having given me the
opportunity to be a partner of the Timorese in their
historic nation- and State-building endeavours.

