Mr. Lowcock: Let me begin by welcoming the
action that you, Mr. President, have taken today to
adopt resolution 2393 (2017). I note your request that
the Secretary-General conduct an independent review
and for us to work even harder on monitoring, reporting
and data gathering. We will, of course, do all that.

Cross-border deliveries will remain an essential
part of our efforts to meet the needs of all those across
Syria who require humanitarian assistance. This will
hardly be news to the Council, but it is important for
me to repeat that in besieged eastern Ghouta increased
fighting and the lack ofhumanitarian access is rendering
life unbearable for an estimated 393,000 people trapped
inside the enclave. Thousands of civilians are caught
in fighting that threatens their lives on a daily basis.
Except for a pause of two days, intensive air and
ground-based strikes have been reported every day
since mid-November. There has been significant loss
of civilian life and hundreds have been wounded, both
in eastern Ghouta and in Damascus city, where shelling
from the besieged enclave has continued.

Over the past weeks, the United Nations and its
humanitarian partners have been allowed to reach only
7 per cent of those in besieged towns and villages in
eastern Ghouta. Tiny amounts of aid have been allowed
in, enough for only a fraction of those in desperate
need. Food shortages have led in many cases to severe
acute malnutrition, and a nutrition sector survey
conducted in November showed a rapid and significant
deterioration in the nutritional status of children under
the age of five. Nearly 12 per cent of children have been
diagnosed with global acute malnutrition - a fivefold
increase in the past 10 months. This is the highest level
of acute malnutrition recorded so far in the country
since the conflict began. These children, whose lives
depend on timely and targeted intervention, need our
immediate support.

In addition, more than 500 people in eastern Ghouta
still require urgent medical evacuation. They include
137 children, 231 girls and women, and 61 people over
the age of 65. There are 73 people with severe cancer.
There are 25 patients with kidney failure. There are
97 people with heart disease. There are five acutely
malnourished children. Infants - some of them just
one or two months old - will die if evacuation permits
are not granted immediately. There have already been
16 civilian deaths among those waiting for permission
to leave eastern Ghouta for medical reasons, including
three in the past few days. Among them are a 45-day-
old infant, a nine-year-old girl and a quadriplegic.
All that is needed is the green light from the Syrian
authorities for these people to go to hospitals just a few
miles outside of eastern Ghouta.
There has also been minimal progress in recent
months in responding to the needs of those trapped
and besieged in Fo'ah, Kefraya and Yarmouk. So far
this year, only a trickle of assistance has been allowed
in for those people. Humanitarian access continues to
face restrictions in all the besieged and hard-to-reach
locations. On average in 2017, only 27 per cent of
people identified to receive assistance under the United
Nations bi-monthly plans have in fact been reached
through inter-agency cross-line convoys each month.
Bureaucratic impediments, like the non-issuance
of facilitation letters, continue to be a significant
factor in these delays, despite the creation of the
tripartite coordination mechanism intended to address
such problems.

In November, only five cross-line convoys were
able to deploy, reaching approximately 200,250
people in hard-to-reach locations and 28,700 people in
besieged locations out of a total besieged population
of more than 400,000 people. So far in December,
none - not one - of our convoys has made it to any
of the besieged locations. Only two convoys have
received the necessary authorizations for deployment
to hard-to-reach locations - one to Harbanifse
in Hama governorate and the other to Al-Houle in
Homs governorate, on 14 December, which delivered
assistance to 60,000 people. Those deliveries were
themselves delayed, following a reduction of one third
in the agreed number of beneficiaries from what had
initially been approved in the access plan.

In the past month, the United Nations and its
partners have continued to reach millions of people
in need through regular programming to parts of the
country controlled by the Government of Syria and
through cross-border operations. Regular programming
from within the country resulted in the delivery of
humanitarian assistance to millions of people in
need, including approximately 2.7 million people who
received food assistance so far this month through more
than 1,595 deliveries.

Cross-border assistance also remained a vital
part of the humanitarian response, with the United
Nations and its partners providing services for health,
education, protection, water and sanitation, and
humanitarian supplies. More than 650 trucks have this
month delivered food assistance to more than 900,000
people through cross-border operations, as well as
health assistance for nearly 1 million treatments.

The overall humanitarian and protection situation
of civilians displaced from Raqqa city remains of high
concern to me, particularly due to mines and explosive
remnants of war. Civilian deaths and injuries due to
mine explosions continue to be reported with alarming
frequency. More than 125 civilians were killed and
almost 200 trauma cases were reported since the end of
military activities in Raqqa city.

Contamination from explosive hazards, including
improvised explosive devices, presents a major threat
and impediment to enabling safe returns. The full scale
of the contamination is not yet fully known, given the
lack of a systematic survey of the city. In addition to the
threat posed by unexploded ordnance, up to 80 per cent
of all buildings in Raqqa city are severely damaged
and at risk of collapse. Those conditions mean that
humanitarian organizations have only very limited
access and presence on the ground.

In Deir ez-Zor governorate, military offensives to
retake the remaining areas held by the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) continue to prompt
significant population displacement. More than
250,000 displacements were registered in November.
Government advances against ISIL along the Euphrates
River have displaced thousands of people from the Abu
Kamal sub-district, near the border with Iraq. Military
operations and associated heavy aerial attacks have
reportedly resulted in more than 150 civilian casualties.
The majority of internally displaced persons (IDPs)
are suffering in dire circumstances due to an extreme
shortage ofshelter, food and safe water. On 12 December,
a Syrian Arab Red Crescent convoy was finally able to
deliver food, health and other relief items provided by
the United Nations and other partners to about 15,000
children, women and men in Abu Kamal city.

People continue to suffer from the effects of
conflict in other areas of the country that have received
less attention. Increased fighting in the past two months
in Hama, Idlib and Aleppo governorates resulted in
more than 90,000 people being displaced. Most ofthose
people moved further into Idlib governorate, which
is already under strain from hosting extraordinary
numbers of IDPs. The humanitarian response in that
area has been difficult due to the ongoing violence, and
the little humanitarian infrastructure that is in place
continues to be impacted by the fighting.

October and November were the worst months this
year for displacement, with 440,000 people forced to
move in October and almost 375,000 in November.
That brings the total number of people displaced this
year alone to approximately 2.6 million, which equates
to 7,700 displacements every day. Many have been
displaced more than once.

The last time humanitarian assistance was delivered
to the people in Rukban camp, which is located on the
border with Jordan, was in June. I am still urging the
Government of Syria to authorize, as a matter of urgency,
the inter-agency deliveries of life-saving humanitarian
assistance to those people from Damascus. In the
meantime, let me say that I am very grateful for the
ongoing efforts to permit an exceptional delivery of
humanitarian assistance to that camp from Jordan and I
hope that that can happen immediately.

The civilian population of Syria deserves to see a
tangible improvement in their daily lives, because they
have always borne the brunt of this unrelenting conflict.
I urge all Council members to do everything possible to
ensure that 2018 brings some relief to their suffering.

