Mr. Wittig (Germany): Let me start by warmly
thanking Ambassador Nawaf Salam and his team for
his wise, effective and courageous leadership of the
Council in the month of September. Let me also join
others in congratulating you, Madame President, as
you assume the presidency of the Council for this
month; you can count on Germany's support.

Since the beginning of this year, we have
witnessed tremendous change in the Arab world. We
see how peaceful demonstrators express their desire for
freedom, dignity and self-determination. We are
impressed by the courage of the people and their
readiness for sacrifice, in spite of oppression and
authoritarian rule. Throughout the region, we commend
all those who continue to express their legitimate
aspiration in a peaceful manner. We are appalled by
those who so brutally repress their own people.

The Syrian security forces - military and
militias - have violently and indiscriminately crushed
demonstrations that were overwhelmingly peaceful.
Syrians from all segments of society were demanding
their basic rights. Their aspirations were met with
tanks, bullets and mass arrests, as well as murder,
forced disappearance, torture, deprivation of liberty
and persecution.

We mourn the victims and have profound respect
for the hundreds of thousands of Syrians who have put
their lives at risk to achieve a better future for
themselves and their children. Thousands are still
under arrest, in many cases without contact with their
families. We urge the Syrian authorities to release all
political prisoners and detained political demonstrators
immediately.

For months now the international community has
called on the Syrian authorities to end all violence,
fully respect human rights and comply with their
obligations under international law. The Security
Council, the Secretary-General of the United Nations,
the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights, the Gulf Cooperation Council, the Arab
League, the European Union and many, many
individual States and Governments - not a single one
of those appeals has been heeded by the Syrian regime.
On the contrary, the violent repression continued
unabated.

Today the Council finally had a chance to decide
that the actions of the Syrian leadership will not go
unanswered. We sincerely regret that members of the
Council could not find a common voice to
appropriately address the grave and systematic human
rights violations by the Syrian authorities.

The stakes are high. If the repression by the
Syrian regime does not stop, the country will move
closer to the brink of civil war. The stability of the
region is at risk. International peace and security are
threatened. This is not the time or place for a mere
wait-and-see approach; it is for actively engaging in
pursuit of greater stability.

Today the Council failed to live up to its
responsibilities under the Charter of the United
Nations: the maintenance of international peace and
security. But let me be very clear. My country would
have wished for a stronger resolution at a much earlier
stage. For the sake of a unified signal from the
Council, the European sponsors of this draft resolution
(S/2011/612) have been working eagerly towards a
compromise among Council members in recent weeks.
We made substantial concessions in order to gain the
support of the Council. We are deeply disappointed that
some members did not find themselves in a position to
reach a compromise, two of them using their veto
power.

This should not, however, spoil the message
already sent out by a large segment of the international
community: we do not want to stand idly by while
atrocities are being committed. The aspirations of the
Syrian people cannot be answered by tanks, bullets and
torture. Not only will members of the regime be held
accountable for their deeds; they also have to
understand that the only viable option for the future of
Syria is through a meaningful, Syrian-led political
process.

While we encourage political dialogue, we will
continue, if need be, to push for sanctions against those
who brutally repress their people and threaten
international peace and stability. We will do so within
the framework of the United Nations and the European
Union, and bilaterally. The people in Syria and the
Arab world should know that Germany, its partners and
all those who cherish the values of freedom, dignity
and self-determination will not relent in their efforts to
stand by them.
