Mr. Tatham (United Kingdom): I thank the
Secretary-General's Special Representative for Kosovo,
Mr. Farid Zarif, for his briefing today. I am delighted to

also welcome to the Council His Excellency Mr. Hashim
Thaci, Prime Minister of Kosovo, and His Excellency
Mr. Ivica Dacie, Prime Minister of the Republic of
Serbia.

The United Kingdom joins others in welcoming
the largely successful local elections held in Kosovo on
3 November and the efforts of both Serbia and Kosovo
to encourage a large turn out. I also commend the
contribution of international organizations, including
the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE), the European Union Rule of Law Mission in
Kosovo (EULEX), the Kosovo Force (KFOR) and the
European Union Election Observation Mission.

The United Kingdom condemns the Violent actions
of a minority of extremists on 3 November, including
the storming of three polling stations in northern
Mitrovica. We call on the relevant authorities to ensure
the perpetrators are swiftly brought to justice.

It was important that all constituencies in Kosovo
were able to participate in the elections. We welcome
the commitment shown by Prime Ministers Thaci and
Dacie to the municipal elections, particularly in their
prompt meeting after 3 November to discuss next steps
for the electoral process. That underlines the value
of the dialogue they have established as a means of
carefully managing potentially sensitive situations.

We welcome the peaceful conduct of the rerun
polling in northern Mitrovica on 17 November.
Cooperation between the OSCE, the Kosovo police,
EULEX and KF OR was exemplary. Those timely reruns
prove that political will and coordination can translate
into a broadly secure and successful outcome. Ahead of
the parliamentary elections next year, Pristina should
implement a wider reform of its electoral process.

The United Kingdom is encouraged by the renewed
momentum in the European Union-facilitated Kosovo-
Serbia dialogue, including the progress made on
energy and telecommunication. We look forward to
seeing both parties continue to implement the relevant
agreements faithfully and to resolve any outstanding
issues expeditiously. We welcome the commitment to
that dialogue shown by the Governments of Kosovo
and Serbia and agree with the Secretary-General that
both Belgrade and Pristina are displaying vision and
perseverance through their commitment to dialogue.

The normalization of relations between Kosovo
and Serbia is integral to both countries' European
Union accession paths. Both parties must continue to
implement fully the dialogue agreement in order to
unlock progress. Kosovo and Serbia must also continue
to communicate the benefits of the agreement and work
together to improve the integration of Kosovo Serbs
in the north. The continued assistance of EULEX in
the implementation of the dialogue agreements will be
indispensable.

Let me take this opportunity to condemn
wholeheartedly the attack on EULEX on 19 September
and pay tribute to Audrius Senavicius, EULEX's first
fatality by hostile action, and to call for the perpetrators
of that attack to be brought to justice.

We fully and wholeheartedly support the important
work of EULEX in Kosovo, including the integration
of institutions in the north under Kosovo's jurisdiction.
We welcome the renewed engagement by both Belgrade
and Pristina in the dialogue and we look forward to
further tangible results.

The United Kingdom welcomed the launch of
negotiations on 28 October for a stabilization and
association agreement between Kosovo and the
European Union, the first milestone on the path to
eventual European Union membership. That step marks
a new phase in Kosovo's relationship with the European
Union, NATO and the United Nations. Kosovo is now
recognized by over half of the United Nations States
Members. We encourage those countries that have not
yet recognized Kosovo to do so.

Finally, I would like to comment on the welcome
way in which the climate of discussion in the last few
debates on the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo in the Council has become markedly
more positive, as most Council members have been able
to come together around welcoming progress in the
dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina and welcoming
also the increased cooperation and stability that has
resulted. Today's meeting so far has sustained that
trend. Against that backdrop, we wonder whether the
Council should be considering reducing the frequency
with which it meets to discuss this matter.

