The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Burundi, the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, Egypt, Japan, Namibia, Rwanda and
Sweden, in which they request to be invited to
participate in the discussion of the item on the
Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

On behalf of the Council, I welcome the Minister
for Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, His Excellency
Mr. Leonard She Okitundu.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. She
Okitundu (Democratic Republic of the Congo)
took a seat at the Council table; Mr. Nteturuye
(Burundi), Mr. Aboul Gheit (Egypt), Mr. Akasaka
(Japan), Mr. Theron (Namibia), Mr. Gasana
(Rwanda) and Mr. Norstro'm (Sweden) took the
seats reservedfor them at the side of the Council
Chamber.

The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations and in the absence of objection, I shall
take it that the Security Council agrees to extend an
invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of
procedure to Mr. Jean-Marie Gue'henno, Under-
Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite Mr. Guehenno to take a seat at the
Council table.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations and in the absence of
objection, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Olara Otunnu,
Under-Secretary-General in the Office of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite Mr. Otunnu to take a seat at the Council
table.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the
eighth report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, document S/2001/572.
Members of the Council also have before them the
report of the Security Council mission to the Great
Lakes region, 15-26 May 2001, documents S/2001/521
and S/2001/521/Add.1.

At this meeting the Security Council will hear
briefings by Mr. Jean-Marie Guehenno, Under-
Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations, and by
Mr. Olara Otunnu, Under-Secretary-General in the
Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Children and Armed Conflict.

I now give the floor to Mr. Guehenno.


