Mr. Arias (Panama) (spoke in Spanish): Let me
begin by welcoming Mr. Nikola Spirie and thanking
him for his statement this morning with regard to the
work, commitment and responsibilities of his
Government. My delegation is pleased also to welcome
the High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina,

Mr. Christian Schwarz-Schilling, and to thank him for
the work he has done in carrying out his tremendous
task, which deserves acknowledgment. The best
witness to his work is the fact that, more than 10 years
after the war and its scars, Bosnia and Herzegovina
remains under the same Government without further
outbreaks of violence.

However, much remains to be done. The current
political stagnation in Bosnia jeopardizes the progress
made in consolidating the achievements of the last 12
years.

The absence of progress in the areas of the
constitution and the police and the insufficient
cooperation with the International Criminal Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY), among other things,
have paralysed Bosnia and set the stage for regression.
Without ethnic and political consensus in Bosnia, the
viability of the country is called into question. Thus,
the main goal of the Dayton Accords - to consolidate
peace in a multi-ethnic Bosnia - seems to be
disappearing over the horizon.

The year 2006 was not a good one for Bosnia.
Ethnic and nationalist policies have slowed and
jeopardized the reform process that was leading the
country towards European integration. The leaders of
each ethnic group making up the population of the
country have the primary obligation to reform
institutions and enter into political agreements that go
beyond their pre-war nationalist goals.

The decisions to be taken by Bosnia and
Herzegovina's political leaders are difficult, which is
not surprising in view of the tragic background that led
to the disintegration of the former Yugoslavia. We
reaffirm the territorial integrity, sovereignty and
political independence of Bosnia and Herzegovina and
urge its political leaders to cooperate among
themselves and with the High Representative in order
to resume the institutional reform process.

Although the future of Bosnia and Herzegovina is
in the hands of its citizens, it also requires greater
leadership, courage and vision on the part of its leaders
than has been seen recently. Yet progress in the
situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina requires the active
participation of the international community. Today
more than ever, we all have a responsibility to guide
Bosnia and Herzegovina towards a liberal democracy
and a free-market economy. Through the High
Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina, we
reiterate our support and urge the parties to take the
difficult political decisions necessary for the country if
it is to progress.

Likewise, the European Union needs to increase
its commitment to Bosnia if it expects the country to
meet the obligations that will set it on the road to
Brussels. The European Union should ensure that the
responsibilities it has assumed in Bosnia continue to be
a priority to its members, and that it fulfils that
obligation in an energetic and broad-based manner.
Only this will ease the political transition of the
Balkans to greater understanding and stability. The
success or failure of efforts in Bosnia is very closely
linked to other similar situations in the region.

