Mr. Portas (Portugal): I thank you, Sir, for
convening this timely debate. I also wish to thank Under-
Secretaries- General Herve Ladsous and Ameerah Haq
for their comprehensive statements.

Allow me also to congratulate you and your
country, Sir, on your very efficient stewardship of
the Council during this month. Morocco and Portugal
share not only centuries of history and strong and
confident neighbourly relations, but also an identical
commitment to making our world a more peaceful,
secure and prosperous one.

It was in that aim that Portugal presented its
candidacy to a non-permanent seat on the Council,
and it was our sincere commitment to the values of the
United Nations and to the fulfilment of the objectives
of its Charter that won the confidence of a significant
number ofits member States. Pursuing those values and
reaching those objectives were and are our only aim
and agenda as members of the Council.

Now, as our mandate draws to its end, I trust that we
have lived up to the confidence placed in us two years
ago. We have done our utmost in the Council to help
settle disputes, promote democracy and human rights;
uphold the protection of civilians, especially women and
children; contribute to collective peacekeeping; actively
engage in peacebuilding efforts; promote dialogue,
reconciliation and religious and cultural tolerance; and
defend freedom, equality and justice for all. The past
two years have been particularly intense, and many of
the decisions taken here have been far-reaching indeed.
Let me mention the Council's decisive contribution to
the establishment of democratic transitions in Libya
and Yemen.

Unfortunately, concerning Syria, we mustrecognize
that the Council has been unable to make an effective
contribution to the cessation of violence in that country
or to help meet the legitimate aspirations of the Syrian

people. Likewise, a comprehensive peace between Israel
and Palestine based on the two-State solution continues
to be stalled. We hope that the recognition of Palestine
as a non-member observer State of the United Nations
will help to relaunch credible negotiations between the
parties in order that a comprehensive agreement may be
reached between them.

In Africa, although we have had to face a renewed
crisis in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
new challenges in Mali and the Sahel, the Council
played an important role in stabilizing the situation in
Sierra Leone, Cote d'Ivoire and Liberia. The Council's
active support to South Sudan also contributed to the
State-building efforts of its people and its ultimate
accession to the United Nations.

Finally, in the Far East, Timor-Leste became a
success story for its people and for the United Nations
with respect to active peacekeeping and peacebuilding.
Portugal is particularly proud to have participated
actively in that endeavour.

Allow me to offer a sincere word of thanks and
appreciation to all our colleagues in the Council, with
whom we have worked closely during these past two
years, and our sincere congratulations and best wishes
to all those that will be joining the Council.

In the light of the tasks ahead and of the old and
new challenges facing the world, it is essential for the
Council to fully uphold its role as the main international
body entrusted with preserving the peace and to act in
a prompt, efficient and credible way in meeting those
challenges.

Our debate today concerns exactly those new
challenges and ways to improve our efficiency and
capacity to address them. It has to do with how the
United Nations can better use the instruments available
to it to act in a more expeditious and efficient way and
to more effectively address some of the new challenges
that confront us.

Peacekeeping is today a flagship activity of
the United Nations and has to a large extent become
the most visible symbol of the United Nations
presence in different regions. We currently have 16
peacekeeping operations and a number of special
political missions. That amounts to more than 100,000
women and men - military, police and civilian
personnel - carrying out the tasks mandated by the
Council. They serve our common objectives, often
in harsh and dangerous conditions. Very often, they
represent the only hope for people who are suffering
and threatened with violence. All those who serve the
United Nations in the field deserve to be commended,
constantly supported, respected and protected.

Everyone knows how deeply Portugal is committed
to peacekeeping. Over the past decades, 23,000
Portuguese peacekeepers have participated in several
United Nations missions, as well as in European
Union and NATO operations. They have been rightly
commended for their professionalism and their outreach
to local populations. Like others, we believe that the
growing complexity and diversity of mandated tasks
demand an increasingly integrated and coordinated
approach to peacekeeping operations.

On the other hand, many of the problems that
missions must face have an increasingly regional
dimension that demands regional approaches and
regional answers if our collective action is to have any
chance of success. That is the case, for example, in the
West Africa region, where inter-mission cooperation
has already proved its usefulness, as was the case
with the cooperation between the Missions in Liberia
and Cote d'Ivoire. Inter-mission cooperation will
certainly be particularly relevant when we discuss an
integrated strategy for the Sahel. Indeed, the complex
crisis in Mali, and its dangerous impact on the Whole
region, calls for a concerted effort on the part of the
international community, with the United Nations in a
leading role.

That is obviously also the case where drug
trafficking, terrorism and other forms of international
crime are concerned. In order to fight them effectively,
it is critical to share intelligence, pool resources and
closely coordinate action among missions. Similarly,
due to the growing capacities of international criminal
organizations, we must be particularly careful to
ensure that success in fighting international crime
in one country does not amount to transferring that
threat to its next-door neighbour. A regional approach
is therefore paramount. We know from experience
the particularly perverse role that international
criminal organizations play in effectively undermining
legitimate Governments, disrupting democratic
electoral processes and promoting to power their
protected clients through violent means, as has been the
case in Guinea-Bissau, unhappily. In order to prevent
such phenomena from becoming widespread, close
inter-mission cooperation can be particularly useful
in detecting signs of such threats at an early stage and
allowing the Security Council to act preventively.

But the case for close cooperation and sharing
experiences and best practices can also be made in
other areas, since many problems' root causes are very
similar in neighbouring countries and often have a
cross-border impact. For instance, the fight against the
scourge of the Lord's Resistance Army is inconceivable
without a regional strategy involving the missions
in the area of the Great Lakes, the Sudan and South
Sudan, in close collaboration with all the Governments
concerned.

Such cooperation between missions has also been
decisive in launching new operations, as happened
recently with the United Nations Supervision Mission
in the Syrian Arab Republic, which benefited from
the contributions of other missions in the region.
Indeed, closer cooperation between missions in terms
of fulfilling surge needs, dealing with capacity gaps
and helping in fast mission start-ups is a concept that
deserves further development, with a view to applying
it more often. Naturally, such inter-mission cooperation
can proceed only if troop- and police-contributing
countries fully share in and agree to such developments.
Portugal believes that this type of cooperation could
also be usefully expanded to other areas, such as
peacebuilding, through a comprehensive approach that
would benefit from regional synergies.

In conclusion, inter-mission cooperation is a
concept that deserves our increased attention. It should
be strengthened and expanded. Obviously, there is
no one-size-fits-all solution, and each mission is an
individual case. But as we have seen, there are important
opportunities and reasons to enhance cooperation and
coordination among them, maximizing the available
resources. We need that discussion, based on the
important lessons learned from recent experiences, in
order to explore the opportunities and challenges that
this concept brings to the implementation of United
Nations missions' mandates and, beyond them, to make
our world more peaceful and secure.

It has been an honour to serve with the Council for
the past two years. Sooner rather than later, I think, we
will be back.

