Mr. Dah (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation thanks Mr. Alexander Zouev, Assistant
Secretary-General for Rule of Law and Security
Institutions, and Ms. Irina Schoulgin Nyoni, speaking
on behalf of the Chair of the Liberian configuration of
the Peacebuilding Commission, for their briefings. My
delegation would also like to thank Mr. Farid Zarif, the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, for
his tireless efforts to bring stability to Liberia as Head
of the United Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL).

The briefing bringing us together today is especially
important to my delegation, marking as it does the
symbolic closure of a third peacekeeping operation in
West Africa, after those of the United Nations Mission
in Sierra Leone and the United Nations Operation
in Cote d'Ivoire. That reflects the effectiveness of
our shared Organization and its resolute focus on its
primary purpose of maintaining peace and security
around the world.

The closure of the United Nations Mission in
Liberia marks a defining moment in that country's
history, but also for the United Nations in its strategic
and pragmatic approach to peacekeeping operations
around the world. The lessons learned from UNMIL's
experience will unquestionably enable us to strengthen
the effectiveness of our structures and mechanisms
dedicated to preserving international peace and security.

Cote d'Ivoire would like to take this opportunity
to salute the memory of the 202 peacekeepers who
lost their lives in the service of peace during the 15
years of the deployment of the United Nations Mission
in Liberia. Liberia has achieved reconciliation and
enjoys excellent relations with neighbouring countries,
including Cote d'Ivoire, as President George Weah's
recent trip to Abidjan on 4 and 5 April demonstrates.

I would also like to take this opportunity to
acknowledge the essential contribution of the Liberian
political stakeholders, who decided to place their
national interests above all other considerations
during a critical period in their country's history. My
thanks also go to the United Nations and to all the
bilateral and multilateral partners whose multifaceted
contributions have enabled Liberia to restore peace
and stability. Along with the rest of the Council, my
delegation welcomes Liberia's evolving sociopolitical
development, as manifested in the recent holding
of open, transparent and peaceful elections and an
exemplary political transition that shows Liberia to be
a country that has definitively chosen a path of peace
and democracy.

Many challenges remain, but we believe firmly that
the commitment and political will of the new Liberian
authorities will enable Liberia to begin again on solid
ground. In that regard, we note the Government's
determination to combat corruption, promote good
governance and advance the national reconciliation
process. However, it will need the support of the
international community if it is to strengthen the
credibility and legitimacy of its governmental
institutions. As the Secretary-General has called for,
international efforts must therefore continue so that
Liberia's partners can support the Government's efforts
to sustain peace and strengthen the investments that
have already been made towards the country's lasting
stabilization. Liberia's fresh start must be based on
a sound footing so that it can make resolute progress
towards development in the interests of its people.

The final departure of a United Nations
peacekeeping operation is a milestone and marks
the host country's break from a long, painful but
instructive interlude towards a transition to sustainable
development and stability. Building on the results
achieved with a view to sustaining peace and stability
will continue to be essential in order to prevent any
backsliding. It is therefore incumbent on the United
Nations country team, along with the Government of
Liberia and regional and subregional organizations, to
work together towards that goal.

For its part, Cote d'Ivoire reiterates its readiness
to share its experiences with its neighbour with a view
to helping it to regain peace and stability once and
for all, within the framework of a dynamic bilateral
partnership between the two States.

