Mr. Bermudez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, I would like to thank Mr. Jeffrey Feltman,
Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs;
Ambassador Roman Oyarzun Marchesi, in his capacity
as facilitator for the implementation of resolution
2231 (2015); and Mr. Joao Vale de Almeida, Head of
the Delegation of the European Union to the United
Nations, for their briefings.

Uruguay, as a non-nuclear-weapon State; a
State member of the first nuclear-weapon-free
zone, established under the Treaty of Tlatelolco;
a State member of the South Atlantic Peace and
Cooperation Zone; and as State party to the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, is
strongly committed to strengthening the disarmament
and non-proliferation regime. The Government of
Uruguay welcomed the International Atomic Energy
Agency's report indicating that Iran had fulfilled all
its obligations under the Joint Comprehensive Plan of
Action, endorsed on 14 July 2015 in Vienna by the P5+1
countries - China, France, Germany, the Russian
Federation, the United Kingdom and the United
States - and the Islamic Republic of Iran, concerning
the Iranian nuclear programme.

Implementation day reached after more than
two years of intensive diplomatic efforts, was a
historic landmark in multilateral diplomacy towards
non-proliferation. It contributed greatly to international
peace, security and stability, and eliminated one of
the main hotbeds of tension in the Middle East. In
recent weeks, the parties have expressed differences
regarding some aspects of the text of resolution 2231
(2015), which understandably diverges from language
previously used in resolution 1929 (2010). We call on the
parties directly involved to step up their talks to resolve
these differences, in the same spirit of cooperation
and commitment they showed in the long negotiation
process to reach resolution 2231 (2015), and thereby
avoid undermining the historic agreement.

Finally, Uruguay echoes the words ofthe Secretary-
General in his report (S/2016/589), in which he urges
us to keep the momentum sparked by the signing of
the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action, in line with its
constructive spirit.

