Mr. Ouane (Mali) (spoke in French): Six months
ago to the day, on the initiative of Mali and under the
presidency of Mr. Alpha Oumar Konare, the Security
Council met at the level of heads of State or
Government, for the second time in its history, to
consider how to ensure for the Security Council an
effective role in the maintenance of international peace
and security, in particular in Africa.

Mali welcomes the spirit of cooperation that
made possible this historic meeting. I am grateful to
the delegation of Ukraine for having taken the initiative
of organizing an open debate to take stock of the
recommendations contained in resolution 1318 (2000),
adopted on that occasion.

Taking into account your appeal for brevity, Mr.
President, I shall limit myself to making a few
comments on two of the six questions raised in the
outstanding working paper prepared by your
delegation. My delegation believes that these questions
deserve particular attention.

First of all, there is a need to strengthen
cooperation and communication between the
United Nations and the regional and subregional
organizations. My country has on numerous occasions
taken a stand in favour of a genuine partnership
between the Security Council and these organizations
that would be mutually reinforcing.

We are most gratified by the meetings of the
Security Council with, on the one hand, the Mediation
and Security Council of the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS), on 12 February 2001,
and, on the other, the Political Committee on the
Implementation of the Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement, on
21 and 22 February 2001, to consider, respectively, the
situation in the West African subregion and in the
region of the Great Lakes.

Those meetings made possible the adoption of
resolutions 1341 (2001) and 1343 (2001), which, in the
view of my delegation, represent a real test of the
determination of the Security Council to address the
aforementioned situations.

Cooperation and coordination between the
United Nations and the Organization of African Unity
(OAU) should also be strengthened through a lasting
political support and commitment. Here I should like to
emphasize how important it is for the international
community, and the Security Council in particular, to
fully support regional and subregional efforts at
conflict prevention, the maintenance of peace and
security, and the settlement of disputes.

It is essential, indeed, to act rapidly to bring
about the implementation of the peace agreements
concluded under the auspices of the OAU and of the
subregional organizations, in particular by taking care
to provide the necessary logistical and financial
assistance. Moreover, resolute action on the part of the
Security Council in this respect is in accordance with
its primarily responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security.

It is indeed a source of satisfaction that the
Security Council placed its action in this context in its
presidential statement of 9 February 2001, which
vigorously supports the peace agreement which the
Government of the State of Eritrea and the Government
of the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia signed
in Algiers on 12 December 2000.

My delegation considers, moreover, that the
Security Council must continue to attach equal
importance to all situations which may have a bearing
on international peace and security, and do so in all
regions of the world.

The Security Council should respond with the
same determination and the same speed when it is
dealing with a situation that poses a threat to
international peace and security.

I should like to recall that in this area the Charter
does not provide for any type of categorization or for
any order of priorities. It is the full responsibility of the
Council to cope with these situations with the powers
entrusted to it by the Charter and the instruments
available to it.

In conclusion, I should like to recall that peace
and security in Africa can be achieved only if
consistent and constant attention is paid to them.
Today's debate marks an important stage in this
process. As President Konare emphasized at the 7
September 2000 meeting, only a comprehensive and
consistent approach can provide an extensive and
lasting impact with respect to the effective role of the
Security Council in the maintenance of international
peace and security, in particular in Africa, by providing
a better life for all in conditions of greater freedom.

