Mr. Hassan (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like express our condolences to the
peacekeepers in Mogadishu and to the families of the
victims of the wanton attack that took place there today.

My delegation congratulates the United Kingdom
on its assumption of the presidency of the Council
for this month and for its concept paper on conflict-
prevention and the effective, transparent management
of natural resources in conflict-affected States
(S/20l3/334, annex).

Natural resources such as water, oil, natural gas
and minerals can be causes of conflict if not managed
wisely and in a manner that avoids rivalries and
competition that lead to conflict. The first presidential
statement (S/PRST/2007/22) on the relationship
between natural resources and conflicts, particularly
the assistance provided by the United Nations through
its peacekeeping operations or field offices, clearly
affirmed that this should be done at the request of
the States concerned while fully respecting their
sovereignty and their strategic policies for managing
natural resources.

I have mentioned before that conflicts may arise
over grazing rights and water sources. A case in point
is the Darfur conflict. Waves of extreme drought and
desertification in Africa in the 1980s led to a scarcity of
natural resources and to further conflicts and rivalries
among different tribes in Darfur. These conflicts
acquired political dimensions as they deteriorated. In
some areas, such as Darfur, for example, conflict erupted
over gold-mining rights - a development we do not
wish to see recur in the region. The Government of the
Sudan has therefore set out strategies and established
laws to govern mining activities in a manner that avoids
conflict between the various tribes in those areas.

In conclusion, we would like to endorse the
concept paper's emphasis on the need for sound and
transparent management of natural resources. I stress
the important role of the United Nations in this field,
in particular in providing neutral and honest advice to
national Governments at their request. We also reiterate
the importance of supporting the efforts of national
Governments to establish peace and stability as the
core foundation on which all national institutions can
manage natural resources in the most effective way.

We look forward to the Council's support for the
efforts to achieve peace and stability in the Sudan by
sending a strong message to the rebel groups under the
banner of the so-called Sudan Revolutionary Front,
which are seeking to topple the Sudanese Government
and have committed several military assaults against
cities and villages in Northern and Southern Kordofan,
as well as against the United Nations Interim Security
Force for Abyei, killing one peacekeeper and wounding
two others. Those rebel movement would not have dared
commit such flagrant crimes had the Security Council
dealt with them more firmly. They would not have dared
to continue such attacks. The time has therefore come
for the Council to take effective punitive measures
against those movements that target infrastructure,
resources and development efforts in the country.

