Ms. Bahous (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank the delegation of your
country, Madam, for presiding over the Security
Council during this month and for Poland's tireless
efforts in organizing this open debate and placing this
important topic on the agenda of the Security Council.
I wish you every success.

I would like also to express my gratitude and
appreciation to Secretary-General Antonio Guterres
for his informative briefing and for his latest report
on this topic (S/2018/462). I would also like to thank
the Director-General of the International Committee
of the Red Cross and the Chair of the Iraqi Al-Amal
Association for their briefings.

I also wish to express my condolences to the
bereaved families of the victims of the unjustifiable,
illegal and inhumane Israeli violence against innocent
civilians who recently protested against the Israeli
occupation of the Gaza Strip.

Two years ago, the Security Council unanimously
adopted resolution 2286 (2016), on the protection
of civilians in armed conflict, to deter any acts of
violence, attacks or threats facing civilians - as well
as medical and humanitarian personnel - in armed
conflicts. Unfortunately, violence and abuses continue
to be perpetrated against civilians and civilian
infrastructure such as hospitals and schools, with no
deterrence sufficient to put an end to such violations of
international law.

Israel used excessive force against unarmed
Palestinians in the Gaza Strip, mostly women and
children, who were exercising their legitimate right to
peacefully protest against oppression and occupation.
Israel killed more than 61 Palestnians, including eight
children, over the past two months. This is a new crime
that is pushing the region towards violence.

Peace cannot be built on the debris of the legitimate
aspirations of peoples or on bloodshed or violence or
perpetual occupation and siege. Peace can be built only
by recognizing the right of all peoples to live in dignity,
to independence, to freedom and their inalienable
rights. Peace and security will materialize in the region
only when the occupation comes to an end and when
the independent State of Palestine is established along
the borders of 4 June 1967, with East Jerusalem as its
capital. We stress in that regard that Jerusalem is key to
peace and harmony in the region.

We call upon the international community to
shoulder its ethical and legal responsibilities and take
all measures necessary to ensure the protection of the
Palestinian people falling victim to the arrogance of
the illegitimate Israeli occupation, which disregards all
of the relevant Security Council resolutions and insists
on its practices, which undermine any opportunity
for peace. We reiterate our support of the Human
Rights Council resolution regarding the establishment
of an independent mechanism for investigating
the incidents in Gaza and the Israeli violations of
Palestinian rights. We look forward to the outcomes
of that mechanism to secure accountability of those
responsible for committing those crimes in violation to
international law.

The violence and violations against the Palestinian
people perpetrated by the Israeli occupation should
come to an end. The international community should
shoulder the responsibility to protect the Palestinian
people before history. We reaffirm our principled
position regarding support for the Palestinian people
and their inalienable rights. Within the framework
of helping our Palestinian brothers in Gaza, King
Abdullah II has instructed the General Command of
the Jordanian Armed Forces to enhance the capacities
of the Jordanian field hospital in the Gaza Strip and to
equip it with all the personnel and equipment necessary
to provide the health care required by our Palestinian
brothers and sisters due to the violations perpetrated by
the Israeli occupation.

Jordan attaches great importance to the enforcement
of international law, international humanitarian law
and international human rights law. We fully comply
with the implementation of all the relevant provisions
enshrined in various areas. Our security agencies
fully understand these laws; no violation has ever been
attributed tothem. That also applies to the Jordanian
troops who contribute to United Nations peacekeeping
operations in several places. They place the protection
of civilians as their top priority.

We reaffirm the importance of applying all
measures that aim to improve the protection of
civilians, including health-care facilities and workers,
as well as humanitarian workers, and to operationalize
all procedures for prevention, protection and
accountability. A continuous lack of accountability and
the scourge of impunity would exacerbate the dangers
against civilians and embolden the perpetrators to
commit further violations. That will deepen despair,
which will eventually lead to violence and extremism.
We must gear our efforts towards fighting terrorism
and violent extremism and the extreme transborder
ideologies that accompany the same.

It is important to execute the Secretary-General's

agenda for building and sustaining peace, which places
protection at the core of the work of the United Nations
in conflict prevention. Once again, we reiterate that the
root causes of conflicts should be addressed. Progress
must be made also in human rights work and sustainable
development, as well as the peacekeeping and
peacebuilding efforts, especially given the increasing
level of armed conflicts and increasing numbers of
refugees, as well as military acts and wars that have
reached their peak since the Cold War.

Putting an end to armed conflicts is part and
parcel of protecting civilians from the scourge of war
and conflict. It is also an integral part of the avenues
towards development, humanitarian, diplomatic and
security actions that we must continue to follow. In that
vein, we reiterate that building and sustaining peace
and the administration of justice is a common priority
for the entire world: the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development charts a road map to that end. Sustainable
development is key in the prevention of conflicts and is
a main pillar for efforts towards achieving sustainable
peace and the administration of justice, particularly
by focusing on people themselves; fighting poverty
and marginalization; robust education; socioeconomic
development; the creation of hope and prospects for
progress, prosperity and dignified life.

Special importance should be attached to the
protection of women, girls and children in armed
conflict, given the unprecedented crises in today's
world. Such crises are attributed to the surge in sexual
violence in conflict, which is one ofthe most horrendous
tactics of war and terrorism used to intimidate women
and children, threatening security and undermining
any chance for peace. The unprecedented wave of crises
witnessed by the world has exacerbated all forms of
violence against civilians - women, men and children.
This is a threat to security and could undermine the
potential for peace.

Violence has become pervasive all over the
world: Afghanistan, the Central African Republic,
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Iraq, Syria
and Myanmar, to name but a few. Violence against
the Rohingya is particularly despicable. This painful
phenomenon requires a coordinated and prompt
response from the international community, including
by meeting the needs of the survivors of violence.

We are all witnesses to the ongoing Syrian crisis and
its political and social consequences, which continue to
cast shadows on neighbouring countries hosting Syrian
refugees. In that context, Jordan has proved its respect

for international law by hosting 1.3 million Syrian
refugees. This is out of our belief in the necessity to
protect civilians in armed conflict.

In conclusion, the responsibility to protect civilians
in armed conflict reflects a true commitment by Member
States and the parties to conflicts to work earnestly if
we are to spare ourselves and future generations the
scourge of war and the consequences thereof. This is
especially true given the multiple threats facing us
today, for example, extremism and terrorism, which
threaten the entire globe and which constitute a violation
of international humanitarian law, international human
rights law and all other humanitarian norms.

