Mr. Spatafora (Italy): Allow me to join previous
speakers in thanking Under-Secretary-General Pascoe
for his very exhaustive briefing and its clear-cut
language, which once again gives us a clear picture of
the situation on the ground and of where we stand on
the political track, the way forward and the
conditionalities. We fully share and support his
concluding remarks in paragraphs 32 and 33 of his
statement and his encouragement addressed to both
parties, Prime Minister Olmert and President Abu
Mazen.

We are deeply concerned by the evolution of the
situation in the Gaza Strip and southern Israel, and we
are very worried about its humanitarian repercussions.
I think the clear-cut language, as I said before, of
Under-Secretary-General Pascoe speaks for itself: grim
realities, intensification of violence, and increased
humanitarian suffering and Violation of human rights.
Those three points encapsulate what is going on and
what we have to deal with.

We welcome, in principle, the decision by the
Israeli authorities to suspend the blocking of the
crossing. We will have to see it on the ground. We hope
that the flow of goods across the border, and not only
diesel fuel, will resume as quickly and effectively as
possible for humanitarian and trade purposes. Also on
that matter, we support Under-Secretary-General
Pascoe's call on all parties to work urgently for a
controlled re-opening of the crossing.

We firmly condemn the firing of rockets at Israel
and recognize, certainly, Israel's right to self-defence,
but we request that the consequences of those actions
not be borne by innocent civilians. We believe, as I
said before, that the decision to suspend or restrict the
delivery of essential goods into Gaza is unsustainable
and counterproductive.
It is imperative that there be an end to all
violence and, above all, that the civilian population of

both parties no longer be subject to indiscriminate
attacks. We thus support the proposal for the
Palestinian Authority to take control of the Palestinian
side of the Gaza Strip crossing, and we support the
resolution adopted by the League of Arab States in that
regard. For that purpose, we would also like to resume
the monitoring mission of the European Union at Rafah
on the basis of the 2005 Agreement on Movement and
Access.

We welcome the stance taken by the Egyptian
Government in the peaceful and orderly management
of the crisis underway, and we support the availability
of the European Union to foster a solution in
collaboration with Egypt, the Palestinian Authority and
Israel.

The evolution of the situation in the Gaza Strip
should in no way slow down the dialogue underway, as
Under-Secretary-General Pascoe stressed. There is a
need for all parties to show the necessary consistency
with the spirit of Annapolis. Most of all, it is important
that the parties abstain from taking stances conflicting
with the principles of the Road Map and that they do
not send the wrong signal regarding their goodwill in
pursuing the success of their bilateral dialogue. In
particular, it is necessary for all the activities aimed at
expanding the Israeli settlements in the West Bank to
cease and for all of the illegal outposts to be
dismantled, in accordance with the commitments
undertaken in the Road Map. In addition, it is
necessary for the freedom of movement and access of
the Palestinians to be eased.

The international community is strongly
committed to supporting the building of an
independent, democratic, contiguous and Viable
Palestinian State. The European Union has made a
major commitment to that effort, including through the
recent adoption - recalled by others, in particular my
Belgian colleague, Mr. Verbeke - of the new
mechanism for managing assistance to the Palestinian
people.

Also, in the light of the complex situation on the
ground, it is our hope that the Quartet's role in support
of bilateral dialogue will be re-launched.

With regard to the situation in Lebanon, Italy
categorically condemns the terrorist attack that took
place in Beirut on 25 January, taking the life of the
captain of the Lebanese internal security forces,
Wissam Eid.

I would go on, but since I am taking the floor at

this stage of the debate, I will limit myself to simply

recalling and fully supporting what the French

Permanent Representative, Mr. Ripert, has said. What
he has said is what I would have said.

Allow me to conclude by saying that we would
like to stress that we welcome the mediation efforts of
the League of Arab States and we encourage its
Secretary-General. We strongly support the Arab
League's role in the search for a rapid solution to the
political crisis. On the final point that was raised by
Mr. Arias as a matter of principle, I think that it is an
important point and provides food for thought, and it
would be a mistake and shortsighted of us to dismiss it.
I think he makes an important point about our mission
and that of the General Assembly. We must think about
that. Our credibility, that is, the credibility of the
United Nations, depends on how we address those
issues.

