Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, I would like to wish you,
Mr. President, a blessed Ramadan. Allow me to
congratulate my dear friend His Excellency Dato Sri
Anifah Aman, Minister for Foreign Affairs, and his
friendly country, Malaysia, on its assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month and
for holding this important meeting.

I would like to start with two pieces of news before
I read out my statement. The first is that Daesh herds
of Israeli settlers attacked and set fire to the Church of
Loaves and Fishes on Lake Tiberias, in Upper Galilee,
Palestine. That church was so named because Jesus
Christ multiplied the fishes there. Today, the Daesh
herds of Israeli settlers have burned it down and on its
walls wrote malicious graffiti offensive to humankind
and to religions. The second piece of news is directly
related to the topic under discussion. According to the
Turkish newspaper Cumhuriyet, the Turkish regime has
backed down from transporting 1 million detonators to
terrorist groups in Syria Via Jordan. I wanted to bring
those two pieces of news to the Council's attention.

At the time when the Government of Syria is
receiving the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
for Syria, Mr. Staffan de Mistura, in Damascus, in
keeping with its serious commitment to eliminating
terrorism and to finding a Syrian political solution to
the crisis in Syria, the terrorist armed groups, which
some would like to call "moderate", have pounded the
cities of Aleppo and Damascus and the rural areas with
all kinds of missiles, shells and mortars, and have set
off booby-trapped cars over the past two days. Those
groups have spared no residential area, school or
hospital from their acts. That has resulted in the death
and injury of hundreds of civilians, the majority of
whom are women and children.

That was the subject of two letters that I sent to the
President of the Security Council and the Secretary-
General on 16 June, hoping that the information
contained in those letters would be taken seriously by
the leaders of this international Organization and not be
omitted from their future reports. We have had to deal
with this problem in the past, and we are still facing the
same problem in the report of the Secretary-General
under discussion today (S/2015/409).

Just yesterday 7,000 mortar shells and rockets fell
on the city of Aleppo. That figure could be useful to the
representative of Luxembourg, who just had the floor. I
would like to enlighten her cultural understanding and
knowledge of the situation in Syria.

We are discussing the third report on children and
armed conflict issued by the Secretary-General based
on the recommendations of his Special Representative
Ms. Zerrougui. These reports should have taken into
consideration the information received from all the
parties concerned - particularly all Governments,
including the Syrian Government - with regard
to the situation of the children in our country.
Regretably, however, what we have witnessed over
the past years, despite our close cooperation with the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
her Office, is a dubious disregard by that Office of
much correspondence and documented governmental
evidence refuting the allegations included in this report
and the preceding reports.

We have sent to the Office of the Special
Representative a list of the names of the children killed
by the terrorists and a list of the schools and hospitals
that they targeted. We have sent her all the information
that is relevant to her mandate and have provided
her with hundreds, even thousands, of documents on
actions committed by the terrorist armed groups against
the children in Syria since the onset of the crisis. The
latest of this correspondence was dated 30 March, and
in it we provided Syria's detailed reply with regard to
the allegations against the Government in Syria. That
reply and the evidence we provided were not taken into
consideration in this report. Not one of those actions we
detailed were mentioned in the report. That is a source
of concern for us and tarnishes the image of those who
drafted the report.

That leads us to one conclusion: the people who
wrote these reports have become a tool in the hands
of some influential countries in this international
Organization with a view to tarnishing the image of the
Syrian Government. The drafters of these reports will
not accept any View that has not been endorsed by those
influential countries. That accounts for the lack of any
recommendation to add the Israeli armed forces to the
lists in the annex of the report as the party responsible
for the killing of thousands of Palestinians under
occupation over the last six months. It also accounts
for the failure by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General over the last years to even mention
the suffering of the Syrian children in the occupied
Syrian Golan.

Despite what has been said, I think the general
line of thinking behind this report is to ignore facts
and only mention the numbers of the victims. It fails
to mention the real causes behind the crisis and denies
the role played by sponsor countries, especially their
role in increasing the grave violations of the rights of
our children, especially the recruitment of children by
terrorist and extremist groups.

Despite all those acts, our country has assumed its
responsibility and provided protection for its citizens.
I think we have to refute all the allegations against
the Syrian Government, which is actually fighting
terrorism, instead of accusing the countries that sponsor
terrorism in the country.

In Syria and the neighbouring refugee camps, the
heinous ways used to recruit children are unprecedented.
They have targeted 4-year-old children. I do not believe
that we have just been imagining the propaganda videos
released by Daesh depicting children, some under 10
years old, collectively executing dozens of detainees
held by that terrorist organization, either by shooting
or beheading them.

How have children come to commit these
murderous massacres? Regrettably, terrorist groups
have indoctrinated our children by teaching them their
murderous ideologies, after abducting them from their
loved ones and instructing them on how to commit such
crimes, on the basis of takfiri and Wahhabi teachings.

We have witnessed the horrendous and appalling
massacre committed by Al-Nusra Front terrorist
operatives against 40 Syrian civilians in the village
of Qalb Al-Loza in rural Idlib last week. More than
half of the victims were children. The massacre was
carried out because the villagers had refused to recruit
their children into the Al-Nusra terrorist group. In this
connection, our country supports adding the crime of
the abduction of children as a form of grave Violation,
identifying those responsible for such crimes and listing
them in the annexes to the report of the Secretary-
General. We must recall here that the crimes committed

by Daesh and the Al-Nusra Group have their roots in
the Middle Ages, with the Seljuks, the Ottomans and
the Janissary army.
Despite all of that, the Syrian Government is
making every effort to protect its children from this
terrorist extremist ideology. We have been successful in
reopening 207 schools in the area of rural Hasakah, but
more than 532 schools are still closed because they are
controlled by Daesh operatives. These schools are used
to stockpile weapons. The Special Representative ofthe
Secretary-General is accusing the Syrian Government
of targeting schools without really explaining the
situation or indicating who is using them for terrorist
purposes. The Syrian Government has spared no effort in
fostering cooperation with the Special Representative's
monitoring and reporting team; we have provided
her Office with fully documented information on the
hundreds of crimes and grave violations committed
by these groups, in the hope that these acts will be
immediately investigated.

Some say that two thirds of the schools that were
destroyed were destroyed by the Syrian Government, as
if they had counted these schools one by one and thus
reached this conclusion. As I mentioned earlier, the
Syrian Government has spared no effort in cooperating
with the Special Representative in the area of monitoring
and reporting. However, we have not seen any effective
or concrete actions to that end.

What is required today is to put an end to the
policies adopted by terrorism-sponsoring Goverments;
some of these countries are members of the Council.
It is also important to take measures to hold these
Governments accountable and to implement the
Security Council resolutions on combating terrorism,
especially resolution 2199 (2015). It is also important
to provide support for the Syrian Government, with a
view to rehabilitating and reintegrating children into
their communities. Otherwise, ammunition and fuel for
this war will continue to flow into the country from
outside Syria. New generations within and outside
Syria will be raised against the backdrop of bloodshed
and violence, which will only further the agendas of
terrorist organizations and their backers and prolong
the crisis, which may spread worldwide.

