Mr. Davide (Philippines): I thank you, Sir, for
this opportunity to address the Council and
congratulate the presidency of the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, now in the midst of
a successful leadership of the Council this month.

In view of time constraints, I will deliver a
condensed version of my delegation's statement, copies
of which will be made available in the Chamber.

At the outset, my delegation associates itself
broadly with the views of the Chairs of the Non-
Aligned Movement and the Group of 77 and China as
regards the principle that the competencies of each
organ of the United Nations should be respected in
order to uphold and maintain the clear delineation of
their functions and responsibilities.

My delegation is participating in today's open
debate because of the importance of the issues of
energy, security and climate change to my country. As
to the latter, which is linked to the environment, the
Constitution of the Philippines expressly provides that
the State shall protect and advance the right of the
people to a balanced and healthful ecology, in accord
with the rhythm and harmony of nature. In a landmark
decision - Oposa et al. vs Secretary of Environment
Factoran - the Supreme Court of the Philippines
allowed children, on their own behalf and on behalf of
the children of succeeding generations, to sue the
Government to enforce that right, thereby enunciating
the doctrine of intergenerational responsibility and
intergenerational justice.

There is a need to focus on United Nations
system-wide attention to those issues. More
importantly, there is an extreme urgency for
international community-wide prioritization, including
at the regional and national levels, to address the
challenges posed by energy security and climate
change. My delegation therefore hopes that this debate
will help raise awareness that will lead to a much-
needed international consensus for speedy cooperation
and action on energy and climate change.

Mankind's survival on our fragile planet faces a
serious threat posed by our fast-deteriorating climate.
In the landmark decision I mentioned earlier, the
Supreme Court declared that, unless something is done
today, humankind may inherit a parched earth
incapable of sustaining life. It is undeniable that
inordinate consumption and production patterns,
especially in developed countries, have led to the
current climatic situation. Let us not, however, be
diverted by finger-pointing; instead, we should
examine how each of our countries can contribute to
the mitigation of climate change, in keeping with the
moral doctrine of intergenerational justice, equity,
responsibility and burden-sharing.

The abatement of climate change was one of the
main issues addressed at the Second East Asia Summit
held on 15 January 2007 in the Philippines. In the Cebu
Declaration on East Asian Energy Security adopted at
the Summit, the 10 South-East Asian countries,
together with Australia, China, India, Japan, New
Zealand and the Republic of Korea, agreed to work
closely together to mitigate greenhouse gas emissions
through effective policies and measures.

The environment ministers of the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) issued in November
2006 the Cebu Declaration on Sustainable
Development, wherein they expressed their concern
over the impact of climate change on ecosystems. They
reiterated their commitment to addressing global
environmental issues through national and regional
cooperation, and called upon the international
community to continue to work with ASEAN in that
regard.

Climate change is also built into the ASEAN Plan
of Action for Energy Cooperation 2004-2009. The Plan
mandates the inclusion of environmental and
sustainable development concerns in regional energy
policy formulation.

Climate change was also discussed last month
during the sixteenth ASEAN and European Union
Foreign Ministers Meeting. The ministers noted with
particular interest the Cebu Declaration on East Asian
Energy Security and agreed to promote cooperation on
climate change, energy security, sustainable energy and
multilateral measures for stable, effective and
transparent energy markets.

The Philippines itself has made climate change a
priority issue. Recognizing the urgent need to confront
the issue and address its adverse effects, President
Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo established, in February this
year, the Presidential Task Force on Climate Change.
The Task Force is mandated to conduct a rapid
assessment of the impact of climate change, ensure
strict compliance with air emission standards, combat
deforestation and apprehend violators.

The United Nations Framework Convention on
Climate Change recognizes, among other things, that
poverty eradication and economic development are the
first and overriding priorities of developing countries.
Under the principle of common but differentiated
responsibilities, developed countries have to take the
lead in modifying longer-term trends in anthropogenic
emissions, such as changes in consumption and
production lifestyles, to address climate change. In
view of this, the Philippines would like to stress a
number of points.

First, all of the risks are of equal significance and
are equally applicable to all parts of the world.
However, developed countries are better equipped than
developing countries to respond and manage the risks,
and there is therefore a need for truly global
cooperation, with developed countries - given their
historical responsibilities - taking the lead.

Secondly, there is a need to further improve our
understanding of technological responses in addressing
climate change - and particularly its adverse effects -
through adaptation, recognizing that developing
countries remain most vulnerable to those adverse
effects. What is needed is cooperative development of
technology, which would ensure that there are no
barriers to effective technology transfer and that such
technology is adapted to the needs of user countries.
Cooperative development of technology would address
the needs of both developed and developing countries,
all of which are affected by climate change.

Thirdly, all countries should comply with their
legally binding obligations under the Framework
Convention, in particular on the provision of financial
resources and the transfer of technology. Greater
resources should be provided for concrete adaptation
measures.

Fourthly, the pursuit of sustainable development
is fundamental for all countries. All countries should
thus make climate change considerations an integral
part of their development plans.

In conclusion, my delegation wishes to point out
that the years 2007 to 2009 will be critical in testing
the resolve of Member States to take bold and decisive
steps to mitigate climate change. As long as the
approach involves all stakeholders - Governments,
parliaments, non-governmental and civil society
organizations, the private sector, faith communities and,
above all, the people themselves - and as long as there
is the determination and political will to make and
fulfil commitments, we will be able to save mankind
and make this planet a beautiful place to live in.

