The Secretary-General: I thank the Ukrainian
Presidency for convening this meeting, which is
an opportunity to build on last month's debate on
preventing conflict (see S/PV.7857) in the most tangible
and concrete ways.

The two global conflicts that ignited in Europe
during the first half of the last century played a
foundational role in the United Nations and in the
SecurityCouncil,whichwasbornfromanoverwhelming
conviction that such wars can and must be prevented.
For the past 70 years, the countries of Europe have
been at the forefront of conflict prevention. European
institutions have shown the effectiveness of binding
countries together with rules-based mechanisms to
resolve differences without resorting to violence.

(spoke in French)

European leaders have developed a sophisticated
collective peace-and-security apparatus and have
striven to promote human rights - civil and political
rights, as well as social, economic and cultural rights.
Many European societies are multicultural, multi-faith
and multi-ethnic. The countries and communities
that have invested politically and economically in
cohesion and inclusion have shown that diversity
spawns creativity and innovation. That being said,
we should not take peace and prosperity in Europe
for granted. The transition to a multipolar world has
increased uncertainties and risks. We need multilateral
institutions and sound regional organizations to
maintain peace and stability as we address today's
new and dangerous challenges. At a time when serious
conflicts persist in Europe, new issues and threats have
emerged - populism, nationalism, xenophobia and
violent extremism are the causes and repercussions
of conflicts.
(spoke in English)

The Security Council is seized of many of the
conflict situations in the region. The United Nations
is working in a complementary way with regional
organizations and mechanisms that were created to deal
with those challenges in line with Chapter VIII of the
Charter of the United Nations. We are leading some of
the peace efforts in Europe, including negotiations to
reach a comprehensive and durable settlement to the
long-standing Cyprus question. The United Nations
and I personally are at the disposal of the two Cypriot
communities and of the guarantor Powers to support a
search for a solution that is acceptable to all.

The United Nations is working alongside the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) and the European Union (EU) in co-chairing
the Geneva international discussions on Georgia.
In the Balkans, we have been working closely with
our regional partners to support sustainable peace
in Kosovo, in the context of resolution 1244 (1999).
Thanks to the efforts of my Special Envoy, the United
Nations is facilitating discussions aimed at addressing
the so-called name issue between the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia and Greece. Elsewhere, our
work complements the efforts of regional actors and
mechanisms, including the OSCE, the EU and others, to
address situations in the South Caucasus and Moldova,
as well as the current conflict in Ukraine. The United
Nations system is also fully engaged on the ground in
peacebuilding, governance, human rights, development
and the rule of law. Such multi-dimensional work is at
the nexus between conflict prevention and sustaining
peace, supporting stability in the region and beyond.

The term "frozen conflict", which is often used to
refer to conflicts in Europe is misleading. Until peace
agreements are signed and implemented, the risk of
renewed violence remains, as we saw last April in
Nagorno-Karabakh in the South Caucasus. The United
Nations fully supports the efforts of the OSCE's Minsk
Group and urges the parties to the conflict to de-escalate
tensions and fully implement agreed conflict-prevention
measures. I urge all concerned to show greater political
will, so as not only to strengthen the ceasefire regime
and implement previous commitments but also to renew
a sustainable and comprehensive negotiating process.

The Transnistrian conflict in Moldova is also
unresolved. The 5+2 process, led by the OSCE, has
made some progress but more needs to be done in
order to achieve a lasting settlement for the benefit of
residents on both banks of the Dniester river. In the
Western Balkans, the devastating conflicts ofthe 1990s
have left a damaging legacy, where reconciliation and
peacebuilding efforts are incomplete. It is crucial to
guard against the erosion of the progress made over the
past 20 years in Bosnia and Herzegovina and elsewhere.
I urge continued efforts to promote the normalization of
relations between Belgrade and Pristina and to resolve
the long-standing "name issue" between Greece and the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia.

The crises in Georgia in 2008 and in Ukraine in 2014
show that Europe remains at risk from new outbreaks of
conflict. The United Nations fully supports the Geneva
international discussions, which will soon enter their
tenth year and urges the participants to demonstrate the
political will to find creative solutions for the benefit of
all. Some progress has recently been made, including
on humanitarian issues, but much more should be done
to resolve key peace and security issues. There is an
urgent need for agreement on the non-use of force, the
freedom of movement and internally displaced people.

The ongoing tragic conflict in Ukraine illustrates
that localized violence has the potential to escalate into
more serious confrontations. They can have geopolitical
consequences that risk undermining regional and
international peace and security. Direct challenges
to national sovereignty and territorial integrity are
reminders that we must collectively work to preserve
and strengthen a rules-based international order so as
to maintain peace and security, in accordance with the
Charter.

In accordance with the relevant Security Council
and General Assembly resolutions, the United Nations
remains committed to supporting a peaceful resolution
of the conflict, in a manner that fully upholds the
sovereignty, territorial integrity and independence of
Ukraine. The United Nations fully supports the efforts
within the Normandy Four, the Trilateral Contact
Group, and the OSCE's Special Monitoring Mission,
and has repeatedly called for the full implementation
by all sides of all of their commitments under the
Minsk process, both in letter and in spirit. We need an
immediate and full ceasefire.

I take note of the Normandy format meeting on
18 February, endorsing the most recent ceasefire
measures agreed by the Trilateral Contact Group
effective yesterday, including the immediate withdrawal
of heavy weaponry. I hope that that will finally translate
into real progress towards peace, which is long overdue
for the people of eastern Ukraine. I urge all sides to
give the highest priority to protecting civilians.

In Ukraine and in all other conflicts, I urge all
stakeholders to avoid unilateral steps or attempts to
create facts on the ground, which further complicate
and endanger efforts to find negotiated settlements.
That is especially relevant in view of the latest actions
taken in relation to the conflicts in eastern Ukraine and
the South Caucasus. The international community must
guard against such steps.

Conflict in Europe is not only a tragedy for those
directly involved; those killed, injured or displaced,
or who have lost loved ones, may be unable to access
health care and are missing vital years of their
education. It is also reversing development gains and
preventing communities and societies from achieving
their full potential and contributing to regional and
global prosperity.

Economic progress and sustainable development
are based on long-term stability, which, in turn, requires
peace and security and respect for human rights. No
single factor can be blamed for the emergence and
continuation of conflicts in Europe. In many cases,
peace agreements are simply not being implemented.
Other factors include challenges to democratic
governance and the rule of law, and the manipulation of
ethnic, economic, religious and communal tensions for
personal or political gain, fuelled in part by worsening
geopolitical rivalries.

Whatever the causes may be, the inability ofregional
and international institutions, including our own, to
prevent and resolve conflicts is seriously undermining
their credibility and making it more difficult for them to
succeed in the future. I call for honest reflection on this
vicious cycle. And I encourage the States Members of
the United Nations, the Council, regional mechanisms
and all stakeholders to intensify their efforts to define a
peace and security agenda aimed at addressing today's
complex challenges. The status quo is not sustainable.

The United Nations has globally tried-and-tested
tools, norms, agendas, lessons learned and best
practices for mediation, the promotion of dialogue, early
warning and early action, preventing and resolving
conflicts, and peacebuilding. They are readily available
to Member States and regional mechanisms engaged in
such efforts. I urge all those with influence to step up
their efforts to resolve existing conflicts and to prevent
tensions from escalating into new conflicts. That is
essential for safeguarding stability and cooperation in
Europe and beyond, based on mutual trust and respect.
The United Nations and I, personally, stand ready to
lend our support.

