Mr. Mohamed (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): I wish
to congratulate you, Mr. President, on assuming the
presidency of the Security Council for this month.
I also wish to congratulate your predecessor, the
Representative of the United Kingdom, on her efforts
while assuming the presidency ofthe Council last month.
I want as well to assure you of the full cooperation of
my country's delegation with you.

At the outset, I would like to reiterate the
commitment of my country to cooperate with the United
Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA)
so that it can fulfil its mandate pursuant to resolution
1990 (2011). I also thank the Secretary-General for his
report to the Security Council (S/2018/778), as well as
Under-Secretary-General Lacroix for his briefing. I
also would like to wish Special Envoy Haysom every
success in his new post.

We should not forget the positive, and even
the ideal, circumstances that made it possible to
successfully conclude an agreement in July 2011 on
the final status of Abyei. That was a direct result of
the full commitment to the right to self-determination
of South Sudan, which was the basis of the 2005
comprehensive Peace Agreement. That Agreement was
an international negotiated one that led to a commitment
to strengthening the points of convergence among
the two sisterly countries and to avoid the use of any
non-peaceful means.

We agreed at the time that we are one people in
two States. We believe in the moral obligation as
well as the legal commitment to respect the Abyei
Agreement, which also addresses the final status of
this integral part of the Sudanese territory. I would like
to underscore that the stability and security currently
prevailing in Abyei and the significant progress being
made in terms of coexistence between Misseriya
and Ngok Dinka communities, as documented in the
report recently presented to the Council, are the direct
outcome of efforts deployed by the Government and
the communities, as well as the positive role played by
UNISFA since its establishment.

Wisdom dictates the need for cooperation among
all partners to further consolidate security and stability.
It likewise requires that the parties distance themselves
from any actions or decisions that could undermine
that stability before the final legal status of Abyei is
determined. Until then, Abyei is an integral part of
Sudanese territory, and the Sudanese Government
exercises full sovereignty over that territory.

I wish to recall what the members of the Security
Council asserted last year, namely, that achieving
security and stability in Abyei is a feat in itself, and
that should be preserved and further strengthened.

The Government of the Sudan took note of the
recommendations contained in the report of the
Secretary-General, and expressed its reservations on
some of them because they are in contravention of
the 20 June 2011 Agreement between the Government
of the Sudan and the Sudan People's Liberation
Movement (SPLM) on Temporary Arrangements for
the Administration and Security of the Abyei Area,
which is the basis of all arrangements regarding Abyei,
including the deployment of UNISFA. Indeed, the two
parties to the Agreement - that is, the Government
of the Sudan and the People's Liberation Movement of
Sudan, which later became the Government of South
Sudan - remain bound by that Agreement until the
final status of Abyei is determined.

I wish to quote from article 41:

"This Agreement and the Abyei Protocol (except as modified by the terms herein) shall continue to
apply until such time as the final status of Abyei
has been resolved."

I would also like to recall article 29 of the same
Agreement, which links any amendment in the
UNISFA mandate to the consent of both parties to the
Agreement. That Article reads as follows:

"The Government of Sudan and the SPLM. will
request the United Nations Security Council to
approve the deployment and mandate of the ISFA,
with the understanding that the mandate referred
to in paragraph 27 of this Agreement shall not be
changed without agreement of the Government of
Sudan, the SPLM. and the Government of Ethiopia."

My country's Government underscores its
commitment to implementing all the agreements
reached with the Republic of South Sudan, beginning
with the 2004 Protocol on the Resolution of the Conflict
in the Abyei Area, the Agreement on Provisional
Arrangements for the Administration and Security of
the Abyei Area and the 27 September 2012 agreement
on bilateral cooperation. We call on our brothers and
sisters in the Government of South Sudan to cooperate
meaningfully with the Government of the Sudan and
the African Union in order to accelerate the setting up
of institutions in Abyei pursuant to the Agreement of
June 2011. That would make it possible to resolve the
final status of Abyei. Those institutions include ajoint
administration in Abyei, ajoint legislative council and a
joint police service. We all agree that those institutions
are essential and indispensable for administering the
Area and establishing peace, providing basic services
to the population, strengthening coexistence among
the various communities and creating the appropriate,
required and necessary conditions towards resolving
Abyei's final status, so as to meet the aspirations of all
stakeholders within a setting that is acceptable to all.

Allow me to reiterate the need to consider the
issue of Abyei as part of the overall relations between
the Sudan and South Sudan, taking into account the
developments in the internal situations of the two
countries. My country's delegation hopes that the
latest developments will make it possible to strengthen
bilateral relations and address the pending issues, at
the top of which is the issue of Abyei, especially given
that the Sudan has hosted peace negotiations between
the South Sudanese parties and exerted tireless efforts,
with the recognition of the Security Council, which on
12 September led to the revitalized Agreement on the
Resolution of the Conflict in South Sudan.

In conclusion, allow me once again to thank all our
partners who have endeavoured to facilitate the work of
UNISFA, in particular the Government of the sisterly
Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia, the African
Union Peace and Security Council, the African Union
Commission, the High-level Implementation Panel, the
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Sudan
and South Sudan and the staff of UNISFA, along with
the Secretariat. I also reiterate the Sudan's commitment
to continue working with UNISFA in order to allow it
to carry out all its tasks. I support what Mr. Lacroix
and certain members of the Council have said, namely,
about the importance of holding more consultations in
order to strengthen the existing positive situation and
promote our collective determination on the issue.

The meeting rose at 11.45 a.m.
