Mr. Khiari (Tunisia): At the outset, I would like to
thank the delegation of Chad for taking the initiative to
organize this important debate on the them "Threats to
international peace and security: terrorism and cross-
border crime". I also wish to thank the presidency of
the Security Council for the concept note (S/2014/869, annex) prepared for the purpose of this debate. We
share most the views and ideas contained in it.

In fact, there are many complex links between
transnational organized crime and terrorism, which
in turn pose a significant threat to regional and
international peace and security. This trend is becoming
clearer, notably in Africa, with the threat expanding
from the Sahel to its neighbouring regions. The terrorist
groups in the region are increasingly turning back to
existing informal trade routes and black and illicit
markets, including for the exchange of arms and drug
trafficking, to generate more funds and bolster their
capacities and geographic reach, as stated in various
United Nations and African Union reports.

As terrorism and transnational organized crime
transcend national boundaries, the effective prevention
and combatting of these threats require a renewed and
firm commitment, primarily at the national level. In this
context, Tunisia has ratified the relevant international
conventions, including 14 international instruments
against terrorism; the United Nations Convention
against Transnational Organized Crime of2000 and the
protocols thereto; and the United Nations Convention
against Corruption of 2003. A new draft anti-terrorist
law is under consideration by the legislative body. This
draft criminalizes acts of support for, the incitement
of, training for, the recruitment for, the glorification of,
the attempt to commit and complicity in terrorist acts.
In the same vein, an anti-terrorism judicial pole has
been inaugurated, on 16 December, bringing together
investigating judges, the indictment division and the
prosecutor, as well as judges who have already been
tasked with terrorist cases. On the security level, a
national counter-terrorism and organized crime pole
has also been put in place with the aim of addressing
this phenomenon based on a comprehensive security
approach.

Tunisia has additionally concluded a number of
bilateral agreements on counter-terrorism operations,
including with neighbouring States. These bilateral
agreements have focused, in particular, on assessing
terrorist threats, eliminating the sources of terrorist
funding and obtaining available information on
terrorists' plans. It is also working on the development
of national electronic identification documents and
biometric passports by 2016.

Moreover, we are still strengthening our regional
cooperation with the Council of Arab Ministers of
the Interior, as well as through cooperation with the
relevant institutions, including the United Nations
counter-terrorism entities. I would like, in this regard,
to seize this opportunity to express my country's
gratitude to the level of cooperation with the United
Nations counter-terrorism entities, in particular with
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate,
with a view of further strengthening our national
legislation and judicial system to address the complex
related challenges.

By their very nature, complex links and dynamics
and the seriousness of their threats, countering
transnational organized crime and terrorism in the
affected regions, including in Africa, requires efficient
and effective national measures, but most of also
concerted actions by countries of the region, as well as
enhanced international cooperation by the international
community as a whole, building on the principle of
national ownership.

Renewed international action is indeed required
to ensure that terrorist groups do not receive any form
of financial or material support. For instance, there
are promising African-led initiatives, such as the
Nouakchott Process on the enhancement of security
cooperation, and the operationalization of the African
Peace and Security Architecture in the Sahelo-Saharan
region, the African Mechanism for Police Cooperation
and the Tripoli Plan of Action of 2012, which
demonstrate the full commitment of African countries
to work closely together to address the challenges
facing the region. Those initiatives need to be further
supported by international partners, as highlighted by
the communique of the Peace and Security Council
of the African Union issued in a recent meeting, held
on 2 September, on the prevention and combatting of
terrorism and violent extremism in Africa.

Efforts need also to be redoubled with a view to
reinforcing the capacities of the national authorities of
the region to effectively police and control their borders,
curb illicit arms and goods, and deny terrorists safe
havens, as well as to strengthen the national judicial
systems to effectively prevent and prosecute terrorists
benefitting from transnational crime. Greater assistance
should be provided to the countries of the region with
a view to helping them to devise comprehensive and
integrated national strategies to counter terrorism,
transnational organized crime and illicit trafficking,
including the mechanisms for their implementation.
This is indeed a shared responsibility for the sake of
common interest.

Finally we consider that the United Nations is at
the heart of international cooperation against terrorism
and transnational organized crime. We are thus looking
forward to the report of the Secretary-General, as
mandated by resolution 2195 (2014), adopted today, and
in particular its recommendation to reduce the negative
impacts of terrorists benefitting from transnational
organized crime.

