Mr. Djani (Indonesia): Let me begin by expressing
my delegation's deepest sympathy and condolences
to the families of the victims of the heinous terrorist
attack that took place today at the two mosques in
Christchurch, New Zealand, as well as to the people and
the Government of New Zealand. We of course strongly
condemn the attack, which took the lives of peaceful
people during prayer and left many injured, including
two Indonesian nationals at the mosque. We certainly
condemn terrorism; it has no place in any society. As
New Zealand's close neighbour, we once again extend
our condolences.

Much has been said by my colleague the
Ambassador of Germany, including that we worked
together and collaborated as co-penholders. I would
like to extend our gratitude to our colleagues around
the table for the support extended to Germany and
Indonesia throughout the negotiations on resolution
2460 (2019), on the renewal of the mandate of the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA). It was not an easy task to come up with
a text that was agreeable to all, and indeed we had to
strike a balance so that more weight was not placed on
one side or the other.

The idea, as my German colleague mentioned, was
to ensure unity within the Security Council; it is very
important to show the world that the Council is united.
But the most important part that takes precedence
is to side with the people and the Government of
Afghanistan, who have been on a long quest for peace
and stability. That was the basis for us to ensure that
we had a consensual text that was not only acceptable
to the Council but also in line with well-being and
interests of the people of Afghanistan.

Like my colleague also mentioned, the resolution
does not necessarily purport to answer all challenges,
but we are confident that it reinforces, in a substantive
manner, the indispensable role of the United Nation in
support of Afghanistan. That is the main message that
we wanted to see in the text. Certainly, the text can be
built upon in future, as the situation warrants.
For the co-penholders, as I mentioned, unity was
the priority, and that was what we are sought. We were
both happy to play the role of bridge-builder. Once
again, we are grateful for the understanding and all the
positive contributions in that regard.

I would like to recall the message that Special
Representative Yamamoto delivered during last
Monday's briefing that the success of the Afghanistan
peace process will depend upon international support
for local efforts (see S/PV.8481). I think that is the main
point that we should work on, and we are delighted that
there is a text in that regard.

As can be appreciated, given our discussions,
the text before us focuses on what matters most for
UNAMA, that is, to continue to operate without
disruption to support Afghanistan in its efforts. It
underlines the importance of an Afghan-led and
Afghan-owned political process; reaffirms once
again the strong commitment to the sovereignty,
independence, territorial integrity and national unity
of Afghanistan; continues support for the Government
and the people of Afghanistan as they rebuild their
country and strengthen democratic institutions; and
also expresses the desire for the Government and the
people of Afghanistan to reinvigorate their country's
standing as a platform for international cooperation.
That is the main gist of the resolution.

As I mentioned before, we will have an opportunity
again to further develop the resolution, according to the
conditions and priorities of Afghanistan. I would just
like to underline that this resolution is a good basis to
do that sort of work - to chart positive development
in Afghanistan and monitor the areas where the
Government and the people of Afghanistan need the
international community's support.

This resolution on UNAMA is revolutionary in the
sense that it does not simply build on past resolutions
but tries to focus on the main priorities and interests of
the Afghan people. We have heard in many instances
and proceedings that members want a successful
resolution, and we hope that this resolution can be read
and understood as having a clear mandate. I think it
answers that basic prerequisite for which a member has
long been asking.

Lastly, I think we should also take into account the
positive movement that is happening in Afghanistan.
The country is no longer the same as it was several
years ago. Let us play our respective roles, befittingly
at this important juncture in history. I am positive that
the Council will support Afghanistan in all its effort.
I think I will leave it at that. Once again, I thank you,
Madam President, for all your support. I also thank my
brothers, our German colleagues, who worked hard, as
well as my team and their team.

