Mr. Zinsou (Benin) (spoke in French): May I begin,
Sir, by once again congratulating you most warmly
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council and thanking you for having convened this
important meeting on Mali, which is being held at a
critical juncture in the history of the country. Over
and above Mali, the crisis affects the stability of the
entire Sahel region, West Africa and the continent as a
whole, and even the entire world. I wish also to thank
Mr. Feltman for his very informative briefing on the
situation.

Since northern Mali fell under the control of
fundamentalist groups, the whole world has witnessed
grave violations of human rights and the destruction of
the cultural heritage of that country. That heritage is
part of the historical memory of Africa; UNESCO has
rightly determined it to be the heritage of all humankind
and called for the mobilization of resources to restore
the sites that have been destroyed.

We pay tribute to all agencies and partners, as well
those persons of goodwill, who are seeking to provide
humanitarian aid to the peoples affected by the crisis,
particularly refugees and internally displaced persons.

The evolution of the situation in Mali has dispelled
any doubt as to the nature of the threat and the
challenges faced by Mali. The crisis in that country
is the undeniable outcome of the fall of the former
Libyan regime and in particular the result of the inflow
of hegemonistic outside elements with ties to criminal
networks and religious extremists, who have sought to
subjugate a free and independent State by making use
of a tiny subgroup of one of the ethnic minorities.

Since 10 January 2013, they have clearly shown
themselves to be terrorists and they have made clear
the nature of the threat that they pose to the State of
Mali. Over and above their actions in Mali, in recent
days they have attacked Algeria's vital infrastructures,
causing the deaths of innocent victims who had been
taken hostage as retribution for that country's support
for the efforts undertaken against the terrorists in
Mali. Here Benin wishes to convey its condolences
to the families of the victims of that attack, including
the hostages, dozens of whom died at the hands of the
terrorists. May their souls rest in peace.

There is no doubt that Mali will recover from
this situation. It will rise again to pay tribute to the
illustrious memory of its sons and friends who died
on the battlefield to prevent the country from falling
to the terrorists. Indeed, Mali is a State member of
the Community of Democracies and the site of the
conception and adoption of the Bamako Declaration,
which in November 2000 laid down a shared conception
of democracy in francophone countries.

In the view ofBenin, Mali is and wishes to remain a
secular State. Mali's borders have impregnable ramparts
forged by respect by its neighbours for the principle
of the intangibility of borders, which is so dear to the
African Union, and by the recognition of the territorial
integrity of Mali by the international community.

Mali can count on the solidarity of the States of
Africa in general and those of West Africa in particular,
which are strongly committed to regional integration
and to mutual defence among its member countries.

At no time was Benin's belief shaken that the
free world would not let Bamako fall into the hands
of a transnational criminal network masquerading
in different forms. The President of the Republic of
Benin, His Excellency Mr. Boni Yayi, has reiterated
his belief in the ability of the international community
to demonstrate the necessary decisiveness with respect
to the advancing threat of religious intolerance and
fanatical fundamentalism, which fuel terrorism, which
is seeking safe haven in Mali.

We wish to express our admiration of and deep
gratitude to France, historically Mali's closest partner
beyond the continent. At the decisive moment, France,
through a robust intervention, came to the assistance
of the Malian State, at the request of its legitimate
authorities. It came to Africa's help a few hours after
the urgent appeal launched by President Yayi, in his
capacity as Chairman of the African Union, in the
face of the swelling ranks of armed criminal groups
advancing on Bamako.
France's intervention brought firepower consistent
with the threat looming over Mali, stopped the
aggressors from advancing and paved the way for the
arrival of troops of the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) that are part of the African-
led International Support Mission in Mali (AFISMA).
The developing situation has placed Mali in a situation
of extreme urgency and requires an immediate increase
of AFISMA's strength, mindful of the fact that it is an
international force open to all contributions from other
African countries that wish to participate in destroying
the terrorist hydra in the Sahel.

We thank the countries that are providing logistical
support for the deployment of the ECOWAS and African
Union troops. AFISMA must be able to rapidly deploy
its full capacity, in terms of troops and equipment, in
order to assert itself on the ground before the terrorist
groups with the sustained support of France and all
countries of the free world highly concerned by the
situation.

For us, the start of that military campaign is
fully authorized by resolution 2085 (2012). The
United Nations should immediately deploy to the
African Union and ECOWAS the logistics, equipment
and financial support package provided for by the
resolution, and finance the implementation of the
Organization's earmarked resources and other available
resources ahead of the donor conference expected to
help set up the trust fund, pursuant to paragraph 22 of
the resolution.

In that regard, we thank the Secretary-General
for his relevant proposals to the Security Council, on
which we have been briefed here. We urge him to act on
the most appropriate options to respond to the urgent
situation on the ground so that the lack of resources and
assistance does notjeopardize the lives ofthe deployed
troops. We encourage France to maintain its active
presence on the ground and to maintain its offensive
position to prevent the terrorist groups from retaking
the initiative.

That said, their leaders, who have the greatest
responsibility for the crimes committed against
humanity, should be sought out, found and brought
before international justice for their heinous crimes.
Beyond the military campaign in Mali, the international
community should redouble efforts to cut the supply
lines and financial channels to the terrorist groups
raging in the Sahara desert and should put an end to the
trafficking from which they live.

Benin has decided to actively participate in
AFISMA by making available the most battle-tested
elements of its armed forces. In this Chamber, Benin
launches an urgent appeal for international solidarity,
in particular the material and financial support of all
countries devoted to peace andjustice, and to the troops
of African States being deployed to commit themselves
as soon as possible alongside the French troops and the
Malian armed forces.

The prompt success ofthe military action under way
will make it possible to launch the democratic process
that will lead to free and transparent elections open to
all Malians, from north to south, east to west, pursuant
to resolution 2085 (2012). The United Nations must take
all necessary measures to support that campaign and
to prepare the ensuing political process. My delegation
welcomes the deployment of the advance team of the
United Nations political mission. The political process
should be conducted in strict respect for the national
loyalty owed by all communities that make up Mali to
the Malian nation and for their increasing inclusiveness,
while taking fully into account their influence in
relation to the country's demography.

The United Nations must ensure that the terrorists
answer for their acts before an appropriate international
jurisdiction. Beyond the military campaign, it is
necessary to redouble efforts to promote dialogue at the
level of the United Nations Alliance of Civilizations
in order to counter all kinds of fanaticism and
fundamentalism.

In that way, we can prevent the resurgence of
practices of past ages in order to promote the progress
of humankind in upholding the common values of
respect for dignity and the integrity of the individual
for the greater good of its nations and peoples.

