Mr. Ould Cheikh Ahmed (spoke in Arabic):
Yemen today continues to traverse a critical and
agonizing period, as civilians pay a terrible price
in an unending power struggle. Those who survive
the fighting face death by famine or disease, as the
economic situation continues to deteriorate and the
humanitarian conditions worsens.

Military clashes have continued in several
governorates around the country. On 4 August,
according to several field reports, an air strike in the
Madha area of Sa'dah governorate resulted in the death
of eight civilians. On 20 August, another air strike on
the Mawza district of Taiz killed more than 20 civilians.
Houthi forces and forces loyal to Ali Abdullah Saleh
continued to shell residential areas in Taiz, inflicting
heavy losses among civilians who have already been
subjected to much hardship over the past two years. In
addition, several ballistic missiles have been launched
into Saudi Arabia.

There were also reports of attacks on ships in
Mokha port. Those attacks are a further evidence of
the increasing threat to maritime security in the Red
Sea. This threat puts the much-needed humanitarian
and commercial supplies in peril.

We have also observed continued hostilities along
the Yemeni-Saudi borders as well as in Haj jah, Midi and
Ma'rib. Fighting escalated in western Taiz, around the
Khalid Bin Al Walid camp and the Taiz-Al Hudaydah
road. Moreover, forces of the Government of Yemen,
backed by the United Arab Emirates and United States
Special Forces, have launched a military offensive in
Shabwa targeting Al-Qaida in the Arabian Peninsula
fighters. I reiterate that the longer the conflict goes on,
the higher the risk that terrorist groups will spread and
the stronger their influence will become.

Uncontrolled migration to Yemen through the
Gulf of Aden has continued relentlessly with tragic
consequences. On 9 and 10 August, the International
Organization for Migration reported that more than 41
migrants died after they had been forced by traffickers
to abandon the boats andjump into the sea off the coast
of Shabwa.

In brief, death looms for Yemenis by air, land and
sea. Diseases and epidemics are at unprecedented levels,
as the Council has just heard from the Under-Secretary
General for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency
ReliefCoordinator, my colleague, Mr. Stephen O'Brien.
I would like to commend Stephen for the role he has
played. Since this is his last meeting with the Security
Council on Yemen, I would also like to commend him
for his courage and continued support for and visits to
the most dangerous country in the world.

Those who have survived cholera will continue to
suffer the consequences of what I call the "political
cholera" that infects Yemen and continues to obstruct
the road towards peace. Over the last few weeks, I
have visited Egypt, the Islamic Republic of Iran, the
Sultanate of Oman, the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia,
and the United Arab Emirates. In these visits, I met
with several Ministers for Foreign Affairs as well
as other senior officials from Yemen and the region.
There is still consensus on the need to reach a political
solution for the Yemeni crisis and to support the United
Nations-sponsored peace process under the auspices of
the Secretary-General. The international community
is unified in support of a peaceful settlement, but the
parties to the conflict continue to miss this opportunity.
Certain parties continue to take advantage of internal
divisions and place personal interests ahead of the
urgent need for peace in Yemen.

The political tensions in Yemen continue to
undermine the State institutions on which many
Yemenis depend. Immediate measures are needed to
stop the deterioration of the humanitarian situation
and save the country from further violence, epidemics,
famine and other preventable and controllable crises.
We are currently urging the parties to agree to measures
that will preserve the country's vital institutions and
help, in the first phase, to secure the continued flow
of humanitarian aid, pay salaries to civil servants and
bring the smuggling of weapons under control.

The proposal seeks to ensure the safe and
uninterrupted functioning of the port of Hudaydah,
which is presently a key artery for the entire Yemeni
economy. It includes a practical plan to hand over the port
to a committee of respected Yemenis with security and
the economic expertise, who would be working under
United Nations guidance and oversight. The committee
would work to prevent the smuggling of weapons and
ensure the safety and security of the port's operations
and infrastructure. The committee would also ensure
the smooth flow of humanitarian and commercial
goods through the port to all parts of Yemen, as well as
the transfer of port revenues to support the resumption
of salary payments to civil servants.

In parallel, we are working with the parties on
reopening Sana'a International Airport to commercial
flights. That is a vital and fundamental component ofthe
proposals, as it would make it possible for the wounded
and sick to seek treatment abroad and permit students
to continue their studies outside of Yemen. It would also
ease imports and exports and improve the conditions of
Yemeni citizens. There should also be immediate steps
to reopen roads to and from Taiz for humanitarian and
commercial supplies, as many representatives of Taiz
civil society have demanded. The denial of access to
basic goods for the people of Taiz has gone on too long.
Ensuring freedom of movement for civilians is required
by international humanitarian law, but is also called for
out of respect for the long-standing values of solidarity
and compassion of Yemeni society.

Those initiatives should contribute to the
rebuilding of confidence between the parties and
serve as a first step towards a new national cessation
of hostilities and the resumption of discussions for a
full and comprehensive solution consisting of security
and political components based on the Kuwait talks. I
know that Yemenis are demanding those steps, and I
hope that the parties to the conflict will embrace them
as soon as possible.

I met with the President of Yemen, Mr. Abdrabuh
Mansour Hadi Mansour, a few days ago, and we
discussed the ideas and proposals that I presented. The
Ministers for Foreign Affairs of Egypt, Iran, Oman,
Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates expressed
their full support for my proposals, which also received
backing from the Gulf Cooperation Council and the
League of Arab States.

Last month - and I informed members of
this following my open briefing last month (see S/PV.7999) - I received a letter from Ansar Allah and
the General People's Congress in which they reaffirmed
the need to build upon what was discussed in the Kuwait
talks. I have invited them to meet with me in a third
country in order to discuss those proposals and turn
them into an agreement that includes concrete steps to
avoid further bloodshed and alleviate human suffering. I
hope they will commit to join those meetings as soon as
possible. Every day we spend lingering without serious
action towards a solution means more destruction and
greater loss oflife.

Yemen's path towards peace is clear, and actionable
proposals are ready that will yield tangible benefits
and serve to build confidence between the parties.
International support for a full and comprehensive
solution and for the efforts of the United Nations is
unwavering. What is missing at this point is for the
parties to the conflict - without any delays, excuses or
procrastination - to demonstrate their determination
to end the war and put the national interests above any
personal gains.

Placing blame on the United Nations, the Special
Envoy or the international community will not make
peace. Postponement and posturing for the media do
not end the war, but only serve to deepen the rift in the
country. A solid foundation for peace needs to be built
from within Yemeni society. A society at peace, with
competent and responsive institutions, will be built
only through partnership and inclusiveness and policies
that respond to the demands of the people throughout
the country, from north to south. Those aspirations will
need to be reflected in a constitution that protects all
citizens - youth, children, men and women - from all
political and ideological backgrounds.

Those who want peace should find solutions, not
search for pretexts. It is no secret that there are many
merchants of war in Yemen who do not want peace. We
will continue to work with Yemenis, including human
rights groups, women's groups and civil society, to
mainstream the language of peace and reach a political
solution that provides safety and stability to the Yemeni
people, who deserve no less.

