Ms. DiCarlo (United States of America): Let me
begin by thanking Under-Secretary-General Le Roy for
his briefing and by expressing our gratitude to the
personnel of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (UNAMID), who operate in very
difficult circumstances.

I should also like to welcome Mr. Mikhail
Margelov to the Council and thank him for his helpful
comments today.
As other speakers have noted, UNAMID has
faced serious challenges in implementing its mandate,
but despite these difficulties the mission has provided a
stabilizing presence in Darfur. I should like to highlight
four areas that we believe to be critical to the mission's
success: outstanding deployment issues, prioritization
within UNAMID's mandate, support for the peace
process and the 2010 elections.

First, we are pleased to see the increased
efficiency in UNAMID's deployment at large -
progress that we attribute in part to the Tripartite
Mechanism spearheaded by Under-Secretary-General
Malcorra. We also acknowledge the increased
cooperation provided by the Government of the Sudan,
upon which UNAMID's deployment and operational
ability depend. In this regard, however, we are troubled
by the Government of the Sudan's continued failure to
issue visas for UNAMID personnel in a timely fashion,
as noted in the Secretary-General's report
(S/2009/352). UNAMID's success is predicated on its
having experienced staff on the ground. The pace at
which visas are being granted and the outright denial of
some visas indicate an unacceptable disregard for
UNAMID's status-of-forces agreement. The
Government of Sudan must fulfil its obligations under
that agreement and promptly clear the backlog of visas.

The Secretary-General notes that he expects that
all pledged UNAMID assets will be deployed by the
end of this year. We welcome that progress, but we
note that the assets that have been pledged constitute
only 92 per cent of UNAMID's total authorized
strength. Certain key assets, particularly critical air
assets, have not been forthcoming from Member States.
Nonetheless, we believe we must start to focus on
measuring UNAMID's capacity to perform its mandate
using the resources it has. We hope that in upcoming
reports the Secretary-General will be able to report
more on UNAMID's operational effectiveness.

Secondly, we believe that the Council must
provide guidance to help UNAMID prioritize its
activities. The Secretary-General has noted that two
most important aspects of UNAMID's mandate are
protecting civilians and facilitating humanitarian
access. We agree. The situation for civilians in Darfur
remains deeply troubling. We are particularly concerned
by the level of sexual violence against women, and we
ask the Secretary-General to work with UNAMID to
develop a comprehensive strategy to protect women and
girls from such gender-based violence.
No discussion of humanitarian relief can fail to
mention the 4 March expulsion by the Government of
Sudan of humanitarian organizations. Through the
considerable efforts of the United Nations and the
international community, a humanitarian crisis was
averted. But the Council cannot afford to be
complacent simply because the disaster has been
warded off through emergency measures. Sustainable
delivery of humanitarian relief remains our goal. We
must continue to monitor the situation closely, and we
will look to UNAMID to maintain its role as facilitator
for humanitarian access.

Thirdly, we fully support the dedicated efforts of
the Joint United Nations-AU Chief Mediator, Djibrill
Bassole. My Government's Special Envoy, Scott
Gration, will continue to work closely with the parties
in support of the Chief Mediator's efforts to obtain a
cessation of hostilities and to push for a more inclusive
peace process.

But as long as the Governments of Sudan and
Chad are engaged in active conflict, there can be no
peace in Darfur, as underscored by such recent events
as the bombings along the Chad-Sudan border. Chad
and Sudan have the sovereign right to protect their
territorial integrity. But continued tension and rhetoric
between the two harm the peace process and undermine
stability in the region. We encourage both countries to
exercise restraint, to refrain from supporting each
other's rebel groups and to work to pull those groups
back from the brink.

Finally, let me touch on the issue of elections.
Under the terms of the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement, elections are scheduled to take place in
April 2010. The Council normally discusses this issue
in the context of the United Nations Mission in the
Sudan (UNMIS), but elections are a national issue and
as such must also be discussed when we talk about
Darfur. The extent to which Darfuris will be able to
participate meaningfully in the voting is a real concern.
We look forward to the United Nations elections
assessment report and hope that it will contain
information on the mechanisms necessary to help
protect Darfuri participation. The Council cannot
afford to neglect this issue.

UNAMID plays a valuable role. The United States
supports the extension of UNAMID's mandate for an
additional 12 months, and we thank the delegation of
the United Kingdom for preparing the draft resolution.
