Ms. Paik Ji-ah (Republic of Korea): First of all,
my delegation would like to thank the Chief Prosecutor,
Ms. Bensouda, for her briefing. We commend her efforts
in the Libyan situation, including her effort to reach out
to the Libyan authorities for improved cooperation in
her tireless pursuit of other serious criminal allegations.

Over the past two years, the Court has achieved
a new milestone in admissibility cases. Such
achievements should be translated into reality on the
ground without further delay. We hope that Libya's
international obligations stemming from the cases
should be discharged in a timely manner through close
cooperation with the Court. We also hope that the
International Criminal Court (ICC) continues to take
the steps necessary to ensure fair trials for the accused.

The implementation of the memorandum of
understanding on burden-sharing is another case
in point to produce fruitful outcomes through close
cooperation. Mutual efforts to that effect should be
further strengthened.

Although we have been briefed about many attempts
to make progress in the Libyan situation, our shared
goal of ending impunity in Libya remains elusive due
to, inter alia, the unstable security environment. The
worsening security situation provides fertile ground for
additional crimes to be committed by different parties.
It also prevents the ICC from conducting effective
investigations on allegations of crime and hinders the
Libyan authorities from cooperating with the Court to
the fullest possible extent. That vicious circle should
be broken.

To that end, we need to redouble our efforts
to improve the security situation in the country.
Improvement of the overall security situation and our
goal of ending impunity are closely related in Libya.
In that regard, the Security Council's engagement with
the situation should be strengthened. In addition, we
believe that an effective follow-up of referrals by the
Council to the ICC can play a role in improving the
cooperation between the two organs in a more mutually
reinforcing way. Through such a follow-up, Libya, the
ICC and the Security Council can engage one another
more constructively and effectively to deliver justice
in the country. We will continue to work with other
Council members and the international community to
make progress to that end.

