Mr. Mansour (Palestine): At the outset. I wish to
warmly congratulate the brotherly country of the Arab
Republic of Egypt on its assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council this month. I wish its delegation
all success in upholding its solemn responsibilities, and
I remain confident of its skilled leadership. We express
our appreciation to the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Egypt, His Excellency Mr. Sameh Hassan Shokry
Selim, for his presence at this important meeting
to address the grave issue of terrorism and its threat
to international peace and security. I also take this
opportunity to express our deep appreciation of Egypt's
constant attention to and efforts on behalf of the issues
concerning our Middle East region, including in
particular the question of Palestine.

Countering the narratives and ideologies of the
terrorism that is plaguing our world and causing so
much suffering and trauma for civilians and destruction
in so many countries requires urgent, collective and
comprehensive action. Extremist takfiri ideology,
whereby religion is abused, distorted and maliciously
interpreted to achieve the political objectives of
terrorist groups such as Da'esh, Al-Qaida, Boko Haram
and others must be completely rejected.

Those who espouse and promote extremist religious
terror ideologies, whether they are Muslim, Jewish or
Christian extremists, must not be permitted to continue
unopposed in spreading their violent views and actions
that are terrorizing millions of innocent civilians and
destabilizing peace and security in the Middle East and
around the world. Such terror groups and their false and
dangerous ideologies must be countered by responsible
efforts and cooperative actions based firmly in
international law, including international humanitarian
law and human rights law.

While the Security Council must remain at
the forefront of that effort, eliminating the scourge
obviously requires the mobilization of all capacities in
the relevant realms of the international system, be they
political, legal or financial. In that regard, our collective
efforts must make a prioritity of genuinely redressing of
the root causes of the problems in our world - whether
political, security or socioeconomic -which are being

exploited by extremists to recruit cadres to their ranks
to serve their sinister objectives.

We are certain that respect for international law
and a zero-tolerance policy for impunity would have
averted the deepening of many of the grievances
exploited by extremists to advance their ideologies
and not allowed space for their fostering and growth.
That includes, of course, the open wound and long-
standing injustice of the question of Palestine, which
continues to be cynically used by extremists to justify
their abhorrent ideologies and behaviour. Moreover, it
is imperative to undertake efforts to foster an honest,
open intercivilization and interreligious dialogue that
involves and reaches not only leaders and Governments,
but also the average civilian, including young people
and women.

Such a dialogue and cooperative efforts must
reaffirm international law as the necessary guiding
framework for international relations, rather than
power and might. It must reaffirm commitments on
that basis and respect for the law and human rights
in addressing major grievances, including ending the
destructive conflicts of our times and reasserting the
true tenets of the respective faiths, including tolerance,
peace and respect for humankind, so as to counter the
distractions, distortions and misinterpretations that are
being used by extremists to advance their ideologies
and recruit so many, especially disaffected youth, to
their ranks.

The State ofPalestine adheres to the comprehensive
position of the Non-Aligned Movement and the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation regarding
terrorism, as affirmed in numerous ministerial and
summit declarations. Terrorist acts constitute one of
the most flagrant violations of international law. Such
actions undermine human rights, including the rights
to life and security, and the fundamental freedoms
of peoples and endanger the territorial integrity and
stability of States, as well as national, regional and
international security and the economic and social
stability and development of States.

Violent, criminal actions intended to provoke a
state of terror among persons for any purpose, wherever
and by whomever undertaken, are unjustifiable in any
circumstance. There must be no exception or selectivity
in the application of that principle as we seek to

confront extremist ideologies and groups and bring a
halt to their terror.

Lastly, we must reaffirm that terrorism should not
be equated with the legitimate struggle ofpeoples under
colonial domination or foreign occupation for self-
determination and national liberation. In accordance
with the Charter of the United Nations, international
law and the relevant United Nations resolutions, the
struggle of peoples under colonial domination and
foreign occupation for self-determination and national
liberation, including the decades-long struggle of the
Palestinian people for freedom and justice, does not
constitute terrorism and any such characterization or
analogy must be rejected.

