Mr. Kozyrev (Russian Federation) (interpretation from Russian): It is a pleasure for us to greet the delegation
of Italy, which is presiding over this special meeting of the
Security Council, because Italy is a country with which
Russia has traditionally had friendly relations.

The past 50 years have convincingly demonstrated the
foresight of the founders of the United Nations in
establishing the Security Council. In the post-
confrontational era, the Security Council has played a
fruitful role in the settlement of dozens of conflicts.
However, the commemorative nature of our meeting
compels us not only to pay due tribute, but also to affirm
that much remains to be done to improve the effectiveness
of the Council's work.

First of all, it is necessary to improve the partnership
among the Security Council members, particularly the
permanent ones. I should like to assure members that
democratic Russia will not abandon its chosen path of
achieving its national and state interests, not through
confrontation or diktat, but through equal partnership in
keeping with its role and responsibilities as a permanent
member of the Security Council.

However, attempts to monopolize the settlement of
international problems by one State or group of States, and
to rely solely on military alliances rather than on a
strengthened United Nations, can be as dangerous as the
cold war itself to the integrity of the world and the work
of the Security Council.

We believe that the Security Council must conduct
a thorough analysis of the issue of improving peace-
keeping and sanctions mechanisms. Many who have
spoken here have raised this issue. Most important is that
the decisions taken on such measures and their
implementation should not give rise to any suspicion of
double standards.

We share the concern expressed in this regard by the
Secretary-General, Mr. Boutros Boutros-Ghali, whom we
support. Neither sanctions nor peace-keeping operations
should serve as instruments for revenge or the punishment
of entire nations. Among the main criteria should be
transparent goals, clear conditions and a mechanism for
ceasing operations or lifting sanctions. It is obviously high
time that we considered broadening the definition of
security. This has been made necessary by the realities of
the post-confrontational world, which include, primarily,
ever-greater threats arising from within States, the effects
of major financial and economic crises, man-made
disasters, international terrorism and illicit drug-
trafficking. I believe that this is in keeping with the ideas
expressed on this topic by Secretary of State Warren
Christopher before the General Assembly yesterday.

I propose that the Security Council hold a special
meeting to compare the views of the member States on
new challenges to security. It might also be possible to
hold a special meeting of the Council on the problem of
international terrorism.

The walls of this Chamber remember the atmosphere
of the cold war, in which mutual suspicion and
confrontation were predominant. One of the main and
most valuable achievements of the Council in recent years
has been a new spirit and the new relations among its
members. I believe that the Permanent Representatives of
our countries deserve praise for that. At times they have
held negotiations around the clock here in their search for
mutually acceptable and important decisions. We are all
responsible for the maintenance of this complex culture of
constructive cooperation. That is the task of the next 50
years.

