Mr. Llorentty Soliz (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, I would once again
like to thank the British presidency for convening this
important meeting. And, of course, I would like to thank
the Secretary-General for his report on the situation
in South Sudan (S/2017/224). We are encouraged by
his approach and his leadership. I would also like to
thank President Mogae for being here and for his work
on this difficult problem. And I thank Ms. Sunday for
her presence.

Bolivia is ofthe view that, in line with the efforts of
the Secretary-General, it is essential that the Council be
united in supporting the political process, which is the
only possible solution to the situation in South Sudan.
We support the point made today by the Secretary-
General on the three elements that are essential to
making progress in resolving this tragic conflict: first,
a cessation of hostilities; secondly, a resumption of the
peace process; and thirdly, unrestricted humanitarian
access. Similarly, the combined support and continuing
follow-up that regional organizations, the United
Nations and the international community can provide
will be key to ensuring that the dialogue process is
genuinely inclusive and enjoys legitimacy.

In addition, I would like to express the support of
my delegation for the joint press statement of 29 January
2017 by the African Union, the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development, and the United Nations
in support of a national dialogue. In that regard, I
would also like to stress our recognition of the work
and good offices of the Chair of the Joint Monitoring
and Evaluation Commission, Mr. Mogae, and the
African Union High Representative for South Sudan,
Mr. Alpha Konare.

With regard to the security situation, we call for
compliance with the peace agreement on the cessation
of hostilities between the parties and the end of the
clashes in the regions of Equatoria, the Upper Nile,
Bahr el-Ghazal, Malakal and Wau Shilluk, which have
led to a general situation of insecurity and the ongoing
displacement of civilians, of whom women and children
are the most vulnerable. We believe that it is important
to ensure that the Government, together with the United
Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS), works
to guarantee unrestricted access for humanitarian
assistance and the protection of civilians in the areas
that need them the most.

We are concerned about the reports of human
rights violations, sexual violence and the recruitment
and use of children. We call for chapter V of the peace
agreement to be upheld, and we hope that the African
Union will take all necessary measures to establish
a just, impartial and credible hybrid court for South
Sudan. It is also important to welcome the progress
made in the practical measures being taken to deploy
a regional protection force, which could contribute
significantly to mitigating the worsening security
situation as long as we are clear about what its functions
will be. The regime's cooperation is also very important
in that regard.

Concerning the humanitarian situation, the
announcement by the Food and Agriculture Organization
of localized famine in Leer and Mayendit counties
represents an urgent call to the Government and the
international community to take immediate measures
to mitigate it and ensure that the situation does not
deteriorate further. According to figures issued by the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs,
100,000 South Sudanese are in a state of famine and
5.5 million are experiencing food insecurity and
in need of concerted action. According to Under-
Secretary-General Stephen O'Brien and his appeal to
the international community and financial donors, it is
essential that we raise $1.25 billion to deal with this
difficult problem.

The famine is clearly caused by a number of
factors, including the armed conflict between the
various parties, the difficulties of humanitarian access
and the severe drought in the region, which also shows
that the effects of climate Change increase the potential
for conflict. That is why we call on the Government to
work together with humanitarian workers and UNMISS
staff to bring the necessary assistance to the people in
those regions as soon as possible.

In conclusion, I would like to stress that the joint
work of regional organizations is fundamental to
efforts to develop action plans aimed at strengthening
the institutions of South Sudan. Those plans must
address the institutions' structural problems and should
respect the principles of the Paris Declaration on Aid
Effectiveness whereby all development cooperation
should be adapted to the country receiving it, aligned
with the country's plans, coordinated among the parties
and, lastly, based on the mutual responsibility of all
stakeholders. Similarly, we believe that the conflict in
South Sudan should be resolved by the people of South
Sudan themselves, with the help of the international
community, while respecting the principles of the
Charter of the United Nations.

