Mr. Masood Khan (Pakistan): We thank you,
Madam President, for convening this open debate on
children and armed conflict. We also appreciate the
insightful briefings given today by various briefers,
and commend Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Leila Zerrougui's determined efforts to protect
the rights of the children trapped in conflicts.

The statistics on the recruitment and use of
children in armed conflicts are chilling. The United
Nations has documented more than 4,000 cases in
2013. But the Secretary-General's report (S/2014/339)
says that thousands more children are believed to have
been recruited and used. What is more, impunity for
grave and consistent violations of children's rights
is rampant. Children continue to be killed, maimed,
abducted and subjected to sexual violence. Wars and
conflicts leave deep psychotraumatic scars on their
tender minds. Pakistan condemns the recruitment and
use of children in conflicts. We call on all parties to the
conflict - States and non-State armed groups 4 to
stop forthwith violations of children's rights and prevent
their recurrence.

In the past 15 years, because ofthe Council's resolute
efforts and the Secretary-General's effective outreach,
significant progress has been made in protecting
children's rights. The theme of children and armed
conflict has been mainstreamed into the Council's work
so effectively that it is now cited as a good example of
proficiency. Comprehensive norms and standards have
been developed. The commendable work done by the
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict and
the regular monitoring, reporting, listing of the parties,
and action plans have all helped. Thousands of children
have been demobilized, rehabilitated and reintegrated
into socities. And yet, the scourge continues.

Pakistan supports the Children, Not Soldiers
campaign, launched by the Special Representative and
UNICEF to end the recruitment and use of children by
Government security forces by 2016. Progress through
that innovative campaign is assured because of its
emphasis on priority activities, road maps, benchmarks,
deadlines and a review, as well as the active participation
of listed States. The donor community should step
forward at this point to fill the funding gaps.

As you said in your remarks, Madam President,
persistent perpetrators of violence against children must
be identified and brought to justice through national
judicial systems and, where applicable, through the
use of international justice mechanisms. To that end,
investigative and prosecutorial capacities should be
strengthened at all levels.

We endorse the Secretary-General's key message.
The ultimate goal is to ensure that no child is ever,
anywhere associated with parties to conflict. In that
context, we welcome the dialogue with non-State armed
groups that has led to public statements and command
orders to prohibit the recruitment and use of children.
The United Nations advocacy strategy should include
ways to convince the commanders and ideologues of
armed groups not to indoctrinate children to participate
in conflicts. In the meantime, attacks on schools and
hospitals should cease, and schools should never be
allowed to be used for military purposes. That should
also be made part ofmilitary planning and training. The
protection of children should also be made an integral
part of peace negotiations and agreements.
Peacekeeping missions have an important role to
play in the protection of children in situations of armed
conflict. It is therefore essential that peacekeeping
missions receive the necessary training and requisite
resources to effectively perform that critical task.
As one of the largrest troop-contributing countries,
Pakistan welcomes the recommendations on specific
operational predeployment and in-mission training of
peacekeeping troops.

Pakistan supports the mandate of the Special
Representative, which is adequate to dealing with
situations of armed conflict. We want to strengthen
the political consensus around it, but the mandate
does not need accretion. We firmly believe that the
legal parameters of the mandate established by the
resolutions 1261 (1999), 1612 (2005) and 1379 (2001)
must be respected. Our singular focus should remain
on child soldiers and the protection of children in
armed conflict. In that context, we want to state for the
record that the references to Pakistan in the Secretary-
General's report of 15 May (S/2014/339) are not within
the purview of the established mandate on children and
armed conflict. We hope that this principle will be kept
in mind when future reports are being prepared.

Finally, we call on the Council and the Working
Group to pronounce themselves on the plight of the
children of Gaza.

