Mr. Karev (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): First of all, I would like to join my
colleagues in thanking the Presidents and the
Prosecutors of the two Tribunals for their extremely
interesting and detailed statements. I would also like to
make several comments and ask a question, as previous
speakers have done.

The International Criminal Tribunal for the
former Yugoslavia and the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda have, without doubt, played an
important role in the establishment of a modern and
independent judiciary. Of course, it has not been
possible to travel down that very long path without
encountering problems and making mistakes - that is
completely to be expected. As has been rightly noted,
there have been problems related to very low
productivity and a slow rate of work, and drawbacks and
delays of various kinds in the organization of work.

We note with satisfaction the fact that in recent
years the leadership of the Tribunals has persisted in
trying to correct the mistakes and overcome the
problems. In this respect, the insistence of both
Tribunals on fully implementing the completion
strategies by 2008-2010, pursuant to Security Council
1503 (2003), is of fundamental importance.

As noted in the resolution, that strategy is based
on three fundamental elements: the prosecution and
trial of the key indictees; the transfer of others to
national courts; and assistance to the relevant States
with a view to strengthening their judicial systems.

In this respect, an important contribution to
resolving related issues is being made by the ad litem
judges. In that context, we are sympathetic to the
proposal of the President of the Rwanda Tribunal as to
how the number of ad litem judges can be increased
and greater use made of them in trials. We also
welcome the proposal to establish a Special Chamber
to deal with war crimes in Bosnia and Herzegovina and
the passing on of the torch from the International
Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia. That
issue was discussed in detail yesterday here in the
Council. We also believe that the competent judicial
bodies in other Balkan States should consider similar
cases. We note with satisfaction that the leadership of
the Tribunals has moved from totally rejecting that
possibility towards allowing that such a development
might take place in the future. It has been made clear
today that such a development would require the
fulfilment of certain conditions, which is only to be
expected.

In this respect, I would like to ask the leadership
of the Yugoslav Tribunal whether, in addition to taking
note of the necessity for changes in the work of those
judicial bodies in the Balkan States, the Tribunal is
carrying out any specific work with those States with a
view to bringing about such changes in the judiciary
and to ensuring that there is the same possibility for
handing over cases as was done with Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

We are also looking forward to hearing the answers
to questions that were asked by our colleagues earlier.

