Mr. Doraiswami (India): Mr. President, allow me
at the outset to convey the regret of Ambassador
Nirupam Sen, Permanent Representative of India, at
being unable, at the last minute, to address this body on
behalf of India.

I have the honour to read out his statement on his
behalf:

"India joins other delegations in
congratulating you, Mr. President, on your
outstanding stewardship of the Security Council
for this month. We also thank Special
Representative Koenigs and the Executive
Director of the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime, Mr. Costa, for their informative and
lucid briefings. For India, given our historic and
cultural ties with the Afghan people, today's topic
is one of great importance, especially as the
Security Council considers extending the
mandate of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA).

"The ongoing effort to help Afghanistan
emerge from war, strife and privation remains the
responsibility of the international community, in
particular, the States of the region. Hence,
consolidation of the hard-won gains since the fall
of the regressive Taliban regime must be a long-
term strategic objective for all of us, not merely a
tactical manoeuvre for the present.

"At the outset, therefore, the latest report of
the Secretary-General on Afghanistan accords
well with India's own assessment of the situation
on the ground. However, sections of the report on
the security situation make for depressing
reading, not the least of which is the frequent use
of the term 'insurgents'; for us, this is a
euphemism that does not begin to describe
extremists and terrorists of the most vicious sort.

"The report also throws Afghanistan's
steady slide into violence into sharp relief. India
has consistently held that one cannot negotiate
with those who choose the path of terror. Three
months ago, India had noted that it was not
evident that efforts to find ways of negotiating
peace in the more troubled provinces of
Afghanistan were succeeding. Sadly, the
Secretary-General's report and the increasing
trend of suicide attacks by terrorists only
reinforce that point. Tolerating the spiral of
violence is not an option, and a strong, unified
international voice condemning international
terrorism is the need of the day. We must
maintain a robust response to terror, while
simultaneously focusing upon the most rapid
possible expansion of capacity in Afghanistan to
deliver effective governance, development and
the dividends of peace. The reason for this
prioritization is as simple as it is self-evident:
development, good governance and other symbols
of democracy are based primarily on peace and
stability.

"It is in this context that we welcome the
completion of the expansion of the International
Security Assistance Force (ISAF), the current
strategy of deploying more provincial
reconstruction teams, and the effort to expand the
capacity and the size of the Afghan National
Army and the Afghan Police. It is particularly
creditable, as the report notes, that the Afghan
Army is taking an active part in combat
operations while it is under training, and
simultaneously dealing with a situation of
'improving' logistics support, administrative
institutions and so on.

"Assistance for the national budget, to
enable a rapid expansion of capacity for the
police and the army, remains inadequate, and this
is a cause for concern. It must be part of the
international community's long-term strategy to
enable the Afghan State to support appropriately
equipped, well-funded, pan-Afghan institutions of
State that exercise the State's monopoly over the
use of force. Until there is predictability and
irreversibility of this process, it is unlikely that
efforts to disband illegally armed groups will be
taken forward meaningfully. As long as Afghan
forces of law and order are not fully empowered,
the nexus between drug trafficking and terror
cannot be broken.

"This brings us to the question of
development. Under normal circumstances,
timetables for reconstruction do not need to be so
tightly telescoped, and benefits can be spread as
thinly and widely as possible. The situation in
Afghanistan, however, requires that development
follow in the wake of security, and thus, it is
occasionally less than even-handed. The example
of drug trafficking is particularly relevant. At one
level, firm action is required against drug lords
and their mercenaries, as well as those who
process the raw material. But having taken such
action, the effort must be to rapidly follow up by
providing alternative sources of employment to
farmers and other unwitting victims of the drug
industry. In such circumstances, it is difficult to
ensure a fully even-handed approach.

"In that context, we note that there is often
a tendency among donors to seek to resolve all
possible problems in the recipient country at once.
This is natural, and, to an extent, understandable.
However, one cannot be prescriptive in providing
assistance, as this is often the surest way to alienate
the recipients of our good intentions. It is our view
that donors must let the Afghan Government and
people draw up their own list of development
priorities, and these may occasionally differ from
our own. Once basics such as food, medicine,
shelter and education are provided for, in an
atmosphere of relative security, it is natural that
the recipients of assistance will want to build
upon such gains incrementally.

"We should also focus on the many

achievements of Afghanistan in the past five
years as a case of the glass being half full, and
not bemoan the half that remains empty. The
Afghan leadership would be the first to
acknowledge the existence of corruption, people's
far-from-complete access to Afghan public
service institutions and the judiciary, and its still-
evolving political system. But there can be little
doubt that - given the widespread anarchy of
past decades, ongoing campaigns of terror,
today's drought and the devastation of the past -
whatever has been achieved thus far is nothing
short of miraculous. The list of chores ahead of
the Afghan State merits the widest and most
sustained programme of assistance from all of us.

"That brings me to the role of regional and
international assistance and the need for closer
and more effective coordination between
international organizations and stakeholders in
Afghanistan. In that context, I commend the
efficacy of the Joint Coordination and Monitoring
Board process, which has begun to coordinate the
work of an array of international actors from the
region and beyond. India is ready to contribute to
such an effort. In that context, it is essential to
underline that, despite the myriad challenges
before us in Afghanistan, the countries of the
region cannot but play a larger and more direct
role in reintegrating Afghanistan into the region.
Indeed, lasting development in Afghanistan will
eventually be based on a revival of the age-old
commercial, social, cultural and political ties that
made Afghanistan the crossroads of East and
West Asia, South Asia and Central Asia.

"India is attempting to support precisely
such a transformation. India had the honour to
join Afghanistan in hosting the Second Regional
Economic Cooperation Conference, in November
2006 in New Delhi, at which both Prime Minister
Manmohan Singh and President Karzai were
present. As the incoming Chair of the South
Asian Association for Regional Cooperation
(SAARC), we are delighted to host Afghanistan
at its first SAARC summit, in early April this
year in New Delhi. We believe that that will
strengthen regional cooperation while also
enabling SAARC to reach out to Central and
West Asia. We also believe that Afghanistan's
entry into SAARC will help SAARC address
issues relating to transit and the free flow of
goods across borders, which will lead to greater
economic development for Afghanistan and the
region as a whole.

"Bilaterally, India has continued to make
strenuous efforts to support reconstruction in the
widest possible spectrum of activities in
Afghanistan. Our current commitments exceed
$750 million and cover the gamut of activities -
from large projects such as road construction,
power transmission lines and the construction and
the refurbishment of dams to more locally
relevant projects such as supplying and
refurbishing hospitals, schools, community
organizations, cold storage plants and so on. We
are also mindful of the need to support
investment in capacity building, both within
Afghanistan and through the provision of over
500 scholarships a year to study in India. We
endeavour to ensure that our assistance is widely
spread among the regions of Afghanistan.

"In conclusion, India will endeavour to
assist, to the extent possible, in every activity that
can buttress peace in Afghanistan. We see that as
an investment in our region and as a means of
assisting a fraternal people. In all our efforts
aimed towards the reconstruction and
development of Afghanistan, we have ensured the
close involvement of the Government of
Afghanistan and the welfare of its people. With
that as our common goal, India reiterates its
abiding commitment to support reconstruction
efforts in Afghanistan."

