Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French):
Luxembourg welcomes the Nigerian delegation's
initiative in organizing today's public debate. The
presence here today of the country's Minister for
Foreign Affairs emphasizes the importance that Nigeria
attaches to security sector reform. Mr. President, we
welcome your leadership in the area. I also thank the
Secretary-General for his report (S/2013/480) and for
his briefing, which show how central security sector
reform is to the concerns of the United Nations in many
conflict and post-conflict situations.

I fully associate myself with the statement to be
made by the observer of the European Union.

In The Republic, Plato has Socrates say he should
take the necessary measures, including in terms of
education, to prevent the guardians of the city from
becoming predators rather than benevolent protectors
of their citizens, whom they surpass in power. In
the real world of today, the lack of mechanisms for
appropriate management and control unfortunately
leads to situations in which the institutions responsible
for security become predators and impose their own
law, thereby threatening the populations they are
supposed to protect .

Based on the excellent concept note prepared by
Nigeria (S/2014/238, annex), I will focus my remarks
on three aspects - country ownership, the role of the
United Nations and regional organizations, and the
contribution of my country to security sector reform.

The main purpose of security sector governance
and reform is to create or restore trust between the
State and its citizens. The legitimacy of a State arises
from its ability to perform its public administrative
functions, the first of which is to protect and ensure
the safety of its population. It is the very essence of
the social contract. It is therefore clear that if it is to
succeed, security sector reform should be carried out
by national authorities with the aim of making the
security sector accountable, effective and responsive to
the needs of the population. National ownership of the
work of security sector reform is therefore the key to
its success.

I would mention in that regard the example of
Guinea, which I have had the honour of working with as
President of the Guinea country-specific configuration
of the Peacebuilding Commission. In Guinea, the
President of the Republic himself is chairing the
strategic committee for the reform of the security
sector, including the reform of the justice system.
That clearly expresses the political will at the highest
level to break with a past in which the representatives
of law enforcement had protected their own interests
instead of providing for the safety of the population. In
Guinea, national efforts are now rightly focused on the
modernization and professionalization ofthe police and
gendarmerie - key institutions to restore confidence
in everyday life between the State and all ofits citizens
without exception.

I now turn to the role of the United Nations.
While respecting the principle of national ownership,
the United Nations has a vital contribution to make
to support security sector reform. As shown in
14 operations peacekeeping and special political
missions that the Security Council has mandated for
that purpose, United Nations support is necessary,
especially in contexts where the conflict has
considerably weakened State institutions.

We see a special role for the United Nations in
the coordination of support for security sector reform
and the implementation of a comprehensive approach
to reform including the defence, police and justice
sectors and aspects linked to parliamentary control.
In terms of coordination, I would cite the example of
the Democratic Republic of Congo. Under the mandate
of the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General was
instructed in resolution 2098 (2013) to play a leading
role in coordinating support for security sector reform,
provided by international and bilateral partners and
by the United Nations - a crucial area for sustainable
stability.

To support the key role of the United Nations,
Luxembourg has provided regular financial support to
the Office ofRule ofLaw and SecurityInstitutions andthe
Department of Peacekeeping Operations - especially
its Security Sector Reform Unit. In particular, we
supported the establishment of a roster of experts in
SSR and rapid and flexible deployment of these experts
in the field, when necessary. We have lent our support to
specific United Nations SSR projects in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and in Somalia.
Luxembourg is also proud to have supported the
development of the policy framework on security
sector reform that the African Union adopted last year.
Regional organizations have indeed an indispensable
role to play in guiding the efforts of their members
states. Finally, through its personnel's participation
missions of the European Union, my country strongly
supports the reform of the Forces armees de la
Republique democratique du Congo, the training of
the Malian armed forces, and capacity-building for the
internal security forces in Niger and, soon, in Mali.

In conclusion, Luxembourg can only congratulate
Nigeria on having proposed the first resolution of the
Security Council on security sector reform, of which my
country has willingly become a sponsor. We welcome
in particular the inclusion, in the extension of resolution
2143 (2014), of strong provisions to encourage Member
States to take account of the need to protect children
in the context of SSR and to establishment monitoring
mechanisms to exclude national security forces
responsible for violations and abuses against children.
Security sector reform must indeed meet the needs of
all citizens, including the most vulnerable.

