Mr. Moraes Cabral (Portugal): Portugal's
position on Israeli settlements in the occupied
Palestinian territory is well known. We have repeatedly
stated that settlements, including in East Jerusalem, are
illegal under international law and an obstacle to
peace. That has also been the consistent position of
the European Union. So it would not surprise the
Council if my statement follows that of France,
Germany and the United Kingdom closely.

Settlements thwart attempts to move the
negotiations process forward. They also erode the
prerequisites of the two-State solution, a goal to which
we remain firmly committed. All settlement activities
in East Jerusalem and the rest of the West Bank,
including natural growth, should cease immediately.

Our ultimate goal remains that of a lasting, just
and comprehensive peace in the Middle East, based on
the creation of a sovereign, independent, democratic,
contiguous and viable Palestinian State living side by
side with Israel and its other neighbours in peace and
security.

Therefore, we call on both parties to return as
soon as possible to direct negotiations towards an
agreement on all core issues by September 2011. The
parameters of a final status agreement are known to all,
namely, a Palestinian State based on the 4 June 1967
borders; a security arrangement that fully respects the
sovereignty of the Palestinian State, while protecting

the security of both Palestinians and Israelis; Jerusalem
as the capital of the two States, in accordance with
modalities to be negotiated between the parties on its
status; and finally, a just, fair and agreed solution to the
refugee problem.

The Palestinian Authority has worked diligently
in preparing for statehood. In doing so, it has proved
itself a dependable partner and demonstrated its
capacity to assume full sovereignty as an independent,
democratic and peaceful State living in peace with
Israel.

As I have previously stated, it is essential that the
parties urgently resume direct negotiations. Our aim is
an agreement on all final status issues. With that in
mind, we look forward to active international and
regional diplomatic efforts so that we can indeed
welcome Palestine as a full Member of the United
Nations by September 2011.

