Mr. van Walsum (Netherlands): My delegation,
too, would like to thank the Secretary-General for his
quarterly report, and Mr. Kouchner for his inspired
briefing.

Most speakers have already pointed out that it
will be one year ago tomorrow that this Council
adopted resolution 1244 (1999). Two days later, on 12
June 1999, the first Kosovo Force (KFOR) units
entered Kosovo. We are all aware of what the
Secretary-General's report terms, in paragraph 3, "the
persistence of a number of serious concerns". But my
delegation takes the view that much has been achieved
in one year.

After 10 years of repression, injustice and
destruction, brought about by the Belgrade regime,
Kosovo has now gained a new perspective. It is a
multi-ethnic society under construction. The majority
of refugees- hundreds of thousands of Kosovar
Albanians who had to flee in the face of President
Milosevic's terror - have returned. The rule of law is
being restored. Schools have been reconstructed and
reopened; the economy is being revitalized;
preparations for municipal elections are well under
way. With all the critical notes we have to make about
the situation in Kosovo, we should not lose sight of
those achievements. My delegation pays tribute to
KFOR, the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) and the leadership of Mr.
Kouchner. Without their determination and
perseverance, these achievements would not have been
realized.

We heard Mr. Kouchner say that, at best, his
briefing could be regarded as a progress report. He
pointed out that it would take years and years to build
real democracy, and that it cannot be denied that there
continue to be negative aspects in the current situation.

But my delegation resolutely disassociates itself
from those who focus so much on these negative
aspects that they endlessly speak of the Belgrade
authorities but cannot bring themselves to offer even
the slightest hint of praise and encouragement to the
courageous Kosovo Serbs who are trying to break out
of the vicious circle of ethnic hatred and wish to
contribute to making today's Kosovo work. My
delegation has said this before. These Kosovo Serbs
show both moral and political vision and deserve our
undivided support.

But, if I may follow the Russian delegation's
example and make one observation on the Belgrade
authorities myself, I would like to question the
accuracy of Ambassador Lavrov's assertion that the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia has not refused to
cooperate in the matter of detained and missing
persons. Belgrade simply has failed to respond and has
not done anything for more than a year. As a matter of
fact, the detainees do not require any cooperation; they
simply need to be released or tried in a court of law.

Having said this, let me stress that my delegation
is concerned about certain developments in Kosovo. I
am, of course, referring to the recent upsurge of what
the report calls localized violence, mainly perpetrated
against Kosovo Serbs. Our concerns are heightened by
the fact that this violence appears to be orchestrated.
The Netherlands condemns all violence and supports
the efforts of the UNMIK, KFOR and the United
Nations International Police to put an end to it. We
equally condemn all violence against KFOR and
UNMIK personnel, as well as the increased number of
incidents where non-governmental organizations in
Kosovo have become victims of robberies.

The Secretary-General's report rightly highlights
the courageous decision of the Serb National Council
(SNC) of Gracanica to join the Joint Interim
Administrative Structure (JIAS). This decision was
taken a few months ago, and the Serb representation
was limited to observers. In the meantime, much to our
regret, the decision has been reversed. Although this
was prompted by security concerns, which, of course,
must be addressed, the Netherlands calls upon the Serb
National Council of Gracanica to reconsider its recent
reversal and to return to the Joint Interim
Administrative Structure - this time as a participant
rather than as an observer. Here, as in the question of
registration and participation in the election process,
we are convinced that the interests of the Serbs are best
served by their active participation in the interim
structures. It would seem to us that the international
community could encourage the renewed Serb
participation in interim structures by fostering Serb
refugee return, by improving living conditions in
enclaves inhabited by moderate Serbs and by including
explicit guarantees to the rights of Serbs and other
minorities in interim regulations for local self-
government.

The Netherlands welcomes the decision of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General to
temporarily close down the Albanian newspaper, Dita,
for incitement to hatred and violence. We commend the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for his
firm action in this matter.

The Netherlands is not in favour of revision of
resolution 1244 (1999) or a formal extension of the
mandate of KFOR. In the View of the Netherlands, full
implementation of resolution 1244 (1999) should be
continued, guided by the principles of a multi-ethnic
society and respect for the human rights of all ethnic
groups. At present, the international community should
focus on reconstruction, successful municipal elections
and implementation of the framework of local
administration. The question of the final status of
Kosovo should be discussed at a later stage.

Finally, the Netherlands would welcome the
appointment of a special envoy for missing persons,
detainees and prisoners. I would appreciate learning
when this appointment may be expected. In any event,
the Netherlands would welcome it if the special envoy
could cooperate closely with the International
Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) and devote his or
her attention to missing persons and prisoners from all
sections of the population.

