Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): I would like to thank Mr. Farid Zarif, the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, for
his briefing.

Spain considers the role of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK),
in accordance with its mandate as established by
resolution 1244 (1999), to be very important. UNMIK
makes a crucial contribution to promoting and
preserving stability in the region and acting as a link
between the various international presences on the
ground. That is clearly expressed in the most recent
report of the Secretary-General (S/2015/74), which
emphasizes UNMIK's active role and the important
part it plays in preventing and reducing tensions and
in promoting cooperation among local authorities,
particularly North and South Mitrovica. For that
reason I would like to reaffirm Spain's support for
UNMIK and Mr. Zarif. I would also like to express
our appreciation for the statements made by Mr. Ivica
Daeic', First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Serbia, and by Mr. Hashim Thaci.

After a long hiatus, a new high-level meeting on
the dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina, facilitated
by the High Representative of the European Union, is
scheduled to take place, and that is clearly good news.
Spain offers its constructive support, without prejudice
to our principled position, for the High Representative's
efforts to foster that direct dialogue in order to produce
concrete results that benefit the whole population. I
wish to acknowledge in that regard the commitment
that the authorities in Belgrade and Pristina have shown
thus far, as well as the openness and constructiveness
of their participation in the dialogue. We encourage
both parties to continue to participate in the process
with the same positive attitude.

Spain welcomes the agreements reached throughout
the process, but also believes that it is essential that
dialogue continue with political commitment and work
at the technical level in order to move ahead in the
implementation of the still pending provisions of the
19 April 2013 Agreement. It is important to make quick
and decisive progress on three fronts: in the justice
sector, property rights and the full establishment and
entry into functioning of the association/community of
Serb municipalities pursuant to the Agreement.

In another vein, in the area of security, we listened
closely to Special Representative of the Secretary
General Zarif's briefing, which brought us up to date
specifically on the recent violent episodes and protests,
which were also alluded to in the Secretary-General's
report. Unfortunately, we cannot yet speak of total
reconciliation or a satisfactory integration among the
different constituent communities, which is seen, for
example, in the persistent incidents involving religious
sites, the ongoing decrease in the number of voluntary
returnees and the absence of conditions needed to
adequately reintegrate returnees in their communities.
There is also an ongoing contrast between legislation
that has made nominal progress in the area of human
rights and the rights ofminorities and, at the same time,
a practical application thereof, which is not yet at the
level of international and European standards.

I wish to also highlight the work performed by
the European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo.
The Security Council acknowledges that work and
appreciates it. Economic governance issues and rule-of-
law issues are two areas where reforms are needed as a
matter of priority.

In conclusion, I wish to reiterate Spain's commitment
to the European perspective for the Western Balkans.
We believe that progress made towards this shared
objective will allow for the definitive stabilization of
the region and the economic and social progress for its
inhabitants. That necessarily requires, however, a high
level of political commitment and concrete work from
all stakeholders, each in their areas of responsibility.

