Mr. Wlosowicz (Poland): The Polish delegation
would like to express its satisfaction that the Security
Council has convened this open debate on the situation in
Liberia to explore the international community's options
with regard to the bloody conflict in that country. We are
also grateful to the Secretary-General for his informative,
although very pessimistic, report on Liberia, issued in
connection with the expiration of the mandate of the
United Nations Observer Mission in Liberia (UNOMIL)
on 31 May.

The Polish delegation is deeply concerned by the
continuing fights between the antagonistic factions in
Monrovia and by all their consequences: the complete
breakdown of law and order, violence against the civilian
population, massive looting - which has also affected the
property of the international organizations operating in
Liberia - and a severe and ever-deteriorating
humanitarian situation. All these developments mark a
very serious setback in the peace process in Liberia and
a return to the civil war that has been devastating that
country for the past 20 years.

We are seriously disquieted by the fact that the
timetable for the fulfilment of the obligations assumed by
the parties to the conflict under the Abuja Agreement has
been completely disrupted. As the Secretary-General has
indicated in his report, it is not now to be expected that
the free and democratic elections will be held in August.

The international community is disappointed and
discouraged by the development of the situation in
Liberia, which poses a threat to security throughout the
region of West Africa. Despite the international
community's longstanding commitment to resolve the
conflict in that country and the engagement of people and
resources in the peace-keeping operations led by the
United Nations and the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS), the goal of all these efforts -
that is, a peaceful settlement of the conflict - seems to
be very remote at this stage. We are now confronted with
the very serious questions of how to deal with the
Liberian conflict and whether to continue the involvement
of the international community in the affairs of that
country.

It should be emphasized that the primary
responsibility for the developments in Liberia lies with
the leaders of the warring factions, who do not

 

demonstrate the political will for an accord and a
compromise. We share the opinion of the Secretary-
General, expressed in his report, that the tendency of some
Liberian warlords to Violate the provisions of the Abuja
Agreement and to interpret them in their own way led
directly to the outbreak of the recent bloody fighting. We
are also of the View that any leader who would seize power
by force should be internationally ostracized.

The Liberian leaders should become conscious that the
international community will be ready to maintain its
presence in their country only if they return to the
principles determined in the Abuja Agreement. Otherwise,
it may begin considering a withdrawal from Liberia, with
all the ensuing consequences for that country. With such a
position in mind, we fully support the ECOWAS Foreign
Ministers, who agreed in Accra on the conditions to be
fulfilled by the Liberian faction leaders, including the
restoration of the cease-fire and the withdrawal of fighters
from Monrovia as the first steps towards reinitiating the
peace process.

The efforts made to date by the States of West Africa
to resolve the internal conflict in neighbouring Liberia
should be highly appreciated. First of all, we would like to
emphasize the role played by the ECOWAS Monitoring
Group (ECOMOG). Its termination would have very serious
consequences for that country, as the Secretary-General has
pointed out in his report.

We are of the opinion that, pending the results of the
ECOWAS summit, the international community should
offer ECOMOG its strong support. At the same time, the
States participating in ECOMOG should spare no effort to
improve its efficiency.

The Polish delegation remains convinced that the
United Nations should still be engaged in the cause of
resolving the Liberian conflict. Therefore, we express our
gratitude to the Secretary-General and to his representatives,
especially Mr. James Jonah, for all the efforts they have
made to maintain and facilitate the negotiations between the
antagonistic Liberian parties.

We also pay tribute to UNOMIL, which has for many
years embodied the interest of the international community
in resolving the Liberian conflict. Due to UNOMIL's
mandate as an observation Mission and to its modest size,
it is dependent on ECOMOG, particularly in terms of
ensuring the security of its personnel. For these reasons, we
support the recommendation of the Secretary-General that,
at this stage, the mandate of UNOMIL at its diminished
size should be extended for no more than three months, to
31 August, when the results of the ECOWAS summit with

 

regard to the question of maintaining ECOMOG will be
known.

In conclusion, let me emphasize once more that the
fulfilment of the hopes for a propitious future for Liberia
depends first of all on Liberians themselves.

