Mr. Wetland (Norway): From the talks we had
with Prime Minister Abdiweli Mohamed Ali in Oslo
last week, we believe that there is now far greater
commitment and determination by Somali leaders to
move towards lasting peace. While they bear the primary
responsibility, they will also need strong support and
commitment from the international community.

We are now entering a critical turning point, not
only for Somalia but also for that country's relationship
with the international community. Together we may
now have a real opportunity to bring Somalia out of the
misery and political chaos that have plagued the
country for too long. If we are successful, it will be the
start of a new and more hopeful life for the Somali
people, and a major step towards ending the threat of
violence, terrorism and piracy, which affects both the
region and the wider international community.
It is of vital importance that the international
community seizes this opportunity to work together
with Somali leaders and the region in their effort to
ensure that this opportunity is not wasted. In addition
to the humanitarian and other assistance that we have
already provided - which in the past couple of years
has amounted to approximately $40 million annually -
Norway has decided to contribute $2 million to the
new stabilization fund for Somalia. We shall also
continue to support the process for establishing a new
Somali constitution and electing the new Parliament.
We strongly encourage both the members of the
Council and other countries to use the opportunity we
now have to go the extra mile in supporting the efforts
to bring peace and stability to Somalia and the region.

The new momentum that we now see in the
Somali situation has in large part been created by the
military achievement of AMISOM. in pushing the
militant extremists out of Mogadishu. We should give
them full credit for that. We therefore welcome the
recent decision by the Council to expand support for
this important African Mission.

We must now ensure that the achievements in the
military field are followed up by appropriate political
measures and other measures, in order to avoid a
vacuum in the areas recovered from the militants.

