Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): I thank you, Sir, for
arranging this urgent meeting of the Security Council
today to give the United Kingdom the opportunity to
update Council colleagues on our investigation into a
nerve agent attack in Salisbury.

On Sunday, 4 March, Sergei Skripal and his
daughter Yulia Skripal were found in the town
centre, slipping out of consciousness on a public
bench, and were taken to hospital by our emergency
services, where they remain in very serious condition.
Investigations by world-leading experts of the Defence
Science and Technology Laboratory at Porton Down,
accredited by the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons (OPCW), discovered that they had
been exposed to a nerve agent. British police officer
Nick Bailey was also exposed and remains in hospital
in serious condition.

Hundreds of British citizens have been potentially
exposed to this nerve agent in what was an indiscriminate
and reckless act against the United Kingdom. We have
deployed our military to secure and decontaminate
numerous sites. The police continue an exhaustive,
wide-scale investigation. Through those investigations,
we have concluded that Mr. Skripal and his daughter
were poisoned with a Novichok - a military-grade
nerve agent of a type developed by Russia. It is not a
weapon that can be manufactured by non-State actors.
It is so dangerous that it requires the highest-grade
State laboratories and expertise.

Based on the knowledge that Russia has previously
produced this agent, and combined with Russia's record
ofconducting State-sponsored assassinations, including
against former intelligence officers whom it regards as
legitimate targets, the United Kingdom Government
concluded that it was highly likely that Russia was
responsible for this reckless act. We saw only two
plausible explanations. Either this was a direct attack
by Russia on my country, or Russia had lost control of a
military-grade nerve agent that it had developed.

We requested the Russian Government to provide
an explanation by the end of Tuesday, 13 March, on
how this Russian-produced nerve agent could have
been deployed in Salisbury. It has provided no credible
explanation, which could suggest that it had lost control
of its nerve agent. We therefore have no alternative but
to conclude that the Russian State was responsible
for the attempted murder of Mr. Skripal, his daughter
and police officer Nick Bailey, and for threatening the
lives of other British citizens in Salisbury. This was
no common crime. It was an unlawful use of force and
a violation of Article 2 of the Charter of the United
Nations - the basis of the international legal order.

The United Kingdom is proud to have been one of
the States that played an integral role in drafting the
Chemical Weapons Convention (CWC), a landmark
piece of international law. We are therefore dismayed
that Russia has suggested that our response fails to
meet the requirements of the Convention. Article VII
of the Convention calls on States parties to implement
the Convention under their own legislation. The United
Kingdom has enacted the Chemical Weapons Act
in order to fully comply with this obligation. That
legislation, together with relevant criminal law, is now
guiding our investigation into this incident, as the
Convention was designed to ensure.

This was an attack on United Kingdom soil. Under
the Convention, we have the right to lead our response,
engaging the OPCW and others, as appropriate. On
8 March, the United Kingdom formally notified the
Technical Secretariat of the OPCW that a chemical
attack had taken place on United Kingdom soil.

The Russian Federation has complained that we
are not acting under article IX of the Convention. On
the contrary, on 12 March, once it became clear to
us that the United Kingdom had been attacked, the
Foreign Secretary summoned the Russian Ambassador
and sought an explanation from his Government, as
article IX clearly sets out we have the right to do. We
have received no meaningful response. It is therefore
Russia that is failing to comply with the provisions
of the Convention. The Council should not fall for
their attempt to muddy the waters. In addition, the
United Kingdom has welcomed the offer of technical
assistance from the Director-General of the OPCW. We
have invited the Technical Secretariat to independently
verify our analysis. We are making every effort to
expedite that process.

Let us now turn to the part of the Chemical
Weapons Convention that Russia is not talking about,
which requires States parties to declare chemical
weapons stockpiles and facilities that have been used
at any time since 1946 to produce chemical weapons.
Chemical weapons were to be verifiably destroyed and
production facilities destroyed or converted, subject
to approval, within 10 years of the entry into force of
the Convention. Russia completed the destruction of
its declared stockpile in September 2017, 10 years later
than required by the Convention and five years beyond
the single five-year extension period. Russia did not
declare Novichok agents or the production facilities
associated with them, as it was required to do under the
Convention. No development facilities were declared.
Yet we know from the testimony of the Russian scientist
Vil Mirzayanov that Novichok agents were developed
as part of the Soviet Union's offensive chemical
warfare programme and that they were inherited by the
Russian Federation. Such facilities associated with that
programme should have been declared under the CWC.
Even today, a Russian politician said that Russia had
destroyed the Novichok nerve gas.

From all I have said, we can conclude that Russia is
in serious breach of the Chemical Weapons Convention
through its failure to declare the Novichok programme.
That fact alone means that the Security Council should
discount any arguments it hears about the possibility
of other countries having inherited that technology.
Had Russia declared and destroyed its own programme,
there might have been some truth to that.

On 4 March, a weapon so horrific that it is banned
from use in war was used in a peaceful city in my
country. That was a reckless act, carried out by people
who disregard the sanctity of human life and who are
indifferent to whether innocent people are caught up in
their attacks. They either did not care that the weapon
used would be traced back to them or mistakenly
believed that they could cover their tracks.

Russian officials and media channels have
repeatedly threatened those whom they consider traitors
even after the attack on 4 March. Russia has a history
of State-sponsored assassinations, including that of
Alexander LitVinenko, who was poisoned by radioactive
materials in my country a decade ago. Russia has a
history of interfering in other countries - whether
the failed coup in Montenegro, repeated cyberattacks
on other States or seeking to influence the democratic
processes of other countries. Russia has a history
of flouting international law, most egregiously in
Crimea, eastern Ukraine, and Georgia. Russia shows
disregard for civilian life. We all remember Flight
MH-l7, shot down by Russian proxies supplied with
Russian weapons. In its repeated protection of the use
of chemical weapons by Al-Assad, Russia has shown
that it has different standards when it comes to the use
of those terrible substances.

We have not jumped to conclusions. We have
carried out a thorough and careful investigation, which
continues. We are asking the OPCW to independently
verify the nerve agent used. We have offered Russia
the chance to explain but Russia has refused. We have
therefore concluded that the Russian State was involved
and we have taken certain measures in response. In
taking such measures, we have been clear that we
have no disagreement with the people of Russia, who
have been responsible for so many great achievements
throughout history. It is the reckless acts of their
Government that we oppose.

We are grateful for the support of so many countries
around the world. We will come back to the Council as
the investigations make more progress and will continue
to keep it informed. We have already heard the attacks
and threats that Russia has made over the past few days.
We know that there will be more to come. That is how
Russia has acted in every other case where it has been
caught flouting international law - denial, distraction
and threats. That is what Russia does. However, we
will not allow such threats to deter us. We will not
weaken our resolve. We will stand firm, confident in
our democracy, our rule of law and the freedom of our
people. We will stand by the values that are shared by
the overwhelming majority of those on the Council at
the United Nations. We ask them today to stand by us.
