Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): We did not seek
this meeting, but we take requests from the Council
for meetings very seriously. I am pleased to be able to
update the Council on some developments, but I am also
pleased to be able to provide the intellectual clarity that
our Russian colleague has called for. In my statement,
I will stick to the facts. Following Sergei and Yulia
Skripal's poisoning in Salisbury on 4 March, the United
Kingdom has launched one of the most comprehensive
and complex investigations ever conducted of the use
of a chemical weapon. It involves more than 250 police
detectives, who are supported by a range of specialist
experts and partners. They are trawling through more
than 5,000 hours of closed-circuit television footage.
They are examining more than 1,300 seized exhibits
and interviewing more than 500 witnesses.

In the United Kingdom, the police are independent
of the Government, but if there are more details that
we can share with the Council as the investigation
proceeds, we will be very happy to do so. We all know
why that investigation is under way. It is because a
military-grade nerve agent was used in an attempt
to kill civilians on British soil. It was carried out
recklessly and without regard for public safety. It was
a weapon of mass destruction. A British police officer
was in critical condition alongside the Skripals, and
ordinary members of the public, going about their daily
business, were put at risk.

I am glad not only to be able to inform the Council
that Yulia Skripal is able to communicate and is getting
better, but also to clarify what the Russian Ambassador
said about consular access. We have received a request
from the Russian Consulate that we have conveyed to
Yulia Skripal, and we are awaiting her response. That
is an obligation under international law that the British
Government takes very seriously, but there is also the
question of Ms. Skripal's own wishes, which have to be
taken into account.
The Russian Ambassador had several points to
make about the United Kingdom's demands of Russia.
As he outlined, on 12 March we asked the Russian
Government a very clear question. Russia refused
to respond and said that it considered the request
null and void. It was indeed true that we asked for
a response within 24 hours to the question of how a
Russian-developed military-grade nerve agent came to
be used on the streets of Salisbury and if it meant that
Russia had lost control of its chemical-weapons stocks.
We stated that Russia should declare its Novichok
programme to the Organization for the Prohibition
of Chemical Weapons (OPCW). We gave 24 hours
because it is a weapon of mass destruction. It was no
ordinary poisoning and no ordinary attack. In our
view, the circumstances justified that tight deadline.
Notwithstanding, the Russians stated that the request
was null and void. They did not request more time.
They did not come to us and say that they wanted to
look into it with us. They rejected the very premise of
the request.

As the Russian Ambassador stated, we have said
that it is highly likely that Russia carried out the
assassination attempt. The British Government came
to that conclusion because of positive identification
by experts at Porton Down that the specific chemical
used is a type of Novichok nerve agent. Porton Down
is an accredited laboratory under and conforms to the
Chemical Weapons Convention. It is allowed to conduct
protective research.

The second reason that helped us come to our
conclusion was the knowledge that Russia has produced
that nerve agent within the past 10 years and remains
capable of doing so. As the Prime Minister made clear
in the British Parliament, we know that the Russian
State has investigated ways of assassination through the
use of nerve agents. The third reason is Russia's record
of conducting State-sponsored assassinations. I do not
want to detain the Council by going through a long list
but I can provide examples if anyone would like to hear
them. We also made our own assessment that Russia
views defectors as suitable targets for assassination
and, indeed, there are public statements from Russian
leaders to that effect.

I would like to say a word about the use of the
phrase "highly likely". We use it because under the
British system, only a court can finally determine
culpability. Therefore, the use of the phrase "highly
likely" is a reflection of ourjudicial process and should
not be construed as casting any doubt whatsoever on
the likelihood of Russia being responsible.

I would also like to take this opportunity to address
the Russian Ambassador's comment about Porton
Down contradicting Foreign Secretary Boris Johnson.
There was no contradiction. The Foreign Secretary
was making clear that Porton Down was sure that
the nerve agent was a Novichok - a point that it has
subsequently reinforced. In the same interview, based
on that information, additional intelligence and, as I
said, the lack of an alternative explanation from the
Russians, he goes on to make clear why we have reached
the conclusion we have. What the Foreign Secretary
said then and what Porton Down has said recently is
fully consistent with what we have said throughout. In
contrast, we have had innumerable theories from the
Russians. I think we have counted some 24 in all. On
21 March, for example, the Russian Foreign Ministry
stated that it believed terrorists were to blame. On
14 March, Mr. Lavrov said that the British response was
aimed at distracting from Brexit. The use of chemical
weapons on any country's territory is far too serious for
those theories to hold water.

The Chemical Weapons Convention, which came
into force 21 years ago, is clear in article VII that
States should adopt legislation criminalizing activity
prohibited under the Convention. That is why the
United Kingdom is conducting a full investigation
into the incident, including under our own Chemical
Weapons Act. Because of it, in addition to the United
Kingdom's criminal investigation, we have invited the
OPCW - the relevant international body - to assist
in verifying our analysis on the basis of article VIII
of the Chemical Weapons Convention. It mandates the
Technical Secretariat to provide technical assistance
and technical evaluation to States parties.

Everything we have done has been consistent with
the Chemical Weapons Convention and, ifI may say so,
I will not take any lectures on morality or review our
responsibilities under such international conventions
from a country that, as the Council debated yesterday
(see S/PV.8221), has done so much to block the proper
investigation of the use of chemical weapons in Syria.
The United Kingdom's track record on that issue speaks
for itself.

On 21 March, the OPCW deployed a team to
the United Kingdom to visit the locations where
the victims were exposed to a toxic chemical. The
Director-General briefed the OPCW Executive Council
yesterday on its actions. OPCW expert staff collected
environmental samples from the scene and biomedical
samples from the victims. The OPCW has verified the
chain of custody. The samples have been sent to several
designated laboratories for testing. The analysis from
those laboratories will now be returned to the OPCW
and they will produce a report. Contrary to Russian
claims, the United Kingdom looks forward to sharing
its findings once we have received that report.

Yesterday, Russia put forward a draft resolution at
the Executive Council, proposing a joint investigation.
There are several ways to View that investigation. I
think the metaphor that I find most apt is that of an
arsonist turned firefighter but, in this particular
instance, the arsonist wishes to investigate his own fire.
Having failed to obtain a joint investigation, the draft
resolution received only 6 out of 41 votes in favour
and, without waiting for the outcome of OPCW testing,
Russia has reverted to a familiar path of undermining
the international institution involved.

There is no construction we can place on
Mr. Lavrov's remarks today other than that Russia will
accept the results of the OPCW Salisbury poisoning
investigation only if Russian experts participate in it.
I am sorry but that does not make it an independent
investigation. If Russia insists on having its own
experts, it seeks to move away from the Chemical
Weapons Convention's stipulation and it sets a test that
no independent investigation could credibly tolerate.
Regrettably, it is part ofa wider pattern of irresponsible
Russian behaviour. Russia discredited the work of the
OPCW-United Nations Joint Investigation Mechanism
on the use of chemical weapons in Syria. Members of
the Council will be familiar with a pattern of aggression
over the years in Georgia and Crimea. F1ightMH-17 was
shot down and there was a bungled attempt at a coup
in Montenegro. Each time, such acts are accompanied
by distortion and disinformation - the same sort of
distortion and disinformation we saw yesterday in The
Hague, in the Russian press conferences and in the
Security Council today.

While we ourselves would not have called today's
meeting, we hope to be able to brief the Council further
once we have received the report from the OPCW. We
believe that it is right that the Security Council remain
seized of the flagrant use of chemical weapons. It is
such use that threatens international peace and security.
The threats to the Chemical Weapons Convention from
attacks in Syria, Malaysia and now the United Kingdom
pose a very serious challenge to the non-proliferation
regime that the Council and others have carefully
constructed in response to the terrible events ofthe past.

There is one country among us - Russia - that
plays fast and loose with our collective security and
the international institutions that protect us. It it is
that reason that leads people to accuse Russia and take
steps against it. It is not out of lack of friendship for
the Russian people or lack of respect for Russia as
a country. My own Foreign Secretary Visited in the hope
of establishing a more productive relationship with
Foreign Minister Lavrov. But we cannot ignore what
has happened in Salisbury. We cannot ignore Russia's
turning a blind eye to the use of chemical weapons
in Syria and in Salisbury, and we cannot ignore the
way that Russia seeks to undermine the international
institutions that have kept us safe since the end of the
Second World War.

We believe that the actions of the United Kingdom
stand up to any scrutiny. We have acted in accordance
with the Chemical Weapons Convention throughout
and, through the body charged for these purposes, the
OPCW, we are happy to come to the Council at any
time. We would be very willing to hold an open briefing
at our mission here in New York if there are members
of the United Nations who still have questions. We have
nothing to hide, but I do fear that Russia might have
something to fear.

