Mr. Sinirlioglu (Turkey): First of all, I would like to thank UNICEF Executive Director Fore and Assistant Secretary-General Mueller for their very valuable briefings. I would also like to pay tribute to all humanitarian workers who continue to risk their lives to help the Syrian people, against all odds. Each and every day, we witness another tragic new phase of the humanitarian disaster unfolding in Syria. The reports of United Nations agencies tell the story of twenty-first century- style barbarism. Such brutality and disregard for human life is beyond comprehension. The Al-Assad regime and its supporters have a strategy that leaves civilians with two options. They can stay in the Idlib area and desperately hope tosurvive the indiscriminate attacks of the regime and its supporters, or they can leave their homes and run for their lives, under very harsh winter conditions. The strategy is not new. It has been the modus operandi of the regime from the beginning. That is how it has killed innocent people in order to hold onto power. We are therefore familiar with that plan of action. Now, the question is, what is our strategy? Will the international community stand idly by as millions of people are displaced and children continue to freeze to death? Will we continue to watch as schools and hospitals are bombed? The situation in Idlib is not just a humanitarian tragedy; we are faced with serious crimes against humanity. We have a collective responsibility to stop the massacre. We have already made it clear that Turkey is not going to stand idly by. We are not going to just watch. We are already hosting 4 million Syrian refugees in our country and providing care and protection to 5 million people within Syria. Around 1.7 million of Syrians in Turkey are children. More than half a million Syrian babies were born in Turkey in the last nine years. Altogether, 9 million Syrians are under Turkey's protection. Our presence on the ground gives hope to millions. We will continue to help our Syrian sisters and brothers; we will not let them down. As for the unfolding crisis, the road map is clear, and I would like to reiterate it once again. First, we need an immediate cessation of hostilities. Secondly, we need the full implementation of the Sochi memorandum. And, thirdly, we need to return to the status quo ante. These are the main messages that we have been conveying to Russia, the guarantor of the regime, at all levels. Our talks with Russia to ensure that the regime acts in compliance with existing frameworks on Idlib are continuing. The regime's deliberate attacks on our forces has been a turning point. We are now more determined than ever to preserve Idlib's de-escalation status. As President Erdogan stated very clearly again today, we will not withdraw our forces, and we will not abandon our observation posts. We will not allow the regime to act in a way that is contrary to the agreements on Idlib. Acting in self-defence, we have already reinforced our forces on the ground. We will continue without hesitation to take all necessary measures. Turkey ensures the safe passage of lifeline convoys to millions of Syrians through the United Nations cross- border mechanism. Currently, people in the north-west are fully relying on cross-border aid. We are working with the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs to increase the capacity of the two existing crossing points. Today shelter continues to be the most pressing need on the ground. We urgently need temporary housing, makeshift schools and hospitals for the more than | million newly uprooted people, half of whom are children. We should also immediately address their needs in terms of food and medicine. We welcome the Secretary-General's appeal to donors for an additional $500 million to meet the needs of newly displaced people over the next six months. But funding continues to fall short. We urge the international community to step up its contributions. The Secretary-General, in his recent report (S/2020/139), recommended the Tall Abyad border crossing as the most feasible alternative for cross- border operations in the north-east. We will take all measures necessary to operationalize that alternative, in full cooperation with the United Nations. We welcome that and will be ready to work with the members of the Security Council on the upcoming cross-border draft resolution. Cutting cross-border aid by not renewing that mechanism cannot be an option. Humanitarian assistance should not be the subject of petty negotiations. It is our joint responsibility to bring assistance to the millions of people in need in Syria. If we fail, history will not forgive us. Here I would also condemn the representative of the regime for his attempt to intimidate United Nations humanitarian officials. Nine years ago the Syrian people spoke out for democracy and a better future. But their legitimate demands were met with force, and they faced destruction and torture. The expectations of the Syrian people are still legitimate. The regime and its supporters continue to seek a military solution. What we understand from their actions is that they want to destroy the political process by killing each and every member of the opposition. The Council knows better than Al-Assad's murderous regime that there is no alternative to a political solution in Syria. A Syrian-led, Syrian-owned political solution in line with resolution 2254 (2015) is still the only option. Syria can still be a democratic,secular and stable country with secure borders and a strong economy. The Syrian people deserve nothing less. But they need our help. They need the Council to play its role to bring peace and security to Syria. As to the previous speaker's delusional statement, I will not honour him with a response, because, I reiterate, I do not consider him a legitimate representative of the Syrian people.
