Mr. Hague (United Kingdom): I am very grateful
to you, Mr. President, for organizing this important
debate today and to the Secretary-General for being
here with us.

Terrorism remains one of the greatest challenges
to international peace, stability and security, and
therefore also to the development and prosperity of
nations. The threat posed by international terrorism is
evolving and becoming more diffuse, and our response
to it as an international community must therefore
evolve. We must stand together, building on the
successful cooperation of the past to protect our own
citizens and assist those of other regions where
terrorism has found a foothold.

While the United Nations efforts have been
improving and should be commended, there is still
scope, in our View, for better coordination among the
various United Nations counter-terrorism bodies, and
between the other parts of the United Nations system
and Member States, to help Governments develop and
implement their own counter-terrorism strategies.

United Nations programmes to build the counter-
terrorism capacity of Member States should
complement bilateral efforts between Member States.
The United Nations has a role to play in filling gaps
that could otherwise be exploited by terrorists, their
financiers and supporters. The fiscal constraints
common to most countries in the wake of the financial
crisis make it all the more important that we focus
resources on assistance to the most vulnerable
countries.

In that regard, the threat emanating from the
Afghan-Pakistan border remains our greatest long-term
concern. The current situation could be exacerbated by
the consequences of the devastating recent floods. We
must therefore reinforce international support to the
Government of Pakistan so that the instability and
human misery of today do not become the recruiting
sergeants of tomorrow.

Terrorists will try to exploit disasters, instability,
alienation and conflict wherever they can, seeking to
harness poverty or political grievances to violent ends,
and trying to justify the unjustifiable with specious
social, economic and political arguments. So our
efforts to alleviate suffering, reduce poverty, prevent
conflict, keep and build peace, which are essential in
and of themselves, also help undermine the ideology of
violent extremism and deplete the ranks of Al-Qaida
and other terrorist groups.

The United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy, unanimously reaffirmed by the General
Assembly earlier this month, recognizes the
importance of addressing conditions conducive to
terrorism. To that end, United Nations agencies, such
as the United Nations Development Fund and
UNESCO, must play full and active roles as members
of the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force.

We have seen growth in the capability and ambition
of Al-Qaida in the Arabian Peninsula, Al-Qaida in the
Islamic Maghreb, and Al-Qaida-aligned extremists
operating in East Africa. We must work with
Governments and a range of partners in those regions
to disrupt, contain and reduce the threat. Terrorists are
adapting and becoming more opportunistic.
The growing trend in kidnapping for ransom is
one example of this. The United Kingdom Government
believes that we must act to prevent kidnapping
ransoms from becoming a significant source of terrorist
finance. From our own experience of hostage
situations, we understand how difficult kidnapping
cases are, but it is dangerous to regard ransoms as a
necessary evil or legitimate tool for resolving
kidnappings. They encourage more kidnappings and
fund murder. Major attacks can be mounted for only
tens of thousands of dollars, so million-dollar ransoms
can mean dozens of attacks. Resolution 1904 (2009),
adopted last December, explicitly confirmed that it is
illegal to pay ransoms to those whom this Council has
sanctioned because of their connection to Al-Qaida or
the Taliban, and we look to all countries to respect this
resolution.

We are here in part because of the terrible
atrocities committed not far from this building just
over nine years ago. Hardly any country in the world
has been untouched by terrorism. The most lasting and
devastating impact of terrorism is, of course, on
victims, their families and communities. I am reminded
of this each day; outside the Foreign and
Commonwealth Office in London stands a memorial to
the 202 victims of the Bali bombings, including 28
British people who died that day.

The United Nations can provide a platform for
victims of terrorism from all over the world, to give
them a voice and help others derive strength and
inspiration from their courage. Their stories remind us
that terrorism is an assault on all humanity. They are
the most effective antidote to the peddlers of Violent
ideology and a spur to Governments around the world
to make common cause against terrorism in all its
forms. The United Kingdom will continue to stand
absolutely firm in this endeavour.

