Mr. Skinner-Klee Arenales (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish): Allow me to commend your delegation,
Mr. President, for organizing this open debate on a topic
of high relevance in the context of today's world. We
are grateful for your concept note (S/2019/605, annex),
which provides valuable guidance for this debate. We
further extend our thanks to the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed
Conflict and the Executive Director of UNICEF for
their valuable briefings, as well as to the other speakers.

Since 1999, the Security Council has adopted
specific resolutions on children and armed conflict.
Each of those resolutions contains increasingly
stringent provisions on the protection to be accorded to
children. The Security Council has taken a particular
interest in preventing children from suffering the
tragic consequences of armed conflict. It is clear that
comprehensive development cannot be achieved, let
alone peaceful societies, without the comprehensive
protection of children.

Despite the efforts of the international community
to prevent any threat to children, we continue to learn
of serious abuses committed against children by armed
groups, which not only constitute a grave violation of
their human rights, but are also testament to a clear
disregard for human life. We are concerned that we are
currently witnessing an increase in civilian casualties
in armed conflicts, with children falling victim to
atrocious and ruthless violence. The macabre scenes
of indiscriminate attacks on hospitals and schools,
direct attacks on civilians with explosive weapons, air
strikes and the use of chemical weapons, which claim
numerous civilian casualties 4 including thousands of
children, who are also deprived of their basic rights, if
not subject to death 4 should be sharply sanctioned by
the Security Council as the despicable acts that they are.

Guatemala therefore reiterates its commitment to
peace and expresses its strong condemnation of the
recruitment of children, who are compelled by armed
groups to serve as soldiers and, worse still, as human
shields in warlike confrontations between parties to
conflict, robbing them of their innocence and even
their lives.
It is not enough to be aware of the barbarism
afflicting children; we must take drastic steps to
prevent those terrible vicissitudes. It is imperative to
take additional action to prevent impunity for those who
commit serious crimes against children, especially acts
of sexual violence and servitude, common abuses in
various situations included in the Secretary-General's
report (S/2019/509). We therefore must redouble our
efforts to develop effective protection mechanisms
focused on the defence of children and to implement the
tenets of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.

The devastating consequences of armed conflicts
can destroy the social fabric of a country. That is
why we believe that the approach on prevention must
be reinforced by taking steps to entrench a culture
of peace, respect and tolerance. It is indispensable to
undertake significant efforts to ensure the protection
of children in any broad prevention strategy, including
the rehabilitation and reintegration of children in their
communities, which would foster sustainable peace,
in line with General Assembly resolution 70/272 and
Security Council resolution 2282 (2016).

This is also a timely occasion to recall the
importance of cooperation and assistance among
Member States, as established by the Optional Protocol
to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the
Involvement of Children in Armed Conflict, which my
country, Guatemala, ratified on 9 May 2002, in order to
coordinate actions and share best practices to prevent,
document and address violations against children in
armed conflict. We must also support the work of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, in
collaboration with UNICEF and other United Nations
system agencies.

We welcome the Council's adoption of resolution
2475 (2019), on the protection of persons with
disabilities, including children, which not only
highlights the deep concern about the disproportionate
impact of armed conflict on persons with disabilities,
including the potential for abandonment, violence
and a lack of access to basic services, but which also
addresses the assistance and protection needs of all
affected civilians.

To conclude, my delegation wishes to underscore
our commitment to ensuring and protecting the rights
of every child. In May, Guatemala endorsed the Safe
Schools Declaration, joining the 89 countries that
have signed on to that initiative, through which strong
political support is expressed for the protection of every
child and young student, teacher and school buildings.
We call on all the countries that have not yet done so
to join the initiative. Defending children is a moral
and political imperative that sends a message of hope
and a clear sign of our collective will. If we continue
working together, we will be able to fully live up to our
responsibility to protect children 4 the most cherished
part of our population.

