Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): I also thank the Special
Envoy for Yemen and the other briefers for their updates.

Needless to say, the briefers draw a grim picture
of the significant deteriorating of the humanitarian
situation in Yemen, which is a cause of grave concern
for all of us. The ongoing conflict has only aggravated
the already existing problems in that country. There
have been more than 6,800 dead and 33,800 injured
only since March 2015, according to the World Health
Organization. Access to Taiz, with a population of
200,000 people, continues to be limited. Nine of the
22 governorates remain at the emergency levels for
food security, if not yet facing famine. Those are just
a few indicators, but they are a timely reminder of
the grim reality in Yemen and require our united and
urgent reaction to stop what Under-Secretary-General
O'Brien describes as a "man-made brutal humanitarian
disaster"and to prevent the country from total collapse,
as many have said already.

On a separate note, we view as equally worrying
the upsurge in rocket attacks launched by the Houthi
forces in Yemen against targets located in Saudi Arabia,
as well as maritime targets, including United Arab
Emirates vessels and United States ships. Keeping the
important shipping passage of Bab Al-Mandeb safe and
secure is of paramount importance for international and
regional peace and stability. We also call on all sides to
prevent any attacks against innocent targets. Immediate
steps are needed to prevent further internationalization
of the conflict.

Against that backdrop, we fully support the United
Nations Special Envoy and hope that his relentless
efforts will bear fruit in the form of a negotiated
settlement. In that regard, the latest United Nations
peace plan for Yemen deserves careful consideration.
The key elements of the plan - a negotiated withdrawal
from Sana'a and the handing over of heavy and medium
weapons, including ballistic missiles, along with the
formation of a national unity Government - appear
to open a path to hard, but necessary, decisions that
may lead to a durable settlement. If fulfilled, that
peace initiative can become a solid foundation for the
continuation of the national political dialogue, on an
inclusive and non-sectarian basis, thus contributing to
the full implementation of resolution 2216 (2015) and
the Gulf Cooperation Council initiative.

In conclusion, the Council should do everything
possible to reverse the trend that makes Yemenis, as
Mr. Hadi rightly described to us, "feel forgotten by
the entire world". In order to achieve that, we call
on all sides of the conflict to return to negotiations
immediately. As in Syria, there is no military solution
to the crisis in Yemen.

