Mr. Kovanda (Czech Republic): Allow me, too, to
congratulate you, Sir, on your service as your country's
representative on the Security Council this year,
culminating in your skilful management of the Council as
its President this month. Your tenure among us has
amounted to a fitting capstone to your long and
distinguished diplomatic career, and we will miss you.

Liberia is in imminent danger of becoming another
failure for the peace-keeping efforts of the United Nations.
It has been said all too often that there is no place for
peace-keepers where there is no peace to keep. This is
demonstrably the case in that tormented country. The
factions of the civil war are splitting into ever smaller,
ever more vicious, ever more self-centred splinter groups
whose members are frequently interested in little more
than self-aggrandizement, personal gain, killing for the
sake of killing, and drugs. It is precisely the people of
Liberia who bear the ultimate responsibility for achieving
peace and national reconciliation. The price the
international community is prepared to pay to help them
in this effort is fast reaching its limits.

The last time we discussed Liberia in this forum,
there was a glimmer of hope extended by the factions: the
meeting in Abuja. That meeting was postponed from one
date to the next and in the end achieved results which, to
be generous, we can only describe as modest. Charles
Taylor's absence from Abuja was in our View
inexcusable.

Today, these same factions are dangling another
promise of hope in front of the Security Council. But
many of us are fed up. We have voted to extend the
mandate of the United Nations Observer Mission in
Liberia (UNOMIL) for another two-and-a-half months.
But we insist that, during this period, the wrangling
concerning Liberia's Council of State finally end and that
it be installed, that a real cease-fire come into effect, that
all forces disengage and that a serious timetable be agreed
upon to deal with all other aspects of the Akosombo and
Accra agreements, especially as concerns disarmament.
The factions are understandably interested in keeping
UNOMIL in the country, not only for economic reasons,
but also for public relations purposes. But my country, for
one - which for several years now has contributed
soldiers to UNOMIL - will be hard pressed not to
demand its withdrawal if, come September, the conditions
outlined in operative paragraph 4 of resolution 1001
(1995) are not met.

Of course, if left alone, factions can fight only up to
a point - only until their resources are exhausted. We
therefore highlight again the importance of the arms
embargo this Council has imposed on Liberia. And we
note with distress that external support and what the
Secretary-General delicately describes as the "lack of
harmonization" of the policies of Liberia's neighbours
(5/1995/473, para. I]), contribute to the tearing of that
country asunder. To note, as does the preamble of today's
resolution, that a

"concerted and harmonized effort would be
helpful to advance the peace process" (resolution 100] (1995), sixth preamhular paragraph)

 

is a very self-effacing way of telling Liberia's neighbours:
Stop meddling. Stop supplying the factions with arms. Stop
pursuing your own objectives at the expense of Liberia's
peace.

There is one other troubling aspect of the Liberian
situation: the shortcomings in cooperation between
UNOMIL and the Monitoring Group (ECOMOG) of the
Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS).
The parallel and concerted functioning of the two forces
has been viewed as a model for Chapter VIII-style
cooperation between a United Nations observer mission and
a regional force in other parts of the world as well. It is
therefore all the more disturbing that, at the working level,
this cooperation "has not always been satisfactory", to
quote the Secretary-General (8/1995/473, para. 20). We
salute the ECOWAS countries that have been shouldering
the burden of ECOMOG, but we are particularly concerned
that ECOMOG provide the necessary security for UNOMIL
personnel, in line with the Cotonou Agreement, as specified
in paragraph 12 of the resolution we have just adopted.

