Ms. Moglia (Argentina) (spoke from Spanish):
We would like to thank Mr. Annabi for the information
he provided us this morning.

Since the meeting which the Council held on 9
June to hear a briefing by the Special Representative,
Mr. Bernard Kouchner, institutional advances have
been registered that include the establishment of the
office of the Ombudsperson. This institution is
synonymous with democracy and respect for human
rights, and we hope that it will begin its work soon. Its
multi-ethnic and independent character will enable it to
gain the trust of the individuals, groups and
organizations which it is designed to serve.

Another factor we deem important because it
relates to the very essence of the agenda for
coexistence is the decision of the Serb National
Council (SNC) to resume participation in the work of
the joint institutions, even though it will do so as an
observer and for a period of three months, not as a fully
fledged member. We are aware that the SNC's decision
is the result of the signing of an Understanding with
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) whose goal is the adoption of
concrete measures to guarantee the freedom, security
and fundamental human rights of the Serb community
in Kosovo. We hope that this agreement will be
interpreted by the Serb community as proof positive
that UNMIK and KFOR are committed to achieving a
better future for all of the inhabitants of Kosovo.

We hope also that the Serb community in Kosovo
will, for its part, cooperate decisively in the creation of
a secure environment, not only for its own benefit but
for the benefit of all. We also extend this appeal to the
Kosovar Albanians.

That is why we deem unwise, to say the least, the
decision taken by the leader of the Kosovo Democratic
Party to suspend its participation in the Joint Interim
Administrative Structure in response to the signing of
the aforementioned agreement between the Serb
National Council and UNMIK.

It is imperative that everyone understand that in
Kosovo there must be room for all ethnic groups. As
we have noted on other occasions, we believe that the
next municipal elections will represent a good
opportunity to ensure that everyone in Kosovo
understands that life in democracy is based on
participation, not exclusion. That is why we sincerely
hope that all of the communities will participate in this
process.

A democratic society, in addition to providing the
opportunity to elect legitimate representatives, requires
that justice and the rule of law prevail. That is why we
must continue to work to put an end to acts of
vengeance between ethnic groups and to bring their
perpetrators to justice. These efforts must involve the
media, which, under the pretext of freedom of the
press, incite hatred and fuel the desire for vengeance.

We are concerned by the recent discovery by
KFOR of large caches of arms. Though on many
occasions we have been told that in this region it is
common practice to carry a weapon and that the
borders are porous, we must recall that resolution 1160
(1998), which imposes a weapons embargo and other
prohibitions, remains in force and must be complied
with, in particular by neighbouring countries.

Clearly reconciliation will be difficult to achieve
if the refugees and displaced persons are not afforded
the opportunity to return to a secure environment and if
there is no resolution to the question of missing
persons and persons who are being held in Serbian
prisons.

Finally, we wish to express our gratitude and
support to UNMIK and the Kosovo Force.

