Mr. Heller (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): I have
the honour to speak on behalf of the member States of
the Rio Group: Argentina, Belize, Bolivia, Brazil,
Chile, Costa Rica, Colombia, the Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, El Salvador, Guatemala, Guyana, Haiti,
Honduras, Nicaragua, Panama, Paraguay, Peru,
Uruguay, the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela and
Mexico.

The Rio Group would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for holding this open debate and for
placing it on the Council's agenda in order to follow
the Council's activities with regard to the agenda item
"Threats to international peace and security caused by
terrorist acts". This forum of open debates and the
increased interplay between the Council and its
subsidiary bodies with non-Council member States
constitute significant efforts without a doubt to achieve
the common goal of this Organization in the fight
against terrorism.

The Rio Group has taken particular note of the
report introduced by the Executive Director of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
(CTED), whom we wish to welcome, pursuant to
Security Council resolution 1787 (2007) and
concerning the modifications made to the revised
organizational plan of CTED (S/2008/80).

The report shows that important steps have been
taken at the national level for the implementation of
resolution 1373 (2001). It also shows that focus must
now be placed on evaluating the implementation of the
measures and coordinating the mechanisms adopted.
For those reasons, the Rio Group notes with great
interest CTED's proposed priorities in the areas of
technical assistance, developing a better
communications strategy and pledging further efforts
towards strengthening collaboration and cooperation
with the other committees established under
resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1540 (2004).

Since the adoption of resolution 1373 (2001) and
the establishment of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
(CTC) and its Executive Directorate, the United
Nations has taken significant steps towards
collaboration and cooperation in the fight against
terrorism. This is the case of the General Assembly's
adoption of the United Nations Global Counter-
Terrorism Strategy, which will undergo a collective
review during September of this year.

The Strategy and the Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force provide an excellent
opportunity to enhance the United Nations system's
capacity to identify assistance needs and real
possibilities for cooperation by linking the stakeholders
in the fight against terrorism.

Accordingly, the Rio Group recognizes the
importance of CTED's support to Member States in
implementing the Strategy as a member of the Counter-
Terrorism Implementation Task Force, but also when
fulfilling its mandate to promote the development of
assistance programmes for Member States and in
coordinating efforts with international, regional and
subregional organizations in the fight against terrorism.
With these aims in mind, the Rio Group is of the view
that the CTC should strengthen its activities to
facilitate contact between donors and cooperation
recipients, and should promote greater interaction to
identify thematic areas and country priorities in this
field.

In our View, this contribution will significantly
help to progressively strengthen the United Nations
system in achieving the necessary coherence and
coordination in its efforts to fight terrorism. This is our
common task.

The resolution through which the Security
Council will renew the mandate of CTED for a two-
year period envisages an interim review. The Rio
Group hopes that this review will provide a new
opportunity to strengthen the United Nations response
through a better and more coherent coordination of its
efforts to fight terrorism.

We also trust that this Council will conduct the
review in consultation with and with the participation
of the wider United Nations membership.

