Mr. Yun Byung-se (Republic of Korea): The
Republic of Korea welcomes the adoption of resolution
2118 (2013). The resolution marks a historic moment,
when the Security Council has finally come to a unified
position on the crisis in Syria. It is my sincere hope
that the consensus will propel us towards fulfilling
the long-overdue responsibility owed by the Council
to the Syrian people. In that regard, the Republic of
Korea commends the intensive efforts made by the
United States, Russia and other stakeholders, as well as
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, over the past several
weeks.

The Republic of Korea condemns the use of
chemical weapons in the strongest possible terms and
reiterates its View that all chemical weapons - not just
in Syria, but in all other States - should be permanently
eliminated. The use of chemical weapons is a grave war
crime and a serious violation of international law. More
significantly, today's resolution articulates that the use
of chemical weapons anywhere constitutes a threat to
international peace and security.

While adopting the resolution was an important
step, only its full implementation will determine the
true value of our collective enterprise. The robust
language and binding nature of the resolution reflect
the Council's strong commitment to completely
eliminating chemical weapons in Syria. It is also
significant that the resolution reserves measures under
Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations in a
case of non-compliance. We believe that it is indeed the
task of the entire international community to encourage
thorough and prompt implementation of the resolution.

Although resolution 2118 (2013) is focused on
the elimination of chemical weapons in Syria, the
international community cannot afford to allow acts of
impunity. As stipulated in the resolution, the Council
must see to it that those responsible for the use of
chemical weapons are held accountable.

The Security Council should remain focused on the
broader goal of resolving the Syrian crisis, which has
continued for more than two and a half years. We would
like to underline the importance of the provisions of
today's resolution calling for the convening of an
international conference on Syria to implement the
Geneva communique' (S/2012/523, annex). The Republic
of Korea sincerely hopes that the conference will be
convened as soon as possible with a view to putting an
end to the tragic suffering of the Syrian people and the
regional instability caused by the Syrian situation.

