I thank you, Sir, for convening this important debate in the wake of the seventy- fifth anniversary of the International Court of Justice and the hundredth anniversary of the Statute of the Permanent Court of International Justice on 23 December 2020. I would also like to thank Judge Yusuf, President of the International Court of Justice, for his comprehensive briefing. We also welcome the draft presidential statement on cooperation between Security Council and the International Court of Justice. Indonesia firmly believes that, while the Court and the Security Council have different powers and roles, both organs strive in their respective capacities to promote and advance the fulfilment of the basic principles and objectives of the Charter of the United Nations. Having said that, let me make three brief points. First, with regard to a mutually beneficial relationship between the Council and the International Court of Justice, from our interactions with the Court during Council meetings, we share the common view that international peace and security, as envisaged by the drafters of the Charter of the United Nations, also rests on effective cooperation between both organs. It is beyond question that the Court is a fundamental part of the international system for maintaining peace and security; therefore, it stands to reason that strengthening the relationship between both organs could indeed advance and promote the achievement of that objective. Indonesia therefore believes that the Council must be encouraged to engage in more dialogue and interaction with the Court in the exercise of its mandate. We are separate organs, but we are complimentary one to another and need to take advantage of the best of each organ. That leads to my second point, which concerns the essential role of international law in the maintenance of international peace and security. International law plays a critical role in promoting stability and order in international relations. For the drafters of our founding Charter of the United Nations, justice and law are the fundamental conditions for international peace and security. They wanted to see an international community grounded in law. As we are living in a challenging time when disputes are unfortunately on the rise in various parts of the world, it is important to prevent the escalation of such disputes and to try, wherever possible, to resolve them following appropriate legal procedures. That is exactly what the Council, in close cooperation with the Court, must strive for. Rest assured that the attitude of Indonesia towards international law, particularly with respect to the peaceful settlement of disputes, including through the Court, has been and will always be supportive. Indonesia and its neighbour Malaysia chose to accept the jurisdiction of the International Court of Justice in 1997, and both countries have remained bound by its decisions. That brings me to my final point, which is the interaction between both principal organs of the United Nations. The Charter of the United Nations provides tools to the Council to peacefully settle disputes between States by making use of the Court's jurisdiction in such cases or requesting its advisory opinions on legal questions that arise in the Council's work. However, facts and figures have shown for many years that the Council has to some extent refrained from making use of that provision. That should not be the case. The Council needs to be encouraged to make use of those Charter tools. Indonesia believes that stronger relations with the Court will assist the Council in its work. We should continue to explore ways and means to reinvigorate and reinforce the relations between both organs. We are fully convinced that is in the interest of peace between and among nations. To that end, Indonesia calls on all members of the Council to remain united in their support of the work of the Court.
