Ms. Bartolini (San Marino): I would like to
thank the Indonesian presidency for convening this
very important meeting. I would also like to thank
the briefers for their presentations this morning. San
Marino welcomes the latest report of the Secretary-
General (S/2019/373) on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict and supports its recommended measures.

As we approach the seventieth anniversary of the
Geneva Conventions, civilians continue to be victims
of direct and indiscriminate attacks on a daily basis.
They continue to be killed, targeted and forced to flee
their homes. Even humanitarian and medical workers
are often attacked, killed or kidnapped, and hospitals
and medical facilities are bombed or looted. San Marino
firmly condemns such attacks, which are in flagrant
violation of international humanitarian law.

The implementation of resolution 2286 (2016), on
the protection of health services in armed conflict,
remains critical. San Marino also welcomes resolution
2417 (2018), which condemns the use of starvation of
civilians as a method of warfare, as well as the unlawful
denial of humanitarian access. Humanitarian space
should always be respected, including in domestic
counter-terrorism measures. San Marino also supports
the Swiss proposal for an amendment in article 8 of the
Rome Statute on the inclusion of starvation as a war
crime in internal armed conflicts.

The situation of vulnerable groups is of great
concern, since it tends to worsen during armed
conflicts. Children, for example, are being recruited
as soldiers, and their schools have been attacked,
destroyed or used as military facilities. San Marino
condemns those acts in the strongest terms and fully
supports the development of action plans to prevent and
end grave violations against children. San Marino has
joined the Paris Principles and Guidelines on Children
Associated with Armed Forces or Armed Groups, the
Safe Schools Declaration, the Vancouver Principles
and the new #ACTtoProtect campaign - important
instruments aimed at protecting children in conflicts
and ensuring their rehabilitation and reintegration.

I would also like to highlight the disproportionate
impact of armed conflict on persons with disabilities.
Conflicts always cause physical impairments, primarily
as a result of the use of explosive devices, which also
disrupt basic services for the disabled, who are often
unable to flee attacks. Furthermore, women and girls
with disabilities are in particular at risk of violence and
abuses. It is urgent and essential to act for the protection
and assistance of those specific groups.

San Marino fully supports the Secretary-General's
call on parties to conflict to avoid the use of explosive
weapons with wide-area effects in urban centres.
These weapons cause massive suffering to civilians.
They damage and destroy their homes and critical
infrastructure. We firmly believe that all parties should
avoid the use of such devices in populated areas, and
we support the Secretary-General's call to develop a
political declaration as a measure to address that threat.

The Security Council has now been debating the
item on today's agenda for 20 years. Much progress has
been made, but it is essential that we continue to stress
the importance of respecting international humanitarian
law. All parties must abide by these norms, and we
need to prioritize measures to ensure accountability. In
that regard, we welcome investigations at the national
level and we call on States to support the work of
the International Criminal Court. San Marino firmly
believes that ensuring greater respect for international
humanitarian law is one of the most effective ways to
protect civilians.

