Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): 1 would like to begin by thanking
Under-Secretary-General Mark Lowcock for his
comprehensive and informative briefing. We agree that
we continue to see the most difficult humanitarian and
military situation in the territories outside the control
of the Syrian Government on the eastern bank of the
Euphrates and in the Idlib de-escalation zone and the
United States-occupied zone around Al-Tanf.

Our colleagues have given a number of fair and
critical assessments of the situation in north-eastern
Syria. We want to point out that the issues in this area
are not new and were not created by the Governments
of Syria, Russia or Turkey. To a significant degree, the
root cause of the destabilization in the area beyond the
Euphrates is its illegal occupation and the dangerous
experiment in demographic engineering introduced
there to spite the Syrian Government. Achieving strong,
lasting stabilization in Syria as a whole is possible
only if the sovereignty and territorial integrity of this
country is respected. Syria must be liberated from the
illegitimate foreign military presence there as soon as
possible, even if its oil resources, so important to our
American colleagues, are at stake. They belong not to
the United States but to the Syrian people, for whom
the actions of the United States are simply plundering
and pillaging. Incidentally, the restoration to Syria of
its oilfields would constitute a genuine contribution by
the United States to the humanitarian assistance efforts
for the people of Syria.

Russia has been trying to rectify the situation to
the best of its ability in order to avoid a humanitarian
catastrophe and civilian deaths. The situation in north-
eastern Syria has been brought under control thanks
to the signing of a Russian-Turkish memorandum on
22 October in Sochi. Russian military police have begun
joint patrols of the zone along the border, while Syrian
Government troops have been sent to the agreed border
posts and Kurdish self-defence units have withdrawn.

Turning to the Idlib de-escalation zone, we once
again heard nothing, or nothing clear, in members'
statements about the main thing, which is that the area
continues to be a hotbed of international terrorism,
and that is precisely why Abu Bakr Al-Baghdadi,
the leader of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL), was hiding in Idlib province, while the so-
called international coalition was even obliged to
launch strikes in the area earlier. We can see that our
colleagues are becoming increasingly convinced that it
is controlled by terrorists who are utilizing the civilian
population as human shields.

At the same time, militants continue to engage
in provocations and shell Government troops.
Approximately 600 such attacks were recorded in
October alone. One of the heaviest attacks took place
on 11 and 12 November, targeting Tal Turki, Madaya,
Khwein Al-Kabir and other villages in southern Idlib.
There was shelling of residential areas of Aleppo on
10 November in which a child was killed and dozens of
other people injured. There are reports of executions,
detentions and violent dispersals of demonstrations
by ordinary people protesting the terrorists' control
in Idlib, as Mr. Lowcock mentioned. In the silence
about those crimes we see yet another attempt to divide
terrorists into good ones and bad ones. Whatever names
these groups go by - ISIL, Jabhat Al-Nusra, Hayat
Tahrir Al-Sham - we want to once again warn against
flirting with jihadists for short-term interests, whether
by providing them with political cover or financial or
material support, and especially by portraying them as
so-called moderate radicals.

Today, unfortunately, we once again heard
accusations that the Syrian army and its allies conducted
air strikes on civilian facilities in Idlib. As we learned
from other media outlets, the source of that information
was once again the infamous White Helmets. We have
spoken in detail about the problem of the reliability
of the information shovelled out by media outlets
and regurgitated in our Security Council colleagues'
statements. On 16 September we held a detailed press
conference in which, based on irrefutable evidence,
we pointed out that some of the most serious-sounding
cases of alleged attacks on civilian targets in Idlib
by the Russian and Syrian armed forces had actually
turned out to be fake. However, as a number of our
colleagues' statements today showed, that information
was ignored. It is of course far more convenient to talk
about the humanitarian problems in Syria without doing
anything to save civilians from terrorists.

For our part, we continue to work together with the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
(OCHA) with the aim of resolving the humanitarian
situation, including in the interests of making the
de-confliction mechanism more accurate. We have
frequently spoken about its existing problems. We
welcomethefactthatmistakeswereacknowledged-and
we hope that they were unintentional - in relaying
the coordinates and descriptions of alleged civilian
facilities that when verified turned out to be bases and
shelters for militants. Against that backdrop, we are
pleased that OCHA intends to review the methodology
for collecting the de-confliction mechanism data,
which is a step in the right direction.

We share the concerns expressed today about the
danger of an increase in the terrorist threat in various
parts of Syria that are not yet under Government control.
We call on those who maintained or established prisons
in north-eastern Syria not to shift the responsibility
of preventing jihadists of every stripe from spreading
throughout the region onto others.

Russia, together with the Government of Syria,
is taking steps to create the necessary conditions for
the return of refugees and internally displaced persons
(IDPs). Almost 2 million Syrian citizens have now
returned to their homes, of whom more than 1.3 million
were internally displaced. A total of 914 educational
and 212 medical institutions have been restored, and
electricity, water supply and industrial facilities are
also being built or restored, numbers that are irrefutable
proof of the effectiveness of the measures taken by the
Syrian authorities to create the necessary conditions
for the voluntary, dignified and safe return of refugees.
We call on international organizations, including the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees and other relevant humanitarian bodies, to
step up their efforts to that end. Unfortunately, we have
seen that such activity is often artificially held up.

With the assistance ofthe Government of Syria and
Russia's Centre for Reconciliation of Opposing Sides
in the Syrian Arab Republic, together with the United
Nations and the International Committee of the Red
Cross, efforts are continuing to resettle people from
the Rukban camp. However, owing to the efforts of
the armed groups in the area to maintain their control
there, that work has stalled. We hope that the problem
of refugees and IDPs there will be resolved as soon as
possible. As for the Al-Hol camp, the situation there
continues to be disastrous owing to humanitarian
agencies' limited access and to funding shortages.

