Mr. Okitundu (Democratic Republic of the Congo) (spoke in French): Allow me at the outset, Sir,
on behalf of my delegation and on my own behalf,
warmly to congratulate you on your assumption to the
presidency of the Security Council. While recognizing
the merits of your predecessor, the representative of the
United States of America, I am particularly gratified to
see the presidency assumed by the representative of a
friendly country, Bangladesh.

I should like also to avail myself of this
opportunity to thank the Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi
Annan, for his persistent efforts in favour of the
maintenance and restoration of peace throughout the
world, and in particular for his eighth report on the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

I take this opportunity also to express our
gratitude to Mr. Olara Otunnu and to Mr. Guehenno for
the mission they carried out to my country.

Let me also express the deep gratitude of my
Government and of the Congolese people to the
Security Council mission that visited the Great Lakes
region in May to gain a firsthand insight into the
realities of the Congolese crisis and to better assess
mechanisms for its resolution.

Finally, let me voice my heartfelt gratitude to all
of the personnel of the United Nations Organization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUC), in particular Ambassador Kamel Morjane,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, who masterfully
led that mission, to the great satisfaction of all parties
concerned.

Concerning the peace process that is under way in
my country, I should like to comment on a few issues
that my Government considers essential. I will discuss
the following points: disengagement; the
demilitarization of Kisangani; the withdrawal of
foreign forces; the disarmament, demobilization,
repatriation, reintegration and reinstallation of armed
groups; the inter-Congolese dialogue; the humanitarian
situation and the economic revival of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo; and, finally, the transition to
the third phase.

Turning to the disengagement process, we take
note of the fact that there have been delays because of
the continued refusal of one of the parties to the Lusaka
Agreement to abide by the Kampala plan and the
Harare sub-plans for disengagement and redeployment,
despite oft-repeated promises.

The Security Council had ordered that party to
disengage from Equateur province starting on 1 June
2001, to new defensive positions under the Harare sub-
plans.

My Government must inform the Security
Council that the party has in no way disengaged in
keeping with the Kampala plan of 8 April 2000. If the
disengagement is to be consistent with the Kampala
plan, the party must withdraw by at least 165
kilometres from its current positions. If disengagement
does not take place shortly, as determined by this
Council, the measures provided for in paragraph 28 of
resolution 1341 (2001) of 22 February 2001 must be
imposed. That is, moreover, the position of this
Council, clearly expressed in paragraph 103 of the
mission report contained in document S/2001/521 of 29
May, in which the main organ responsible for the
maintenance of international peace and security affirms
that its members would react sharply if that party did
not disengage to the agreed position as from 1 June.

With respect to the question of the
demilitarization of Kisangani, my Government feels
that it should be resolved on a priority basis. The
Council mission to the Great Lakes region noted that
Kisangani has yet to be demilitarized. This deliberate
non-demilitarization can be characterized only as a
flagrant violation of the relevant provisions of
resolution 1304 (2000) of 16 June 2000, unanimously
adopted by the Council over a year ago, which
provisions were reaffirmed by International Court of
Justice Order No. 116 of 1 July 2000 concerning the
armed activities on the territory of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.

At the risk of wearying its members, I must
remind the Council that the city of Kisangani
underwent its own war within the war of aggression.
Kisangani was the theatre of unusually violent fighting
between the regular armed forces of Uganda and
Rwanda, in violation not only of the Lusaka Ceasefire
Agreement, but also and above all of international
public law. All this fighting entailed tremendous loss of
human life, as well as the destruction of the economic,
social and cultural infrastructures of the city. These
serious armed confrontations have left an indelible
mark and deeply traumatized the population of
Kisangani.

My Government therefore calls on the Security
Council to determine, in the draft resolution that it is
about to adopt on the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, a specific date for the effective and complete
demilitarization of Kisangani. It is up to the Security
Council to transmit a clear and precise message
reminding the forces of occupation not to
underestimate its determination to enforce respect for
all resolutions on the war in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and that they must demilitarize Kisangani
as soon as possible.
It is also up to the Security Council to consider
innovative measures to ensure respect for resolution
1304 (2000). The United Nations must be in a position
to reinforce the Moroccan troops and to increase its
civilian and associated staff in order to assist in
administering the city. Just as Kisangani has been the
symbol of the martyrdom and suffering of the
Congolese people, we are convinced that it will
become the political and physical symbol of renewal
and the return to dignity of an entire people.

As regards the withdrawal of foreign forces and
disarmament, demobilization, resettlement,
reintegration and repatriation, all the leaders of the
region confirmed to the Council mission the joint
objective of withdrawing from the territory of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo in accordance with
the relevant provisions of resolution 1304 (2000).
Furthermore, we clearly stated in Lusaka that this
concept of the withdrawal of foreign forces should
include a timetable with D-Day set for 22 February
2001.

As is known, General Njuki Mwaniki, Chairman
of the Joint Military Commission (JMC) entrusted with
the implementation of the Lusaka Ceasefire
Agreement, has convened a meeting of the JMC for 22
June in order to finalize precise plans for withdrawal
and for disarmament, demobilization, resettlement,
reintegration and repatriation. In the ongoing interest
of advancing the peace process, my Government
affirms that it will spare no effort at that meeting to
finalize the plans for withdrawal and for disarmament,
demobilization, resettlement, reintegration and
repatriation. Specific instructions will be given to the
Government representative so that he may assist in
resolving all pending issues.

With respect to the disarmament of the armed
groups, disarmament, demobilization, resettlement,
reintegration and repatriation will be provided to them
in conformity with the Lusaka Agreement, which, we
would recall, recognizes the need to find solutions to
the security concerns of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and the neighbouring countries.

In that respect, I would inform the Council that
my Government has taken the initiative of opening
direct contacts at the highest level with the leaders of
the aggressor countries. We seek credibly to formulate
our security concerns and to define practical modalities
of responding to them. That is the only way for us to
find a way of reconciling our countries and to establish
peaceful coexistence between our States and respective
peoples.

As to my Government, I can assure the Council
that the Democratic Republic of the Congo cannot
serve as a staging post for the destabilization of
neighbouring countries. It is important for us to know,
however, that a peace restored through negotiations
between States will not last long unless the deep-seated
causes of the crisis in the Great Lakes region, including
exclusion and intolerance, are addressed. Lasting peace
in the Great Lakes region requires the promotion of
democracy, human rights, national concord and
reconciliation within each of our countries. To ignore
this dimension of the issue of peace would be to
prolong the unrest for a long time or indefinitely and to
strengthen the advocates of ethnic cleansing. The
adherents and advocates of these ideologies must be
sought and brought before an international tribunal.

With respect to the inter-Congolese dialogue, my
Government reaffirms its commitment to that great
forum, which it considers to be an irreversible process
and the best possible road to national reconciliation.
We place all our trust in President Masire's ability to
convene the inter-Congolese dialogue as soon as
possible. We wish it to be an inclusive process that will
bring together all trends and socio-political groupings
in the country, with no foreign interference or military
pressure whatsoever, so that they may reflect on and
devote themselves calmly to the future of the
Congolese nation and have their say in the new
institutions of the next Republic. That is why we have
welcomed the facilitator's proposal to convene a
preparatory meeting to the dialogue on 16 July 2001.

As regards the issue of child soldiers, my
Government has already issued a decree, as pointed out
earlier by Mr. Otunnu, forbidding the recruitment of
child soldiers in the Congolese armed forces and
launching the process of their demobilization. During
his recent visit to Kinshasa, Mr. Otunnu, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict, noted that my country has signed
and ratified the Optional Protocol to the Convention on
the Rights of the Child on the involvement of children
in armed conflict, as well as the Optional Protocol to
the Convention on the sale of children, child
prostitution and child pornography.

With the support of the United Nations Children's
Fund, my Government recently launched a vast
awareness campaign to ensure the immediate
demobilization of any child soldiers still serving in the
Congolese armed forces, to halt the use of child
soldiers and to protect children from sexual abuse and
other forms of exploitation.

With respect to the humanitarian situation and the
economic recovery of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, we must note that the humanitarian situation in
my country is a disaster. According to data provided by
non-governmental organizations, such as the
International Rescue Committee and United Nations
agencies, more than 2.5 million Congolese have died in
the occupied territories as the direct or indirect victims
of aggression. Such bodies as the United Nations
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
and the European Community Humanitarian Office
point to an unbearable humanitarian catastrophe. There
are 2.1 million displaced persons. Almost 400,000
Congolese have taken refuge in neighbouring
countries. Sixteen million people have been directly
affected by the war, and the number of vulnerable
persons - street children, widows, orphans - has
multiplied. Child soldiers have been recruited by force.

The Council mission noted the precarious
situation of the Congolese population in the provinces
that are occupied as well as in those that are under
Government control. The recent Government
devaluation, carried out on the recommendation of the
World Bank and the International Monetary Fund, has
had a devastating effect on the daily lives of my
people.

Furthermore, the systematic looting of the natural
resources and other forms of wealth of the soil and the
subsoil of the Democratic Republic of the Congo is
being carried out at an unbridled pace with full
impunity, thus depriving an entire population of the
benefit of the tremendous resources the country is
fortunate enough to possess.

The Council is also aware that these activities run
counter to international public law and violate the
Congolese people's right to freely dispose of its natural
wealth and resources, as enshrined in common article 1
of the two United Nations covenants of 1966: the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights
and the International Covenant on Economic, Social
and Cultural Rights. This is also a contravention of the
principle of respect for the territorial integrity and
sovereignty of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
which has been repeatedly reaffirmed in United
Nations resolutions on the situation in my country.

The Council mission identified and announced
publicly some 40 small quick-impact projects to be
carried out in the zones where the contingents of
MONUC are deployed. My Government is grateful to
the leader of the Council mission for having called
upon the Bretton Woods institutions to contribute to the
implementation of these projects.

However, what is important for the Congolese
population is the need to include provisions for post-
conflict management that is appropriate for this crisis
in the plans to restore lasting peace. The Democratic
Republic of the Congo requires the full support of the
international community. In an act of international
solidarity that is commensurate with existing needs, the
international community must commit itself to helping
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, particularly
through the appropriate resumption of multilateral and
bilateral structural cooperation, as well as by providing
access to various debt-relief mechanisms, including the
facilities enjoyed by countries emerging from an armed
conflict under the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries
Initiative.

If the reconstruction of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo is handled properly from the outset, it can
only help the situation throughout Central Africa and
the Great Lakes region, which includes Rwanda and
Burundi, and where, until not so long ago, there was a
regulatory mechanism with an integrating effect that
facilitated their peaceful coexistence. This mechanism
could be revived in some other form on which we
could all agree.

Therefore, the disengagement and withdrawal
processes must be accelerated to put an end to the
misery of the Congolese people. A large-scale
international humanitarian operation, in which many
friendly countries have already announced their
willingness to participate, would finally permit the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to create optimum
conditions to curtail traditional structural forms of
cooperation.

Regarding the transition to phase III, it is
important to note that in his report the Secretary-
General, on the basis of the conclusions of the Council
mission to the Great Lakes region, calls on the Council
to approve the transition to phase III of MONUC.

My Government takes note of the ceiling of 5,537
personnel. However, we vigorously request that the
MONUC mandate be redefined to endow it with a clear
enforcement capacity. As far as I am concerned, this is
a sine qua non for the success of the process.

It also seems vital to me to underline that the
imperative of the withdrawal activities of foreign
troops call for increased civilian, military and
associated MONUC staff, so that it can successfully
carry out the support policies aimed at ensuring peace,
security and stability in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo.

To secure the smooth development and regular
follow-up of all relevant MONUC activities and the
Joint Military Commission, my Government is
convinced that the co-location of these two structures
in Kinshasa and in the field will promote significant
progress in the peace process. This is why my
Government invites the Security Council to exert all its
influence to ensure that the decision to co-locate the
Joint Military Commission and MONUC, which has
been accepted by all the parties, will be realized,
particularly bearing in mind that the security concerns
raised by certain parties have been proved baseless in
the report of the Chairman of the Joint Military
Commission submitted to the Security Council
delegation in Lusaka on 22 May 2001.

I cannot conclude without restating my
Government's concern regarding the snail's pace of the
peace process in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. My Government is convinced that because of
procrastination, only greater involvement of the
Security Council and the redefinition of the MONUC
mandate, in order to give it a clear enforcement
capacity, can bring about the successful
implementation of the process now under way.

Finally, to put an end to the allegations of certain
parties, the Government invites MONUC to intensify
its deployment in the eastern part of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, which is currently occupied.
All this justifies the urgent need to redefine the
mandate and increase the MONUC staff.

