Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): The
United Kingdom is pleased that the Council has united
around resolution 2119 (2013). The United Kingdom is

a strong supporter of the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH), but I would like to raise
two points of concern - one general and one specific.

In general, MINUSTAH is the clearest example ofa
mismatch between the needs on the ground and the tools
the Security Council uses to address them. Even after
the drawdown of troops mandated in this resolution,
there will still be over 5,000 military peacekeepers
deployed in a country where there has been no military
conflict in recent times. This makes little sense.

We are concerned that some tasks that could be
better managed by other elements of the United Nations
system and its partners still fall to MINUSTAH to
perform. This is troubling. In particular, we note the
continued provision of quick-impact projects. In the
United Kingdom's view, as the MINUSTAH mandate
enters its tenth year, the time has long past when there
should be such a dependence on measures designed for
the initial confidence-building phase of a mission. Ifwe
are still doing quick-impact projects to build confidence
after 10 years, we might conclude that their impact has
not, in fact, been very quick.

Transitioning these tasks to long-term development
experts and funds would ensure the continuity of
international support to Haiti, While allowing the
Mission itself to focus on providing a safe and stable
environment in which this work can take place. Such an
approach would be more consistent with the objective
of enhanced national ownership. For this reason, while
we strongly support the drawdown of MINUSTAH
provided for in the resolution, we believe that there is
scope for a more accelerated drawdown, in particular of
engineering personnel. We are confident that this can
be done in a manner which consolidates and protects
security gains.

We welcome the Secretary-General's proposal to
consider the reconfiguration of the Mission, and look
forward to hearing more of this in his next report.

