Mr. Fedotov: I welcome today's initiative of the
Security Council to discuss Afghanistan, and I am
pleased to be here to provide a briefing together with
my dear colleague Jan Kubis to the assessment of the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC)
of the current situation.

Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Kubis was very clear about the risks and challenges
facing the current election process in Afghanistan. The
2014 political and military transition is likely to create
considerable political and security uncertainty, which
must be addressed. At this crucial moment, Afghanistan
needs continued international support. If its economic
development declines and international aid is reduced,
along with business confidence, the reliance on the
illicit economy will further increase.

Over the past decade, drug cultivation and
production have been the most profitable illicit
and criminal business activities in Afghanistan. At
UNODC, we estimate that the global opium market is
worth some $68 billion, and 80 per cent of the world's
opium and heroin is produced in Afghanistan. The
narcotics trade may be worth between 10 to 15 per cent
of the country's gross domestic product. In 2013, the
area under poppy cultivation reached an historical high
of 209,000 hectares. Opium production increased by
50 per cent, compared to 2012, rising to 5,500 tons.

Afghanistan remains at the centre ofa multi-billion
dollar illicit business that impacts on security, the
rule of law, health and sustainable development. This
is being driven not only by global consumption, but
also by domestic speculation and corruption. The link
between the lack of security and opium cultivation
is also evident. 90 per cent of total opium poppy
cultivation in Afghanistan takes place in the southern
and western provinces - the most insecure areas,
where anti-Government elements and drug traders
are extremely active. Money-laundering is hindering
proper tax collection and creating an underresourced
Government bereft of the financial means to confront
illicit drugs. This is true on both the supply side and the
demand side; the country has the highest rate of opium
addiction in the world.

Unfortunately, these problems have not been
concretely reflected in the Kabul and Tokyo processes.
As a result, counter-narcotics efforts have not been
given a high priority by national and international
stakeholders. However, it would be unfair to say that
nothing has been done to confront this challenge. Here
are just a few facts and figures on the most recent
developments.

Notwithstanding the election period and security
concerns, the Counter-Narcotics Police of Afghanistan
have continued with the eradication of opium crop in
12 provinces although the figure of 1,600 hectares
eradicated from the beginning of the season to 2 June is
down form previous years. In the period from January
to December 2013, the Afghan Counter-Narcotics
Police undertook 440 operations resulting in 383
arrests, dismantled two heroin laboratories, and seized
2.8 tons of opiates and 13.8 tons ofprecursor chemicals.

UNODC's role is to provide support and assistance
to the relevant Afghan counter-narcotic authorities and
to help them to do more. We are also building effective
international cooperation and partnerships through such
networks as the Regional Programme for Afghanistan
and Neighbouring Countries; the Triangular Initiative,
which brings together Afghanistan, Iran and Pakistan;
and the Afghanistan-Kyrgyzstan-Tajikistan (AKT)
Initiative, while working closely with many regional
organizations.

Ministerial review meetings have been held
recently between the members of the AKT group
and the Triangular Initiative, as well as the Steering
Committee of the Regional Programme, to further
strengthen cooperation in countering illicit drugs and
in border management among countries of West and
Central Asia. The Triangular Initiative, in particular,
has already produced concrete results in terms of
several tons of drugs seized; even more importantly, it
has made it possible for those three countries to engage
in constructive cooperation at the operational level.

UNODC is continuing to support law enforcement
operations in the region through new initiatives, such
as the Criminal Assets Southern Hub, the Southern
Trafficking Operational Plan and the Maritime
Regional Security Initiative. Furthermore, UNODC is
promoting drug control cooperation at the interregional
level to assist countries in countering transnational
organized crime and drug trafficking rings involved in
the Afghan opiates trade.

In that context, we are supporting the linkages
between counter-narcotics intelligence-sharing centres
such as the Joint Planning Cell, under the Triangular
Initiative, and other regional centres, including the
Central Asian Regional Information and Coordination
Centre, the GulfCriminaI Information Center to Combat
Drugs, the Southeast European Law Enforcement
Centre and many others. To cement that process, last
year UNODC launched its "networking the networks"
initiative, which brings together regional centres to
enhance criminal intelligence and to collaborate in
operations along the main trafficking routes used for
shipping drugs and precursors to and from Afghanistan.

Despite the work of the international community,
much more needs to be done. Afghanistan needs
a meaningful action plan that takes a long term
development, peace and security approach - one that
is coupled with an effective drug control effort that is
able to balance its different components of supply and
demand reduction and alternative development and that
mainstreams action against drug lords and criminality
into work promoting sustainable economic and social
development. A more comprehensive approach is
needed in three key areas.

First, there is a need to reduce the vulnerability of
citizens to the illicit economy through improvements to
the quality of their lives, including in the areas of health
care, education and job creation. Of course, alternative
development is an essential tool in those efforts that
can help farmers to permanently move away from illicit
crop farming. But that will succeed only if we also
provide licit markets for substitution crops and improve
upon existing infrastructure.

Secondly, we must remove the opportunities for
criminals by focusing on good governance, the rule
of law and anti-money laundering and anti-corruption
activities. Those issues are a fundamental element
of the Tokyo Mutual Accountability Framework.
Nevertheless, there is still a great need to turn the
text of the framework into concrete action so that we
can eliminate corruption in Afghan society and its
institutions and sever the flow of money from this
crime.

Thirdly, we have to generate the political will
that can introduce a long-term engagement that binds
together the United Nations family as well as the
relevant international and national stakeholders. The
2016 special session of the General Assembly could
also help at the international level by reviewing the
achievements and challenges in countering the world
drug problem, including in Afghanistan.

Allow me assure the Security Council that UNODC
will continue to support Afghanistan in fighting
drugs and crime and will further promote regional
and interregional cooperation in an integrated and
comprehensive response to illicit drugs.

