The President: I shall make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the United Kingdom.

I join everyone who has thanked, Mr. Egeland for
what I thought was a very powerful briefing and for his
call for action to all of us.

First, with respect to western Sudan, the lack of
progress, the deterioration of the situation and the
problem of humanitarian access all demonstrate how
precarious the situation is. We really need to do more.
The results of the assessment mission of the African
Union Mission in the Sudan - which is, I think, just
now coming back from the region - are quite crucial.
We need for the Council to be in a position to be able
to consider the implications of that mission: what does
it mean for the present African Union Mission, how
does that Mission move forward next year to cover an
even bigger task, and how does that fit in with what the
United Nations is doing in the Sudan? All of those
aspects are crucial. At the same time, it is necessary to
exert maximum pressure on the parties to try to deliver
a peace agreement in Abuja as soon as possible.

Secondly, with respect to the Great Lakes region
and the humanitarian consequences of the activities of
the Lord's Resistance Army (LRA) in the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo, southern Sudan
and northern Uganda, we all share the concern at the
some 2 million displaced persons and at the impact that
the relatively small number of fighters have on
millions of people in those three countries. The LRA
activity is causing an instability that is wider than even
before. So, we must encourage the parties to try to
reach a peaceful solution. We, as the United Nations -
including the United Nations Organization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC) and
the United Nations Mission in the Sudan (UNMIS) -
must do whatever we can to help the Governments of
the region actually tackle that problem. I think the
Council's role should be supportive of the
Governments.

Thirdly, with respect to Zimbabwe, the United
Kingdom shares the concerns that Mr. Egeland set out.
There is a humanitarian situation which, owing to a
natural disaster and man-made causes, is extremely
serious and getting worse. I do not think that we have
seen the improvements that we had hoped for,
following the July visit of Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General Anna Tibaijuka.

The fact is, the United Nations and its agencies
and non-governmental organizations are doing a very
good job in the most difficult of circumstances.
Mr. Egeland said very clearly that the action taken by
the Government of Zimbabwe in terms of the eviction
programme was the worst possible action at the worst
possible time. We can only welcome the agreements
that he was able to secure with the Government of
Zimbabwe during his visit. What has been done by
Mr. England on food security and what has been done
by the World Food Programme in obtaining better
access for non-governmental organizations are all
essential elements. I think we would all look to see the
Government of Zimbabwe now fulfil its obligations in
terms of the agreements that it has entered into. I think
that means that we should be encouraging an
accountable and democratic Government, the rule of
law and respect for human rights.

For my part, I would welcome greater
involvement by the United Nations in the dialogue on
the political relationship with the Government of
Zimbabwe. But I think we need to see substantial
progress before we could think of the Secretary-
General himself getting involved in that issue.

As for the part of the United Kingdom, let me be
clear too, we will provide significant assistance to the
needy Zimbabweans, both bilaterally and through the
European Union.

In conclusion, I would like to make a few
practical suggestions. First, Mr. Egeland's briefing
demonstrates how humanitarian crises have
implications for regional stability and security and how
cross-border movements only underline the impact on
further insecurity. So, the Security Council and the
international community have a responsibility to
monitor such situations and to provide better assistance
to countries actually facing such crises. It seems to me
to be quite obvious. The aim, quite clearly, is to try to
tackle conflict and potential conflict, provide
protection for civilians and ensure the availability of
humanitarian assistance and the access of that
assistance to those who need it.

I thought Mr. Egeland's last paragraph really
summed it up: security and stability actually go hand in
hand with humanitarian crises. Where the former do
not exist, crisis is more likely. The United Kingdom
commends UNMIS and MONUC for what they are
already doing to tackle armed groups, including the
LRA. But I think that the lesson is that we need to be
more involved in the efforts that we actually undertake
to tackle those problems, given the graphic map Mr.
Egeland has shown us of the path into the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the path out, and what
might be possible by way of interdiction. It would be
wholly consistent with everything that we have been
saying with reference to the role of the International
Criminal Court to say that the peacekeepers of the
United Nations should be more active in trying to
prevent the scourge of the LRA from contaminating
other countries.

In conclusion, it seems to me that Mr. Egeland
has provided the Council with a lot of material. I think
it is for the Council to decide, perhaps at a slightly
slower pace, how it can react to that. But certainly, it
would be the United Kingdom's intention to put
forward some suggestions in due course.

I now resume my function as President of the
Council.

As there are no further requests for the floor, I
give the floor to Mr. Egeland to respond to the
comments raised so far.

