Mr. Bin Momen (Bangladesh): I thank you,
Mr. President, for inviting Bangladesh to address the
Council on strengthening triangular cooperation for
peacekeeping operations.

Triangular partnership is critical to effective United
Nations peacekeeping; there is no question about that.
Yet, building partnerships across divergent views of
the three key stakeholders - the Security Council,
troop- and police-contributing countries (TCCs/PCCS)
and the Secretariat - has always been a challenge and
remains so even today. I hope that today's discussion
will play an important role in informing and guiding
our upcoming work. I thank Under-Secretary-General
Lacroix and the other briefers.

Despite a clear division of responsibilities among
the three parties of the triangle, there are significant
interlinkages and interplay among their work. Therefore,
meaningful cooperation and consultations among those
three parties are crucial to crafting clearly defined,
realistic and achievable mandates. Furthermore, such
consultations can also help to narrow gaps between
mandates and realities during the implementation
phase, ease tensions on unresolved issues in other
bodies, such as the Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations (C-34) and the Fifth Committee and bring
in fresh ideas from the field in defining the contours of
future policies, particularly during the drawdown and
exit phase of a mission.

In our efforts to set triangular dialogue in a
better and more robust framework, in the past we
held discussions both on procedural and substantive
matters. In that regard, we must commend the work of
delegations in the 2018 C-34 negotiations for coming
up with a consensus-based section on triangular
cooperation with specific recommendations. In keeping
with those discussions, let me take this opportunity to
share some concrete thoughts.

First, the objective of strengthening triangular
cooperation should be primarily about overcoming
the so-called Christmas-tree mandate dilemma. More
flexibility and receptiveness to the inputs coming
from TCCs and PCCs and the ground while setting
the mandates are key in that regard. The performance
appraisal system and apportionment of responsibilities
must also be uniform and informed by realism,
practicality and achievability. Essentially, the idea
should be to allow ownership among the TCCs and
PCCs by creating spaces for their voices in critical
decisions, including the composition of peacekeeping
operations, force adjustments, resource requirements
and so on.

Secondly, very often in the United Nations bodies
dealing with peacekeeping operations, such as the
C-34, the Fifth Committee, the Security Council
Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations and
the Contingent-Owned Equipment Working Group,
the views of the Council, the TCCs, the PCCs and
the Secretariat become very divergent. In addition,
those United Nations bodies have their own ways
of operating, which are not necessarily in sync with
each other. Triangular dialogue can certainly play
an important role in eliminating those barriers and
creating platforms for more meaningful and regular,
perhaps institutionalized, interactions among various
intergovernmental processes on important issues, such
as safety and security, performance, peacebuilding and
sustaining peace, among others.

Thirdly, we must take concrete steps to further
systemize triangular dialogue with an appropriate mix
of formal and informal meetings. We see great value
in holding regular informal meetings at the expert
level with adequate opportunities for participation by
field-level actors through videoconferences or other
means. That will encourage dynamic, field-focused,
two-way discussions. Such meetings should encourage
bottom-up thinking and, as such, be adequately
flexible, constructive and open in nature to inform
decision-makers of the views and concerns expressed by
actors and contributors in the field. It is also important
to maintain an adequate balance between the military
and the civilian voices. Those informal meetings can
be used to lay the ground for higher-level meetings in
a formal setting, with an effective decision-making
agenda and political commitment.
Fourthly, the existing mechanisms, such as the
C-34 and the Security Council Working Group, need
to be utilized for more in-depth discussions of common
concerns over various policy issues. In addition, other
existing practices for formal and informal meetings
need to be further strengthened and streamlined through
innovative ways. The Security Council Working Group
can play a catalytic role in further institutionalizing
triangular cooperation by regular and systematic
engagement with TCCs, PCCs and the Secretariat. They
can aim to push the discussions beyond the traditional
pro forma and formulaic domain to a more open and
interactive one and to keep the Security Council
informed of the outcomes of such discussions. In turn,
the Security Council can reflect the outcomes of such
discussions in mandate setting and renewals.

Fifthly and lastly, to guide the discussions towards
convergence in a systematic way over a period, it is
essential that the discussions in a meeting adequately
inform the meetings to follow. The Secretariat can keep

track of the discussions in a matrix format, particularly
for meetings on thematic issues and mission-specific
matters. In addition, advance planning and a tentative
yearly calendar for triangular consultation with a
flexible agenda can help to prepare Member States to
contribute to such meetings appropriately.

