Mr. Gonzalez de Linares Palou (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): I welcome the briefings by Mr. Herve
Ladsous and the Police Commissioners from the United
Nations Mission in South Sudan, the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the United Nations Mission
in Liberia. I thank you, Sir, for taking the initiative to
hold this meeting.

I am going to ask my questions now, at the
beginning, so that they are clearly understood. I
have two questions on gender policies in the police
components. First, what has been the recent evolution
with respect to the percentage of women in mission
police components, and what measures are being taken
to increase that number? Secondly, we know that there
is a senior gender adviser, and we would like to know
if there is an intent to appoint specific focal points
within the police components in missions to ensure the
incorporation ofa gender perspective within each unit.
I have now asked my questions.

We fully agree that police components provide
considerable added value to the complex mandates
that characterize today's peacekeeping operations,
especially with regard to the protection of civilians.
Police units have an enormous potential to generate trust,
because they work closely with the local population, and
that proximity is quite important. However, we would
point out that, in order for that potential to be fulfilled,
the police units must be accountable for their actions
and must have adequate training. Accountability and
training are key to any mission, but that is even more true
in the case of police components. Troop-contributing
countries should provide trained police units that have
been rigorously selected and that have predeployment
experience in the areas of human rights, international
humanitarian law and sexually-based violence. Such
pre-deployment training would, we believe, meet the
objective established by the United Nations, and we
are therefore quite pleased that Spain has received
certification attesting to the fact that all our personnel
deployed in United Nations peacekeeping operations
have received appropriate pre-deployment training in
accordance with the standards set by this Organization.

Mission police components can be effective only
if the missions themselves are effective. In that regard,
we share the recommendations aimed at ensuring
the effectiveness of missions drafted by the High-
level Independent Panel on Peace Operations (see S/2015/446) and in the Secretary-General's report
reviewing the implementation of the recommendations
of the Panel (S/2015/682). Members of the Security
Council have the obligation to provide missions with
clear mandates that reflect sufficient political will
for their implementation, and to give missions the
necessary intelligence capabilities and training in new
technologies. We also share the idea expressed in the
Secretary-General's report that conflict prevention
is a central component of peacekeeping operations
and a particularly relevant principle with regard to
the conduct of police components in the context of
protecting civilians.
Another point is the coordination between the
police and the protection advisers. We believe that
is crucial, since the work of the police, given their
proximity and direct contact with local populations, can
assist in detecting potentially conflictive situations and
can prevent outbreaks of violence. Moreover, we recall
that United Nations police play a very important role
in supporting security-sector reform, in particular that
of the police units of host States. Spain also supports
the development of a strategic guidance framework for
police units within the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations that would establish a doctrinal basis for the
work of the police components of missions. We hope
that that pillar will be finalized by the end of the year.

We also find timely the decision to organize an
external review of the functions, structure and capacity
of the United Nations Police Division. The demand for
and the increasing complexity of the tasks performed
by the police units in peacekeeping operations means
that the Division needs to have an appropriate structure
and sufficient human resources to carry out their work.
At the recent Leaders' Summit on Peacekeeping we
pledged to review future contributions of formed police
units and a gendarme corps - a Civil Guard of which
we are especially proud - which is doing outstanding
work in Haiti and the Central African Republic.

In conclusion, I would like to stress the essential
role that the police components play in missions in
the context of women and peace and security. The
participation of women in the police units is more
advanced than it is in the military components but
we are still far from our objective of 20 percent. We
welcome the recent launch by the Police Division of the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations of the United
Nations Police Gender Toolkit, but I think we could be
even more ambitious. As recently adopted resolution
2242 (2015) notes, we must do more to increase the
participation of women in peace operations. Women's
participation will further promote trust among the
civilian population, help to protect women and children
against all forms of violence and abuse, and lead to
reporting of cases of sexual or gender-based violence.

Finally, I would like to refer to cases of sexual
exploitation and abuse by United Nations personnel.
On this point, we fully endorse the Secretary-General's
zero-tolerance policy and, as far as my country is
concerned, we are committed to applying that policy
most rigorously, as our Prime Minister stated at the
recent review ofresolution 1325 (2000) (see S/PV.7533).

