Mr. Franco (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to welcome Mr. Annabi and thank him for
the information he has given us at this meeting. I
should also like to take this opportunity to send a
message of congratulations to all of the officials of the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK), KFOR and the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) for the
excellent work that they did on 17 November on the
general elections. Thanks to this work, and particularly
to the determination of the people of Kosovo openly to
express their support for the creation of democratic
institutions, the international community today has
higher hopes for the future of Kosovo.

The results of the elections demonstrate the
commitment of the population to moving forward on a
democratic path and within the parameters established
in the Security Council's resolutions and by the
Constitutional Framework adopted a few months ago.
The road will not be easy. Obstacles and differences
will emerge to complicate the process, not only for the
leaders who will have to overcome them, but also for
the voters, who will have to remain actively present in
order to ensure that their expectations are met.

For Colombia, it is important to know that this
entire process can count on the leadership of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr.
Haekkerup, which provides a guarantee of success in
the face of great challenges, as was demonstrated in
earlier phases.

The results of the 17 November elections have
raised some challenges. First, the international
community, through the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) and
KFOR, must ensure compliance with resolution 1244
(1999) and the Constitutional Framework. This will
require it to take a firm stance vis-a-vis any possible
violations of provisions of those two documents and to
demonstrate flexibility with respect to the application
and implementation of those provisions. It is important
for the international community gradually to grant
greater freedom to those who will lead the new
institutions so as to guarantee that the emerging
democratic structure will be deeply rooted and not
depend on the supervision of third parties over its
functions in the future.

Secondly, the commitment of elected leaders and
the population at large is to achieving a multi-ethnic
Kosovo. This means that, although KFOR remains
responsible for ensuring the security of minorities, it is
the obligation and responsibility of all to ensure that
their rights are respected. Now more than ever, we
must see a proactive attitude on the part of the leaders
to that effect. We cannot continue to tolerate the
discrimination targeted daily against minority groups
or the functioning of parallel administrative structures.
All citizens of Kosovo must commit themselves to
working with UNMIK and KFOR to build a truly
pluralistic society.

Thirdly, the elected leaders must abandon their
own agendas and begin to work to create solid
institutions that can lay the foundations of an
increasingly autonomous Government, as stipulated in
resolution 1244 (1999). It is still far too early to think
about the final status of the province. Focusing our
efforts on that will only weaken the emerging
democratic process and dash people's hopes.

Fourthly, relations between Belgrade and the new
Government of Kosovo are essential, as the elected
leaders must understand. Accordingly, we recommend
that UNMIK continue to strengthen those relations, as
it has done recently.

Fifthly, the representatives of the minorities face
a great challenge in promoting their opinions and
defending the interests of the population they represent.
This road will not be easy and it is therefore important
that they remain faithful to their ideals and that they
can rely on the support of the international community
in bringing those ideals to fruition.

We wish once again to congratulate all the people
of Kosovo on the democratic example they have set for
the international community. We invite them to
continue along this path.

