Mr. Orrenius Skau (Sweden): In accordance with
paragraph 24(e) ofresolution 1970 (2011), of26 February
2011, I have the honour to report to the Security Council
on the work of the Committee established by the same
resolution. The report covers the period from 18 January
to 21 March 2018, during which time the Committee
met once in informal consultations and conducted
additional work via the written silence procedure.

During the informal consultations held on
9 February, the Committee heard a presentation by the
Coordinator ofthe Panel ofExperts on the interim report
of the Panel, prepared in accordance with resolution
2362 (2017), and discussed the recommendations
contained therein.

The interim report addressed, inter alia, security-
related designation criteria, the implementation of
the arms embargo, the unity of State institutions
and misappropriation of State funds, the prevention
of illicit exports of petroleum, the implementation
of the asset freeze and the travel ban. Of the eight
recommendations addressed to the Committee, it
agreed to take follow-up action on six and took note
of one. Two recommendations are addressed to the
Council. On 13 February, the Committee issued a press
release on the informal consultations.

Also in connection with the Panel's interim report,
which is a confidential and unpublished document, the
Committee received a letter from the Coordinator of
the Panel of Experts on 7 March, expressing the Panel's
extreme concern regarding media reports citing, often
inaccurately and out of context, excerpts from the report,
as well as reproducing the content of the entire report.
The Committee shares this concern. In a press release
issued on 9 March, the Committee stressed the need to
ensure the safety of Panel members, in accordance with
paragraph 16 ofresolution 2362 (2017). The Committee
also reiterated its full support and appreciation for the
work of the Panel and underlined the importance of
that work being carried out in an unhindered manner.
Upon the proposal of a Committee member, I intend to
call a meeting of the Committee on this matter in the
near future.

During the period under review, with respect to the
arms embargo, the Committee approved one request
for exemption from the arms embargo submitted
under paragraph 9(c) of resolution 1970 (2011). The
Committee also received a post-delivery notification
from the United Nations Support Mission in Libya for
previously exempted items.

Furthermore, on 16 January, the Committee
received a letter from Turkey providing certain
information concerning the vessel Andromeda,
which had been seized by Greece. On 29 January, the
Committee received an inspection report of the cargo
from Greece, in line with paragraph 21 of resolution
2213 (2015). Containers of explosives, detonators and
related materiel, as well as empty gas tanks, were
found on board this vessel, which was flying the flag
of Tanzania. The Committee has notified Libya of
the inspection and has written to the relevant States
seeking clarifications from them on the matter. Greece
subsequently informed the Committee that the Panel of
Experts had inspected the seized items.

In connection with the measures imposed on two
vessels, the Nadine and the Lynn S, for illicitly exporting
gas oil from Libya, the Committee renewed those
measures for a further period of 90 days for each, based
on requests received from Libya. The Committee also
updated the sanctions list entry details for those vessels
based on updates provided by the Panel of Experts.
It further wrote a letter to the relevant States on the
matter. Recently, the Committee received, through the
Chair of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 2140 (2014), an inspection report
from the United Nations Verification and Inspection
Mechanism for Yemen dated 4 January 2018, on the
vessel Lynn S.

Concerning the travel ban, the Committee approved
an extension to the exemption request submitted on
behalf of Mr. Sayyid Mohammed Qadhaf Al-Dam,
who had been authorized to travel from Libya to
Egypt on the grounds of humanitarian need. However,
the Committee did not approve a request submitted
on behalf of Mrs. Safia Farkash Al-Barassi that she
no longer be subject to this measure. Accordingly,
she remains subject to both the travel ban and the
asset freeze.

