Mr. Sharma (Nepal): I wish at the outset to thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this public meeting
to discuss threats to international peace and security
posed by terrorist acts.

This meeting could not be timelier. Today
terrorism is the gravest threat to international peace
and security. It has spared no country, rich or poor,
large or small. Most nations have suffered the
consequences of this senseless scourge. Combating
terrorism should be the top priority of the international
community in its quest for peace.

Terror invites conflicts and brings swift decay to
society. It breeds political uncertainty, disrupts
economic progress, undermines human rights and
freedoms, and spawns social discontent. Experience
has taught us that terrorists in one country may force
the entire region and the world into an ugly conflict by
using other countries as the staging ground to advance
their agenda of destruction. In this sense, terrorism
frays the very fabric of our international society.

Nepal strongly condemns terrorism in all its
forms and manifestations. We have always been
committed to combating terrorism. Our firsthand
experience with this indiscriminate and ruthless crime
has further reinforced our resolve. Consistent with this,
Nepal has already promulgated a stringent and broad-
based law that responds to our specific needs and to
our international obligations. Legal, institutional and
administrative measures are being strengthened to
prevent acts of terrorism and to bring the perpetrators
to justice.

As terrorism has a global reach, sustained
regional and global efforts will be critical to combat
the toxin of terrorism. Nepal has been working with
other countries in the South Asia region and in the
wider world, sharing intelligence, tracking the
movement of suspected terrorists, stifling their
financial flows and frustrating their communications to
the best of our limited capacity.

The United Nations provides a common platform
for our shared endeavour to promote joint action and
coordination in our fight against terrorism. The 12
international conventions and various relevant
resolutions constitute that platform. Among them,
Security Council resolution 1373 (2001) is one of the
most powerful arrows in the quiver of the United
Nations to combat terrorism.

Indeed, resolution 1373 (2001) - adopted in the
wake of terrorist attacks on the United States on 11
September 2001 - marks a watershed in our collective
endeavour to stamp out terrorism from the face of the
earth. The Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC)
established under that resolution has proved itself to be
an effective instrument to advance our common goal.

Nepal expresses its appreciation to the CTC for
its good work and for the positive approach it has
embraced, and it pledges its continued support.
Mr. President, we also applaud your effective
leadership of the CTC.

Now that it has collected substantive information
and identified the gaps, the CTC should pay more
attention to ensuring financial, technical and legal
assistance to the needy countries, so that infrastructure
critical to attaining the goals of resolution 1373 (2001)
could be put in place in those countries.

Counter-terrorism assistance, now available from
different sources, needs to be consolidated and
disbursed from one window in order to ensure easier
access and greater impact. To make this happen, the
Security Council should create an anti-terrorism fund,
to be administered by one of the existing United
Nations mechanisms. Meanwhile, the world
community must speed up the process of finalizing the
international convention against terrorism that has been
under negotiation for the past several years.

Before closing, I must underline that the world
community should address the root causes of terrorism,
not just its symptoms, which, unfortunately, receive
more attention and resources. Terrorists often use
poverty as their breeding ground. The world
community must deny them that ground by reducing
poverty and by addressing structural anomalies in
national and global economies. Only a reduction in
abject poverty, accompanied by growth with equity,
will help us put the genie of terrorism into the bottle.

