Mr. Motoc (Romania): First, I would like to
thank Special Representative Mr. Harri Holkeri, the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) and, not least, the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations for this thorough and lucid
report of the Secretary-General (S/2004/348). I also
welcome the presence at our meeting of Mr. Vuk
Draskovic, Federal Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Serbia and Montenegro.

Romania associates itself with the statement to be
delivered shortly by Ambassador Ryan of Ireland on
behalf of the European Union.

The general image of the situation in Kosovo in
the aftermath of recent events as depicted in Mr.
Holkeri's report is a distressing one. The progress
made in the province prior to the ethnically motivated
violence in March has been seriously overshadowed by
the organized, widespread and targeted attacks against
the Serb and other communities in Kosovo.

We are at the stage where simply identifying
problems is not enough. Concrete measures have to be
adopted and put in place for ensuring the real and
effective implementation of measures set out in the
Kosovo Standards Implementation Plan and, as an
ultimate goal, for the development in Kosovo of a
secure, democratic, tolerant and multi-ethnic society.

Therefore, while reaffirming Romania's
attachment to the "standards before status" policy, we
fully share the View that the aforementioned Plan must
be further recalibrated and prioritized. More emphasis
should be put on security, returns, minority rights, the
rule of law and justice and the devolution of functions
from the central level to local bodies, so that every
inhabitant of Kosovo and every person wishing to
return there can have an equal opportunity for a
normal, free and secure life.

The Provisional Institutions of Self-Government
and all communities in Kosovo, with the assistance of
the international presence, should work together in a
responsible and coherent manner to achieve that goal
and to prevent the recurrence of similar violence in the
future. An important step forward would be the
establishment of a stricter legal regime for small and
light weapons and the intensification of operations to
collect illegal weapons. It is crucial to eradicate the
mentality existing in Kosovo of violence as a means to
achieve political goals. And that action should proceed
at every level and in every field, not least starting with
a change of attitude among those political and local
leaders who failed to act responsibly during the recent
crisis. To the same end, the local media should be
supported in acquiring more professional and
democratic reporting standards.

As a country of the region, Romania is
particularly concerned about the long-term
implications of any action related to Kosovo's future.
That is why we insist that "standards before status"
should be taken very seriously and reiterate that its
implementation should be reflected throughout
Kosovo, serving as a symbol of the Kosovars' will to
live in peace in the region and to promote its stability.

We all have a stake in implementing standards, no
matter what status will eventually be arrived at. In the
same vein, the longer it takes for standards to be
worked on, the more difficult it will prove catch up,
irrespective of the eventual determination of the final
status. In this context, we note that the report before
the Council also stands as an initial review of the
current state of standards implementation in Kosovo.
Romania attaches great importance to the further
development of the review mechanism, the functioning
of which will be essential in clarifying the political
approach and reasoning of the international community
and the Security Council with respect to the discussion
of Kosovo's final status.

We can find no better illustration of why full
implementation of the standards should dominate the
political agenda of Kosovo than the fact that recent
violent events have further damaged its already fragile
and weak economy. How can one build a future on
such foundations? Romania welcomes in that respect
the public commitments of Kosovo leaders to
implementing the standards. We hope that those
commitments - and every chapter of the Kosovo
Standards Implementation Plan - will be fully put into
practice in order to maximize the chances of a positive
review in 2005.

However, in the short term, we believe that
confidence-building in Kosovo will not be possible
without some timely and effective measures in terms of
rule of law and justice, reconstruction and full
protection of minority communities. In that respect,
every effort should be made to bring to justice those
responsible for the grave attacks in March, to enforce
the rule of law throughout Kosovo and to reverse the
huge moral damage created by the violence and the
destruction of property and Serbian Orthodox churches
and monasteries, many of which are part of our
universal heritage.

At the same time - and as requested recently by
the Council - solutions must be sought for more
effective governance and the evolution of
responsibilities at the local level, allowing for the full
observance of the rights and interests of all members of
minority communities. In this context, we welcome
proposals that are discussed and agreed by all
interested parties. But it is clear that the situation
should not be prolonged for too long, as that could
generate even more problems for everyone.

Finally, I would like to add a few words of support
and acknowledgement for UNMIK and its chief, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Mr. Harri
Holkeri, for KFOR and for the entire international
presence in Kosovo. They have huge tasks ahead in
difficult and - as the report indicates - dangerous
conditions. Those tasks cannot be accomplished
effectively unless sufficient political backing and
resources are made available to them by the
international community and the Council.

