Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Kosovo, Mr. Farid Zarif, for his briefing. I welcome
the presence of the President of Serbia, His Excellency
Mr. Tomislav Nikolic', in today's meeting and his
statement. I also listened carefully to the statement
made by Ms. Atifete Jahjaga.
The recent severe flooding in Serbia resulted in
significant loss of life and property. China expresses
condolences to the victims. Our sympathy goes out to
the bereaved families and to the injured. China shall
do all it can to provide support and assistance based on
Serbia's needs.

China respects Serbia's sovereignty and territorial
integrity and understands the legitimate concerns
over the issue of Kosovo. China believes that the best
solution to the Kosovo issue lies in reaching agreements
acceptable to all parties through dialogue and
negotiation, within the framework of relevant Council
resolutions and in accordance with the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations.

At present, the overall situation in Kosovo is calm.
The two parties to the Kosovo issue are pursuing the
dialogue, which has yielded some positive results that
China welcomes. We encourage both parties to continue
their dialogue and negotiation, overcome difficulties
and challenges, actively implement the agreements
previously reached, effectively protect the legitimate
interests of all ethnic groups, and resolve the problem
of the return of internally displaced persons so that all
people will be able to collectively benefit from peace
and development and build a better life.

Resolving the Kosovo issue in a proper way and
building a Kosovo where all ethnic communities live
harmoniously plays a part in the peace and stability
of the Balkans and the rest of Europe. That is also a
common goal of the international community. China
encourages the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) to continue to implement
the Security Council's mandate under the leadership
of Special Representative Zarif. It is China's hope
that the international presence - including UNMIK,
the European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo
and the Kosovo Force - will strengthen coordination
and cooperation in accordance with their respective
mandates to continue to contribute to the peace,
stability and development of Kosovo.

