Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): We
express our gratitude to Special Envoy De Mistura and
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs
and Emergency Relief Coordinator Lowcock for their
comprehensive briefings. It is a pleasure to see Mr. De
Mistura here again. We welcome Mr. Lowcock on
the Security Council for the first time. We wish him
success in carrying out his mandate, which has a great
impact on millions of people throughout the world.

We regularly told his predecessor, Mr. Stephen
O'Brien, that he had the difficult task before him of
briefing us on painful situations and assessing their
impact on this crisis. He also frankly communicated
with us the human and humanitarian repercussions
of the various crises and armed conflicts in which
those among the civilian population are always the
primary victims. In that context, in many cases the
persevering, self-sacrificing and courageous work of
the thousands of humanitarian workers of the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA)
and that of their local partners represent the difference
between life and death for civilians trapped by those
conflicts, in particular for the most vulnerable groups
within the population, such as women and children.

Over the past two years as a non-permanent member
of the Security Council, our delegation has often taken
the floor in these open meetings because it believes that
they offer us elected members the opportunity to report
to our electors among the membership the position and
opinions of our Government concerning the various
issues before the Council. As this is Mr. Lowcock's
first time on the Council, we want him to know first
hand, at the very least, my Government's views.

Over the past two years, the main focus of
Uruguay's work has centred on all that relates to the
protection of civilians and international humanitarian
law, and we have continuously advocated that there be
no restrictions on the access and the distribution of aid
throughout the Syrian territory, including besieged and
difficult-to-access areas. We have also continuously
requested the protection and security of humanitarian
workers carrying out their tasks. Given that there is now
a new head of OCHA, we reiterate that extending an
invitation to Mr. Lowcock to visit the country would be
a very positive gesture on the part of the Government of
Syria. It would allow for a smoother relationship with
the United Nations to facilitate the normal delivery of
humanitarian aid.

I must underscore that the Astana process and other
regional initiatives launched in the past few months to
end local hostilities have led to a considerable reduction
in the level of fighting in the country, through the
implementation of various de-escalation zones. We
stress that it is imperative that those zones be temporary
so as to preserve the unity and territorial integrity of
the Syrian Arab Republic.

For the fifth consecutive month, we must voice our
concern about the fact that we have yet to receive any
information on the implementation of the 4 May Astana
memorandum. Despite the considerable progress made,
it is essential to ensure the unhindered access of the
United Nations and of humanitarian aid to those zones,
and that people are free to enter and leave those areas
at will. That would provide some guarantee that the
basic principles of international humanitarian law are
being respected.

We welcome the fact that following the previous
meeting of the Astana process, the three guarantor
countries issued a joint communique in which they
underscored the need to make use of the de-escalation
zones that were established in May to allow for swift,
safe and unimpeded humanitarian access. Similarly, it
is encouraging that it also mentions the need for the
parties to the conflict to develop confidence-building
measures, including by releasing those who have been
arrested or kidnapped, handing over remains and
identifying missing persons, so as to create conditions
that are more conducive to a successful political process
and a lasting ceasefire.

With regard to humanitarian access, we are troubled
that we continue to fall far short of meeting OCHA's
requirements. We all on countries with influence on
the Syrian Government, and in particular the Syrian
Government itself, to ensure the smooth, safe and
unimpeded delivery of humanitarian aid. To that end,
Syria must ensure the full implementation of OCHA's
bi-monthly plans, by issuing all of the permits required.
The Syrian Government is primarily responsible for
making sure that its own population has access to food,
water, medicines and supplies until the conflict ends.

Dispensing justice for the hundreds of thousands
of innocent victims of the conflict will be crucial
for achieving lasting peace in Syria and for ensuring
that the entire population can move past the mistakes
made during this protracted war. It will also create
a compelling future and prevent the perpetrators of
serious crimes committed during the past seven years
from going unpunished.

In December last year, Uruguay supported
the establishment of an impartial and independent
international mechanism to assist with the investigation
and trials of those responsible for the most serious
crimes under international law committed in the Syrian
Arab Republic from March 2011, including those
deemed to be war crimes, such as the use of chemical
weapons against civilians. In that regard, we support
the request made by Secretary-General Antonio
Guterres for crimes committed in Syria to be referred
to and tried by the International Criminal Court.

Next month, the Joint Investigative Mechanism will
release the findings of its analysis of two incidents, in
which the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons confirmed the use of chemical weapons in
Syria. It is up to the Council to determine the measures
to be taken to punish those found responsible. If not, the
Council risks losing the little credibility it has retained
after its management of the Syrian crisis.

Priorities in Syria have been clearly defined: find
a political solution to end the war; engage in a peaceful
political transition, consolidate local ceasefires and
ensure humanitarian access to the millions in need in
besieged and hard-to-reach areas.

