Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to pay tribute to your initiative, Sir, in convening
this important Security Council debate on the victims
ofpersecution based on their religious or ethnic identity
in the Middle East, especially those suffering from the
crimes being committed by Daesh and other extremist
groups.

Today, the world is facing unprecedented dangers
that represent a source of genuine concern and threaten
the very existence of modern States, which were
founded on the principles of citizenship, coexistence,
equality and human rights. Such dangers seek to impose
an extremist model based on an outmoded fantasy that
relies on ethnic and religious identity as the basis for
large-scale persecution. We must adopt firm measures
to extirpate the deviant thinking that underlies
such attitudes. In order to impose their ideas, those
extremists have always sought to separate the world
into two separate camps based not solely on people's
appearance but on their religious and ethnic identity.
They have tried to impose their concepts through
nihilistic views, insisting on certain values, such as
religious supremacy, a quest for justice and so on.

In opposing extremism, we must exercise prudence
and be careful not to attack members ofreligious groups,
because that could unwittingly exacerbate the sense of
injustice, intolerance or racism, all ofwhich could serve
as an inexhaustible source of fuel for the fires of hatred
and intolerance. In that regard, it is unnecessary to
recall that the misguided thoughts of certain extremist
groups linked to the Islamic religion should not serve
as an excuse to attack Muslims or their religion. Such
a dangerous tendency, which some have adopted out of
ignorance or on the grounds of free expression, only
strengthens the idea of religious warfare.

Given its history, Egypt has always sought to foster
coexistence among various ethnic groups and religions.
We draw on our cultural heritage to counter attempts
to transform the open identity of Egypt and impose
extremist cultures that are contrary to our thinking.
These extremist groups emerged when Egyptian citizens
fell victim to the odious crimes committed by Daesh
in Libya. We cannot allow their blood to be spilled in
vain. I therefore recall that the selective treatment of
terrorism and extremism is an unacceptable, calculated
error that must be corrected. It will cause the downfall
of those who seek to use terrorism to attain their narrow
political interests. Very often, those who play with fire
burn themselves.

In this respect, although laudable, our efforts to
protect our religious minorities in the Middle East,
including the Christians, come with certain risks.
We must counter extremists and violent terrorism.
Accordingly, the classification of Victims based on
their religion is contrary to the principles of religion
and humanity, which give priority to the rule of law,
because all human beings are equal. We must remember
that the Middle East is the birthplace of Christianity,
and Christians are an essential component of the
Middle East. They contributed to the appearance of
Muslim civilization because they helped enrich it, and
no one can deny 4 unless out of ignorance - that their
attachment to the region is firmly anchored in history.

Since the beginning of the twentieth century and the
revolution of 1919, Egyptians have been keenly attuned
to the meaning of citizenship, because they understand
that while religion belongs to God, the nation belongs to
everyone. We recall that the preservation of human life
is a sacred duty. We will spare no effort to protect the
entire Egyptian population from all forms of extremism
and terrorism, and we shall seek to ensure that life takes
precedence over death and destruction.

