Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): Three
years ago, almost to the day, the conflict in South
Sudan began. In those three years, civilians have been
the target of unspeakable violence and abuse, amply
documented by the United Nations, the African Union
and civil society organizations. The situation in South
Sudan continues to be one of the worst in the world.
The humanitarian consequences are tragic and the
needs of the population are staggering. The security
situation remains very volatile and, over the past
weeks, the Security Council has considered the risks
of retaliation and intensification, as well as violence
and mass atrocities. The special session of the Human
Rights Council, held last week in Geneva, underscored
our collective concern over the grim state of affairs.

In that context, France deeply regrets that the
draft resolution submitted by the United States could
not garner the necessary support in the Council to be
adopted. As is well-known and as we have expressed
on several occasions in this Chamber, France has long
supported an arms embargo on South Sudan. We regret
that it was not proposed earlier, when it could have
enjoyed broad support from the Council. In our eyes,
such a measure is fully warranted by the imperative
of protecting civilians. The steady inflow of arms into
South Sudan fuels violence by creating the illusion that
a military solution to the conflict is possible. In the
hands of the enemies of peace, those weapons facilitate
the commission of the worst abuses against civilians. It
is the responsibility of the Council to do all that it can
to reduce that risk and the arms embargo would surely
have helped.

The embargo could have also helped the political
process by Changing the equation for those who
favour a military solution. It could have been a push
for peace. Its contribution to reducing violence could
have brought about a favourable environment and
conciliatory political dialogue. As the Council has
affirmed repeatedly, a lasting solution to the violence
in South Sudan can only be political and an embargo
could have helped.
A few days ago, the Council unanimously renewed
the mandate of the United Nations Mission in South
Sudan (see PV.7840). As the population of South Sudan
is at the mercy of violence and abuse, we hope that the
Council will once again unanimously decide to come to
their aid. Let us be aware of our shared responsibility to
prevent a new cycle of mass atrocities in South Sudan,
as the Secretary-General has warned us about, and
to bring about a positive dynamic. Today's vote only
highlights the need for the Council to remain mobilized
to work for peace and security in South Sudan.

