Mr. Beck (Solomon Islands): I thank you for
your kind invitation, Mr. President, to my delegation to
participate in this thematic debate on the promotion
and strengthening of the rule of law in the maintenance
of international peace and security. My delegation
acknowledges the work of all, including the
Secretariat, on the subject under discussion, and I
would thank Mexico for the concept note (S/2010/322),
which serves as a useful guide for our debate.

As pointed out in the concept note, the General
Assembly plays an important role in advancing
international law. That includes other United Nations
treaty bodies. It is important to have closer
relationships among the General Assembly, the treaty
bodies and the Security Council, which we hope the
current Security Council reform will comprehensively
address. The Security Council has a defining role in the
promotion and maintenance of international security,
given that it is the primary United Nations organ
responsible for the maintenance of international peace
and security.

In discussing the questions raised in Mexico's
concept paper, the promotion of international peace in
post-conflict situations, the peaceful settlement of
disputes, and the efficiency and credibility of sanctions
are, in my delegation's view, secondary issues. The
primary question to ask is whether instability in certain
regions of the world is fed and fuelled by a lack of
application of international law by the Council.
Respect for international law is a must for all Members
of the United Nations. The question that should be
asked is what we do with countries that threaten
international peace and security, continue to operate
outside international law or allow that to happen in
multilateral settings.

Such questions shake the credibility of
multilateralism and have allowed the international
system to shift into a vacuum. Failure to comply with
international law has led to countries looking within
themselves for security to protect themselves and their
population, including empowering non-State actors to
carry out State responsibilities.

For that reason, selective and partial actions by
our multilateral system, including the Council, become
controversial and cost both lives and money in
addressing the symptoms rather than the causes of
conflict. Secondly, the fact that our Peacebuilding
Commission and post-conflict capacity-building
mechanisms are not holistic in their outreach, as in the
case of my country, which, in spite of being a country
emerging from conflict, remains outside those
mechanisms.

Solomon Islands was fortunate to have its
regional neighbours come to its assistance three years
after its ethnic conflict to re-establish the rule of law
under a regional arrangement and to allow us to
continue with our nation-building process. We are
thankful to our neighbours, led by Australia and New
Zealand. We remain eternally grateful.

We should be supporting multilateral and regional
mechanisms that strengthen and consolidate peace and
ensure that home-grown peace initiatives take root and
generate lasting and sustainable peace. On the peaceful
settlement of disputes, the advisory opinions of the
International Court of Justice need to be respected and
upheld. At the end of the day, for the collective good of
the United Nations, those with absolute power need to
take a stronger leadership role in ensuring that all
principles of international law are adhered to. Only
then will peace be possible.

Sanctions against selected countries burn bridges,
build fences around targeted countries and are more
harmful than constructive. We believe that the culture
of dialogue rather than confrontation should be the
norm, and we must have the patience for it. However,
once sanctions are applied, they must be regularly
monitored, reviewed and reported on to ensure that
they remain a tool that serves the purpose of
multilateralism.

Let me thank you, Mr. President, once again for
the opportunity to participate in this debate. I hope that
we can speak with one voice and act as a unit within
the United Nations in the promotion of international
peace and security in upholding the rule of law.

