The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of the United States.

The United States commends the Prosecutors and
Presidents for their efforts to bring to justice those
responsible for genocide, war crimes and crimes against
humanity. Since their creation, the Tribunals have
answered lawless violence with historic justice and, in
myriad ways, produced an impact far beyond the
confines of their courtrooms. Today, we take stock of
what the Tribunals have accomplished over the past six
months and examine the strategies that they are pursuing
to bring their Vital work to a successful completion.

The legacy of the Tribunals must be assured by
the creation of a durable and appropriate institution
that will outlast the Tribunals themselves and complete
their functions. We applaud the work that the Tribunals
have done to advance that goal thus far. We urge both
Tribunals to strive to complete their work at the earliest
possible date; yet, we are mindful of the importance of
doing so with appropriate care, leading to a smooth and
efficient drawdown.

We welcome the Tribunals' efforts to increase
efficiency and believe that fairness and efficiency can,
and should, go hand in hand. We therefore urge the
Presidents and the judges, in their roles as managers of
the courtrooms, to take any additional steps needed to
ensure that the trials are both expeditious and fair. We
continue to support initiatives to complete trials, where
necessary, through the contributions of ad litem judges,
extensions of terms and the redeployment of trial
judges to the Appeals Chamber.

We must act urgently to ensure that individuals
indicted by the Tribunals are brought to justice. The
arrests of Ratko Mladic' and Goran Hadzic' are crucial
to the achievement of justice in the Balkans. The
United States is committed to doing all that is
necessary to ensure that this happens. We welcome the
Government of Serbia's recent efforts to apprehend and
transfer indicted war criminals, and call on Serbia to
continue to fulfil its obligations and to cooperate with
the International Criminal Tribunal for the former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) and ensure that Mladie and Hadzie
are arrested and transferred to The Hague. We also
recognize Croatia's efforts to fulfil its obligations to
the ICTY, particularly the actions of its task force in
exploring new avenues in order to locate or account for
missing military documents. We urge it to continue
these efforts. For States of the former Yugoslavia, full
cooperation with the ICTY is key to their progress
towards Euro-Atlantic integration.

The United States reaffirms its commitment to
see the architects of the genocide in Rwanda brought to
justice. We renew our calls for the immediate arrest of
Protais Mpiranya and Felicien Kabuga. We expect all
States to fully cooperate with the Tribunal in its efforts
to locate Mpiranya, Kabuga and other fugitives.

The ability of the International Criminal Tribunal
for Rwanda (ICTR) to transfer cases to States when
appropriate is an important, critical step towards
meeting the Tribunal's completion strategy. The United
States acknowledges Rwanda's desire to receive cases
transferred from the ICTR. We also acknowledge the
Government of Rwanda's judicial sector reform,
enhanced judicial capacity and positive engagement
with the Security Council on steps to facilitate such
transfers.

The United States commends the Austrian Chair
of the Working Group on Criminal Tribunals for his
excellent work in shepherding the Group to a new era
in international criminal justice. We would also like to
thank the United Nations Office of Legal Affairs for its
ongoing and tireless assistance in helping to craft the
residual mechanism. I also thank the Presidents,
Prosecutors, Registrars and staff of the Tribunals for
their contribution to the fight against impunity and for
promoting the cause of international justice.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I give the floor to the representative of Croatia.

