Mr. Shen Guofang (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation would like to thank the
Secretary-General for his report on children and armed
conflict. We are also grateful to the Deputy Secretary-
General, Mrs. Frechette, and to Ambassador Otunnu
and Ms. Bellamy for their important statements.
Ambassador Otunnu and Ms. Bellamy, in particular,
made some important comments which merit our
serious consideration. We appreciate the efforts made
by the delegation of Jamaica in convening today's
meeting.

In recent years the Security Council has played an
active role in giving impetus to the resolution of the
question of children and armed conflict. Last year the
Security Council adopted resolution 1261 (1999) on the
question of children and armed conflict, which
attracted a great deal of attention to the issue on the
part of the international community.

In his report the Secretary-General describes in
detail the plight of children in armed conflict from the
political, legal and social perspective, as well as from
the point of View of disarmament and peacekeeping,
and also puts forward 55 specific recommendations
which deserve the detailed study and consideration of
the United Nations system and the entire membership.
We hope that they will not stop merely at considering
the report and its recommendations, but will translate
the recommendations into action as soon as possible.
An effective mechanism should be established to this
end.

The protection of children requires a favourable
international environment, especially a favourable legal
framework. The Chinese delegation welcomes the
adoption by the General Assembly last May of the
Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of
the Child on the involvement of children in armed
conflict. We feel that this was an important step by the
international community towards protecting children.
We are now actively considering signing the Optional
Protocol. We hope that the relevant provisions, such as
the minimum age limit on joining the military, will be
observed by all parties as soon as possible.

A fundamental approach to protecting children in
conflict is to effectively prevent, check and eliminate
armed conflicts. The Security Council, as the body
charged with the primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security, should
concentrate its energies on this issue. Only when
conflicts are resolved at an early date, and crises dealt
with in good time, can the question of the protection of
children be truly settled. This is the contribution the
Council should make towards resolving the question of
children in armed conflict.

Protecting children in armed conflict calls for the
common effort of the international community, and
especially the collective effort of all agencies within
the United Nations system. In this regard we have some
good experience, but there is also room for
improvement. We hope that the agencies of the United
Nations dealing with this question can carry out their
own mandates and step up their coordination and
cooperation to produce a synergistic effect.

At the same time, the entire international
community has a duty to protect children that it cannot
shirk. We need the international community's
involvement. Meeting under the Arria formula
yesterday, the members of the Council carried out a
productive dialogue with non-governmental
organizations. We appreciate the efforts made by non-
governmental organizations in this field. We hope that
we can further strengthen the cooperation of the United
Nations with these organizations.

The Chinese delegation attaches great importance
to the protection of children and has participated
actively in the consideration of this question by the
relevant bodies of the United Nations. It has also
participated actively in international cooperation in this
regard. We appreciate the many efforts that have been
made over a long time by the United Nations
Children's Fund (UNICEF), the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR),
Special Representative Olara Otunnu and others to
protect children. The Chinese delegation will continue
to support their work and is prepared to strengthen it
further through bilateral cooperation.

