Mr. Carrera Castro (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, I would like to congratulate
Lithuania on assuming the presidency of the Security
Council, for convening this open debate and for the
important role that country is playing in the Council
through you, Madam Ambassador. I would also like to
thank you for the illuminating concept note (S/2015/306, annex) that is guiding today's deliberations. In addition,
I wish to express our recognition to Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon, United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights Prince Zeid Ra'ad Al Hussein and to
Mr. Karamoko Diakite for their informative briefings,
including in particular the moving and clear statement
Mr. Diakite made this afternoon. Similarly, we thank the
Secretary-General for the valuable recommendations
he presented in his biennial report (S/2015/289).

Slightly less than two years ago, the Security
Council adopted resolution 2117 (2013), the first of
its kind, which sought to address the devastating
impact of small arms and light weapons, with a focus
on the repercussions of illicit transfers, destabilizing
accumulation and the improper use of small arms and
light weapons on international peace and security. The
resolution was an important step towards harnessing
international cooperation in arms control, including
through its provisions on improving the use of arms
embargoes and its recognition of the importance of the
Arms Trade Treaty (ATT), with the aim of reducing
human suffering. The Security Council, more than
any other international forum, has witnessed the high
cost in human life caused by the absence of a legally
binding instrument in that regard, which strengthens
the case for ensuring the Treaty's full implementation
and universality.

The scourge of the illicit trade in small arms and
light weapons has grave consequences that impact
international peace and security, in particular with
respect to the protection of civilians in armed conflicts.
The illicit arms trade fuels armed violence and
insecurity and exacerbates criminality and gender-based
violence. The civilian population, especially women
and children, most often suffers the consequences.
Despite the peacekeeping efforts of the United Nations
and existing mechanisms to help States comply with
arms embargoes, the unregulated circulation of
small arms continues its alarming proliferation. That
situation is able to persist due to the lucrative illegal
market, inadequate regulation and the lack of controls,
including poor or minimal supervision of stockpiles.

Addressing that complex phenomenon requires a
focus supported by integrated policies that highlight
the role of international, regional and subregional
organizations. Moreover, within the United Nations,
even though the theme of small arms and light weapons
is amply addressed by the General Assembly, whose
leadership on the issue deserves recognition, the
Security Council too, inasmuch as this is a transectoral
phenomenon that impacts international peace and
security, should play an active and complementary
role in its areas of specific competence. For that
reason, we support the draft resolution on the matter,
which is based on resolution 2117 (2013) and which we
hope will be adopted soon. We would especially like
to stress the responsibility of States to protect their
civilian populations, and to emphasize that preventing
the proliferation of small arms should be part of that
commitment.

It is not enough to control the flow of arms. In that
regard, we welcome the specific focus on the flow of
illegal munitions in the Secretary-General's report. We
agree with his recommendation to explore new ways to
combat the flow of illicit munitions, especially within
the context of arms embargoes. That could have an
immediate effect on armed violence; indeed, the report
recognizes that the true value of small arms "depends
on the uninterrupted supply of munitions". While it is
true that the Arms Trade Treaty addresses munitions
and their parts and components, the latter are not
subject to the same degree of control as weapons and
are excluded from the Programme of Action to Prevent,
Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms
and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects, as well as its
follow-up mechanisms. As the Secretary-General's
report recognizes, given that the searchability of
consumer products has evolved in other areas, whether
or not munitions are included in weapons regulations
appears to be more a matter of political will than to
reflect a technical or logistical problem that would
prevent it. Munitions are the essence of what makes
firearms lethal; their exclusion leaves our attention to
illicit traffic incomplete.

Moreover, the Secretary-General's report also
refers to the fact that, in post-conflict periods,
criminal violence often replaces political violence,
which has long-term implications for those States.
While responsibility for establishing effective
norms and controls over firearms redounds to those
sovereign States, it is important to bear in mind that
the challenges facing States emerging from conflict
generally reveal serious institutional defects that make
them particularly vulnerable to arms trafficking, which
is often linked, in the case of Latin America and other
countries in Africa and Asia, to drug trafficking and
transnational organized crime. In that regard, we
welcome the Secretary-General's recommendation on
the importance of ensuring that measures to collect
weapons and related activities should go hand in hand
with development programmes aimed at preventing and
reducing armed violence. Concerning the role of the
arms industry, we wish to reiterate that, while it may
prove useful to consider new technologies to improve
stockpile management and reduce the diversion of arms
to illicit markets, it would not be remiss to encourage
producer States to promote responsibility and the
full implementation of the relevant laws and norms.
Our common goal should be to put a halt to the over-
production of all weapons.

Firearms claim the lives of hundreds of thousands of
people each year, not to mention the related and indirect
damage. Given the high toll, we all must support and
improve the existing regulatory framework to ensure
maximum effectiveness of the Council's response to
threats to international peace and security caused by
the proliferation of small arms and light weapons.
To prevent illicit trafficking in small arms and light
weapons, we must strengthen our efforts and create
synergies among the various instruments in order have
coordinated mechanisms that reinforce our efforts.

