Mr. Sobral Duarte (Brazil) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, I wish to congratulate Uruguay for having
convened this important open debate.
(spoke in English)

Allow me to thank the Secretary-General for his
report (S/2017/414), as well as the Vice-President of
the International Committee of the Red Cross and the
Deputy Executive Director for Advocacy of Human
Rights Watch for their enlightening presentations.

It is unacceptable that in many countries hospitals
are still being routinely bombed, raided, looted or
burned to the ground. Brazil strongly condemns attacks
and threats against the wounded and the sick, medical
personnel and humanitarian personnel engaged in
medical duties, their means of transportation and
equipment, as well as hospitals and other medical
facilities. The nature of warfare might have changed,
but the rules of war have not.

For Brazil, the cause of such violations of
international humanitarian law is not associated with
shortcomings in the normative framework, but, rather,
with a lack of respect for international humanitarian
law by the main actors involved.

Geneva Conventions I and II of 1949, aimed at
improving the situation of the wounded, sick and
shipwrecked, stipulate the protection of medical
and hospital personnel, preventing them from being
attacked on the battlefield and ensuring the exercise of
their activities. They also provide that the parties to the
conflict may notify each other of the location of their
fixed medical facilities and that the absence of such
notification does not imply authorization to carry out
attacks on these premises.

Under no circumstances should medical facilities
be used for military purposes. In addition to the
prohibition of targeted attacks on such facilities and
their personnel, it is forbidden to use them as a shield to
protect military equipment and personnel.

Protocol II to the Geneva Conventions, which
addresses non-international armed conflicts, contains
similar provisions in protection of medical services and
their personnel against attacks.

Brazil strongly supports seminal resolution 2286
(2016), which demands respect for international law
and an end to impunity. Violations of humanitarian law
must be considered war crimes, not just errors. They
must be investigated impartially and the perpetrators
held accountable.

In orderto ensuretheresolution's dueimplementation,
it is important, among other initiatives, to align domestic
legislation with obligations under international law, to
train military personnel to minimize disruptions to
health-care services, and to ensure that every transfer
of weapons is accompanied by an assurance of respect
for international humanitarian law.

Brazil is committed to the intergovernmental
process aimed at strengthening respect for international
humanitarian law and the possible creation of a forum
of States on the subject. We regret that the discussions
so far have been marked by excessive polarization.

In peacekeeping operations, the protection of
humanitarian and health workers should be seen as
a multidimensional task to be pursued by all mission
components in the field and by both the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations and the Department of
Field Support at Headquarters. It is also essential to
ensure that peacekeeping missions have the capabilities
and resources they need to discharge their protection
responsibilities as effectively as possible.

The World Health Organization has played an
increasingly important role in humanitarian crises.
Health workers are present in nearly 50 countries at
high risk and are becoming the preferred targets in
conflict situations. However, we are concerned with the
growing securitization of health issues. It is imperative
that national health emergencies be treated as such,
even when they arise from armed conflicts, and that
the activities of international organizations occur only
with the consent of the affected countries.

It is crucial that all parties to armed conflict
facilitate safe and unimpeded passage for medical and
humanitarian personnel. In this regard, we commend
the brave work of all entities involved in providing
much-needed care and protection for conflict-affected
people around the globe.

