Mr. Terence (Burundi) (interpretation from French): During this slow period of the year, when
everyone wants to rush off on well-deserved vacations,
the Security Council, under your lucid guidance, Mr.
President, is carrying out the responsibility entrusted to it
under Article 24 of the United Nations Charter: that of
diligently seeing to the maintenance of international peace
and security. In that context, the Council is now
addressing the question of establishing an international
judicial commission of inquiry, thus acceding to the
specific proposal of the Government of Burundi, with the
support of the political parties from which it derives.

For these various reasons, and on behalf of my
Government, I should like to congratulate you warmly,
Sir, on your accession to the presidency of the Security
Council. I should also like to take the opportunity to pay
tribute to Indonesia for its leading role four decades ago
in founding an international organization given the
historic mission of steering a course halfway between the
ideological blocs that at the time were competing
perilously for global supremacy.

Burundi would like to express its deep gratitude to
all the eminent members of this prestigious body, for their
positive roles vis-a-vis Burundi, and to the Secretary-
General of the United Nations, His Excellency Mr.
Boutros Boutros-Ghali, represented in Burundi by
Ambassador Abdallah, for the constant and praiseworthy
efforts he has made on behalf of Burundi and his special
devotion to the mission of his Special Representative to
Burundi with the aim of reaching a satisfactory end to
Burundi's crisis.

Our special thanks go to the American delegation,
which has shown particular dynamism and constancy in
shepherding the draft resolution to the point at which it is
now about to reach a successful conclusion.

The genesis of the international judicial commission
of inquiry is as follows.

In October 1993 the President of the Republic was
overthrown and assassinated by a handful of military
officers who longed for a bygone era. Terrified as a result

 

of this event, the leaders of the party in power went into
hiding, showing a marked distrust of the army. On the other
hand, the military high command made intensive efforts to
re-establish the legitimate Government and solemnly and
officially proclaimed its natural loyalty to that Government,
rather than seizing power.

Starting on 21 October 1993, and continuing during
the following days, the leaders of the Burundi opposition,
then comprised of eight political parties, vigorously
denounced both the putsch and the assassination of the
President. They demanded the unconditional restoration of
constitutional legality. On the pretext of responding to this
political assassination carried out by a small group of
soldiers, massacres on a terrifying scale were unleashed
across the nation against one of the major national groups,
the Tutsis, and against numerous Hutu members of the
opposition.

In the wake of this dual catastrophe, the political
parties that clung to the notion that the President had been
assassinated because of his Hutu origins showed themselves
to be avid proponents of "ethnic cleansing" aimed at the
Tutsi, who were wrongly accused of being allied with the
army. This view was firmly rejected by the opposition
political parties, which favoured the belief that the
putschists and the assassins of the President had not been
under the orders of the army or the Tutsi population.
Moreover, those parties opposed the strong tendency to
present Mr. Melchior Ndadaye as President only of the
Hutus, who were therefore intent on avenging him. The
opposition objected, on the contrary, that the murdered
dignitary had been elected Head of State of all the national
groups, that he was mourned as such by the entire people
of Burundi and that only the perpetrators of this heinous
crime should be held accountable to the nation and the
international community.

Faced with these opposing positions, our country's
political leaders resolved during arduous negotiations to
turn to an international body to be entrusted with
determining those guilty of murdering the Head of State
and part of the population. Transcending their usual
differences, the Burundi opposition and the presidential
movement succeeded in crossing the Rubicon by reaching
agreement on the establishment of an international judicial
commission of inquiry. The combined will of these two
political groupings was formalized in article 36 of the
Convention of Government, which stipulates that under the
Convention - S/ 1995/ 190, annex - the Burundi parties
have agreed to call genocide, without prejudice to the
outcome of the independent national and international
investigations, the massacres that followed the
assassination of the President of Burundi on 21 October
1993.

In application of the principle set forth in the
Convention of Government, and following the joint and
express endorsement of the presidential movement and the
Burundi opposition, the President of the Republic and the
Head of Government sent the Security Council, on 18
August 1995, through us, a statement of the motives and
terms of reference designed to serve as guidelines for the
establishment of the international commission of judicial
inquiry.

It clearly emerges, then, that the initiative for
establishing this commission comes from the Burundi
political actors in search of an impartial international
arbiter.

As we see it, an international judicial commission of
inquiry would be charged with carrying out judicial
inquiries. That is the understanding of the main parties to
the Convention of Government: the 12 political parties
that signed the Convention.

Since the start of the tragedy, the various political
and ethnic camps have been constantly making
accusations against one another concerning the
assassination of the Head of State and the massacring of
tens of thousands of innocent victims. The result is a
pointless globalization of guilt, whereby the guilty are
confused with the innocent and vice versa. A crushing
burden thus weighs upon the entire nation. The vast
majority of the people of Burundi - of all national
communities - certainly have the right to declare their
innocence. As the memorandum addressed by the
Minister of National Defence to the Secretary-General
during his recent visit to Burundi attests, supported by
overwhelming proof, the army as an institution had
nothing to do with the assassination of President Ndadaye
and his four political colleagues, although, to be sure, a
few soldiers committed this crime.

A malicious campaign orchestrated by foes of the
Burundian army aims at poisoning international opinion.
It is vital to eliminate the evil hearsay that has been
spread throughout the world: far from being perpetrators
of or accomplices in the abortive coup or in the
assassination of President Ndadaye, the military leaders
united to foil the perpetrators of the putsch and to punish
the murderers. The memorandum from the Minister of

 

National Defence to the Secretary-General sets out
instructive facts and deserves quotation:

"From the outset of the attempts at a putsch, the
competent services of the armed forces were engaged
in trying to thwart it, to make it fail and to reestablish
constitutional legality. Subsequently, the military
intelligence services carried out investigations to
identify those responsible. On 23 October 1993 an
initiative to exercise military jurisdiction with a View
to apprehending the suspects was rejected by members
of the Government themselves".

The dogged determination of the military authorities
to shed light on the two events is illustrated by specific,
verifiable actions. Taking a stand against impunity, the
army High Command has already handed over to the
national commission of inquiry 85 soldiers for interrogation
and 22 for detention. It has made numerous attempts to
extradite 15 alleged perpetrators of the attempted putsch
against the legal Government and of the assassination of the
President of the Republic; these have fled to Zaire and
Uganda. We run into a numbing paradox: the politicians
who most vehemently accuse the army are carrying out
clandestine manoeuvres to block procedures to extradite the
15 soldiers who have been summoned by the army High
Command for the inquiries. Repeated requests by the
Attorney-General of the Republic and by the Auditeur-
Ge'ne'ral to repatriate these 15 fugitives have been met with
sabotage and obstacles by the very circles that
ostentatiously pretend to demand that the guilty be
punished.

The appalling attempt to exterminate the Tutsi national
community and the numerous Hutus who advocate
harmonious coexistence in Burundi was a precursor of the
genocide in Rwanda, and could have attained comparable
proportions. To carry out this planned genocide, the army
criminals, the ironically named National Council for the
Defence of Democracy and its armed civilian wing, the
Forces for the Defence of Democracy, along with its
precursor, the Palepihutu, are carrying out a scorched-earth
policy. There is absolute proof that this movement has been
furiously intensifying strategies that would lead to a
genocide similar to that in Rwanda. The poisonous ideology
spread by the so-called Radio Democracy, which is nothing
more than an echo of the infamous Radio Mille Collines in
Rwanda, the methods used and the unvarying targets all
reveal that a new variant of nazism is being created in the
heart of Africa at the end of the twentieth century. These
neo-Nazi knights, under the command of the National
Council for the Defence of Democracy, are focusing their
mayhem on Tutsi refugee centres and on Tutsi civilians,
whom they massacre and murder using the vilest
methods. Hutus violently opposed to this Nazi doctrine
and to "ethnic cleansing" suffer the same fate as their
Tutsi compatriots.

Given the facts and the seriousness of the crimes I
have catalogued, the international commission must
identify the real perpetrators. Without prejudging the
conclusions of the commission's inquiries, it is already
clear that a political crime - the assassination of the
President of our country - was committed and that
crimes against humanity were committed, and continue
with intensity through the systematic annihilation of social
and human groupings on the basis of their ethnic
affiliation, as with the Tutsis, or of their political
allegiance, as with Hutus who struggle against the Nazi
ideology that their fellow Hutus are spreading among the
population of Burundi.

The success of the work of the international judicial
commission of inquiry will depend on close and steady
cooperation with the Government of Burundi in general
and with the security forces and the national judicial
system in particular. The commission will have to resist
any temptation to exceed the mandate and the field of
action delineated in the terms of reference proposed by
the Government of Burundi and set out in the draft
resolution before the Council. This code of conduct is
dictated by a concern to prevent any compromise of
national sovereignty, any interference in the internal
affairs of Burundi and any possible mingling of matters
within the commission's mandate with subjects outside its
area of competence.

