Mr. Ansay (Organization of the Islamic Conference):
I would like, Sir, to extend to you my warmest
congratulations on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for this month. We are confident that your
rich experience and known professional skills will serve the
Council well in the successful discharge of the very
complex task currently facing it. If the cordial relations that
have historically existed between your country and the
country i come from prevailed among the nations today, we
would all be living in a much less troublesome world.

I should like to take this opportunity also to thank
your predecessor, Ambassador Mahugu, the Permanent
Representative of Kenya, for, his able performance in

steering the work of the Council during the month of
February.

On behalf of His Excellency Mr. Laraki, Secretary-
General of the Organization of the Islamic Conference
(OIC), I thank you for giving me the floor to address the
Council on the situation in the occupied Arab territories.

At the outset, let me say, as I have said before, that
I wish I were taking the floor under better, instead of
what have become bitter, circumstances. For we in the
01C joined forces with the international community in
supporting the peace process in the Middle East in full
measure, despite some of the disadvantageous elements
that the relevant agreements contained affecting
Palestinian interests. We were even beginning to feel
hopeful about the future of peace in the area because of
those few achievements that had already emerged during
the early stages of the implementation of the Oslo
accords. We were very pleased, last January, when
agreement was finally reached on the redeployment of
Israeli troops from Al-Khalil, and we were prepared to
continue to lend our full support to the attainment of the
agreed goals and objectives of the peace process.

Regrettably, our hopes, together with those of well-
wishers in the international community, have been
shattered by the unfortunate turn of events in Palestine,
the responsibility for which must lie with Israel and Israel
alone. The turmoil has been brought about by an
accumulation of violations of various elements of the
peace agreements by Israel, and the Israeli decision on 26
February 1997 to build a new settlement in Jabal Abu
Ghneim in East Jerusalem. The latter constitutes the latest
attempt by Israel to preempt the outcome of the
negotiations on final status by changing the legal status
and demographic composition of Jerusalem/Al-Quds Al-
Sharif, a city that is of central importance to the Arab and
Muslim worlds, as it is the first kiblak and the third
holiest city of Islam, to the three major religions, and to
the international community at large. The Israeli decision
not only violates the relevant resolutions of the Security
Council and the General Assembly, the Declaration of
Principles and subsequent agreements, but threatens to
undermine the progress that has been achieved in the
Middle East peace process.

In this regard, the Islamic Group at the United
Nations, at its meeting held on 3 March 1997, called on
the international community, including the Security
Council, to take urgent steps to ensure that the
Government of Israel reverses its decision and renounces
we..." "..........

Fifty-second year 6 March 1997

all settlement activity in all the occupied Arab territories, in
particular in East Jerusalem.

In the spirit of our solidarity with the peace process in
the Middle East, we condemn this latest decision by the
Israeli Government concerning East Jerusalem, just as we
condemned the opening of the tunnel under the western
wall of the holy Al-Aqsa Mosque.

I would like to take this opportunity to reaffirm the
position of the OIC that a comprehensive and lasting peace
in the region cannot be achieved without the full
implementation of Security Council resolutions 242 (1967)
and 338 (1973) which, inter alia, emphasize that Jerusalem
is part and parcel of the territories occupied since 1967.

In this context, we in the OIC would like to request
the Council to implement all of its relevant resolutions,
including resolutions 252 (1968), 267 (1969), 465 (1980),
476 (1980), 478 (1980) and 1073 (1996), all of which
concern Jerusalem; to take all necessary measures to
prevent Israel from altering the geographical and
demographic status of Jerusalem; and to prevent it from
taking any action that in any way affects the status of
Jerusalem, the final status of which is to be discussed in the
subsequent stages of the peace process.

We would like the Council to take the necessary
measures to bring an end to the continuation of Israeli
expansionism and settlement policies in the occupied
Palestinian and Arab territories, including Jerusalem, and
for it to consider all these Israeli policies and practices as
violations of all relevant United Nations resolutions, of
international agreements, especially the Fourth Geneva
Convention of 1949, and of international law.

We would also like to request the international
community to persuade Israel to lift the siege around
Jerusalem and to stop the implementation of all decisions
and practices that adversely affect the interests of the
Palestinian people, especially the confiscation of Palestinian
lands, the demolishing of Palestinian properties and houses,
and the withdrawal of identity cards issued to Palestinians,
designed to expel them from J erusalem, We also request the
international community to prevent Israeli excavations
around the Al-Aqsa Mosque and to make Israel cease
forthwith the violations of Islamic and Christian holy places
in Jerusalem.

In conclusion, I would like to assure this Council,
through you, Mr. President, that as soon as the necessary
measures to restore peace and security in the area have
been undertaken, improving the environment for the
resumption of the peace process, the OIC and its 54
member States, representing the very serious concerns of
more than one billion Muslims all over the world, will
also reaffirm their wholehearted support for the peace
process, in fulfilment of their collective desire to see
peace and tranquillity return to the area.

