Sir Jeremy Greenstock (United Kingdom): We
are delighted to see you in New York, Sir, chairing our
meeting today. The United Kingdom is very grateful to
the delegation of Pakistan for the initiative taken to
bring to the Council's agenda the question of the role
of the Security Council in the pacific settlement of
disputes. We heard three very thought-provoking
speeches at the beginning of today's meeting, and I am
very grateful to our three guests for that. I think the
Council needs to listen with great attention to the
combined depth and breadth of their perspective and
their wisdom.

There is often - rightly - much focus on the
powers and responsibilities of the Council when it is
taking action under Chapter VII of the Charter with
respect to threats to the peace, breaches of the peace
and acts of aggression. But the provisions of Chapter
VI, dealing with the pacific settlement of disputes, are
every bit as important. The prevention of disputes is,
after all, more important than trying to find a cure to
conflicts that are already running. But prevention is
difficult; early action can be taken as interference. It
means the United Nations having a voice, having a
record, having an authority that is respected widely
enough for behaviour that might lead to conflict to
change. I think Sir Brian Urquhart brought out that
point very succinctly in his introduction, and we in the
Council know that we have been having difficulties in
that respect.

In Chapter VI of the Charter, as in so many other
parts, the founding fathers of the United Nations set
out a flexible and quite far-sighted mechanism that
brings together several components. The Council can
act on its own initiative or on that of the Secretary-
General or of others outside the Council. There are
many tools at its disposal: commissions of enquiry; the
Secretary-General's good offices; missions to places
where conflicts are taking place or where conflicts are
threatened. The Council can facilitate or moderate
peace processes; it can facilitate or provide a
framework for the arbitration of factual disputes or for
conciliation mechanisms.

Do we use all those instruments to the full? I
think our speakers have asked us that question.
Ambassador Marker said it is essential that the
international community give consideration to the more
frequent use of the devices for the peaceful settlement
of disputes, requiring not just a strengthening of those
methods but a greater commitment on the part of the
international community and the political will to do so.
The words "political will" are coming up in our
interventions.

Whatever the assessment, in fact the Council can
do even more than is set out in the Charter as
examples. I start with prevention. The Council needs to
raise questions earlier about deteriorating situations. To
do this objectively, it has to be provided with better
access to early-warning information and conflict
analysis. The Council needs to apply lessons learned
from previous conflicts; to ensure that mandates are
clear and realistic and that peacekeeping operations are
sufficiently strong and robust; to address the root
causes of the conflict; and to provide lasting and
sustainable settlements.

The Council needs to draw on the resources of the
United Nations and the international community as a
whole, the Secretary-General, the Secretariat, the
Member States, the regional organizations and, more
widely, those non-governmental organizations and
other international actors that play such a vital role in
supporting the United Nations work. I entirely agree
with the Ambassador of Mexico that women could play
a more pronounced peace-building role. Do we really
use the potential of all these players to the full?

Judge Elaraby has, in addition, drawn our
attention to the scarce use of the International Court of
Justice. It is a remarkable fact that we have only used it
once in each of those two categories that he mentioned.

It would be easy - and it is often too easily or
thoughtlessly done - to blame the United Nations, and
particularly the Security Council, when situations
deteriorate into disputes and then finally into conflict
or unrest. But we also have to remember that the
United Nations is not - and, in the United Kingdom's
view, should seldom be - the only or even the primary
actor in the pacific settlement of disputes. The opening
article of Chapter VI places the responsibility where it
ought to lie in the first instance. That article makes
clear that it is "the parties to any dispute" that must
assume their responsibilities to settle their disputes
peacefully and that are therefore, under the Charter,
obliged to seek a solution to their problems by peaceful
means - that is to say,

"by negotiation, enquiry, mediation, conciliation,
arbitration, judicial settlement, resort to regional
agencies or arrangements, or other peaceful
means of their own choice".

Only if parties to disputes - only if the Members
of the United Nations - are ready to face their
responsibilities in this regard can the Security Council
itself discharge fully and effectively, and with
consistent success, the role it has been given. Only then
can it bring its powerful resources, legal and political,
to bear on the disputes which are so commonplace in
relations between States and which have produced so
much conflict and suffering over the years.

We are learning the hard way that the best way of
dealing with difficult issues of peace and security is to
combine the lawful authority of the United Nations
with the political will and resources of individual
Powers. How that combination can be more effectively
utilized in the future should be a major item of
discussion for the Council from now on.

