Mr.DeMistura: Ithankyou, Sir, forthis opportunity
to address the members of the Security Council. When
I last addressed the Council on 16 May (see S/PV.8260),
I spoke of three bottom-line priorities: de-escalation,
reviving the political process, and bridging the gaps
between different groups of international stakeholders
through high-level diplomacy because it is now time
for high-level diplomacy. I would now like to report on
where we stand on each of these elements.

First, with regard to de-escalation, I regret to say
that I have very little to report, or rather, very little
positive to report. In fact, I am gravely concerned at the
turn of events, particularly in the south-west of Syria.
In that area, now, while we are talking, we are seeing
a full-scale ground offensive in aerial bombardment
and exchanges of fire from both sides. I want to
believe that the Security Council will not allow this
to become another eastern Ghouta or another eastern
Aleppo or Aleppo in general, where so many civilians
were sacrificed and died. Yet I see things moving in
this direction.

Let us be aware of what it would mean if the south-
west were to see a full-scale battle to the end. It could
be like Aleppo and eastern Ghouta combined in terms
of the population in the areas that might be affected.
Some 45,000 - almost 50,000, I hear - have already
been displaced owing to fighting, mostly from eastern
Dar'a governorate to areas near the Jordanian border.
This year alone, more than 900,000 people in Syria have
been displaced nationwide. It is unimaginable what the
situation would be if we added to that number all those
who are presently in the eastern Dar'a governorate. My
colleague John Ging, whom I see is in the Chamber
today, will brief the Council on these issues in greater
depth in due course.

We must also think of the regional implications. As
Secretary-General Antonio Guterres himself has said,
escalation in the south-west poses significant risks to
regional security and stability, which is a point I myself
have constantly underscored. In fact, regional tensions
continue. Just to give Council members one example,
on Monday of this week air strikes on Damascus airport
were reported, which Syrian State media attributed
to Israel. We are not in a position to independently
confirm this, nor has Israel made any statement on the
matter, but we are concerned that a full-scale battle
in the south-west could only add fuel to this type of
tensions. Our position on Aleppo, on Ghouta and on
other places in Syria has always been to put the sanctity
of human - civilian - life above all else.

We have seen months of intensified back-and-
forth regional dialogue on the south-west, and we
looked at it with interest because we saw and believed
that there was some progress. I therefore urge all
parties - the Syrian Government, the armed groups
and all interested parties - to draw on the lessons
that we all learned from eastern Ghouta, from Ghouta,
from Aleppo and elsewhere, and use the channels that
already exist - and we know they exist and we know
where they are - and work on arrangements that could
prevent further human suffering, protect civilians and
provide an exit from the potential for a further tragedy
in this cruel seven-year-old conflict. I hope we will
have an opportunity in private consultations to discuss
this issue because we are indeed concerned.

With regard to the constitutional committee, we are
beginning to see some movement towards a political
process. That is why we are so concerned that military
escalation could have the potential to compromise the
progress that we are seeing on the political front. During
the last month, we have intensified our efforts to find
a way ahead for the implementation of the Sochi final
statement for the establishment of a Syrian-led, Syrian-
owned, United Nations-facilitated constitutional
committee within the framework of the Geneva process
and in accordance with resolution 2254 (2015).

Four and a half months after the Sochi declaration,
on 28 May the Syrian Government provided a catalyst
when it conveyed to my office in Damascus 50 names
for its Government list. I expressed appreciation to the
Syrian Government for this important step. I have also
expressed my appreciation to the Russian Federation
and the Islamic Republic of Iran, with which I know the
Syrian Government has discussed this list and whose
encouragement has helped to produce this movement.

After receiving the list, I decided to consult key
regional partners in Istanbul, Tehran, Cairo and
elsewhere, and I saw senior officials of the countries
where those capitals are located, including President Al
Sisi of Egypt, as well as officials of the Arab League
and opposition leaders. I was in contact with the
Russian Federation at several levels, the United States
and European countries. On the basis of these useful
discussions, I determined that it was now time to take
advantage of this initiative of the Syrian Government,
step up consultations and go deeper. On 19 June,
therefore, I held formal joint consultations at a very
senior level in Geneva with the Russian Federation, the
Republic of Turkey and the Islamic Republic of Iran.
We discussed the best way to implement the Sochi
final statement to establish a Syrian-led, Syrian-owned
constitutional committee under the auspices of the
United Nations in Geneva.

I must say it was a constructive meeting. Much
of the discussion concerned the composition of the
committee as well as such issues as decision-making
and how to avoid deadlocks. The aim was to seek some
preliminary understandings. Participants exchanged
opinions on these matters in a very interactive and
constructive way. Some common ground actually
emerged - preliminary, but it emerged. Overall, a spirit
of productive negotiation and potential compromise
emerged because all three countries recognized the
need for a constitutional committee that is credible in
the eyes of the international community.

On 22 June I met with an official from the
European Union, who provided sound advice, and I
will meet shortly with High Representative Mogherini
on these issues tomorrow. On 25 June I hosted joint
consultations in Geneva with, in alphabetical order,
France, Germany, the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan,
the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, the United Kingdom
and the United States. We discussed the de-escalation
arrangements in depth, a key element, obviously, that
underpins progress on the political front. Views were
exchanged on the importance of diplomatic bridging
between different groups on Syria and prospects for
progress on the constitutional track.

There was a clear expectation on the part of
those countries - and let me be frank: they have an
interest and a stake in the process and also are the
ones who could be important players in any potential
reconstruction - that any constitutional committee
must be credible and internationally legitimate, it
must contain a diverse and representative spectrum of
Syrians, including those mentioned in the Sochi final
statement, such as independence, civil society, experts
and women.

Based on my consultations with many stakeholders,
I intend to maintain my prerogative to contribute
to adjusting the committee so as to ensure, first, its
credibility and secondly, international legitimacy. In
terms of women, let me underscore my own expectation
that any constitutional committee must include a
minimum of 30 per cent women. In this connection,
I noted with pleasure that 26 per cent of those on the
Government list of 50 names provided to us were
women, which is not enough, because we are aiming
for 30 per cent, but it is a very good signal. I will
certainly not be impressed by the argument that others
may raise that there are not enough Syrian women who
are competent on constitutional issues. Just yesterday,
for instance, more than 200 Syrian women from
diverse backgrounds met in Beirut for a conference
organized by UN-Women. Despite their differences,
they agreed on many points, including on women's
equal participation in decision-making, including in
any constitutional committee. I also take note of the
recent letter of support for women's full and effective
participation, with at least 30 per cent representation, in
the constitutional committee, which was sent to us by
the representatives of members of the Security Council
Peru, Sweden and the United Kingdom.

We now await an opposition list of names, which we
hope will be forthcoming shortly. I know that serious
work on this issue is being conducted even as we speak.
I will be proceeding also to facilitate the process of
bridging independence experts, tribal leaders, civil
society and women, as indicated in the Sochi declaration,
and, frankly, in many of our common deliberations. I
should add that both meetings in Geneva underscored
one important point that I, too, will underscore: the
support of key countries for the role of the United
Nations in facilitating the political process in Geneva,
including the constitutional committee.

Overall, these consultations represent a cautious
step forward, and I have to be cautious, having seen
how sometimes we took one step forward and two
back. But let me be clear: this is a package, and that
is something that we have discussed with everyone:
nothing is agreed until everything has been agreed.
That is why it is a work in progress. I am also aware that
this process will require the consent and engagement of
the Syrian Government and parties, with full respect
for their concerns and sensitivities - the Government,
the opposition and civil society.

For my part, I will continue to facilitate further
movement in this direction to seek the support, counsel
and advice of many, which is why I anticipate inviting
the Sochi co-conveners back to Geneva in the coming
weeks, as well as the six countries I saw Monday and
others and then report back to the Security Council.

Let me also flag that if we are to move forward
with a constitutional process towards what everyone
in Syria tells us they want, a safe, calm and neutral
environment, it will be important to start to see steps
that could restore trust and confidence in social peace.
That is why we are concerned when we see unilateral
legislative acts such as Law Number 10, which we
understand many refugees were very worried about,
and frankly I even heard a great deal about this from
neighbouring countries such as Lebanon.

We also urge concrete action on the issue of
detainees. Today, even as we speak, a technical team
from my office is in Ankara for a meeting of the
Working Group on the release of detainees/abductees
and handover of the bodies as well as the identification
of missing persons, of which the United Nations is a
member, together with Iran, the Russian Federation
and Turkey.

As the Council is aware, so far the outcome has
been zero. However, we are not giving up. Today's
meeting is already the third meeting of the Working
Group, which deals with a key humanitarian issue that
affects thousands and thousands of Syrian people. What
is necessary now and what we and the Syrian people
expect are some concrete steps and results to alleviate
the suffering of those affected by this tragic situation.
Members of my team who are present in Ankara today
will continue proactively to support the Working Group,
which was established in Astana. I hope that all actors
involved will demonstrate the political will required to
produce some results in this field.

In the meantime, we continue to seek ways to
bridge different groups of international stakeholders
through high-level diplomacy. That is my bottom line,
and we have seen that taking place. Serious, robust and
sustainable dialogue is vital to underpin de-escalation,
which is very much needed now, and the political
process in general. I discussed this issue with President
Al Sisi in Cairo when I was there, and he gave me
some constructive ideas in this regard. I believe that
we are already seeing an emerging web of high-level
international discussions on Syria: frequent contacts
between the United States and the Russian Federation,
for instance, at many different levels; communications
at a very high level between President Putin and
President Macron and President Putin and Chancellor
Merkel; and intensified talks between the United States
and Turkey over various issues.

All that we can build on. I have shuttled around
all relevant capitals recently, so I can say with some
authority and confidence that there is some common
ground to build upon that could provide a solid basis
for some concrete understandings. Many countries are
not that far apart on issues that are, frankly, easy to
resolve or address, such as national sovereignty, unity
and many others, and we have been working on it.
Let me reiterate once again that the United Nations
stands ready to use its own good offices, competence
and experience - and we have a whole team working
on this - in the bridging of commonalities to contribute
to facilitating international dialogue in the quest for
such commonalities.

In conclusion, we are moving cautiously in the right
direction on the political front. I ask for the support of
all present, including of the Syrian Government, whose
representatives are sitting in the Chamber, in facilitating
this effort. Ultimately, this effort must be Syrian led
and Syrian owned, because no country or organization
can simply impose a fait accompli on the Syrian people.
We know that, but we need to move forward.

My second message is that currently we are gravely
concerned by the battlefield developments and their
potential to expand into regional tensions. Therefore,
we urge the Council and all interested parties to help
find an arrangement or a solution in the south-west
that will spare civilian suffering and large movements
of displaced people and reduce the potential tension so
that we do not see once again seven years afterwards,
perhaps when we are getting closer to the end of the
conflict, a repetition of what we saw sadly in Aleppo
and eastern Ghouta.

