Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola): I would like to start
by joining my colleague, the Permanent Representative
of France, Mr. Francois Delattre, in thanking, first,
the presidency of the Security Council and, next, all
colleagues who joined us in the mission to both the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Angola.

I am very honoured to report to the Council on the
outcome of the Angolan segment of the Security Council
mission to the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
Angola on 13 and 14 November. The mission exchanged
views with the authorities of Angola, which currently
chairs the International Conference of the Great Lakes
Region, on ways to prevent the aggravation of the
situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The
mission was therefore essentially a mission that, I think
we agreed, was intended to be of a preventive character.

The first meeting was with the First Vice-President,
Mrs. Joana Lina Ramos, who is in charge ofthe National
Assembly of Angola, and members of the Commission
for External Relations and the National Security
Commission. The Deputy Permanent Representative
of France, Mr. Alexis Lamek, and I, as leaders of the
mission, outlined the mission's objective, namely, to
discuss with Angolan authorities measures to ensure
a serious commitment by the main political actors in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, to overcome the
political impasse, to help restore confidence among the
political players and to create conditions for an inclusive
dialogue leading the country to the holding of fair,
democratic and transparent elections and permitting
the peaceful transfer of power. The Council again urged
the authorities of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
to respect the Constitution and the rule of law in the
country and encouraged them to pursue stabilization
and pacification through an inclusive and democratic
dialogue favouring the holding of free, transparent and
credible elections in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo.

The Vice-President of the Angolan Parliament
highlighted that the Angolan authorities are aware
of and concerned about the crisis in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, with all of its potential negative
impact on Angola and the rest of the region. They
are therefore advocating an inclusive dialogue in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, citing Angola as an
example - a country that was torn apart by nearly 30
years of armed conflict that took thousands of lives,
but was nevertheless able to reach peace and national
reconciliation primarily through dialogue.

The mission met then with the Vice-President
of the Republic of Angola, Mr. Manuel Vicente,
accompanied by the Minister of State and Chief of
Security, Mr. Vieira Dias, Junior, the Minister for
Foreign Affairs, Mr. Georges Chikoti, and Secretary for
Diplomatic Affairs of the President, Mr. Carlos Fonseca.
During the meeting, the Security Council mission
argued for the need to prevent the Democratic Republic
of the Congo from plunging into chaos and violence,
a situation that could affect all neighbouring countries
and the region as a whole. The Vice-President ofAngola
assured the Security Council mission that Angola was
monitoring the situation in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo with great attention and concern, stressing
that the Angolan Government had expressed its position
on the situation in the Democratic Republic of Congo in
a statement that was issued two days before the arrival
of the Council mission to Luanda, and that declaration,
which was shared with the members of the Council,
reaffirming Angola's policy of non-interference in
the internal affairs of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and stressing that peace and stability in that
country must be preserved, as it is crucial for regional
peace and security, especially for Central Africa.

Angola's declaration further expressed the
conviction that the political dispute must be resolved
through dialogue and not through violence or any other
illegitimate means, and called on the parties to maintain
the dialogue and negotiations, and to avoid confrontation
and violence at all costs. The Vice-President assured
the mission that Angola, in its capacity as President
of the International Conference on the Great Lakes
Region, as well as a neighbouring country and friend
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, will remain
available to work with the international community,
in particular with the Security Council, for the
stabilization of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

In our final meeting with the diplomatic corps
accredited to Angola, the mission reaffirmed the
need for consensus on an electoral calendar and
confidence-building measures by the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the importance
of a peaceful transition from the Government of
President Kabila, after the holding of transparent,
democratic and fair elections.

In conclusion, the Council mission and its Angolan
interlocutors agreed to make efforts to help the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to get through the
difficult period that the country is going through and to
do their utmost to promote a fruitful political dialogue,
respect the rule of law and establish a credible electoral
calendar - all in the interests of peace and stability
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and in the
Central African region. Also, I would mention the
shared idea that the Council is the primary instrument
to help the region, and particularly the countries of the
Great Lakes region, bring about peace and stability in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo with a common
vision, shared between the Council and the countries of
the region, specifically Angola.

