Mr. Dejammet (France) (interpretation from French): Allow me to congratulate you most sincerely,
Sir, on your assumption of the presidency and to assure
you of the support of the French delegation in your work
of guiding our deliberations.
I should like also to convey my congratulations to
Ambassador Gambari and to the Nigerian delegation for
the excellent manner in which the Council's debates were
conducted last month.

Now that a peace process has finally begun, in
accordance with the wishes and the views of the Council,
the resurgence of intolerance, violence and "ethnic
cleansing" that we have seen in certain parts of the
territory of the former Yugoslavia must be strongly
condemned. The absence of any reaction on our part
would compromise the progress towards a just and lasting
peace - the common objective of the Contact Group in

 

charge of the Dayton talks, of the members of our Council
and of the international community.

This is the meaning that France, which was a sponsor
of the draft, attaches to the resolution we have just adopted.
All acts of violence and all violations, not only of
international humanitarian law but also of human rights,
throughout the territory of the former Yugoslavia are
strongly condemned, wherever they occur and whoever
their perpetrators may be. Numerous stands have already
been taken on many of these crimes, and not repeating
those condemnations here in detail in no way means that
we have forgotten them. But certain recent facts required
particular mention, due to their scope and to their
potentially very dangerous consequences.

France had taken the initiative in respect of the
resolution that immediately condemned the crimes
committed by the Bosnian Serb during the fall of the
enclaves of Zepa and Srebrenica. The continuation of these
crimes and their extension to non-Serb populations in
Western Bosnia, in turn required strong and clear
condemnation. That has just been done. By also recalling at
this time the importance of the role of the International
criminal Tribunal and the need to enable it fully to carry
out its work, the resolution we have just adopted faithfully
reflects the unchanging position of my country.

However, when reprehensible acts have other
perpetrators, even if they are not of the same scope, they
must also be denounced. Thus it was deemed necessary to
recall the demand the Council has addressed to the Croat
authorities regarding the safety and the right to return of the
Serb populations driven out by the war from the former
Sectors West, North and South of the Republic of Croatia.
However, these tragedies cannot erase the memory of those
that the non-Serb population driven out of Eastern Slavonia
has been experiencing for many years. That is why we
support unreservedly the process of peaceful negotiation
that is now under way in Croatia. As soon as possible, all
peoples, without distinction as to origin, must have the right
to return to their homes.

Finally, we must salute and support the actions of the
United Nations peace-keeping forces and of all other United
Nations personnel. Their role is decisive on the ground as
well as in the humanitarian sphere - and this, throughout
the territory of the former Yugoslavia and in particular in
the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina. All the Members
of the United Nations involved in this effort will welcome
the mark of recognition that this resolution represents.

