The Secretary-General: It is a pleasure to see
you in New York, Madame President. I am very
grateful to you for chairing this important meeting on
how to strengthen the protection of civilians in armed
conflict. This question is among the most urgent and
most important for this Council and for the United
Nations as a whole as we seek to address the effects of
conflict around the world.

It is urgent because civilians account for the vast
majority of victims of armed conflicts today. Millions
of them are directly targeted, displaced from their
homes, subject to appalling human rights abuses and
denied assistance in times of war. It is urgent because
we know that strengthening the protection of civilians
is a key to achieving a sustainable peace. We are now
in a position to learn from our experiences and take
effective, practical measures to strengthen their
protection. The question is whether we show the will
and the determination to make protection an
inescapable duty for all parties in conflicts.

I know that Colombia is a country in which the
protection of civilians remains a key challenge. The
civilian toll has been terrible, and its effects can be
seen in every aspect of civil life in Colombia. But
Colombia is not alone in facing that challenge. No part
of the world has been immune from this scourge.

It is therefore fitting to have this discussion on
Human Rights Day - a day on which we reaffirm our
commitment to the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights and seek new ways of strengthening respect for
individual rights and freedoms. There exists an
unambiguous linkage between improving the security
of the individual person and securing and sustaining
peace and preventing violent conflict.

The work of the Security Council on this issue
over the past three years has provided us with an all-
important conceptual framework. We need to continue
this work in formulating new policies, especially in
today's fast-changing environment. But what we need
most of all is practical action and a clear path from
policy to implementation.

We need to move forward and develop a more
systematic approach to this issue. We need to build a
solid structure through which analysis and policy and
an awareness of best practices will translate
immediately into practical action that makes a
difference in people's lives. In my latest report I have
tried to show ways in which that may be done, and to
encourage the Council to move decisively towards
practical implementation.

Since my last report eighteen months ago we have
seen many important developments, including the
beginnings of a real, if fragile, transition from war to
peace in a number of long-standing conflicts. The
transitions must be sustained. In many of them, greater
emphasis on the protection of civilians may prove
decisive.

The protection of civilians does not stop with a
ceasefire, but must continue in the immediate post-
conflict phase. Ensuring that they receive needed
humanitarian assistance, ending and reversing forced
displacement, tackling the scourge of landmines and
small arms and beginning processes of justice and
reconciliation: these are not only worthy efforts in
themselves, but they are also the building blocks for
peace and recovery.

I thank the members of the Council for their
important work in this area. Success in this endeavour
is essential to achieving the most fundamental aim of
this Organization: to save succeeding generations from
the scourge of war.

