Mr. Wang Xuexian (interpretation from Chinese):
The Chinese Government has always supported the
settlement of differences between the two parties
concerned in Georgia through peaceful negotiations. We
emphasize that the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Georgia must be respected, and we hope that the two
sides demonstrate political sincerity and facilitate an early,
comprehensive political settlement of the Georgian
question through earnest negotiations.

In accordance with the agreement reached by the
two parties in Georgia - and I wish to emphasize - in
accordance with the agreement reached by the two parties
in Georgia, the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe (OSCE) and the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights will set up a human
rights office in Abkhazia, Georgia. In order to ensure its
efficiency and security, the Secretary-General
recommended that the United Nations Observer Mission
in Georgia (UNOMIG) provide appropriate support
facilities. In this connection, my delegation proposed
reasonable solutions.

The Security Council has entrusted UNOMIG with
the primary peacekeeping mandate. We are of the View
that peacekeeping operations should have a clear mandate.
They should not and cannot be all-inclusive, still less
overextended by assuming responsibilities that fall to
other agencies. It was on the basis of this principled
position and with a constructive attitude that we proposed
amendments to the draft resolution before us. Regrettably,
however, our amendments were not accepted. We believe
that it is beyond the Security Council's competence to
authorize the establishment of the aforementioned office,
and it is not in accordance with the Agreement between
the two parties concerned. Therefore, the Chinese
delegation cannot but abstain on the draft resolution.

We wish to emphasize that, even if this draft
resolution is adopted, it should in no way set a precedent
for other United Nations peacekeeping operations. The
Chinese delegation would like this position to be reflected
in the official record.

