Mr. De La Sabliere (France) (spoke in French):
First of all, I wish to refer to the situation in Lebanon
to express the deep shock and concern of French
authorities at the cowardly assassination this morning
in Beirut of Pierre Gemayel, the Minister for Industry.
France would like to extend its condolences to the
family of Mr. Gemayel. We condemn in the strongest
terms this new attempt to destabilize Lebanon through
violence, intimidation and assassination. France also
reaffirms its commitment to the independence,
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Lebanon, as well
as our support for the legitimate and democratically
elected Government of Mr. Fouad Siniora. At a time
when the Security Council is considering the
establishment of an international criminal tribunal, the
international community must send those who employ
assassination and violence a message that their crimes
will not go unpunished. As the Secretary-General has
said, there will be no peace without justice in Lebanon.

I would like to thank Mr. Gambari for his
briefing. France is also very concerned about the
ongoing violence in Israel and the Palestinian
territories. In this Chamber on 9 November 2006 (see S/PV.5564), I expressed my country's great shock at
the tragic events that cost the lives of many Palestinian
civilians in the Gaza Strip, in particular in the area of
Beit Hanoun. At the request of the General Assembly, a
fact-finding mission is promptly to be sent to the area
by the Secretary-General. We hope that this mission
will fully elucidate the Beit Hanoun tragedy. We call
on all parties to cooperate with the Secretary-General
to that end.

Unfortunately, since those tragic events, the
situation has continued to deteriorate. Rockets fired by
Palestinian armed groups have caused more Israeli
casualties, in Sderot. Other Israeli military operations
have also taken the lives of Palestinian civilians in the
Gaza Strip and in the West Bank. An end must be put
to all violence.
The Palestinian Authority must combat terrorism
and in particular put an end to the firing of rockets into
Israeli territory. The Palestinian Government's failure
to take decisive action in that respect is of concern.
Israel, for its part, must halt any operations that put
civilian populations at risk, in particular the bombing
of residential areas. Israel's legitimate right to defend
its citizens must be exercised with full respect for
international humanitarian law.

France believes that, given the distressing
increase in the number of civilian casualties, there
should be an immediate discussion on ways of
strengthening the protection of civilian populations.
The upcoming meeting of the Quartet could provide
the proper framework to begin such a discussion on the
basis of the proposals that the Secretary-General, in
cooperation with his partners, primarily the European
Union, might deem useful to formulate.

The cessation of violence, in order to be effective
and durable, must be accompanied by the creation of
credible political prospects. We call on both sides to
adopt confidence-building measures and to lay the
groundwork for the resumption of the peace process.

France calls on the Palestinians to work for
national unity. We urge all factions, primarily Hamas,
to respond favourably to President Abbas's appeal for
the formation of a new government with a political
platform reflecting the principles of the peace process
endorsed by Mr. Abbas. Such a government, which
would be a legitimate partner of the international
community, should receive the necessary support for
carrying out reforms expected of the Palestinian
Authority, including in the area of security.

France calls on the Israelis to refrain from any
unilateral action that might prejudge the results of final
status negotiations or undermine prospects for the
creation of a Viable Palestinian State. In keeping with
the advisory opinion of the International Court of
Justice, it must put an end to its settlement activities
and to the building of the wall inside the West Bank.
Finally, the conditions governing the movement of
Palestinians within, between and to the Palestinian
territories must improve pursuant to the Agreement on
Movement and Access concluded in November 2005
and the Agreed Principles for the Rafah Crossing.

France, together with its European Union
partners, will continue to act without letup and with
resolve to find a just, lasting and comprehensive
solution based on the resolutions of the Security
Council, the terms of reference of the Madrid
Conference, the principle of land for peace and the
Arab Peace Initiative. Given the current impasse, we
reiterate our conviction that an international
conference, carefully prepared with the participation of

all stakeholders, should be convened very shortly in
order to revive the hopes of the peoples of the region
and help the parties to break the current stalemate.
France, Italy and Spain, together with their European
partners, are discussing this issue so as to contribute to
overcoming the impasse in the peace process. That is
the thrust of the initiative taken at Girona.

