Mr. Mayoral (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation wishes to thank you, Sir, for your initiative
in calling for this debate on the protection of civilians
in armed conflict. We also thank the Secretary-General
for submitting his fourth report on this matter, which
contains a complete overview on the progress achieved
and the ongoing shortfalls in the protection of civilians
in armed conflict.

Before commenting on the Secretary-General's
report, I wish to affirm that my country attaches
fundamental importance to respect for international
humanitarian law, which is a matter of concern to all
States signatories to the Geneva Conventions and their
Protocols. In the current circumstances, it is essential
to recall once again that no security issue trumps the
primary obligation of all States to comply with those
basic norms. The obligation to respect the civilian
population within the framework of international
humanitarian law also extends to other non-State actors
that aspire to international legitimacy, whatever the
justice of their claims might be.

We also believe that the fight against terrorism, a
priority of the international community which my
country shares, should be carried out in full respect for
international human rights law. Regrettably, reports
have recently come to light of activities undertaken in
increasing contravention of such respect, and my
country certainly supports the cooperation of this
Council with the High Commissioner for Human
Rights in order to promote respect at all times for
rights that cannot be derogated.

Argentina joins its voice with those in the
international community that have tirelessly expressed
their deep concern at the evidence that it is civilians
who are still the most affected by armed conflict.
Violations of international humanitarian law and
international human rights, sexual violence as a
weapon of coercion and war, and the forceful
displacement of populations are the unfortunate results
of national and international conflicts.

We recall that the Security Council has been
developing a normative framework to address this
problem and has expressed interest in the 10-point
platform in order to put it into practice. Moreover, the
Secretary-General has highlighted some progress made
in the implementation of the Council's resolutions on
the protection of civilians, such as cooperation with
regional and subregional organizations. Specific areas
exist within a conflict in which action can be
undertaken regionally, such as the issue of refugees, the
illegal trade in natural resources, smuggling,
disarmament or the traffic in small arms. The regional
organizations can play a role of great value through
their better knowledge of local difficulties and their
more realistic perception of the possible solutions. In
our American hemisphere, this is what we expect from
such regional organizations such as the Organization of
American States or the Caribbean Community.

The fight against the impunity of those who
commit war crimes, crimes against humanity and
genocide has been given decisive momentum by the
establishment of the International Criminal Court, the
International Criminal Tribunals for Rwanda and the
Former Yugoslavia, and the Special Court for Sierra
Leone. The Secretary-General has succinctly pointed
out that the

"tragic legacy of Rwanda also underlines the need
to ensure that justice is delivered efficiently and
expeditiously". (S/2004/43], para. 40)

The peace process should address the question of the
guilt of those who committed crimes, and we agree
with the Secretary-General who, in paragraph 55 of his
report, underlines that sustainable peace requires that
past atrocities be punished, since impunity can be an
even more dangerous recipe for sliding back into
conflict.

With respect to the security of United Nations and
associated personnel, the panorama continues to look
bleak. Since the last report, 27 personnel of the United
Nations have died, and there have been hundreds of
attacks against United Nations personnel. In that
connection, there is also an aberrant trend of attacking
United Nations personnel in order to prevent assistance
from reaching the civilian population and thus to obtain
a political advantage. We trust that the Security
Council will take measures to put an end to such acts
and increase concrete actions to enhance practical
security.

As we have affirmed in previous years, it is
necessary to study ways to broaden the range of
protection provided by the 1994 Convention on the
Safety of United Nations and Associated Personnel and
to seek the Convention's universal ratification, which
would help improve this grave situation.

In recent days, ongoing restrictions on
humanitarian access to the civilian population of Darfur
in the Sudan has been the cause of great concern, as the
situation threatens to lead to a new catastrophe that
could claim hundreds of thousands of innocent lives.
We cannot fail to act. The Secretary-General notes that
similar situations exist in other regions. We support his
appeal to the Council to send missions to conflict
zones; to call on Governments to ensure the necessary
humanitarian access; and to insist on rapid interventions
by regional organizations and neighbouring countries in
order effectively to provide those populations with the
support they so urgently need.

In conclusion, I have mentioned only a few of the
grave issues we face in the area of the protection of
civilians. States, which remain the main actors of
international action, must renew their commitment to
basic legal rules of law and to respect for human
dignity. It is a question of political will and self-
restraint in the management of existing conflicts. The
Security Council and all organs of the United Nations
must seriously commit themselves to this task and
require all to fulfil their responsibilities and to
implement the principles developed by the United
Nations, thus ensuring the effective protection of
civilian populations and respect for their essential
rights.

