Sir Emyr Jones Parry (United Kingdom): As
well as the progress outlined by Ambassador
Negroponte, I can confirm that progress is continuing
on the provision of basic services, economic and
reconstruction issues and human rights and justice. The
Coalition Provisional Authority is engaged with the
people of Iraq in a massive effort to revive the country
and its institutions. I'm sure it will be a relief to
everybody when I say that I am circulating separately a
very detailed note reporting on these points. I will now
simply set out the headlines of that report.

On water and sanitation, our priorities have
continued to focus on infra structural rehabilitation of
the existing water and sanitation networks. Much of
our work is long-term, addressing the legacy of
mismanagement and neglect. For example, three of
Baghdad's sewage treatment plants, benefiting 3.2
million people, will this year undergo rehabilitation,
finishing in October, which will lead to nearly 800
million litres of waste water per day being treated.

Power generation in Iraq has been continually
improving, leading to a new February average of 4,260
megawatts, the highest achieved since the Coalition
Provisional Authority began its work in 2003. Essential
and necessary long-term repairs and scheduled
maintenance are being undertaken throughout the
country to build a sustainable power grid. Oil
production has increased to 2.3 million barrels per day.
The Coalition Provisional Authority has continued also
to rehabilitate critical road and rail infrastructure. Key
bridges are being rebuilt, allowing for the critical flow
of fuel and agricultural products throughout Iraq. In
recent weeks, three key bridges were repaired or
reopened to traffic.

Turning to health care, the Coalition continues to
look to the long term, supporting a reformed Ministry
of Health capable of delivering essential health
services throughout Iraq. Work is currently under way
between the Iraqi Ministry of Health, the Coalition
Provisional Authority and the World Health
Organization to develop a complete overview of drugs,
supplies and equipment. This is expected to be
completed by March. Salaries in the health sector,
which is a key indicator, have also increased, with
doctors' salaries having risen from $3 - I repeat, from
$3 - a month to $350 per month.

On education, the Authority's objectives have
focused on increasing enrolment and improving the
quality of primary and secondary education. During the
February school holidays, almost 33,000 Iraqi teachers
will undergo a period of training designed to lead to an

improvement in the provision of primary and
secondary education throughout Iraq.

Turning to economic issues, a key focus for the
Authority has been to establish a sound economic
framework and a transparent public expenditure
system. Iraqi financial institutions have continued to
grow and have begun the process of reintegration into
the international community. We have witnessed
progress on interest rate liberalization; the provision of
banking licenses to foster a modern and efficient
financial sector; commitments to reduce Iraqi debt; and
approximately $650 million transferred to the
Development Fund for Iraq from Iraqi assets stolen by
the former regime and previously held overseas. On 11
February, all 146 members of the General Council of
the World Trade Organization welcomed and accepted
Iraq's request to become an observer. The Central Bank
law has also now been enacted, granting the Central
Bank full independence. Its mandate will be to pursue
price stability and to supervise the banking system. The
balance for the Development Fund for Iraq, as of 12
February, was $8.8 billion. Between October 2003 and
January 2004, the Iraqi budget benefited from an
additional $1.8 billion. Greater oil revenues than expected
have produced that. To date, the total disbursements from
the Development Fund amount to $3.2 billion, details
of which can be found on the Coalition Provisional
Authority web site (www.cpa-iraq.org).

On 7 February, the International Advisory and
Monitoring Board and the Authority agreed on the
statement of work for the independent public
accountant who will audit the sale and export of oil
from Iraq. And the Development Fund, as required by
resolution 1483 (2003) will carry that out. The
Authority's nomination for the auditing contract will be
submitted to the Board for approval by 27 February.

Let me now turn to a top priority for the
Authority, which is to create new jobs. Unemployment
levels remain too high, but under-employment is a key
challenge too. We are prioritizing and accelerating
work on projects that can produce employment
opportunities and visible economic benefits for the
largest number of Iraqis possible. The national
employment programme and the additional
employment programme in the northern governorates
have so far created close to 110,000 jobs out of a target
of 155,000 new public work jobs. The Ministry of
Finance also plans to invest $125 million during 2004
to create an additional 125,000 jobs.

In coordination with the Coalition Provisional
Authority, the Iraqi Ministry of Justice has developed
strategies and activities to ensure the establishment or
reconstruction of basic Iraqi criminal justice facilities.
The Authority has continued to support efforts to
strengthen civil society and human rights education
throughout Iraq. The new Iraqi Ministry of Human
Rights will also play an important role in shaping
human rights developments throughout the country. We
look forward to the United Nations engaging this focal
point. The judicial review committee in Iraq has
completed its review of every judge and prosecutor,
checked their membership in the Baath party, their
complicity in human rights violations or corruption, to
ensure that the Iraqi justice system is now run by
people of integrity. The overall dismissal rate is about
25 per cent.

A key issue is the role of women, where the
Authority continues to actively encourage the
participation of women in all phases, and at all levels
in the reconstruction of Iraq, in accordance with
Security Council resolution 1325 (2000). It is worth
highlighting that Iraqi women will be travelling to New
York for discussions to be held by the Commission on
the Status of Women, which takes place next month.

Turning to my conclusion, as Ambassador
Negroponte has already stated, much has been
achieved. Iraqis now have a wide variety of freedoms
never afforded to them by the previous regime. With
the gradual rebuilding of Iraq's economy and
infrastructure, they have the opportunity, at last, for a
better future. Iraqis are also gaining the right to control
their own lives and their nation's destiny. The transfer
of authority to a sovereign Iraqi Government on 30
June 2004 will be a defining moment. At the same
time, the scale of the tasks still faced in rebuilding Iraq
remains massive. Attacks continue to be perpetrated
against the Iraqi people by former regime loyalists and
foreign extremists who are bent on denying the Iraqi
people control of their own political future. Decades of
oppression will not be undone overnight. But already,
the efforts we have undertaken in partnership with
Iraq's creative and talented people are making a real
difference.

As I said in our previous briefing to the Council
on 21 November 2003, to succeed, the people of Iraq
and its institutions will need the sustained commitment
of the international community. We very much
welcome the support so many nations have given and
are giving to Iraq's reconstruction and security, as well
as the contribution being made by the United Nations
and its agencies. We also very much value the
contribution that the United Nations is now making to
the political process, most recently through the report
of the United Nations fact-finding mission led by
Lakhdar Brahimi. We welcome the United Nations
offer to help with consensus-building as well as with
the preparations for subsequent elections. We want to
see a strong and growing United Nations role.

Iraq is making progress towards the goal of a
democratic Iraq governed by the people and for the
people of Iraq, a goal that likely seemed impossible to
the vast majority of those living under the former
regime. The United Nations and its Members can and
should continue to help the Iraqi people along that
journey. We hope that the coming weeks and months
will bring continued and enhanced United Nations
engagement and continued work to ensure the
successful transfer of authority on 30 June to a fully
sovereign Iraqi Government. The coming weeks and
months will also bring the further intensification of
international efforts to assist the Iraqi people.

