Mr. Merimee (France) (interpretation from French):
My delegation was pleased to vote in favour of the
resolution, which authorizes the Secretary-General to make
arrangements for the transfer of the duties of the
Multinational Force in Haiti to the United Nations Mission
in Haiti.

When it adopted resolution 940 (1994), the Council
decided that the objective was to hand over to the United
Nations as quickly as possible - that is, as soon as a
secure and stable environment had been established and the
United Nations was in a position to take over it. There is
therefore every reason to be pleased that the conditions
have been met to allow the second phase of the operation
to begin on 31 March. This attests to the progress that has
been made since the deployment of the Multinational
Force four months ago. In this connection, my delegation
again pays tribute to the commanders and other members
of the Force.

The ending of political violence, once one of Haiti's
scourges, is an unquestionable success, as are the waning
of fear and the resumption of political debate. The
Government is performing its duties, and President
Aristide, who advocates national reconciliation, is keeping
his word. Furthermore, his message is being heeded. I
also note that the timetable envisaged when the operation
was launched has been met. That is a positive point.

The holding of legislative elections is a decisive
element in the return of democracy. This ballot should be
held as soon as it reasonably can be. I hope that all the
necessary arrangements will be made for it to be held in
complete security and with complete impartiality. The
United Nations and the Haitians must take the necessary
measures in that regard.

It is true that there remain reasons for concern,
particularly the resurgence of common crime and the
implication in the violence of former paramilitary
networks. This must be stopped if an authentic democratic
society is to be built. Great attention should be focused on
the reintegration and professional training of demobilized
troops. The establishment of an honest and efficient
police force is also of fundamental importance. My
delegation welcomes the success of the training
programmes that have been initiated, in which France is
participating.

Lastly, I wish to emphasize the importance of
economic development and the rebuilding of institutions,
particularly the judiciary, in order to consolidate
democracy in Haiti. We welcome what the Ambassador
of Haiti said on this subject. In this connection, I wish to
inform the Council that a meeting of the donor advisory
group was held today, in Paris. It will be followed by a
meeting to coordinate the activities of those providing
funds to promote justice in Haiti. France has also resumed
its bilateral cooperation on a large scale. We hope - in
fact, we are certain - that everyone's efforts will set
Haiti on the right path.

