Mr. Howard: I extend my congratulations to you,
Mr. President, on your assumption of the presidency of
the Council. I also acknowledge the presence of
Deputy Secretary-General Louise Frechette and also,
very particularly, Mr. Jose Ramos-Horta, with whom
my Government and the people of Australia have had a
significant association over the past few years.

I understand that this is the first time in some
years that an Australian Prime Minister has addressed
the Security Council, and I think it is appropriate that
the address takes place in the context of a debate on the
future of East Timor.

Australia was a founder Member of the United
Nations, and, in fact, provided the first President of the
Security Council. We continue to very strongly support
the relevant role of the Security Council in the modern
world. Its contribution to the emphatic response of the
world to the outrageous terrorist attacks in this city last
year is current evidence of that relevance, as indeed is
illustrated again by the debate today on Afghanistan.
Australia has been a strong supporter of the world's
response to those terrorist attacks, and we were one of
the very first nations to send military forces to assist
the United States efforts within Afghanistan.

We strongly support the work done in the United
Nations to ensure there is a broad international front
against terrorism. It is critical that this international
cooperation be one of action as well as words. This is
what Australia will look to the Council for in
implementing its resolutions.

I want to thank Sergio Vieira de Mello for his
report in the name of the Secretary-General in relation
to the renewal of the mandate for East Timor until
independence. I take this opportunity to record
Australia's admiration for his stewardship over the last
two and a half years. It has been an example of United
Nations work in difficult circumstances at its very best.
I also join others in saying how much we look forward
to East Timor assuming its independence in 110 days'
time. I shall be delighted, myself, to represent Australia
at the independence celebrations from 18 to 20 May.

East Timor has been a prime example of the
Security Council's capacity to respond promptly and
decisively to pressing issues. The mandate that enabled
the deployment of the International Force in East
Timor laid the foundation for a successful and effective
long-term resolution to a difficult and chronic problem.
Australia is indeed honoured to have played such a key
role in that success.
Two years ago the Security Council entrusted the
United Nations Transitional Administration in East
Timor (UNTAET) with a major and unprecedented
task. The success of UNTAET is manifest in East
Timor's rapid move toward independence. I pay tribute
not only to Sergio Vieira de Mello's own leadership,
but also to his UNTAET team, including the members
of the peacekeeping operation, the United Nations
civilian police, East Timorese members of the
Transitional Government and Secretariat officials here
in New York.

The renewal of the UNTAET mandate prefaces a
new phase of United Nations involvement in East
Timor. The Security Council must now give priority to
preparation and planning for the post-independence
United Nations mission. Decisions taken by this
Council in the coming months will have a crucial
bearing on the long-term success of East Timor. We
cannot rest on the successes - great though they
are - over the past two years, for without continued
support, they cannot be sustained.

East Timor remains a small, fragile country. A
start to reconstruction has been made, but there is still
a long way to go. Australia and other donors are
committed to East Timor's long-term sustainable
development. But there also needs to be an assurance
of solidarity from the United Nations system.

The Council is well aware of the significant
contribution Australia has made to the United Nations
peacekeeping operation in East Timor through both
military and civilian police contingents. Over the
period from July 1999 to June 2001, Australia spent
Australian $1.4 billion on its military contribution. We
have also committed Australian $150 million for the
four years from July 2000 to help with reconstruction
and development in East Timor.

I want to inform the Council that Australia will
continue to play its part, both through the United
Nations and bilaterally, to support East Timor. We are
committed to a substantial bilateral assistance
programme to reduce poverty and build the capacity of
the East Timorese people to govern their country
successfully in a peaceful and democratic fashion. In
the Timor Sea Arrangement, we have agreed on a
generous arrangement for revenue from the Timor Sea
gas fields, which will make a big contribution to East
Timor's future.

We look forward to working closely and
pragmatically with our new neighbours, both on
bilateral issues and, as fellow Member States of the
United Nations, in regional and global organizations. In
this regard, I am pleased that we shall begin trilateral
meetings between East Timor, Indonesia and Australia
on 26 February, when senior East Timorese
representatives will meet with representatives of my
Government and the Government of Indonesia in
Denpasar. The relationship between those three nations
is very important to the future of East Timor and its
people.

East Timor will, however, need more than the
help and goodwill of its nearest neighbours. A seamless
transition from United Nations administration to a
functioning post-independence Government is vital to
success in the long term. We should not by skimping
on resources undo the good work already done. It is
critical that the United Nations stay the course, and
Australia will play a significant part in the staying of
that course and leave East Timor well equipped to deal
with the challenges of independence. This is the best
guarantee of minimizing the country's longer-term
reliance on international support.

Australia agrees that the United Nations role in
East Timor is not open-ended. The Security Council
must set in place an exit strategy that preserves the
international community's investment in East Timor's
future. That in turn will secure East Timor's capacity to
function effectively over the long term.

I conclude by assuring the Council that Australia
will continue to play a significant part for so long as
that participation is needed. We will work closely with
the Council to support United Nations efforts and the
new East Timorese Government.

I record again the overwhelming sentiment of the
people of Australia in expressing to Jose Ramos-Horta
and through him to the people of East Timor our
goodwill for their future. There is concern and
sentiment in my country towards the East Timorese
people. We wish them well. We look forward to
working with Mr. Ramos-Horta as fellow members of
the international community and as participants in our
part of the world. I again congratulate Sergio Vieira de
Mello on his great stewardship, and I thank you,
Mr. President, most warmly for the privilege of
addressing the Security Council.

