Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I thank Special
Representative Yamamoto and Ms. Khurram for their
extremely helpful briefings and note how nice it is to
see Ms. Khurram here again. I would also like to thank
my colleague the Afghan Ambassador. We are very
pleased to be part of the Group of Friends of Women
in Afghanistan and find it heartening to hear so much
support from colleagues around the table. I thank
them very much for that. I am also very grateful to the
Indonesian Foreign Minister for her guidance.

I would first like to once again express our
enormous gratitude to the Special Representative for
the work that he and the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) are doing in
incredibly challenging circumstances. In a moment
I will turn to the three main issues concerning us
today - the peace process, the elections and economic
development - but before that I want to add the United
Kingdom's voice to all those condemning last month's
attack on a United Nations vehicle in Kabul and the
recent attack that killed Dr. Nakamura. We join all
those who lament the loss of those fine colleagues. We
send our sympathies and condolences to their families
and all those who knew them.

There is absolutely no justification for those
disgraceful acts of violence. The Taliban claims to
speak for the people of Afghanistan and yet, if it does
not take part directly in such attacks, it certainly creates
an environment in which such attacks become possible.
In that connection, I would like to mention the Taliban
attack on Bagram last Tuesday, which killed two
civilians and injured many more. The United Kingdom
calls on the Taliban to end such attacks in order to give
Afghans a chance at the stable and just peace that they
so much deserve.

Turning to the peace process, we share the view of
other members that only a political process can deliver
a lasting and just peace and that the deal between the
United States and the Taliban is crucial to unlocking
intra-Afghan talks between the Government and the
Taliban. The United Kingdom also hopes that talks
can resume soon, but it is clear that the Taliban needs
to firmly commit to a concrete reduction in violence
as a matter of urgency. The Taliban needs to show
that it is serious about peace, the Afghan people need
respite from the awful violence and we need to create
a conducive environment for the crucial intra-Afghan
talks to succeed.

I have mentioned the vital role that women have
to play in the peace process and join my colleagues
in underscoring that once again. I wish to commend
UNAMA for the launch of the nationwide global open
days on women, peace and security at the symposium
in Kabul in October.

My second point concerns the Afghan presidential
elections. We join others in calling on all stakeholders
to respect and uphold the integrity of the electoral
management bodies as they work to complete the
process and deliver the results in a timely manner. We
welcome UNAMA's continued engagement around the
elections with national and international partners and
likewise support its call for transparency, impartiality
and independence as the results are processed. It was
good to see that the Independent Election Commission
will be able to move forward with recounts in the
remaining provinces. We hope that the process will
unfold expeditiously and transparently and look
forward to preliminary results.

My last point is on Afghanistan's economic
development needs. Regardless of what happens in
the months ahead, Afghanistan will continue to have
considerable economic development and humanitarian
needs, as the Indonesian representative so clearly set out.
Financial commitments made at the Brussels summit
in 2016 will run out next year. The United Kingdom
supports the holding of a pledging conference in 2020
to address the financing gap and identify development
priorities for the remainder of the transformation
decade. We therefore welcome the work that UNAMA
is doing with the Afghan Government in preparation
for the 2020 ministerial conference on Afghanistan and
the initiation of discussions with potential hosts for
that event.
