Mr. Valdes (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): First of
all, Sir, allow me to congratulate you on the excellent
way in which you have conducted our work during this
month. I would like to express the gratitude of the
delegation of Chile for having convened this meeting
to consider the Secretary-General's report
(S/2003/449), dated 21 April, on the situation in
Timor-Leste. We would also like to thank our friend,
Mr. Kamalesh Sharma, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, for his briefing.

Last March the Security Council held a public
meeting to comment on the Secretary-General's special
report, which mentioned serious civil disturbances and
subsequent acts of Violence that affected the security
situation in that country. On that occasion, adjustments
were proposed to downsize the presence of the United
Nations Mission of Support in East Timor
(UNMISET), and they were supported by the Council
members through the adoption of resolution 1473
(2003), of 4 April. The resolution supports the proposal
for the adjustment of the downsizing of the police
component, welcomes a revised schedule for the
downsizing of the military component and calls for a
detailed military strategy for the revised schedule.

We also share the view concerning the specific
security situation, and that the solution of those
immediate problems must be seen within a broad
framework in a long-term process that would make it
possible to fully establish a viable, independent State.

We now acknowledge UNMISET's dedicated
efforts in complying with its mandate in Timor-Leste.
In particular, we note the work done by the Civilian
Support Group, which has trained public servants and
has broadly supported the administration of this new
country. In this context, we urge them to continue
working on developing a strategic plan to identify the
areas that will require bilateral support. We also value
the work that has made it possible for the National
Police of Timor-Leste to have 2,530 officers present in
6 of the country's 13 districts. However, we understand
that the National Police must continue its preparation
in order to take up more difficult threats to security,
especially with respect to civil disturbances and the
handling of the resurgence of armed groups.

We reiterate that resolution 1473 (2003) is a great
contribution in terms of training for the police,
especially when it comes to human rights, the rule of
law, the development of rapid deployment groups and
the maintenance of a greater presence in the districts.
There is no doubt that all this will lead to greater
professionalism, effectiveness and responsibility for
the police force in that country.

Likewise, after reviewing the military strategies
set out in the report, we feel that they are relevant and
realistic and will make it possible to achieve concrete
progress within the framework of the country's
security. In this context, we urge UNMISET to
continue to firmly support Falintil-FDTL in order to
help it overcome its current limitations - that is, its
reduced numbers, the lack of presence in the western
sectors of the territory and the need to improve its
mobility by air and by land, among others.

We greatly value the assistance provided by
UNMISET in the area of human rights. We also value
the assistance given through the Serious Crimes Unit in
seeking to clear up the crimes committed in 1999. That
has led to the submission of 60 charges against 247
people. However, we know that the development of this
judicial process will require more external assistance in
order to complete the process. In this respect, we
would like to point out that it is indispensable that
Indonesia's cooperation be improved in order to
prosecute the accused. We urge the parties to continue
working closely and in a true spirit of cooperation.

Our own experience as a country has taught us
that only with truth and justice will it be possible to
continue building together and to overcome the
difficulties of the past. Likewise, we acknowledge the
need to improve the operation of the judicial system in
Timor-Leste, and we welcome the valuable
contribution made by UNMISET in this area.

The integration efforts by the Government of
Timor-Leste with the States in the region are very
positive. We note its recent joining of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries, as well as its admission into
the Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the
Pacific last 30 April. We greatly appreciate the
agreements on oil resources signed with Australia in
March and the beginning of this month. This is
particularly important, because we know that in order
to achieve true stability Timor-Leste requires economic
development, which will enable it to overcome poverty,
generate jobs, improve the population's well-being and
achieve greater socio-economic success.

We share the View that, although very important
progress has been made, the assistance of the
international community is crucial in order to take up
yet-unresolved complex problems. In this context, we
agree that it is advisable to extend UNMISET's
mandate for another year - that is, until 20 May 2004.
That mandate should be established with clear and
specific tasks in order to ensure a proper and stable
transition for the well-being of the people of Timor-
Leste.

Lastly, we would like to express our gratitude to
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General in
Timor-Leste and to his team. We would also like to
express our gratitude and appreciation for the efforts
made by the Government of Timor-Leste, led by
President Xanana Gusmao and the valuable support
provided by countries of the region to this country,
which is taking its first steps as an independent nation.

