Mrs. Gregoire Van Haaren (Netherlands): The
Kingdom of the Netherlands thanks the Secretary-
General and Under-Secretary-General Voronkov for
their leadership. We would also like to thank their staff,
as well as the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate (CTED) and the Monitoring Team for their
work in composing the most recent report on the threat
posed by Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham (ISIS)
(S/2018/80).

As was pointed out by other Council members
before me, the report indicates that the threat posed by
ISIS and its affiliates remains real. The women, men
and children around the world who have fallen victim
to atrocious acts by ISIS are a sad reminder of that. I
would like to focus on three important elements: the
threat, accountability, and additional action.

First, the threat. Although Raqqa has been liberated
and ISIS has lost territories in Iraq and Syria, the myth
of ISIS has not been unraveled. Less territory does
not necessarily mean more security, and in countries
such as Yemen, Egypt and Mali, the threat posed by
ISIS remains high, as pointed out in the report. And in
Afghanistan, ISIS affiliates continue to commit attacks.

The Kingdom of the Netherlands is concerned about
the increasing number of foreign terrorist fighters, and
their families, returning from Syria and Iraq and those
relocating to other conflict zones. As Mr. Voronkov

has just mentioned, through adaptation to a global
network of motivated individuals, ISIS remains threat
to all of us. That is why we must increase our efforts to
prosecute and detain foreign terrorist fighters.

However, we can stop terrorists only if we spot
terrorists. In December, the Council adopted resolution
2396 (2017), on returning and relocating foreign
terrorist fighters. One of the key elements of the
resolution is the obligation to collect passenger name
records to enhance the detection of foreign terrorist
fighters. We encourage Member States to make a top
priority of developing the capability for that approach,
and we encourage the United Nations to provide
assistance where needed.

Enhancing detection of terrorists enhances
prosecution of terrorists, which brings me to my
second point, that is, accountability. For those men
and women who commit terrorist acts, our message is
clear: accountability is neither optional nor negotiable,
and all victims deserve justice. To that end, we support
the ongoing work and objectives of the International,
Impartial, and Independent Mechanism for Syria, as
established by the General Assembly.

With regard to Iraq, resolution 2379 (2017) requests
the formation of an investigative team to support
domestic efforts to hold ISIS fighters accountable for
their actions. We call for the swift establishment of the
terms of reference of that team, and we underline that
domestic efforts should be pursued in accordance with
international law and United Nations best practices. We
continue to call on both countries to become party to
the Rome Statute or accept the exercise of jurisdiction
by the International Criminal Court.

Let me turn to my third and final point: additional
action by the United Nations and its Member States.
It is essential that countries lacking the necessary
capacities to implement resolutions receive technical
assistance. Their security is our security. CTED plays
a crucial role in the assessment and analysis of such
needs. The Kingdom of the Netherlands welcomes the
role that Under-Secretary-General Voronkov and his
Office play in the subsequent coordination of capacity-
building.

Prevention is key in the work of all United Nations
entities involved. Member States should be provided the
tools to create an environment that balances repressive
and preventive counter-terrorism measures. To make
our fight against terrorism and violent extremism

sustainable, we must better understand root causes and
involve local communities in addressing them.

In conclusion, we welcome the progress made in the
fight against ISIS and compliment the United Nations
on its valuable contribution to that end. However, we
have a long road ahead ofus in order to further diminish
the threat and achieve full accountability.
The Kingdom of the Netherlands will continue
to do its share, including as an active member of the
Global Coalition and as a strong supporter of the
United Nations.

