Mr. Awad (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset,
I would like to thank Ms. Bintou Keita, Assistant
Secretary- General for Peacekeeping Operations, for her
briefing and for the efforts made by the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations in the light of the increasing
challenges facing peacekeeping operations, both on the
ground and at the conceptual level. I would also like
to thank the Japanese presidency for convening today's
meeting on the occasion of the publication of the
report of the Secretary-General on measures to fill the
gaps in peacekeeping. This is another opportunity to
operationalize the efforts of developing and reforming
peacekeeping operations.

Reform and review efforts over the past two years
focused on addressing operational and technical aspects
ofpeacekeeping missions, notably the efforts to broaden
the base of troop- and police-contributing countries
and force generation. These efforts included developing
the United Nations Peacekeeping Capability Readiness
System and holding conferences on peacekeeping
operations, the latest of which was the United Nations
Peacekeeping Defence Ministerial, held in Vancouver.
It is high time for those efforts to take tangible form
in improved effectiveness of peacekeeping operations
on the ground. In this regard, I would like to highlight
three points.

First, force generation and capabilities for United
Nations peacekeeping operations are directly linked
to operationalizing the tripartite mechanism for
consultations among the Security Council troop-
contributing countries and the Secretariat. This
tripartite mechanism directly contributes to achieving
a comprehensive and clear vision for issuing and
reviewing mandates, in accordance with United Nations
capabilities and capacities, while taking into account
the political and on-the-ground realities in all stages of
the conflict as well as the specific context, especially
when it comes to the issuance of sequence mandating.
This approach guarantees the effectiveness of missions
and prevents unlimited mandate extension where there
is no fixed time frame for withdrawal. It further allows
for the Council to define a comprehensive Vision,
thereby enabling it to take decisions on extending,
reviewing and amending mandates in an effective and
realistic manner.

Secondly, reforming and developing peacekeeping
operations includes significant efforts to enhance
aspects related to training, following the chain of
command and control and authorizing those on the
ground to take decisive action in emergency situations.
In this regard, we stress that increasing capacities
and force generation and broadening the base of
troop- and police-contributing countries must not
come at the expense of meeting the highest standards
of performance, the availability of equipment and
training, and complying with the strictest standards
of discipline and conduct, including combating sexual
exploitation and abuse. Evaluating the performance
of forces must be in accordance with clear standards
and benchmarks in peacekeeping-operations
policies and in close consultations with troop- and
police-contributing countries.

There is a clear link in that regard between the
availability of training, capacities and equipment,
on the one hand, and enhancing the capability of
forces to protect civilians and ensure their own
safety, on the other hand. In recent months, we
have witnessed an increased frequency in attacks
against units participating in peacekeeping missions
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Central
African Republic and Mali. These incidents have
uncovered shortcomings in the capacities available for
protection * whether in terms of training, the nature
of the equipment or the availability of information,
including for risk-assessment purposes. We believe
that we urgently need to address these shortcomings
in order to enhance the credibility of peacekeeping
missions and protect the lives of personnel, for they are
the true assets of these missions.

Thirdly, when it comes to filling gaps in
capacities and capabilities, I would like to highlight
the contribution of Egypt in specialized units in the
most difficult United Nations missions. Because we
are committed to supporting the efforts of the United
Nations in peacekeeping, we have pledged to provide the
necessary equipment to fill the gap in many missions,
including our contribution of 100 armoured vehicles
to them. In addition to contributing this equipment
and personnel, we have adopted the highest training
standards for our police and military troops. We have
held detailed training sessions prior to deployment,
notably on the issue of sexual exploitation and abuse, in
accordance with United Nations training curriculums.
Egypt is also contributing to training and building
the capacity of future troop-contributing countries.
The Cairo International Centre for Conflict Resolution,
Peacekeeping and Peacebuilding is holding a number
of training sessions for troops from these and other
countries. We have received a financial contribution
from the Government of Japan.

Finally, it is important for the Security Council to
address the matter of force capability and performance
as well as the provision of equipment. However, we
believe that enhancing the role and effectiveness of
peacekeeping operations starts with the mandates
themselves and the review of those mandates in the
general framework of the primacy of political solutions,
and in making sure that there are sufficient resources
for implementing those mandates on the ground, as
Ms. Keita mentioned in her briefing. The performance
ofthese missions must be evaluated on the basis of their
contribution to providing the necessary conditions for
a political solution.

In that regard, presidential statement
S/PRST/2017/27, which we have just adopted, represents
an important contribution to enhancing the capacity of
the Security Council and the Secretariat in ensuring
that political solutions are our primary focus. The
presidential statement calls on the Secretary-General to
include relevant reports when reviewing peacekeeping
operations, that these reports contain analyses based on
the seven guidance elements set forth in the statement,
with a view to evaluating the efficiency of mandates
and the availability of favourable conditions for the
success of peacekeeping operations. Since Ms. Keita
is with us today, I would like to take this opportunity
to stress the importance of this vital dimension and to
express our appreciation for her focus on enhancing
capacities, availability of equipment, training, conduct
and discipline.

