Ms. Citaku: It is unfortunate that, 17 years
after the war - and I am talking here about a war
that happened in the twentieth century - we see no
remorse, regret or apology. I was a teenager during
the war, and my colleague from Serbia was a senior
State official. The least once should do is apologize for
the atrocities and for the lives lost. Serbia caused the
most horrific catastrophe in Europe since the Second
World War. And we have yet to see condemnation of
those atrocities, not only in Kosovo but also in Croatia
and Bosnia and Herzegovina. This is a very bipolar
approach. You cannot say that you are for reconciliation
when we do not address the past. We can build a joint
future in the region only if we speak in earnest about
what happened, if we are honest about what happened.

To claim today that I am not a Kosovar or a citizen
of Kosovo, or that Albanians did not live in Kosovo is
pitiful. We do not have to stop at the fourteenth century;
we can go further back. But that is an argument for other
forums. This is a Chamber where we discuss resolution
1244 (1999), and our point has been consistently clear.
Resolution 1244 (1999) no longer fits the reality, and
we all know why it cannot be replaced - for political
reasons.

At the end of the day, it was the International
Court of Justice, the highest international legal body,
that stated very clearly that Kosovo did not breach
international law when it declared independence. It also
stated very clearly that States exist for their citizens,
and not the other way around. If you consistently
repress, oppress and commit genocide, ethnic cleansing
and mass murder, what is the justification of that State
for maintaining control of that population? The opinion
of the Court is public, so when I hear my colleague
here saying all the time that he hopes that every single
country in the world that has recognized Kosovo goes
through what Serbia has gone through, I say: "I hope
not". I hope that no people in the world will suffer and
go through what we have gone through.

We hear all the time about the 200,000 Serbs
who left Kosovo. I want to reiterate that every single
citizen of Kosovo is free to return - every single one
of them. We have gone to great lengths and adopted
unprecedented measures to accommodate the needs of
all minority communities in Kosovo. We have reserved
seats in Parliament. We have them as Ministers in
the Government. There is sufficient budget allocated
to meet their needs. But what they need to hear from
Serbia is a message that Kosovo is their State and that
Pristina is the address where they can resolve their
problems. This ambiguity must end, because we can
discuss many things but there is one thing we will
never discuss - our right to exist as a free nation under
the sun. Our independence is irreversible. Kosovo is a
State. Of course it has problems, like any newborn. But
I urge people to come and visit Kosovo and see with
their own eyes the progress we have managed to make
together.

We have also heard references made here to
Mr. Limaj's case. Mr. Limaj was indicted by the Basic
Court, as confirmed by the Presiding Trial Judge of the
European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo, and
he was found innocent. That is justice, and unlike other
people we do not argue about the findings of the Court.

There was a reference made to a church built in the
centre of Pristina. Now, while we do not support any
form of vandalism, let me say that this church is not a
historic site. The church was built during the Milosevic
regime. It is not a part of the cultural heritage; it is a
political statement. Of course we will work closely
with the Serbian Orthodox Church in Kosovo to find
an appropriate solution, but let us describe things as
they are. We want peace. We want good-neighbourly
relations. We want reconciliation. But those cannot be
built on denial.

The meeting rose at 12.55 pm.
