Mr. Dunn (United States of America): I thank
Prime Minister Gusmao and Ambassador Haq for their
briefings on Timor-Leste and the United Nations
Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT). We thank
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Haq
for her dedicated leadership and commitment to
solidifying peace in Timor-Leste.

The United Nations and the international
community as a whole played a critical role in the
independence of Timor-Leste, as described with much
eloquence by Prime Minister Gusmao. Sustained
international support will be crucial to ensuring a
peaceful and prosperous future for this young country.

Today, I would like to make five brief points that
touch on both the progress that Timor-Leste has made
and on the challenges that lie ahead.

First, the United States is encouraged that the
security situation in the country remains stable, to the
degree that a further reduction in the force size of the
United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste
(UNMIT) is planned for June 2011. We are encouraged
by the international community's continued
commitment to the electoral process in Timor-Leste. In
that regard, we are eager to learn the results of the
needs assessment mission, which will determine the
scope and kind of election support needed. The success
of the electoral process will indicate a further
consolidation of peace and security throughout the
country and signal continued progress toward a
peaceful and prosperous future.

Second, the transfer of primary policing
responsibilities from UNMIT to the Timorese national
police will be critical to further cementing stability in
the country. Efforts to strengthen institutions and build
local capacity are essential to the success of the
peacekeeping mission. We commend UNMIT, the
Policia Nacional de Timor-Leste and bilateral donors
for their hard work in this area. We strongly support
the efforts of UNMIT to adapt the composition of its
personnel to address the changing nature of UNMIT
policing in Timor-Leste. UNMIT must ensure that the
Mission has the appropriate specialized skills it needs
to be successful. That includes ensuring that all 19
additional civilian expert posts within UNMIT's police
component are filled as expeditiously as possible.

We are concerned that the Government of Timor-
Leste certified 199 police officers despite pending
criminal and disciplinary charges. Of those, 52 face
serious disciplinary and criminal charges. We strongly
urge the Government to pursue justice expeditiously.
The accountability of the police force and the
discipline process under which it operates are critical
for the integrity of the Timorese national police.

Third, the development of competent and
professional security institutions, both police and
military, is critical to the long-term success of Timor-
Leste. We commend the progress that has been made in
constructing the overarching legislative and policy
framework in the security sector. We urge the
Government to finalize its national security policy and
to work to implement an understanding of the resulting
roles and responsibilities throughout the security
institutions, specifically within the military and police.

The United States is committed to strengthening
the Timorese security sector. We have recently
increased our bilateral support in this area - for
example, through a programme to advance community
policing.

Fourth, we are encouraged by the concluding
conference of the national consensus dialogue on truth,
justice and reconciliation. The United States strongly
supports those and additional efforts to further the
national reconciliation process under clear and
predictable legal procedures. Addressing growing
concerns about impunity and establishing public trust
in the justice sector are important for a stable path
forward.

Finally, socio-economic development and
democratic institutions are critical to the long-term
stability and security of Timor-Leste. Sustained
engagement of the international community is
essential, as is continued engagement with bilateral
partners. The United States is committed to assisting
Timor-Leste to achieve its long-term goals. We are
investing in programmes to promote good governance,
improve health and spur economic growth.

As we continue to partner with Timor-Leste, we
are pleased to note the continued planning undertaken
by the Government and UNMIT for an eventual
UNMIT departure and a transition to a post-UNMIT
presence. The United States welcomes the High-Level
Committee on Transition and the establishment of
seven working groups. Those bodies are critical in
identifying and addressing the challenges on the road
ahead.

We encourage UNMIT and the Government of
Timor-Leste to create a gradual and methodical
transition plan. Such planning should include handing
over or discontinuing certain United Nations functions,
beginning this year, and closing United Nations offices
in a staged fashion well in advance of UNMIT's
departure. We further encourage UNMIT and the
Government of Timor-Leste to identify the role the
United Nations will play after UNMIT's departure and
to work closely with bilateral missions throughout the
planning and transition process. We believe that
elections should not in themselves be an exit strategy.
UNMIT's transition should be determined by events on
the ground.

In closing, I would like to thank the peacekeepers
of UNMIT, as well as their Timorese partners on the
ground, and international supporters for the continued
dedication to peace and security in Timor-Leste.
Timorese have made great strides towards peace and
stability and will continue to do so with the presence
and commitment of strong international partners.

