Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): I would to thank today's briefers. We listened
carefully to the briefing by the High Representative
for Bosnia and Herzegovina and must once again note
that the information he provided, as well as the report
(S/2019/843, annex) circulated in the Security Council,
do not provide an objective and balanced picture of what
is happening on in the country. There is continuing bias
against Bosnian Serbs and Croats, whose leaders the
High Representative unjustifiably blames for all the
difficulties that the country is facing.

The report mentions only briefly the correct
notion that the main reason for most of the Bosnian
problems are the serious differences in views on the
way forward in development the statehood of Bosnia
and Herzegovina between the three sides - the
Bosnians, Serbs and Croats. In such circumstances, the
efforts of the Office of the High Representative should
focus on promoting a culture of dialogue, providing, if
necessary, good offices to resolve disputes among the
Bosnians themselves.

Instead, almost all the time, the energy and
resources of the Office of the High Representative
are spent on attempts to justify the labelling Bosnian
Serb and Croat leaders as anti-Dayton. In that regard,
we cannot fail to note that both the current Serbian
member of the Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Mr. Dodik, and the President of the Croat Democratic
Union of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Mr. Covie, have
repeatedly publicly stated their commitment to the
peace agreement and regularly confirm that in practice.
It is important to be guided by the Dayton principles of
equal rights for the three constituent peoples of Bosnia
and Herzegovina and to provide the two entities with
broad powers to respectfully conduct a proper dialogue
with their Bosnian partners.

We are concerned about the report's reference to an
alleged setback in the implementation of the 5+2 agenda
established by the Peace Implementation Council
Steering Board, which contains the conditions for
closing the Office of the High Representative. Despite
the difficulties, we do not share this interpretation of the
situation in the country. Rather, it is to further artificial

arguments to preserve the outdated international
protectorate in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
In that regard, we call on our colleagues in the
Security Council and the Steering Committee to
step up their efforts for closing the Office of the
High Representative. A positive example is the
Breko District of Bosnia and Herzegovina, which
has been functioning normally since 2012, when the
Steering Committee supported the decision to freeze
international supervision of the region.

We draw attention to the urgent need for the Office
of the High Representative to respect its mandate.
Mr. Inzko is not authorized to lobby for the European
and Euro-Atlantic integration of Sarajevo, of which
much mention is made in the report. We have spoken
about that more than once.

The new head of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe mission to Bosnia and
Herzegovina hastened to do the same by organizing
a seminar at which she advocated for country's
early accession to NATO. It seems that Bosnia and
Herzegovina has no other concerns but to join NATO
as soon as possible.

Ironically, the European agenda has been
overshadowed. Surely, it is clear that there is no
consensus in the country on that issue. We consider
it unacceptable to ignore the principle of consensus-
based decision-making by the Presidency of Bosnia and
Herzegovina in the area of foreign policy.

I would like to say a few words about the work of
the independent international commissions established
by the Republika Srpska Government to investigate
crimes against all peoples in the Srebrenica region and
against Serbs in Sarajevo in 1991-1995. It is unclear
why the High Representative almost demonizes them.
We assume that their formation is the direct result of
known shortcomings in the work of the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and
the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals, about which the Russian Federation has
repeatedly voiced serious concerns. The conclusions
of the commissions are intended to shed light on many
of the most serious war crimes, which, for inexplicable
reasons, were not dealt with by the ICTY. I would like
to take advantage this opportunity to urge all members
of the Council to read the next report of the Republika
Srpska Government on the situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, which contains important information on
that and other relevant topics.

For our part, we will continue to do our utmost
to ensure that the Serbs, Croats and Bosnians address
all the problems in Bosnia and Herzegovina together,
in line with the robust and balanced Dayton Peace
Agreement, which provides for the equality of the
three constituent peoples, all of whose interests it is
important to represent. Assurances were specifically
given in that regard by Prime Minister Dmitry
Medvedev of the Russian Federation during his meeting
in Belgrade on 19 October with Mr. Milorad Dodik,
member of the Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
We are open to mutually respectful cooperation with
the representatives of all political forces, and we hope
that our joint work with the Bosnians will help to
promote the post-conflict settlement, socioeconomic
development and preservation of cultural diversity in
Bosnia and Herzegovina and in the Balkans as a whole.

