Ms. Banks (New Zealand): New Zealand joins
other Member States in strong condemnation of the
recent terrorist attacks in Mumbai. We repeat here our
condolences to India for the tragic losses it suffered, as
well as to those countries whose nationals were also
affected.

The Mumbai attacks were a reminder that in spite
of some significant successes in recent years, the
scourge of international terrorism persists. There
continue to be too many victims of terrorism in too
many places. New Zealand remains unequivocal in our
condemnation, in the strongest possible terms, of
terrorism in all its forms.

The terrorism we face today is a global
phenomenon and as such requires a coordinated global
response. The spread of terrorist attacks and the
globalization of terrorist networks confirm that no
region or country can be complacent when it comes to
taking measures to combat terrorism. The United
Nations, through the work of the General Assembly,
the Security Council and its Committees and other
bodies, is best placed to coordinate the global response.

New Zealand supported the adoption of the
United Nations Global Strategy on Counter-Terrorism,
and we work together with other Member States,
particularly those in our region, to advance our
collective efforts to implement the Strategy.

Equally important is the need for ongoing
improvements in the implementation of the key
Security Council resolutions on counter-terrorism -
resolutions 1267 (1999), 1373 (2001) and 1540 (2004).
We support the work of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee and the Counter-Terrorism Executive
Directorate in this regard. Next year, we look forward
to welcoming a visit to New Zealand by officials from
the Executive Directorate to discuss implementation of
resolution 1373 (2001) in New Zealand and in our
region.

There is a high level of commonality between the
principles under the four pillars of the Global Strategy
and those that guide New Zealand's approach to
counter-terrorism domestically and within our region.
Domestically, we remain determined to take all
necessary measures to prevent and combat terrorism to
ensure that our country is neither a target nor a source
for terrorist activity. We continue to improve our
legislative, policy and operational capabilities.
Regional bodies too play a key role in coordinating
responses to terrorism. We wish to draw attention to
the statements unequivocally condemning terrorist acts
made by leaders and ministers from the Asia-Pacific
Economic Cooperation economies at their annual
meeting in Lima last month. Leaders reiterated that
terrorist acts can never be justified or excused and
reaffirmed their collective commitment to eliminating
the threat of terrorism.

New Zealand has been actively engaged in our
region, building the capacity of partner countries to
counter the threat of terrorism. We continue to help
Pacific island countries meet the requirements of the
international counter-terrorism agenda. We have been
encouraged by the progress made in improving
counter-terrorism legislation, policy and operational
capability in the Pacific. In South-East Asia, New
Zealand continues to support a number of counter-
terrorism capacity-building initiatives both bilaterally
with key partners and regionally through the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations.

The threat of international terrorism requires a
comprehensive, multilayered and long-term response.
Complementing our wider counter-terrorism efforts,
New Zealand has also funded initiatives aimed at
addressing the conditions that are conducive to the
spread of terrorism through a programme of counter-
radicalization activities.

Thank you, Mr. President, for Croatia's
leadership on this fundamental issue and for the
opportunity presented by today's debate to reaffirm
New Zealand's steadfast commitment to combat and
prevent terrorism.
