Mr. Vitrenko (Ukraine): Ukraine aligns itself with
the statement to be delivered by the observer of the
European Union. I will also make a few remarks in my
national capacity.

Allow me to begin by congratulating the delegation
of the United Kingdom on fulfilling the duties of
the presidency of the Security Council in a highly
professional manner and efficient manner. I would
also like to express our appreciation for your initiative,
Mr. President, to convene today's discussion on
mediation, which is a subject of particular importance
for my delegation.

As a country countering military aggression from
its eastern neighbour, Ukraine firmly believes in the
need to strengthen United Nations capacities in the
sphere ofmediation, as well as to increase the efficiency
of the Organization's respective efforts at all stages of
the conflict cycle.

In the light of the Security Council's primary task
to maintain international peace and security, we share
the view that mediation activities can and should greatly
contribute to reducing and to eliminating threats to
global peace and security. They are an important tool in
preventing conflicts, building up trust and confidence
between the parties to a conflict, reaching peaceful
solutions and consolidating peace agreements.

There is no doubt that, as a universal body enjoying
a unique level of legitimacy, the United Nations must
play as effective a role as possible in preventing
potential conflicts and in addressing ongoing ones. Yet,
as rightly observed by a number of speakers before me,
the potential ofthe United Nations is not being used to its
fullest in that regard. There are always justifications for
why the United Nations does or does not do something.
However, those reasons do not in any way absolve the
United Nations from its responsibilities.

People all over the world, including in Ukraine,
therefore continue to look up to the United Nations in
the hope and expectation that it will step up its efforts
to prevent armed conflicts between States and to ensure
universal compliance with international law.

We note with regret the inability of the United
Nations and the Council to take proper and robust
action in response to the blatant Violation of Ukraine's
sovereignty and territorial integrity. As a result, the
Russian Federation's aggression against Ukraine
continues unabated for the fifth year. Exactly four
years ago today, Russian armed forces launched a
direct attack on Ukrainian military units near Ilovaisk,
which is deep in Ukrainian sovereign territory. That act
of aggression resulted in a treacherous massacre of 366
unarmed Ukrainian soldiers - I repeat 366 unarmed
Ukrainian soldiers - despite a safe passage agreement
negotiated with the Russian Federation.

On the anniversary of that tragic occasion and
with your indulgence, Mr. President, I would like to
commemorate Ukrainians who sacrificed their lives in
Ilovaisk and other battlefields in defence of their land
and democratic values. As Ukraine mourns its heroes
today, we would like the tragedy to serve as another
reminder and warning to the Council and others that
deals and compromises with Moscow are worthless.

Still, Ukraine remains committed to a peaceful
resolution of the conflict. We proceed from the fact
that Article 33 of the Charter of the United Nations
envisages an obligation to settle any international
disputes peacefully and provides a toolkit to do so. In
particular, we initiated proceedings at the International
Court of Justice concerning the application of the
International Convention for the Suppression of
the Financing of Terrorism and of the International
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial
Discrimination. We lodged the declaration pursuant
to article 12 (3) of the Rome Statute to enable the
International Criminal Court to exercise its jurisdiction
over war crimes committed since the beginning of the
military aggression against Ukraine.

Earlier this year we filed a memorial in arbitration
proceedings against the Russian Federation under the
1982 United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea,
since Russia continues to violate Ukraine's sovereign
rights in the Black Sea, the Sea of Azov and the Kerch
Strait. Together with other members of the Joint
Investigation Team, we continue working to ensure
accountability for the downing of Malaysia Airlines
Flight MH-17. All in all, we consider negotiations to be
the go-to method of dispute settlement. Before lodging
the cases mentioned at the various international judicial
organs, we exhausted all avenues of negotiation at
all levels.

In conclusion, my delegation strongly believes that
empowering and strengthening existing international
legal tools for the peaceful settlement of disputes
between States should be one of the international
community's priorities. In that context, a more proactive
approach to mediation on the part of the United Nations
is needed. By shying away from the issues considered
to be too hot or sensitive, the United Nations is doing
nothing less than undermining its own standing. As it
pertains to our region, we are encouraged by the fact
that the Secretary-General has identified the settlement
of conflicts in Europe as one of his priorities for 2018.
We now look forward to a concrete follow-through, with
Article 99 of the Charter being used by the Secretary-
General to the fullest, in particular in relation to the
Russian-Ukrainian armed conflict.

Lastly, contributing to conflict resolution requires
total commitment, combined with a conscious decision
to uncompromisingly persevere in pursuit of a
peaceful settlement, which will further strengthen the
moral authority of the United Nations and make the
Organization more resilient.

