President Guelleh (spoke in French): At the
outset, I wish to express my sincerest congratulations
to Lebanon on its return to the world stage and on
assuming its rightful place among other nations with
pride and dignity. Lebanon has a rich and ancient
cultural heritage. It has been plunged into internal
strife many times in its long history, but has always
been able to overcome adversity with grace and to
emerge stronger and more united. I pay tribute to and
2
commend the courage, creativity and tenacity of your
people, Mr. President.

I wish to thank you and the members of the
Council for this opportunity to present my views on the
situation in the Horn of Africa. Unfortunately, I must
say that conditions in that part of the world remain, at
best, unchanged. Certain current trends, along with
worrisome potential developments, offer the prospect
of heightened crises and a severe decline in the quality
of life for the overwhelming majority of inhabitants in
the Horn. This has seriously jeopardized the region's
short-term prospects and requires immediate and
sustained action by the international community.

My most recent statement to the Council,
delivered on 23 October 2008 (see S/PV.6000), remains
valid today, given the paralysed nature of the situation
and the persistence of the problems facing the region
both then and now. However, thanks to improvements
in microeconomic management and growing
international investor confidence in the continent, the
future appears promising. Against a backdrop of
unparalleled economic growth, the projected damage
resulting from the growing global financial crisis is
expected to be minimal. However, although the global
economy has not fully collapsed, given the spread,
persistence and depth of the crisis, inhabitants of the
Horn, and indeed of Africa more generally, have
experienced a decline in their quality of life over the
past year.

Several factors have contributed to this, afflicting
the poorer countries. These factors include chronic
drought, the still relatively high food and fuel prices,
the increasingly dangerous effects of climate change,
stagnant if not declining official development
assistance that is well below the levels promised, and
declining foreign direct investment in non-fuel sectors
in Africa.

Conflict remains at the forefront of the
adversities confronting Africa. In this regard, again,
against the backdrop of the persistent and violent civil
and regional wars that have taken place over the past
three decades, my statement in 2008 is just as relevant
today. Afflicted as it is by extreme human suffering,
abject poverty and grief, the Horn of Africa has known
more than its share of misfortune, tragedy, dislocation
and destruction, all of which are no longer humanly,
socially, economically and politically sustainable. The
region is bracing for the outcome of the coming
10-36796
Sudanese referendum in January to determine the
future of its people. The result of the referendum will
determine the decisions to be taken concerning the
sharing of resources and the demarcation of the border.

Prospects for the Horn as a whole will greatly
depend on the outcome of the referendum. The
commitment and involvement of the international
community is sine qua non to securing an outcome that
enjoys the support of all parties and the entire country.
At the end of the day, what matters most is that the
people be able to enjoy peaceful and productive lives. I
wish to emphasize that everyone - not only those of
us in the Horn of Africa, but the entire the international
community - has a job to do.

In the Horn of Africa, it remains imperative that
we address the deteriorating and increasingly chaotic
situation in Somalia as it affects neighbouring
countries and, through international piracy, the rest of
the world. Everyone now agrees that, despite all the
enforcement efforts, piracy can be eliminated only by
addressing its root causes, such as insecurity, extreme
poverty and State failure on land.

Given the harsh measures and tactics adopted by
the extremist elements, the Transitional Federal
Government (TFG) remains under considerable pressure
in its quest to govern and administer the country. The
ruthless practices and methods adopted by the
extremists have only alienated most people, who have
been ravaged by famine and civil war over the past two
decades. They have been compelled constantly to flee
violence, live in abject poverty and precarious
conditions in their own country, and cross into
neighbouring countries, adding to the misery of already
overcrowded camps that lack security and resources.

A number of Governments, including my own,
have trained and equipped troops with the aim of
gradually retaking the Somali capital from militants
backed by Al-Qaida. However, the real number of
troops has always been small and fallen far short of the
strength necessary to withstand ongoing assaults, let
alone contain them. Given the very low morale of
troops due to poor conditions of service and lack of
pay, most have failed to perform their duties as
expected. Any Government offensive to uproot the
insurgents from Mogadishu will therefore require a
series of serious prior corrective measures in the
security sector.
10-36796

The sooner we understand that Somalia is in a
tragic situation that deserves our full sympathy and
unwavering and undivided attention, the better. We
have routinely been subject over the years to mind-
numbing statistics about the plight of Somalia's
civilian population. Indiscriminate mortar attacks, the
use of civilians as human shields, the millions living in
makeshift camps on the outskirts of the city, public
beheadings, the amputation of limbs, women being
stoned to death, and so on are but a few examples of
daily human outrages occurring in Somalia. Previously,
it was the warlords who perpetrated such heinous
crimes; now it is the militants, extremists, opportunists
and religious zealots who are running this tragic show.

Daily developments in Somalia do not, of course,
bode well for the survival of the TFG. The international
community seems to be in no hurry to shift its thinking
from the business-as-usual mode to one that would
demonstrate a determination to save the people of
Somalia from mayhem, destruction and slow death. It
is against this backdrop of despair, hopelessness and
the imminent demise of the TFG that I formulate the
following scenario for consideration and action by the
international community.

First, we are deeply disturbed at the continuing
internal political squabbles that threaten the very
existence of the TFG. The Intergovernmental Authority
on Development, well-meaning Governments and
organizations, and the wider international community
must step in to intervene before matters get out of
hand. That is both crucial and urgent. Pressure must be
brought to bear now, without further delay, on the
major divisive elements within the TFG. They must be
warned in no uncertain terms that they cannot continue
to undermine the Government.

Secondly, we must also understand that the TFG's
authority is fast shrinking with the advances being
made every day by insurgents throughout the country.
It is no secret that the TFG controls only a few blocks
in Mogadishu, and that thanks largely to the African
Union Mission in Somalia. This is no doubt a
dangerous, senseless and an unsustainable situation.
Let us imagine for a moment a city of over 2 million
people under siege by several militias and marauding
fanatical gangs, while the legitimate Government has
been rendered politically and militarily irrelevant and
inconsequential.
3

The only way we can hope to bring a semblance
of peace and security to Somalia is first and foremost
to recognize and accept the inevitable. In order to end
two decades of civil war, we need to start where it all
began - in Mogadishu. To that end, I would ask
Council members to put aside all the rhetoric,
assumptions, analyses, conditionalities, reticence and
indifference that long pervaded the Somali dossier. Let
us decide once and for all, in the absence of other
options, to clear Mogadishu and its surroundings of
extremist militias in order to secure the capital, restore
law and order, and ensure a functioning Government
that will gradually restore all vital services, while
United Nations agencies and non-governmental
organizations begin establishing their presence in the
capital.

Many will no doubt be sceptical, but let us face
the reality that, without capturing or prevailing in
Mogadishu, I cannot see how we can avert the
possibility of Somalia plunging into an avoidable
disintegration. Moreover, Mogadishu's liberation
would give the Government a significant solid foothold
for returning the entire country to its control. This
would be the first but most important step in a series of
efforts leading to the establishment of a sound
Government able to expand its reach and authority
across the country. What I call for will require a
dynamic Change in the thinking and planning of the
Security Council and the Secretariat. It will need a
gigantic shift from the status quo to a resolute
determination to resuscitate Somalia once and forever.

All agree that reconciliation and political
compromises must continue to be aggressively pursued
in Somalia at all times. However, it is fair to say that
the current explosive situation in the country is not,
strictly speaking, due to lack of consensus,
inclusiveness or peace initiatives. In fact, the Somalis
have become allergic to the terms "peace process" and
"reconciliation". They have heard them all too often.
What, then, are the insurgents fighting for? Without a
doubt, their goal is to topple the internationally
recognized weak TFG because that will enable groups
linked to Al-Qaida to impose their brand of governance
throughout central and southern Somalia before
spreading to other relatively stable parts of the country,
threatening peace and security in the entire region.

The unfolding tragedy in Somalia is not that of
the Somalis and the countries of the region alone;
rather, it is of concern to us all. That war-torn country's
predicament can no longer be shunned, postponed or
minimized. We cannot remain indifferent. Helping
Somalia to defend and protect itself is our
responsibility and an obligation we cannot shirk or
postpone under any pretext. It is time for that lingering
reticence to give way to proactive and pragmatic
engagement in Somalia in order to achieve enduring
peace, security and stability.

As members of the Security Council are aware,
my country has always actively facilitated and
supported the many ongoing efforts against the threat
of piracy in the Gulf of Aden and beyond. While piracy
is yet to be completely eliminated, the focused and
intense collaboration of the world's naval forces is
helping to effectively combat the attractiveness and
rewards of this scourge. The efforts to eliminate piracy
have undoubtedly helped reduce it in the Gulf of Aden
and have extended into the wider Indian Ocean.

The impact of two recent developments is worth
noting. The first was the Security Council's recent
adoption of resolution 1851 (2008), authorizing anti-
piracy measures on land with the aim of severely
crippling the pirates' capacities. The other was the
capture of a pirate base by one of the main rebel groups
fighting for control of the country. Despite the rebel
group's assertions, no one is sure at this stage whether
it will fight piracy or join it, given that activity's
lucrative returns. Paradoxically, piracy has brought
increased attention to the country's dire conditions of
lawlessness, joblessness and political paralysis.

Two years ago, Eritrea decided one fine day that
it was time to drag Djibouti into the conflict in the
Horn of Africa. Eritrea's logic was that no country
should remain immune to conflict; hence its blatant
aggression against my country's territorial integrity.
The military clashes in June 2008 and the ensuing
bloodshed resulted in deaths, injuries and prisoners
taken on both sides, as well as the occupation of Ras
Doumeira and Doumeira Island.

The unanimous condemnation of Eritrea by the
international community, including the Security
Council, insisted on the immediate cessation of
hostilities and the withdrawal of forces to the status
quo ante. My country heeded that call and withdrew its
forces accordingly. To this day, Eritrea's response has
been to deny the very existence of a military
confrontation, to reject any withdrawal and to condemn
the Security Council's swift action of 12 June 2008.

As the Council may recall, in the ensuing two
years we have been intensively involved with all
subregional, regional and international organizations
with the aim of redressing, Via an immediate
withdrawal, the illegal and unprovoked occupation of
my country. In this respect, my country has never
wavered in its devotion to and faith in the Charter of
the United Nations. This is the second time in two
years that I have addressed the Council about the
occupation of my territory. My Prime Minister has
done likewise.

This demonstrates the fact that Eritrea's reckless
incursion remains our greatest national security concern.
Indeed, we have been vindicated by the Council's
successive actions involving the fact-finding mission's
report (S/2008/602), its statements and resolutions.
Those include in particular resolution 1907 (2009) of
23 September 2009, which imposed sanctions on Eritrea
for its misguided and contemptuous rejection of the
Council's demands that it end its occupation and
engage in serious dialogue and diplomatic efforts
leading to a mutually acceptable settlement of the
border conflict. The resolution also demands, in
paragraph 4, that Eritrea make available information
pertaining to Djiboutian combatants missing in action
since the clashes of 10 to 12 June 2008, so that those
concerned may ascertain the presence and condition of
Djiboutian prisoners of war.

Let me state in the clearest terms before this body
that my country's paramount interest is to live in peace
with its neighbours while pursuing internal stability
and economic growth. We have no territorial ambitions
other than to live within secure borders and to
safeguard our sovereignty and territorial integrity. It
was against this backdrop that we welcomed the long-
awaited visit to Asmara by the Security Council
sanctions Committee on Somalia and Eritrea. We had
truly hoped that Eritrea, having finally accepted that
Visit, would make the most of such an important
encounter by opening sincere discussions with all
parties concerned and beginning to engage positively
with a genuine desire for a lasting settlement of all
outstanding issues.

To our great surprise, however, the latest position
paper submitted by Eritrea to the Chairman of the
sanctions Committee contains the usual litany of
unsubstantiated charges, false allegations and denials.
It would appear that, rather than take advantage of this
long-awaited meeting to address key issues raised in

resolutions 1844 (2008) and 1907 (2009), Eritrea chose
instead to pursue a strategy of repackaging its familiar,
obsolete demagoguery and to deliberately squander a
golden opportunity. Clearly, its attitude towards the
Council and its neighbours displays cynicism and
contempt, always with the intent to distort known facts,
distract attention, defer action and create confusion.

None of this, I am sure, will convince a wary and
well-informed Council, some of whose members are
first-hand witnesses to the facts and actions relevant to
this matter. I must seriously caution against any notion
that Eritrea is changing or cooperating following the
committee's Visit to Asmara. We believe that it would
be truly premature, indeed unwarranted, to further
confuse the goodwill that may have been displayed
during the visit with Eritrea's unbending and unaltered
positions on the entire range of outstanding issues. Not
one iota of its obligations under the Council's
resolutions has been fulfilled or is even being considered
for implementation. Let us not rush to judgment, or we
will simply be overstating a non-existent and contrived
good will on the part of Eritrea. Eritrea has not
changed and has no intention of doing so. What we see
is all simply a Charade.

While we are all focused, as we should be, on
Eritrea's occupation of parts of my territory, I wish to
share with the Council some other disturbing new
developments. For almost a year, Eritrea has conducted
a systematic campaign to destabilize my country by
training infiltrators who sabotage infrastructure and
target national events in rural and urban areas in order
to cause fear and friction. We have been very vigilant
to this real, ongoing threat, which has already been
carried out within my country. I am happy to report
that, among the many infiltrators we have recently
captured, is the leader of this band of saboteurs.

It will be recalled that resolution 1907 (2009)
underscored the many ways in which Eritrea is
undermining its neighbours, including by harbouring,
financing, supporting, organizing, training and inciting
individuals or groups to perpetrate acts of violence or
terrorist acts that seek to destabilize the region, and in
particular to incite violence and civil strife in Djibouti.
I urge members of the Council to come to grips with
the wider implications of Eritrea's intransigence and
increasing violence. The escalating tensions and
conflicts and the breakdown of law and order so
widespread in the Horn of Africa could be merely a
prelude to a much worse situation unless their many
causes are adequately and seriously addressed.

