Mr. Osman (Somalia): At the outset, I would like to
offer my prayers and heartfelt condolences to the families
and loved ones of the victims in today's terrorist attacks
in Mogadishu in this holy month of Ramadan, which
injured or took the lives of innocent civilians, including
my mentor, former Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Somalia and Senior Advisor to the Minister for Foreign
Affairs, His Excellency Mr. Hussein Elabe Fahiye. We
are now more determined than ever to fight the menace
of faceless borderless international terrorists.

Since this is the first time that I take the floor this
month, Mr. President, allow me to extend my heartfelt
congratulations on your assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council for the month of May. We are
confident in your able leadership, Sir, and wish you
every success in fulfilling your mandate.

I would like to take this opportunity to thank my
colleagues, the Deputy Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Somalia, Mr. Raisedon Zenenga,
and the Special Representative of the African Union
Commission Chairperson for Somalia and Head of
the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM),
Ambassador Francisco Madeira, for their long-standing
constructive contributions to peace and security in
Somalia. I would also like to acknowledge Ms. Ursula
Mueller, Assistant Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs, for her briefing this afternoon.

We take note of the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2019/393) and continue to renew our support for
and full cooperation with the Secretary-General in
this regard.

Even though it has only been just over two
years since the election of President Mohamed
Abdullahi Mohamed Farmajo, Somalia has witnessed
transformational progress. Thanks to its strong political
will, Somalia is on track to fulfil the key benchmarks
it has set for itself, which is gradually bearing the
fruits of prosperity and stability for all Somalis. We
are encouraged by key positive developments such as
collecting record tax revenues through automation and
enhanced compliance, which is helping us to meet our
economic reform goals.

However, there is a cost to any reform, and though
we have managed it to the best of our abilities, the
Government has since lost some political capital in the
ongoing reform process. It is with continued resolve
and a robust outlook that the Government has taken
on the ambitious reform agenda it set for the security
sector. We have worked tirelessly to ensure that all our
officers and other military personnel are biometrically
registered as part of the electronic payroll reform to
eliminate corruption and ensure that they are paid
on time, as has been the case for the past 25 months.
This reform process will enhance the capability of the
Somali National Army operationally and in terms of
the implementation of the ambitious national security
architecture and transition plan. To answer the question
raised by my colleague, the Ambassador of Germany,
regarding the lessons learned from the Bariire operation,
if the Somali forces are properly funded, equipped and
trained, they are capable of fulfilling their duties.

Nevertheless, Al-Shabaab continues to be a threat
undermining our efforts to deliver security. As part of
the transition process, we have made significant gains
against Al-Shabaab in the past eight weeks, having
retaken from Al-Shabaab control the strategic towns of
Sabiid and Bariire in the Lower Shabelle region.

I would like to express my gratitude to countries
that have contributed troops to AMISOM. for their
commitment and sacrifices. The deployment of their
troops has created a space for the political process
and for humanitarian-relief corridors. But we cannot
effectively implement the transition plan with one
hand tied to our back owing to the long-standing arms
embargo. Regrettably, the decisions made here at the
Security Council and at United Nations Headquarters
continue to negatively affect the military capabilities
of our security forces in the fight against such terrorist
groups as Al-Shabaab, which gives comparative
advantage to Al-Shabaab.

In Somalia, we have shown that, while exercising
pragmatism and political maturity, contentious and
sensitive issues can be debated. In the last month,
the Federal Government of Somalia has succeeded
in passing a petroleum bill in the Lower House that
incorporates a revenue-sharing formula agreed by the
Federal Government and the federal member states. In
addition, the Prime Minister's Cabinet approved a new
draft election law, which is an important step in the
political process towards holding elections. The Federal
Government is clearly committed to the road map on
inclusive politics, which is crucial to sustaining peace
and preventing conflict.

The Somali Government remains fully committed
to the promotion of human rights and the realization of
equality for all its citizens. Despite the great challenges
that we face, combined with a drastic reduction in
assistance in the area of human rights promotion to
less than half of what it has been in the last two years,
the Government of Somalia has taken significant
steps towards promoting human rights values with
specific objectives, including reducing violence against
women through Somalia's first dedicated legislation on
sexual offences, which was unanimously approved by
Cabinet in May 2018. On 2 October 2018, the Federal
Government of Somalia signed the United Nations
Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities,
and since then, the Somali Parliament ratified it. A bill
for the establishment of a national disability agency
was also passed in December 2018, and the national
disability law is being drafted.

Investing in youth is the most effective way to build
the Somali nation and counter the ideology of violent
extremist groups such as Al-Shabaab. As Secretary-
General Guterres once said, "I do not agree that young
people are the leaders of tomorrow. More and more, they
are the leaders of today". Our young men and women
have been the leaders of our change throughout our
history. Therefore, today, more than ever, we need to
equip our youth with the skills required in sectors of high
growth and high employment potential. We encourage
United Nations agencies to train and recruit locally
in order to give hope and opportunity to our capable
young population in their nation-building process.

I would like to turn the attention of the Council
to the recurring humanitarian situation in my country,
which, for the past few years, has continued to be of
concern. As the Secretary-General's report correctly
states, and as the Assistant Secretary-General has
reported in her briefing before the Security Council
today, limited rainfall in the past three months has
compounded existing dry conditions, just as it did last
year, with as many 3.4 million people facing crisis
levels of food insecurity as a result of water shortages
and deteriorating crop yields, according to United
Nations specialized agencies,.

We strongly believe the humanitarian situation
must be addressed as a matter of urgency to avert a
humanitarian catastrophe. However, we must also invest
in implementing and evaluating long-term solutions that
put our people on the path to sustainable development.
By taking a comprehensive, prevention-oriented
approach, we can together strengthen the nexus between
humanitarian and development assistance.

The Federal Government of Somalia is on an
upward trajectory and has made significant strides in
a number of critical areas. Extraordinary challenges
remain as Somalia enters a critical juncture of
State-building, federalization and democratization. The
Federal Government of Somalia would like to reiterate
its commitment to maintaining accelerated progress on
processes involved in implementing the road maps. We
welcome the United Nations commitment to supporting
the Federal Government in its efforts to achieve peace,
stability and sustainable development for all Somalis.

The Federal Government of Somalia is confident
that the recently established relations of mutual respect
and cooperation will be stronger in deepening its long-
standing partnership with the United Nations so as
to enable it to deliver on its mandate to support the
Federal Republic of Somalia in its peacebuilding and
State-building efforts.

The Federal Government of Somalia would like
to underscore that it has strengthened its national
institutions and national capacities that will bring about
lasting peace and development. We urge our partners
to work closely and execute Federal Government-led
policies, under the Federal Government's mandated
bodies and institutions, in order to engender greater
ownership and leadership.

Lastly, the Federal Government would like to thank
the Secretary-General for his able leadership and the
Security Council for its continued support to Somalia.

