Mr. Cengizer (Turkey): Only two days before the
convening of this Security Council meeting, which
deals with the international implications of modern
forms of terrorism, a gruesome terrorist attack took
place in the Republic of Korea. At the outset, therefore,
I would like to extend our heartfelt condolences to the
victims and convey the deepest sympathies of the
Turkish people to the bereaved people of that friendly
nation.

I also wish to congratulate our close friend
Germany on successfully guiding the work of the
Security Council during a very critical period, when
diplomacy must show itself to be the art of conciliation
that it in fact is and when we must all bring to the fore
our best traditions.
Unfortunately, acts of cowardice like the most
recent one that took the lives of more than 120
innocent people resonate throughout the world, and, in
a much undesired and equally twisted way, increase our
awareness that, regardless of the many shapes that it
cleverly assumes, terrorism in our time has indeed
become a burning global issue that urgently requires
greater and more effective international cooperation.

In this last incident, for instance, we witnessed
how easy it has become to acquire lethal weaponry and
carry it into the midst of hundreds of people. While the
Korean authorities were not able to readily connect the
motivations of the terrorist to yet another "higher
cause", what he achieved laid bare the deadly degree of
sophistication that terrorists have reached today,
whether they act individually or as part of a group.

I am sure that every sane person in the world is
wondering what ominous developments can possibly be
taking place right now in many a clandestine quarter at
a time when modern technological devices could end
up in the hands of individuals or groups with terrorist
intentions.

Let me say at this juncture that Turkey has
aligned itself with the European Union statement to be
made shortly by the representative of Greece. Yet,
given the relevance of the Turkish experience, and also
the imminent bearing that this matter has on current
events, I am taking the floor with a View to further
stressing a number of points.

I have already stressed one, namely that we
urgently require greater and more effective
international cooperation in combating terrorism.
Indeed, we are dismayed to see that there are those who
still equivocate when it comes to fully and completely
denouncing terrorism. Whatever the merits of the need
to address the so-called root causes of terrorism, it
should be amply clear beforehand that we cannot start
to grade and arrange in some neat order the forms of
terrorism; nor can we rightfully grasp the motivations
behind terrorism. We cannot come up with degrees of
leniency towards terrorism. We cannot sensibly talk
about "better terrorisms", because terrorism presumes
violence, and terrorists are prepared to do everything in
their power to achieve it. We have been saying that all
along.

Today, Turkey does not doubt that the nature of
the threat faced by the world remains unchanged. The
terrorist attacks in Bali, Mombassa and Bogota confirm
that sustained long-term action, solidarity among
nations and concerted international action are only a
few of the basic ingredients that we continue to require
today in our fight against this scourge.

Ultimately, let us not temper our resolve with
grief and regret. Let us not allow endless theorizing to
hijack the practicalities of our common defence against
this enemy of mankind and civilization. We have been
saying that all along. Let us now see the need for
strengthened mutual respect so that we can in all
sincerity pool the timeless wisdom of the East and of
the West. Let us understand, and help everyone
comprehend, that no higher cause can benefit from acts
of terrorism.

No longer does terrorism only strike at the very
core of democracy and civil society; no longer does
terrorism only hamper social and economic
development. It does more than that. It has started to
kill the very essence of civilization. It has started to
repudiate the fundamental tenets and founding
principles of civilizations the world over. Terrorists, in
fact, disown the causes for which they purport to speak
and act. In effect, they make their so-called higher
causes ignominious causes.

The world has had more than enough. The world
has also had enough shoddy intellectualism. The world
has had enough swayers, false prophets and spin
doctors, all condoning, in one way or another, the
inducement of fear and revulsion in masses of innocent
people as a viable and genuine political method - and
more often than not influencing States in that regard.

When we look into the history of terrorism, we
clearly see that whenever political considerations exalt
the idea of righteous murder, the basic truth of cold-
blooded murder is immediately adulterated. Such was
the case yesterday; it still is today. There is no way of
getting around that basic fact - especially when
confronted by a slain body.

That is why States should refrain from
encouraging, assisting, facilitating and tolerating
terrorist activities in their territory. Given the technical
prowess of modern-day terrorists, and the capabilities
of modern technology, as well as the relative ease of
communications, transportation and border crossings,
abetting terrorist groups has now become tantamount to
knowingly organizing terrorist groups.

In a world where terrorists can plan and operate
on a global scale, establishing institutionalized
cooperation among States and ensuring the smooth
working of the relevant international conventions are
stark priorities. Likewise, States should reinstate
mechanisms to follow the flow of funds that are often
coercively generated and controlled by suspected or
overtly radical groups. Indeed, the nexus of money-
laundering, arms trafficking and drug trafficking,
which we so often encounter whenever we delve into
the intricacies of worldwide networking among
criminal and terrorist groups, cannot be allowed to
fester so as to form part of yet another culture of
impunity.

There is every reason for strengthened
international cooperation, and we should take forthwith
the necessary steps in that direction. No longer should
terrorists groups be able to have such easy access to
logistical means and instruments.

Last but not least, Turkey attaches the utmost
importance to current work at the United Nations and
supports the full and complete implementation of
Security Council resolutions 1368 (2001), 1373 (2001)
and others, which together constitute a solid framework
for our Organization to play a role befitting its ideals
and its unique universality. They should be recognized
in their totality as an important breakthrough in our
common struggle against terrorism. We also welcome
the declaration annexed to Security Council resolution
1456 (2003) of 20 January, reaffirming the seriousness
of the threat posed by terrorist acts and calling for
further cooperation.

We highly commend the work of the Counter-
Terrorism Committee and welcome its initiative to hold
a special meeting with international, regional and
subregional organizations on 7 March. We are grateful
to its Chairman, Sir Jeremy Greenstock.

Turkey, a party to all 12 international United
Nations conventions on this subject, looks forward to
further progress in the Sixth Committee of the General
Assembly with regard to a draft comprehensive
convention against international terrorism and on a
draft international convention on the suppression of
nuclear terrorism. They will complement the legal
infrastructure that is in the making today.

I wish to conclude by calling upon all States to
fully implement the bilateral, regional and multilateral
anti-terrorist conventions to which they are parties. I
also call upon those States that have not yet done so to
become parties to the anti-terrorist conventions adopted
under the auspices of this Organization.

Indeed, we must ensure that there is no safe
haven for terrorists and resist all tendencies to entertain
any remaining temptation in that regard.

