Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I thank
you, Madam President, for convening this debate.
I welcome the powerful contributions of Under-
Secretary-General Valerie Amos, United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees Antonio Guterres, Special
Envoy Angelina Jolie Pitt, and Executive Director
Ertharin Cousin. I am particularly pleased that we are
holding this meeting in an open format, so that we
can bring greater profile to the catastrophe facing the
Syrian people and the region.

The plight of people displaced in Syria and the
region is the greatest humanitarian crisis of our day.
Four years of fighting have left Syrians among the
poorest, most vulnerable people in the world. At the root
of their suffering is Al-Assad's tyranny, exacerbated
more recently by the barbarity of the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) and other terrorist
groups. In the past four years, we have also seen great
generosity - particularly from countries that have
become a safe haven for refugees: Jordan, Iraq, Egypt,
Lebanon and Turkey. I will focus my statement today
on three ways that we can support these countries and
the refugees who have found shelter in them.

First, we must address the immediate financial
requirements of humanitarian agencies and Governments
in the region. Funding is simply not keeping pace with
needs. There are almost 4 million Syrian refugees in
the region. All of them needed access to water, food,
sanitation and shelter when they arrived and many need
ongoing support. I want to pay tribute to the work of
host Governments, to the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees, to UNICEF, the
World Food Programme and other agencies assisting
the immediate needs of the displaced. The $3.6 billion
raised in Kuwait is a lifeline for such work and we are
grateful for Kuwait's leadership.

The United Kingdom is proud to have contributed
$1.2 billion in recent years for the humanitarian crisis,
but more is needed. Donors must disburse their pledges
promptly to ensure that funds reach the agencies
helping those most in need. We must also recognize the
enormous strain that is being placed on the resources
of those accepting refugees. The United Kingdom is
helping to build capacity in the education sector and
supporting thedelivery of health and municipal services
in Jordan. We call on all members to lend their expertise
to Governments in the region.

Secondly, we must do all we can to help those who
remain in Syria and work together to bring peace to
the country so that refugees can one day return. No
one here will underestimate the scale of that challenge.
Al-Assad's brutality knows no bounds and shows no
signs of abating. One hundred years on from the first
use of chemical weapons, Al-Assad stands alone in his
use of chlorine as a weapon against civilians. Shelling
and barrel bombs continue to be weapons of choice
and hundreds of thousands of Syrians remain under
siege, deprived of basic services and food. Camps in
Yarmouk, which remains besieged by Al-Assad, and
Deir ez-Zor now lie exposed to the barbarism of ISIL.
Those responsible must be held to account and the
situation in Syria must be referred to the International
Criminal Court.

We must do all we can to alleviate the suffering of
those remaining in Syria. We call for all sides to the
conflict to respect international humanitarian law. They
must ensure free, unimpeded access for humanitarian
agencies to evacuate the wounded and provide vital
assistance to all those in need. We encourage the United
Nations humanitarian agencies and their partners to
scale up humanitarian deliveries to besieged areas,
including through cross-border routes, and we should
look seriously at the further ideas that Valerie Amos set
out earlier today.

The only sustainable chance of ending the
humanitarian crisis lies in a negotiated political
solution by mutual agreement of the Syrian parties
and supported by the international community. Special
Representative Staffan de Mistura continues to have our
strong support and we look forward to his briefing this
afternoon. But we must be realistic about the timescale
of political change, so, thirdly, we should consider what
long-term support we can offer the region. Establishing
refugees' self-sufficiency, supporting their education
and fostering social cohesion with host communities
are important steps. As Antonio Guterres pointed out,
new financing instruments to support middle-income
countries affected by conflict should also be explored.

The United Kingdom is working with its partners
on more efficient and cost-effective projects. In Jordan
we have invested resources in water supply and waste
water infrastructure, mindful that it will not only
provide a more cost-effective means of supporting
refugees in the medium term, but also a longer-lasting
asset for Jordan in the long term. The United Kingdom
also strongly supports the No Lost Generation initiative
that can provide sustainable, long-term education and
protection to children. We have given $140 million in
support as we recognize that the futures of 5 million
Syrian children are at stake. We call on all members to
work with host countries to support access to services
for refugees and ensure a durable settlement solution.

Today is my final day as the United Kingdom's
Permanent Representative to the United Nations. I
want to thank all members past and present for their
cooperation, their advice and their support over the
past five and a half years. But it is sadly fitting that
I make my last statement to the Council on the tragic
situation in Syria. It is the greatest regret of my time in
New York that we in the Council have failed to end the
fighting and stop the humanitarian catastrophe in the
region.

In the past four years, I have seen four vetoes that
have prevented the Council from taking meaningful
action on Syria. And yet, I have also seen glimpses
of what we can achieve when we are united. Three
resolutions last year helped to secure access to
thousands of those in need from across international
borders. It can be done, but only if we put aside our
narrow, national interests for the sake of the greater
good and the future of the Syrian people. It is this unity
of purpose that all Council members will all need to
draw on in the coming months and I wish them every
success in their efforts.

