Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): We welcome Mr. Stef Blok, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the Netherlands, to New York.
We take this opportunity to congratulate him for the
commendable presidency of the Netherlands during the
month of March.

The Republic of Equatorial Guinea is grateful for
the holding of this informative meeting, which enables
us to once again assess humanitarian resolution 2401
(2018), which we approved one month ago. We thank
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs
Mark Lowcock, who, as he always does, has just given
us a very informative and detailed briefing on the
developments on the ground in Syria.

The 30-day ceasefire throughout Syria, established
under resolution 2401 (2018) in order to carry out
humanitarian operations, has expired. Despite the
diplomatic efforts of the United Nations team in Syria,
violence has increased in eastern Ghouta, in Damascus,
in Idlib and in Afrin, where there is an ongoing Turkish
military offensive. Daily air strikes and bombardments
have increased, including in residential areas, among
Government forces, opposition forces and non-State
armed groups, making it difficult to ensure the
protection of all civilians and the immediate, secure
and sustained provision of humanitarian aid. That
excessive resurgence of violence, orchestrated by
the various parties, only serves to exacerbate and
aggravate the already grim humanitarian situation in
those conflict zones.

As we have reiterated, the solution to the
humanitarian crisis in Syria is tightly linked with a
ceasefire. The prolongation of the conflict can only
further aggravate the tragic humanitarian situation,
which in turn creates greater instability and negatively
affects neighbouring countries that take in the millions
of refugees fleeing the war.

As the Secretary-General underlines in his
20 March report:

"Our common objective" - and one of high
priority - "should be to alleviate and end the
suffering of the Syrian people. What the Syrian
people need immediately has been made abundantly
clear and affirmed in resolution 2401 (2018).
Civilians need a cessation of hostilities, protection,
access to basic goods and services" - and access
to humanitarian and sanitary assistance - "and an
end to sieges." (S/2018/243, para. 48)
All parties involved in the Syrian crisis must
accept that none of them can achieve a military victory.
Government forces, opposition forces and armed
groups must accept that no matter how much death and
destruction they cause in their country, there will be no
victor but rather one single loser - the Syrian people.
Similarly, national parties and international partners
that have significant political and geostrategic interests
and that have the capacity to exercise their influence
on their respective allies must redouble their efforts
and political commitments in order to bring sustainable
peace and stability to the country. Any party that
insists on political red lines that block the necessary
commitments must also consider the setback caused by
the loss of innocent human lives.

It is evident that the Council has not entirely reached
its goal by unanimously adopting resolution 2401
(2018). The Republic of Equatorial Guinea will support
any humanitarian initiative that seeks to definitively
put an end to the suffering of the Syrian people.

In conclusion, I renew the tribute of the Republic
of Equatorial Guinea to Mr. Lowcock and to the entire
humanitarian team of the United Nations for their noble
and tireless work in Syria to provide relief to the Syrian
people living through a humanitarian catastrophe.

