President Torrijos (spoke in Spanish): Panama
welcomes this initiative to devote a meeting of the
Security Council to mediation and settlement of
disputes. This Organization was created specifically to
ensure that the types of conflict that have devastated
entire continents be addressed in a forum where they
could be overcome. On many occasions, the United
Nations in general and the Security Council in
particular have served only as a podium to denounce an
injustice or as an echo chamber so that the world
becomes aware of situations that jeopardize
international peace and security. On other occasions,
the United Nations has spoken out, has urged parties to
reach agreement and has even imposed sanctions on
those countries that it considers responsible for
violating the Charter of the Organization.

On far fewer occasions, the United Nations has
assumed the role of mediator to resolve conflicts. This
was my country's experience. Throughout almost all of
the twentieth century, the United States maintained a
colonial enclave in Panama. In 1973, the Security
Council met for the second and last time outside of
Headquarters in order to convene a meeting in the
capital city of Panama. We have no doubt whatsoever
that this event raised the world's awareness of the need
to put an end to a situation that was in every regard
unjust and contrary to the principles enshrined in the
Organization's Charter. However, the United Nations
restricted itself to a listening role, and the draft
resolution that invited the parties to reach an agreement
was vetoed. Panama and the United States found other
means of negotiation and reached an agreement that
allowed my country to regain sovereignty over all of its
territory and to assume administration of the Panama
Canal on the 31 December 1999.

I underscore this fact, although it is well known,
as it is an example of how the United Nations could
have acted as a mediator rather than only the recipient
of our grievances and requests. Many other conflicts
could have been avoided and many lives could have
been saved had there been a mechanism for this
Organization to mediate effectively. Naturally, one
should recall that the strength of mediation does not lie
in the design or implementation of mechanisms but
rather in the political resolve of parties to reach
agreements. It is also true, however, that parties to a
conflict are more disposed to mediation if effective
mechanisms are in place. In other words, political will
and effective mechanisms are two mutually reinforcing
elements: when there is greater resolve, the
mechanisms will be more effective and when the
mechanisms are more effective, then there will be
greater political will to use them. Therefore, Panama
calls on the Member States of the United Nations and,
in particular, on the members of the Security Council,
to harness their efforts to reinforce this Organization's
role as a mediator and thus to serve fully meet the
purpose for which it was created 63 years ago.

