Mr. Al-Bader (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): The
delegation of Qatar would like to express its
appreciation to you, Mr. President, on this last day of
your presidency of the Security Council for this month.
The Council has been seized with questions of extreme
importance to humankind, including those relating to
the maintenance of international peace and security. It
is our hope that, having listened to our conscience, we
will have succeeded in addressing those questions.

Since the very first days of our membership in the
Security Council, our delegation has consistently
upheld the provisions of the United Nations Charter
and the tenets of international law, while giving due
regard to political considerations, when addressing all
the questions put before the Council, including the
issue of Darfur. With the adoption of today's
resolution, the issue of Darfur has now reached a
drastic turning point, and we hope that we will be able
to deal with it successfully.

For our part, we would have preferred a different
approach to this sensitive issue. Due regard should
have been taken of the numerous aspects and
underlying concrete principles of international practice
before adopting a resolution that will have a bearing on
the sovereignty of the Sudan, a Member State of the
United Nations. More efforts should have been made
on the political front to prepare the ground for Sudan's
voluntary consent to expanding the mandate of United
Nations forces and increasing their strength and
deploying them to Darfur, a region we know is fraught
with tension.

Nevertheless, we also know that the region has
undergone many positive developments since the
signing of the Darfur Peace Agreement (DPA), last
May. We also know that, in a commendable gesture,
the Government of the Sudan submitted a multifaceted
plan to address the situation in Darfur. Regrettably, the
Council did not provide the Government of the Sudan
with its response to the plan, nor has it submitted any
explicit proposals by way of amendments, despite the
fact that the plan included many aspects that have been
deemed positive by the relevant department of the
United Nations Secretariat. Nor were enough efforts
made to engage the Sudan instead of pressuring it into
approving the resolution that the Council has now
adopted. As far as we know, consent is voluntary.

We would have preferred to provide financial and
logistical support to the African Union Mission in the
Sudan (AMIS) to enable it to complete its mandate,
which it has, for the most part, carried out honourably
and commendably. AMIS has gained considerable
experience in dealing with the situation in Darfur. The
African Union should be proud of its ability to resolve
the problems facing its member States. Support for
AMIS has often met with repeated calls to end the
Mission's deployment in Darfur and to replace it with
international forces.

We had hoped that the normalization of relations
between the Sudan and Chad would be positively
viewed. In addition, the improvement in the relations
between the Sudan and Eritrea should have been
deemed a step forward. However, statements made in
certain quarters have continued to describe the
situation as plummeting into further deterioration.

The League of Arab States, the Organization of
the Islamic Conference and the Government of the
Sudan all welcomed the idea of convening of an open
Security Council meeting last week. They desired to
postpone such a meeting only to enable the
stakeholders to attend at a high level. That position was
not well received and the request to postpone the
meeting was declined. That put the draft resolution at a
disadvantage when the Council failed to meet as
requested. My delegation has been keen to preserve the
unity and consistency of the Council, and that is why
we requested that the discussion on any draft resolution
be postponed until all of those elements were in place.
However, the draft resolution's sponsors, for whom we
have the utmost respect, had a political point of View
requiring its speedy adoption.

In the light of the above, the delegation of Qatar
could not support the resolution, given its
repercussions and the modalities of its
implementation- which we understand to be one of
the tasks entrusted to the Security Council - in the

prevailing political atmosphere. Nevertheless, we shall,
in cooperation with our Council colleagues, continue to
address these tasks with professionalism, although we
know how difficult they will be.

