Mr. Kamau (Kenya): At the outset, let me
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
January and for having organized this important debate.
It is indeed good to see you presiding over this meeting.
This debate is important to the Security Council, which
is itself a creation of the aftermath of a major world
war.

You, Sir, have invited Member States to reflect
on the deeper causes of war and the search for a
permanent peace. This debate is even more timely in a
changing international system characterized by rising
levels of international economic interdependence
and environmental scarcity, as well as political
and inter-State tensions. Those challenges raise the
likelihood of more complex transnational conflicts and
call for a paradigm shift from the traditional conflict-
mitigation models and war-prevention tools.

Seventy years on from the creation of the United
Nations, a large percentage of the budget of the
Organization is still spent on peacekeeping. That is due
to endemic wars, even as more urgent needs for human
development abound. Looking back at modern history,
we see that, since the dark era of the transatlantic slave
trade, which itself resulted in a civil war, through
colonialism, the two World Wars and the Cold War era,
war has been a permanent spectre and feature ofhuman
history. The only difference has been the immediate
causes, nature and intensity of the various wars. The
common thread is, however, that conflict occurs in
human society owing to structural inequalities and
social divisions, some of which are historic, religious,
cultural, sociopolitical or economic in nature, including
unresolved issues or memories of past conflicts.

While diplomats, civil society actors and
politicians grapple with conflict mediation, resolution
and peacebuilding, scholars on the other hand are
trying to make progress towards the development of
more sophisticated and perhaps more useful theories on
the causes and prevention of war. However, the deep-
seated structural causes of conflict in human society
remain. Today's modern means of information and
communication technologies, especially television
and the Internet, make economic, social and cultural
inequalities and abuses obvious to everyone, be they
citizens of rich countries or those in the developing
world. That often gives rise to both inter-State and
intra-State tensions.
The international system and its institutions are
characterized by inherent structural deficiencies that,
at times, perpetuate or generate conflict, instead
of promoting an equitable, economic and social
environmental balance that could nurture peace. From
the Security Council to the World Trade Organization
to the Bretton Woods institutions, just to mention a few,
policies and structures are skewed in favour of the most
powerful countries and the interests they support. Those
inequalities within and among the various countries
continue to grow significantly, owing to imbalances
in the international system. In its 2007 Annual Report,
the International Monetary Fund recognized the close
connection between an inadequately managed process
of globalization, on the one hand, and the world's great
inequalities, on the other. However, not much in terms
of reform has been carried out, and the world continues
to reel from one economic crisis to another, with the
spectre of war ever present.

In the international criminal justice system, the
International Criminal Court is an important and
integral part of the international multilateral system. It
is important because fighting impunity and promoting
justice must be an integral part of the search for a
permanent peace. Among the main causes of the
recurrence of violence and war are the perpetuation of
impunity and the lack of a credible justice system, at
both the national and the international levels. But for
the international criminal justice system to realize its
full potential to contribute to lasting peace, it must
meet the following three conditions.

First, there must be a balance between the pursuit
of punitive justice and the pursuit of restorative justice
in the framework of conflict resolution, within and
among nations and nationals.

Secondly, it must reflect deeply on the multiplicity
of justice and cultural systems and practices all over the
world. It cannot, and indeed must not, appear to favour
some while neglecting or side-stepping others.

Thirdly, it must be fair, transparent and equitable
in its involvement of the States and people of the world,
not only as beneficiaries of the system but as actors in
it.

A world that condones impunity will never find
lasting peace, but neither will a world that manipulates
justice and its institutions to promote outcomes that
favour the powerful, and thus undermine a permanent
peace.

Africa continues to play host to a large number of
global hot spots and peacekeepers to deal with them.
That is due, in large measure, to structural deficiencies
in the continent, including weak institutions and poor
governance. The Great Lakes and Horn of Africa
regions, which are the epicentres of the current intense
conflagrations in the continent, are endowed with
vast mineral and natural resources, yet ironically
characterized by some of the most intractable wars,
dating back to the colonial and Cold War eras. It is my
sincere hope that today's debate can shed some light on
the root causes of those conflicts and the links among
war, weak institutions and vast mineral and natural
resources.

Let me now turn to the Kenyan experience, which
I believe has lessons, especially for countries trying to
consolidate peace after conflict. Kenya held peaceful,
fair and free elections in March 2013, much to the
bewilderment of many pundits who had predicted a
recurrence of the violence witnessed in 2007. From
2008 to 2013, the Government of Kenya, with the
support of the Kenyan people, civil society, the media
and international partners, embarked upon a broad
range of fundamental constitutional and institutional
reforms that culminated with the promulgation of
a new transformative Constitution in 2010. Among
the institutions reformed were the judiciary, the
Electoral Commission and the National Police Service
Commission. Various commissions, such as the Truth,
Justice and Reconciliation Commission of Kenya and
the National Cohesion and Integration Commission,
were formed to help heal the country and strengthen
the social fabric.

The Kenyan example reveals how investment
in non-coercive measures, such as institutional
strengthening, bolstering the rule of law and combating
hate speech, can help prevent atrocities when reforms
are undertaken early, with sufficient resources and
with international support. The role of subregional and
regional economic communities in assisting countries
to consolidate peace and economic recovery cannot
be gainsaid. Those regional bodies are the anchors of
the international system in the search for permanent
peace. That explains the maxim in peacebuilding,
supported by many African countries, that initiatives
must be nationally owned, regionally anchored and
internationally supported.

A reflection on the causes of war and the search for
permanent peace are incomplete without focusing on
the inherent threats that lead to conflict. As I mentioned
earlier, the concerns of national and international
security have evolved significantly since the days of
the Cold War. While States are still concerned with
traditional threats, such as military hostility from
other States, today's threats to our security are much
more interconnected. Transnational security threats
constitute a greater threat to political stability than
traditional State-based military threats. In recent times,
transnational security threats have caused serious
damage to economic, social and political development
at the national and regional levels and, as we have seen,
also at the global level.

Furthermore, in the search for permanent peace,
the international community should also focus on
stabilizing post-conflict societies and facilitating
reconstruction and development, while addressing
the transnational challenges that often emerge subtly,
over a long period of time. The landscape of security
and insecurity is vastly complex, and analyses and
policies aimed at improving security must be grounded
in the internal and external realities of each State. The
primary challenge of analysing transnational security
threats is determining which ones are the most critical
to national and international security.

In conclusion, I would like to state that, in order
to improve our search for permanent peace, we realize
that today's threats are interconnected and must be
addressed jointly at the global level. The starting
point must be with the long-standing need to reform
the international institutions entrusted with ensuring
international peace and security, including the Security
Council and those created to promote equitable
economic, social and environmental balance, while
fighting poverty and inequality.

