Ms. Sison (United States of America): I thank
Special Representative Haysom and Ambassador
Tanin for their candid and detailed remarks and for
their dedicated work to sustain a fruitful partnership
between the international community and the Afghan
Government. The United States warmly welcomes the
progress that both of them have noted in their briefings,
which the Secretary-General also highlights in his
report (S/2015/422).

We are particularly encouraged by the formation
of a Cabinet and by President Ghani Ahmadzai's and
Chief Executive Officer Abdullah's commitment to
work together to build a better future for the Afghan
people. Their leadership will be Vital to achieving
the ambitious reform goals that the Government
has set for itself, especially with regard to electoral
reform. We hope that the Afghan Government's recent
announcement to extend the parliamentary term will
allow the time necessary for the Government to carry
out electoral reform. As they work urgently to achieve
those goals, they can count on the strong, continued
support of the United States.

The progress Afghanistan has continued to make
is remarkable when considered in the context of the
ongoing armed conflict that is taking such a heavy toll
on the Afghan people. It seems clear that the Taliban
and other armed groups have been intent on testing the
resolve and capabilities of the Afghan national defence
and security forces since the beginning of the year
when the national forces assumed full responsibility for
Afghanistan's security.
The Afghan national defence and security forces
have risen to the challenge at great cost, and we honour
the sacrifices of the many Afghans who have given
their lives for their country and people and those who
continue to put their lives on the line. We also reaffirm
our commitment to continue to train, advise and assist
the Afghan national defence and security forces,
including through NATO's Resolute Support Mission.
That is a key facet of the enduring United States-
Afghanistan strategic partnership.

The costs ofthe conflict can be seen in all segments
of Afghan society. Just this morning, as Special
Representative Haysom noted, the Taliban detonated a
bomb outside Afghanistan's Parliament. The Taliban's
actions today, which the United States condemns in
the strongest terms, demonstrate the growing distance
between the insurgency and the Afghan people Our
thoughts and prayers are with the victims and their
families at this time.

The continued deliberate targeting of civilians by
the Taliban and other groups is despicable and contrary
to international law. Behind the statistics, however,
are real lives, real people taken from their families
too soon, their full potential unrealized, people like
Dr. Jawid Sahai and Mohammad Mohammedy, who
were working to improve the health and education of
their fellow Afghans until they were killed by insurgents
in a savage attack on a Kabul hotel in May - an attack
in which a survivor said that the assailants hunted down
and executed civilians, repeatedly shooting victims to
make sure they were dead.

How many more Afghans might Dr. Sahai and
Mr. Mohammady have helped had they not been brutally
murdered? How do we account for the devastation felt by
the loved ones they left behind? Amid all the bloodshed
and heartache of that senseless violence, the Afghan's
Government's openness to dialogue is a testament to
the statesmanship of its leaders. Unfortunately, the
Taliban has not reciprocated, despite the commendable
efforts ofinternational actors to facilitate dialogue. We
renew our call on the Taliban to end violence, break
their ties with international terrorist groups, accept
Afghanistan's Constitution and engage in direct talks
with the Afghan Government on achieving lasting
peace for the Afghan people. All of us - members
of the Council, Afghanistan's neighbours and the
international community as a whole 4 have a stake in
Afghanistan's future and in helping Afghans confront
the challenges I have noted. We can and must work
together to support Afghanistan's Government of
national unity, its security forces and its economic
development. We welcome the efforts of all countries
to work to increase and improve their engagement with
Afghanistan, and we look forward to the Heart of Asia-
Istanbul Process ministerial conference in Pakistan in
November. That will be an opportunity to strengthen
regional cooperation and integration.

Afghanistan's problems and challenges are
formidable. They are all too real. They grab headlines,
and those headlines can be dispiriting. But there are
other stories too - stories about the daily incremental
progress that give me great hope for Afghanistan's
future. Stories such as that of a 22-year-old woman from
Logar province whose first two babies died at full term.
The third time she was pregnant, though, she gave birth
to a healthy baby girl at Kabul Hospital, thanks to the
use of the partograph, a low-cost tool that monitors key
issues during labour so that doctors can make better-
informed decisions. The increased use of that device
is one of the reforms that has improved Afghan health
care. Such stories may not sell newspapers or air time,
but they capture the resilience and determination of
Afghans committed to improving the lives of their
countrymen and women despite all the violence. They
offer hope for a brighter future for Afghanistan, and
they remind us why our support for Afghanistan and its
people must never falter.

