Mr. Buallay (Bahrain) (spoke in Arabic): I should
like to join previous speakers in congratulating your
country, Sir, for having presided over the proceedings of
the Security Council for this month. I, too, wish to
express my appreciation for the way in which you have
guided our work.

I should like to thank the Secretary-General for his
exhaustive report. I should also like to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Francis
Okelo, the staff of the United Nations Observer Mission
in Sierra Leone (UNOMSIL), the Economic Community
of West African States Monitoring Group and all the
specialized agencies that are working in Sierra Leone for
their efforts to restore peace and stability in that country.

The Peace Agreement that was signed on 7 July in
Lome, the capital of Togo, between the Government of
Sierra Leone and the Revolutionary United Front (RUF),
is a positive milestone in progress towards the
consolidation of national reconciliation in Sierra Leone.
We should also like to express our appreciation to
President Eyadema of Togo and all others who
contributed to ensuring that that Agreement would be
signed. We should like to reaffirm our belief that respect
for the implementation of that Agreement is necessary in
order to move forward towards peace and to restore
normal life to the people of Sierra Leone, who have been
waiting for so long.

 

We reaffirm our belief that the international
community should support the Government of Sierra Leone
and provide it with economic and humanitarian assistance
with a View to helping it fulfil its obligations towards the
people of Sierra Leone, provide them with an adequate
social and economic environment and ensure that
humanitarian assistance will be received by the needy
throughout the country. We reaffirm our belief that by
reinforcing the institutions of peace we will prevent the
conflict from resuming. Our belief that the United Nations
must play an important role in the peace process in Sierra
Leone is self-evident, and we will accordingly support the
draft resolution before us.

We should also like to reaffirm that the security of
United Nations personnel must be respected. There must be
cooperation between the political, civil affairs, information,
human rights and child protection elements of the Mission,
and they must all cooperate with the Government of Sierra
Leone within the context of the mandate of the Mission.

