Mr. Gomersall (United Kingdom): May I first
congratulate the delegation of Botswana on assuming the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
February and warmly welcome you here today, Mr.
Minister, to preside over this important debate. Our
sincere thanks also go to Ambassador Cardenas of
Argentina and to his delegation for the excellent way in
which they presided over the Council's work in January.

May I also welcome the Minister of Foreign Affairs
of Angola and extend the British Government's
recognition and respect to the Ministers of Foreign Affairs
from the Organization of African Unity (OAU) Council
of Ministers, whose presence here reminds us how much
the hopes of Africa ride upon United Nations engagement
in the solution of African problems. May I also express
the British Government's support for the OAU's own
distinctive role, particularly in preventive conflict
resolution.

The Security Council's decision today substantially
to increase the United Nations operation in Angola
underlines its commitment to support the people of
Angola in their long search for peace and national
reconciliation. It represents the Council's trust that the
signing of the Lusaka Protocol on 20 November 1994 and
the coming into force two days later of a cease-fire were
a clear demonstration of the parties' commitment to a
peaceful solution to Angola's problems. It is encouraging
that the Secretary-General has now, three months later,
been able to report that the cease-fire is generally holding
and that the parties have reaffirmed their commitment to

 

the "Acordos de Paz", to the Council's resolutions and to
the Lusaka Protocol. We commend and thank the Secretary
General, and in particular his Special Representative, as
well as the personnel of UNAVEM. II, the Government of
Zambia and the three observer States to the Angolan peace
process for their persistence and patience, which have
brought us to today's new phase.

The Council has kept faith with the people of Angola
during the civil war that followed UNITA's rejection of the
results of the 1992 elections. But experience of Angola has
taught us to be cautious. As Council resolutions have said
repeatedly, the people of Angola are ultimately responsible
for the future of their country. The United Nations can help
them, but it cannot do so if they will not help themselves.
As many have said here today, peace cannot be imposed on
the people of Angola. Therefore, the Government of Angola
and UNITA must demonstrate, by their deeds as well as
words, that the international community has made the right
decision. An early meeting between President dos Santos
and Mr. Savimbi, following on from the successful
meetings of the Chiefs of Staff, would indeed send the right
signal in this regard.

The Secretary-General has stated in his report that he
will not be prepared to proceed with the deployment of the
main infantry components of UNAVEM. III unless he can
determine that the parties have implemented certain
essential tasks set out in the Lusaka Protocol. The Council
firmly agrees. As the resolution we have just adopted
makes clear, it is not prepared to countenance further
substantial delays or lack of cooperation from the parties,
and would, in those circumstances, review the role of the
United Nations in Angola. The Council also expects that
the mission of UNAVEM. III will be completed without
undue delay, in accordance with the schedule set out in the
Lusaka Protocol, and it believes, rightly in my
Government's View, that this can and should be done before
February 1997, two years from now.

We welcome the substantial improvement in the
humanitarian situation in Angola. We support the
Secretary-General's call for donors to respond generously to
meet the humanitarian needs of the Angolan people. My
Government has contributed around $36 million in
humanitarian aid since the United Nations launched its
major international appeal in 1993. We shall continue to do
what we can to help.

The situation in Angola is not the only one in Africa
on the agenda of the Security Council. Regrettably, war
afflicts several African countries. Paragraph 17 of the
present resolution encourages cooperation between the
United Nations and the Organization of African Unity and
recalls the contribution that regional organizations can
make to crisis management and conflict resolution. We
very much agree, and it was with this in mind that the
British Foreign Secretary launched an initiative in the
most recent General Assembly session to enhance the
capacity for preventive action and peace-keeping in
Africa. Since then, there have been fruitful discussions
with African countries, the OAU, the United Nations, and
some non-African countries, held in Accra, Cairo and
Harare, of practical proposals in the areas of conflict
prevention and support for African peace-keeping nations,
including greater cooperation in training and logistic
support.

My Government also sees this resolution as a
reaffirmation by the international community of its
commitment to United Nations mechanisms to resolve
conflicts that are beyond the means or ability of
individual nations to solve. But we cannot be oblivious to
the clouds that will hang over United Nations peace-
keeping as a whole if important donors cannot follow
through by financing the operations that they themselves
have played a leading role in establishing. We are well
aware of the powerful testimony that our colleague from
the United States has presented on the role which the
United Nations plays in furthering international security
and in shouldering missions and financial burdens that
would otherwise fall, in much worse form, upon
individual Governments. We can only hope that her
arguments will be heeded before we all have to draw very
painful conclusions for the type of operation which we
are unanimously supporting today.
Finally, the United Kingdom is very conscious of the
potential which a lasting peace in Angola could unlock,
not only in Angola itself, but in the region of southern
Africa as a whole. We hope to be able to play our own
part practically, as we have in the Council hitherto, in
helping the Government and people of Angola to realize
their commitments and their hopes for a better future. We
were glad to be able to contribute a contingent to the
United Nations Assistance Mission for Rwanda, and we
are currently considering a request from the United
Nations to contribute to UNAVEM. III in Angola.

