Ms. Durrant (Jamaica): Mr. President, let me thank
you and the other members of the Security Council for
allowing my delegation to participate in this debate on the
peaceful settlement of the conflict in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.

I wish also to congratulate you, Sir, on your excellent
conduct of the business of the Security Council and would
wish to express my delegation's appreciation to the
Permanent Representative of Canada for his skilful
leadership of the Council during the month of February.

Mr. President, Jamaica welcomes your initiative in
convening this open meeting of the Security Council on the
peaceful settlement of the conflict in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.

The conflict in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
brings into sharper focus the wider issue of the need to
promote durable and sustainable peace in Africa. The
deep-rooted conflicts which manifest themselves today have
perpetuated a culture of violence and war, affecting
especially the civilian population. The pervasiveness of
ethnic strife, the continuing refugee crisis, and the
proliferation of small arms in areas of conflict have
seriously undermined Africa's efforts to ensure long-term
stability, prosperity and peace for its people.

My delegation remains concerned about these
developments, and we wish to use this forum to express our
commitment to international initiatives geared at ensuring
the peaceful settlement of conflicts within the region.
In this respect, we wish to thank the Secretary-General
of the United Nations for his continuing efforts in working
actively with the Secretary General of the Organization of
African Unity (OAU), and with all the parties concerned, to
bring about a peaceful and lasting solution to the conflict.

The current situation in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo is indeed alarming, as confirmed by many
speakers here today. The conflicts which have erupted in
recent months pose a serious threat to security and peace in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo as well as to the
Great Lakes region as a whole. My delegation
wholeheartedly believes that in the interest of the people of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the region and
Africa, there must be an end to the war in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. To this end, we support the call for
the immediate cessation of hostilities and reaffirm our
support for the unity, stability and territorial integrity of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, in accordance with the
relevant provisions of the Charter of the United Nations
and the Charter of the Organization of African Unity.

Jamaica fully supports the proposal to hold an
international conference on peace, security and
development in the Great Lakes region under the auspices
of the United Nations and the OAU. We further
encourage the international community to fully
demonstrate its commitment to the region by giving more
tangible support to peacekeeping and peacebuilding
initiatives on the continent.

The very difficult question before us is how to
mitigate the suffering of the civilian population who have
been the victims of war. We call upon all parties involved
in the conflict to take the necessary measures to prevent
violations of human rights and international humanitarian
law by forces under their command, and to refrain from
inciting ethnic hatred and from persecuting civilians on
the grounds of nationality or ethnicity.

My delegation wishes to emphasize that peaceful
solutions must be found to resolve the current crisis so
that the process of democratization and reconstruction in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo can proceed.

We believe that a solution to the crisis lies in
regional and cooperative efforts among African States. An
effective regional approach would promote the resolution
of fundamental issues which may lead to a lasting peace.
In this regard, we welcome the regional diplomatic
initiatives taken by the Southern African Development
Community (SADC) to bring a peaceful solution to the
crisis in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
We are convinced that a peaceful settlement of the
dispute in the Democratic Republic of the Congo is
dependent largely on the political will of the parties
involved to bring about a workable solution. It is
necessary, therefore, that there be flexibility of positions
and a spirit of compromise among the parties. Only then
can durable and sustainable peace be realized.

