Prince Zeid Ra'ad Zeid Al-Hussein (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for your concern and your quick
response to the request to convene this emergency
meeting to consider the continuing crisis and the
deteriorating situation in our region.

The Israeli escalation, seen in the acts of
aggression committed by the occupying Power against
the Palestinian people and the Palestinian Authority,
particularly in the Jenin and Nablus camps, represents
a criminal act of aggression - and an ugly one,
indeed. We strongly condemn this act of aggression and
remind the Israeli Government that its actions in the
occupied Palestinian territories are a stark violation of
international humanitarian law, including the Fourth
Geneva Convention, relative to the Protection of
Civilian Persons in Time of War. That fact has already
been mentioned by the Council.

The time has come for the Israeli Government to
realize that the military option is not a solution to any
crisis. Escalation and violence breed further escalation
and violence and lead to further broadening of the gap
between the Israeli and Palestinian sides. Therefore,
Jordan stresses that a political solution is the only way
to overcome the crisis.

We call on the Israeli Government to implement
Security Council resolution 1402 (2002) and
immediately to withdraw all its forces from the
territories and cities it has reoccupied. We also call on
the Israeli Government to lift the siege imposed on the
Palestinian people and leadership and to begin
implementation of the Tenet plan and the Mitchell
recommendations in preparation for the resumption of
final status negotiations from the point at which they
were left off.

My delegation once again calls on the Security
Council to shoulder its responsibilities under the
Charter by forcing Israel to implement promptly the
relevant Security Council resolutions, particularly
resolution 1402 (2002). We also call on the Council to
work towards sending an international force to protect
the Palestinian people.

