Mr. Necula (Romania): I would like to commend
the United Kingdom for convening this timely meeting
on mediation and the settlement of disputes. Allow me
also to express my deep appreciation for the informative
briefing by Secretary-General Antonio Guterres.

Romania aligns itself with the statements of the
European Union and the Group of Friends of Mediation.
I will now make a few remarks in my national capacity.

Since 2009, the year when this topic was last
discussed in the Security Council (see S/PV.6108), the
achievements made in promoting mediation have been
remarkable. As a member of the Group of Friends of
Mediation, Romania appreciates the successful work
conducted by the Group at the United Nations, including
through the promotion of resolutions in the General
Assembly on strengthening the role of mediation.
We also commend the creation in the Secretariat
of the Mediation Support Unit. We must keep that
momentum, consolidate its normative and operational
basis and reinforce support for mediation activities at
the institutional level.

Mediation is an essential tool for conflict
prevention. However, it should not be employed alone,
but only as part of a greater and more structural
approach together with other mechanisms, such as early
warning, preventive diplomacy, preventive deployment
and comprehensive analysis of the root causes of
conflict, in order to ensure sustainable peace. In that
regard, ifmediation is to succeed it is essential to ensure
cooperation and coherence of purpose among the actors
involved. Success requires teamwork, and we know
that much can still be achieved by using the unique
capacities, knowledge and expertise that regional and
subregional organizations such as the African Union,
the Organization of Islamic Cooperation, the European
Union (EU) and the Economic Community of West
African States can offer.

We also believe that strengthening partnerships
inside the United Nations is crucial, and we welcome the
enhanced cooperation between United Nations bodies
such as the Security Council and the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC). Romania has outlined a set of
priorities for its chairmanship of the PBC, including
implementing peacebuilding and sustaining peace
efforts, partnerships and synergy between the
Peacebuilding Commission and the Peacebuilding
Fund, all of which are directly connected to advancing
mediation efforts. Preventive diplomacy also requires
inclusiveness, and we cannot stress enough the
importance of involving women and young people
in mediation processes. There can be no progress
without them.

A lot has been done but a great deal more can
be achieved. Many international organizations are
stepping up their mediation capabilities. As a member
of the EU, Romania will support its strengthening of its
peace mediation capacities. As a global actor in peace
mediation, the EU has access to effective instruments
of preventive action on the political, bilateral and
multilateral diplomatic, and civilian fronts, as well as
in the areas of trade and development.

Last but not least, we agree that mediation is not
merely the automatic process of bringing parties
together at the negotiation table. It must also be part
of a broader culture of building mutual trust and
understanding among the actors involved, and that is
what we aim for.

