Mr. Zagaynov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We have studied the report of the President
Carmel Agius of the International Criminal Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) (8/2016/454, annex), and the report of President Theodor Meron of
the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals with regard to the state of affairs of the bodies
they head over the past six months.

It is encouraging that the ICTY report contains
no direct information on further lags in judicial
proceedings. Nevertheless, we would like to recall that
resolutions 2193 (2014) and 2256 (2015) called upon the
Tribunal not only to not delay proceedings but also to
take look at accelerating the cases under its jurisdiction.
It is unfortunate that has not happened yet. Furthermore,
the Tribunal is duly resourced, including with staffing
and financial resources, so as to expediently conclude
its work.

Against that backdrop, we are worried about the
report's hinting at possible further hindrances in the
work of the ICTY. We think that the case of Goran
Hadeie could have long since been terminated for
humanitarian reasons, which in this case are irrefutable.
Doing so would optimize the work of the ICTY and
would allow for resources to be reallocated to other
cases. That way, there would be no reason to talk about
the impossibility of accurate forecasting of the dates for
terminating this case.

With regard to the contempt case initiated by
the Tribunal in the framework of the concluded
proceedings against Mr. Seselj, this type of case is not
part of the Tribunal's fundamental functions, nor is
it decreed in the ICTY charter approved by Security
Council resolutions. The jurisdiction in that regard
has been instated by the Tribunal through its rules of
procedure. In that regard, the ongoing operations of the
ICTY due to what the report terms contempt cases are
inadmissible by definition. There is a need to find other
solutions.

In implementation of resolution 2256 (2015), the
Office of Internal Oversight Services (OIOS) audited
the work of the ICTY regarding implementation of the
completion strategy. The conclusions of the inspectors
are dismal. As noted in paragraph 54, the Tribunal
failed to focus its work on a results-based strategy
and to set clear goals for itself regarding time frames.
On the whole, we agree with the recommendations of
the OIOS auditors. The Office identified clear issues,
which we have raised in the Security Council on several
occasions.

In that regard, we were taken aback by the Tribunal's
negative reaction to the OIOS recommendations and by
its refusal to implement them. We do not agree with the
reference in the ICTY comments to the unique features
of the Tribunal's mandate. The difficult tasks facing the
Tribunal are no justification for breaking with generally
agreed upon standards of justice, including those
relating to reasonable time frames for legal proceedings.
Paragraph 11 of resolution 2256 (2015) instructs the
Tribunal to report on the implementation of the OIOS
recommendations in its future reports. We urge the
ICTY to study and implement the recommendations of
that oversight body. We would like to see substantive
reporting on the matter in the next ICTY report.

Our delegation will follow closely the proceedings
of the Residual Mechanism to ensure that there are
no further mishaps in its activities. At this stage we
think that the report of the Mechanism is not fully
in keeping with the requirements of paragraph 20
of resolution 2256 (2015). In particular, the report
contains no information on the staffing structure of
the Mechanism or any details about the workload and
related expenditures. Forecasts about the length oflegal
proceedings are really just estimates, and there is no
information about other residual functions.

It should be recalled that the Mechanism was set
up as a temporary and streamlined body. The period
for its work is not determined by the Mechanism, but
by the Security Council. Extending the operation of
the Mechanism is subject to the Council's review of
its activities. We believe it would be appropriate to
consider the OIOS conclusions during the next review,
among other things.

