Mr. Dang (Viet Nam): I have the honour to deliver this statement on behalf of Indonesia and Viet Nam, the two other States members of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations on the Security Council. At the outset, I would like to thank Mr. Mahamat Saleh Annadif, Special Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA), for his insightful briefing. We welcome Ambassador Issa Konfourou, Permanent Representative of Mali, to this meeting. We reaffirm our support for the unity, sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of Mali. We are concerned that since the 2015 Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation on Mali, the Malian people have yet to fully enjoy peace and stability. We closely follow recent developments in Mali and take note of the appointment of the President and the Prime Minister of the transitional Government in Mali. We join other Member States in welcoming and supporting the tremendous efforts by leaders of the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) to stabilize the situation and prevent violence. We also welcome the 5 October declaration of ECOWAS Heads of State and Government on Mali. We alsocommend MINUSMA's efforts, particularly those to enhance its early-warning and rapid response capacities. We welcome the continued support it provides to the Government of Mali in its response to the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic and its redeployment of the reconstituted units of the Malian forces to northern Mali. We also take note of the progress of the catch-up phase to disarmament, demobilization and reintegration in Mali. However, we remain concerned about the security situation, especially in central Mali, due to terrorism and intercommunal violence. The number of terrorist attacks on civilians, peacekeepers and security forces has increased in the north and centre of Mali. We would like to extend our deepest condolences to the Government and the families of those who lost their lives in terrorist and extremist attacks. We reiterate that such attacks are unacceptable and their perpetrators must be brought to justice. A successful transition requires tremendous efforts to tackle challenges such as food insecurity, organized crime and abuses linked to the spread of violent extremism, terrorism and the spread of the COVID-19 pandemic. In that regard, we would like to make the following points. First, we urge the transitional Government and parties concerned to strengthen mutual trust, work together to promote reconciliation and carry out a swift transition to civilian rule. It is also important that they resolve their differences through dialogue and honour the 2015 peace agreement. The meaningful participation of women in the early stages of the political process must be ensured. Secondly, we stress the urgent need to ensure the safety of the Malian people and to continue fighting the COVID-19 pandemic. The transitional Government and other stakeholders should also uphold their obligations and responsibilities to implement international humanitarian law and protect women and children in Mali. Thirdly, we call for a coherent and integrated approach to the security, humanitarian, and socioeconomic development challenges in Mali, including with regard to addressing the impacts of climate change. There should be more workshops, capacity-building seminars and training courses for women and youth on sustainable development. It is also necessary for all parties to take decisive action to address the most urgent humanitarian needs and destabilizing effects of the COVID-19 pandemic. Fourthly, we call for support and the continued implementation of MINUSMA's adaptation plan in order to enhance the Mission's ability to project force throughout Mali. In addition, we stress the importance of the redeployment of the reconstituted units of the Malian armed forces, especially in the north. It is also essential that the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel continue to receive the support needed to carry out its tasks. Lastly, we reiterate our support for the efforts of the United Nations, the African Union, ECOWAS and the international community in facilitating the transition process and promoting stability in Mali. We commend the tireless efforts of Special Representative Annadif, United Nations civilian anduniformed personnel for their commitment to peace and stability in Mali, especially in this very difficult time.
