Mr. Bertoux (France) (spoke in French): I wish
to thank the Special Representative of the Secretary
General, Mr. Farid Zarif, for his briefing and the
Foreign Ministers of Kosovo, Mr. Hashim Thaci, and
Serbia, Mr. Ivica Daeic, for their statements.

Just two months after our most recent debate in
the Security Council on the situation in Kosovo (see S/PV.7327), we note the revival of the general political
landscape with the formation on 9 December 2014 of
a coalition Government in Pristina and the imminent
resumption of political dialogue between Serbia and
Kosovo. The successful elections of 8 June generally
met the expectations of the Council. We welcome the
fact that the parties have finally been able to take
responsibility for finding a solution, in accordance
with the Constitution and democratic principles, to
the political deadlock that prevailed between June
and December. Now that the uncertainty related to
the elections have lifted, we will remain particularly
attentive to the rapid resumption of political dialogue
between Belgrade and Pristina. The new Heads of
Government, who will meet for the first time in Brussels
on Monday, should give new impetus to the process of
normalization of relations between the two countries.

We encourage the parties to engage in dialogue
and remind them that time is not on their side. In any
political process, regular progress is needed to reflect
the constantly renewed commitment of each. In this
regard, we hope that the agreement on justice can be
endorsed on Monday. In addition, we will continue
to pay particular attention to the establishment of
the association/community of Serb municipalities in
northern Kosovo. It must have real teeth and should be
adapted to Kosovo law. It will be a key milestone in the
implementation of the Agreement of 19 April 2013.

Similarly, we expect Kosovo to take the necessary
measures to establish the specialist court to follow up
the work of the Special Investigative Task Force of the
European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo, which
is looking into allegations of the crimes committed
15 years ago. We send our best wishes to Mr. David
Schwendiman, the successor of Chief Prosecutor
Williamson, leading the Task Force.

We have no doubt about the willingness of Kosovars
to engage in a judicial process that is essential to the
fight against impunity and will address all aspects of
the difficult times experienced by Kosovo in the late
1990s. We note too that progress has been made towards
the the establishment of competent criminal courts.
In that respect, we again count on the commitment of
the political parties in Pristina to taking this process
to its conclusion and to fighting generally in favour of
strengthening the rule oflaw. It is in the light ofprogress
in these two areas in particular that the Council will be
able to assess the positive evolution of the situation in
Kosovo.

Today, I want to return to the situation of the
Kosovars, who are increasingly choosing exile in the
face of the difficulties they are encountering in their
daily lives, in particular employment-related economic
problems. The entire Kosovar political class must heed
those who are voting with their feet, and fight the
organized crime networks that contribute to the growth
ofillegal immigration. The viability of Kosovar society
and the stability of the Balkans and the European Union
are at stake. We will remain vigilant vis-a-vis the
general living conditions of the populations in Kosovo,
and encourage the parties to ensure respect for the
rights of persons belonging to minorities. Restoring a
relationship of trust between communities remains the
only way to allow Kosovo and Serbia to open a new page
in their history. In that regard, demonstrations cannot
be allowed to degenerate into violent confrontations,
and all extremist rhetoric must be banished from the
public forum.

I conclude by commending the joint march of
Kosovo and Serbia towards the European Union.
Important steps have been taken in that direction.
Serbia has made substantial institutional changes, and
we welcome its achievements. The technical negotiation
process for accession to the European Union, formally
launched on 21 January 2014, continues. We now hope
that the efforts of Serbia will be recognized and that a
first negotiation chapter can be opened soon.

The European Commission has welcomed the
commitment of Pristina to concluding its stabilization
and association agreement. We hope that the agreement
will be finalized very soon. It is important that the
progress made by both parties proceed at the same
pace so as to prevent any delay in one from slowing the
progress of the other. We express the hope that Serbia
and Kosovo have again moved a little closer to their
common future.

