I would like to begin by thanking France for convening this important meeting. I also thank the Secretary-General and his Special Representative for the report on children and armed conflict (S/2020/525). This year marks the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the involvement of children in armed conflict and the fifteenth anniversary of landmark resolution 1612 (2005), which instituted the monitoring and reporting mechanism on children and armed conflict. Despite the Council's continued resolve, it is regrettable that children affected by armed conflict continue to experience grave violations and abuses. Japan urges all parties to armed conflict to fully comply with the obligations under international human rights law, international humanitarian law and relevant Security Council resolutions. Coronavirus disease (COVID-19) is currently causing a serious human security crisis, spreading across borders and striking the most vulnerable segments of society, in particular children in armed conflict. Japan is alarmed at the lost opportunity for their education, the increased risk of their recruitment and use, and the further delay in their release. Japan strongly urges all parties to armed conflict to immediately respond to the Secretary-General's call for a ceasefire and ensure safe, timely and unimpeded humanitarian access to children affected by conflict. In March, Japan provided $28.8 million in emergency assistance through the United Nations Children's Fund to assist developing countries prone to the impact of COVID-19, including those affected by conflict, to improve children's access to quality health services. In April, Japan decided on an additional contribution of over $68.1 million for UNICEF. Human security implies that all individuals, in particular vulnerable people, including children, are entitled to freedom from fear and freedom from want, with an equal opportunity to enjoy all their rights and fully develop their potential. Under prolonged crisis caused by armed conflict, children are deprived of all that. As one of the largest contributing countries, Japan is cooperating with UNICEF to protect children who fled their homes in Syria and Myanmar. It is also working to enhance a child-friendly justice system and a gender-sensitive social welfare system in Yemen. Furthermore, as the largest donor to the humanitarian window of the Fund to End Violence against Children, Japan has provided substantial assistance for children affected by armed conflict in African counties. Over 1,900 children have been released from Boko Haram and military detention facilities, over 70,000 children and caregivers have received psychosocial support and over 42,600 have been given mine risk education. Japan calls upon other Member States to join in that endeavour. Japan is determined to make every effort to achieve target 16.2 under the Sustainable Development Goals, namely, to end abuse, exploitation, trafficking and all forms of violence against and torture of children and to realize human security for all children. Japan renews its unwavering commitment to the protection and promotion of children's rights and looks forward to working closely with the United Nations.
