Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein): At the heart of our discussion today is the question of how peace and justice correlate to each other. The Council has answered that question by stating that a comprehensive approach to transitional justice, including the promotion of healing and reconciliation, is critical to the consolidation of peace and stability. That is a clear and strong statement, and we fully agree with it. Such a comprehensive approach encompasses the dimensions of truth, justice, reparation and guarantee of non-recurrence - that is, prevention. The overall purpose of transitional justice is indeed to help societies overcome a difficult, often painful, past, promote reconciliation and support a common way forward towards sustainable peace. Transitional justice is therefore also a key component of conflict prevention and the implementation of Sustainable Development Goal 16. National ownership of such processes is essential. But in many cases, in particular where atrocity crimes were committed on a large scale, international or regional assistance may be not only helpful but, indeed, necessary. There are various examples where truth and reconciliation commissions have played a supportive role in post-conflict situations. A commitment to the right to truth is indispensable. Anyone who has suffered atrocities has the right to know who is responsible; anyone whose family members have disappeared has the right to know their fate and whereabouts. Every society where such crimes have taken place has the right to learn about its history, without lies or denial. They are inevitably painful processes, but they form the basis for moving forward together and for taking the measures necessary to ensure that the same does not happen again. Those processes also give victims their rightful place in the discussion - a place that they are too often denied. We heard in yesterday's discussions (see S/PV.8721) how often children's grievances and calls for justice are neglected in peace processes, with devastating results for sustainable peace. Similar things can be said with respect to the women and peace and security agenda. In addition to securing justice for individual violations, transitional justice has to address, in particular, the context of gender inequality and injustice, which gives rise to conflict. If the Council has a strong conceptual basis from which to work, its practical record is a different story. To begin with, there is no collective political will in the Council's membership to translate thematic agreements on justice into practice. In the case of Myanmar, it has not even seriously considered, let alone acknowledged, the unanimous decision of the International Court of Justice, the principal judicial organ of the United Nations, on the provisional measures to be taken by the authorities of Myanmar on the basis of the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide. In so doing, the Council misses a unique opportunity to help guarantee non-recurrence. In the ongoing conflict in the Syrian Arab Republic, it has essentially ignored the accountability and justice dimension and passed the ball to the General Assembly, which established the International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation and Prosecution of Persons Responsible for the Most Serious Crimes under International Law Committed in the Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011, as a result. But, in fairness, there is also a conceptual difficultywith giving transitional justice tasks to the Council. Of course, there are peacekeeping operations - and the very useful concept note (S/2020/98, annex) has listed those operations where the Council has included relevant elements in their respective mandates. But for the most part, the Council will not stay engaged for the long years that are often required to provide transitional justice. The United Nations body most underutilized in that respect appears to be the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC), which has the mandate "to support the development of integrated strategies in order to lay the foundation for sustainable development", of which transitional justice is a key ingredient. Ongoing discussions on the PBC should therefore place strong emphasis on that dimension. The United Nations system should be equipped to assist all States that do not have a PBC configuration but still face transitional justice challenges. It is a convenient talking point to say that there can be no peace without justice, although it is less in vogue today than it was a few years ago. In practice, however, we often prioritize peace over justice - certainly the Council does. How often have we heard in this Chamber that the involvement of the International Criminal Court (ICC) in Darfur - ironically, mandated by the Council - was not only unwarranted but, in fact, harmful to peace and stability in the Sudan? As it turns out, the authorities in the Sudan seem to have come to a different conclusion. We are following very closely reports concerning a possible transfer of those indicted by the ICC, in connection with the crimes committed in Darfur. The mere fact that those discussions are taking place is the strongest possible statement in support of the relevance of justice for sustainable peace. We hope, of course, that we will witness those transfers. Trials in The Hague would be a late and partial form of relief for the suffering of the victims of the genocide in Darfur. They would illustrate how short-sighted the approach of the Council to the challenge of peace and justice remains, 75 years after its creation.
