Ms. Edjang Mague (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): Equatorial Guinea joins Bolivia and France
in thanking the co-organizers and our colleagues who
participated in the visit and did such high-quality work.

The Security Council had an opportunity to speak
with the staff of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUSCO) and to assess their ability to
implement their mandate in accordance with resolution
2409 (2018), and in particular to respond to current and
current security threats. In its meetings, the Security
Council supported and praised the work of MONUSCO
military and civilian personnel and the staff of the
humanitarian agencies, who, despite the climate of
insecurity and violence caused by armed groups, risk
their lives daily to alleviate the suffering of the people
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

With respect to to the humanitarian situation,
the Security Council encouraged MONUSCO and
the Forces armees de la Republique democratique
du Congo to work together in a coordinated manner
against the threats posed by the armed groups in the
country. We had an opportunity to see that the Mission
has made significant efforts to improve its efficiency
and performance, adapt to new challenges and be more
robust and flexible. That was the main subject of the
Council's discussions with the MONUSCO leadership.
The Council reiterated its full confidence in, and
support for, MONUSCO in this adaptation phase.

Finally, the Security Council expressed its
solidarity with the victims of the Ebola outbreak
and congratulated the Congolese authorities, the
international community, MONUSCO and the World
Health Organization on their speedy response to the
health crisis. The Council also called for the immediate
cessation of hostilities by all armed groups so as to
combat and mitigate the spread of the disease.

I conclude by thanking the Government and the
people ofthe Democratic Republic ofthe Congo for their
hospitality and cordial treatment. It has been a privilege
and a pleasure to have visited that beautiful country.
