Mr. Laro (Nigeria): The Nigerian delegation
thanks you, Madam President, for convening this
important debate on children and armed conflict and
for the concept note (S/2014/144, annex), which sheds
light on the topic and serves as a useful guide for
our discussions here today. We thank the Secretary-
General for his statement. We also thank his Special
Representative Leila Zerrougui, UNICEF Executive
Director Anthony Lake for their briefings, as well as
Alhaji Babah Sawaneh for sharing his experience with
us.

We welcome the adoption by consensus of
resolution 2143 (2014), of which Nigeria was a sponsor.
The resolution comprehensively addresses the issue
of children and armed conflict and underscores the
Security Council's continued concern about the subject.

In the interests of time, my comments will focus
on two aspects of the children and armed conflict
agenda, that is, the role of regional organizations
in implementing the agenda and the "Children, not
soldiers" campaign of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and UNICEF.

Nigeria acknowledges and applauds the valuable
contributions of regional and subregional organizations
to the children and armed conflict agenda. In that regard,
we take note of the agreement signed on 17 September
2013 by the Office ofthe Special Representative and the
African Union (AU) Peace and Security Department,
which aims at strengthening protection mechanisms in
collaboration with UNICEF. The agreement outlines
the following areas of collaboration among the three
entities: first, the protection of children in all African
Union peace and security activities; secondly, the
deployment of child protection specialists in the Peace
and Security Department; thirdly, the joint development
of a programme of work including the alignment of
domestic legislation with internationally recognized
rights of the child; fourthly, the joint development
of guidelines to protect children affected by armed
conflict; and, fifthly, the development of training
programmes on child protection for troop-contributing
countries to AU peacekeeping missions.

In terms of the legal framework at the regional
level, the African Charter on the Rights and Welfare
of the Child, which the Organization of African Unity
adopted in 1990, came into force in 1999. The Charter
prohibits the recruitment or direct participation in
hostilities or internal strife of anyone under the age of
18. It calls upon States parties to respect and ensure
respect for rules of international humanitarian law
applicable in armed conflicts that affect the child.
The Charter requires that all the necessary measures
be taken to ensure that no child takes direct part in
hostilities and, in particular, requires States to refrain
from recruiting any child. It enjoins States parties, in
accordance with the obligations under international
humanitarian law, to protect the civilian population
in armed conflict and take all feasible measures to
ensure the protection and care of children affected by
armed conflict. Forty-seven of the 54 States members
of the African Union have ratified the Charter, which
indicates the near universalization of the instrument on
the continent.

We welcome the "Children, not soldiers"
campaign, launched by the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and UNICEF in collaboration
with other United Nations partners with a view to
ending and preventing by 2016 the recruitment and use
of children by Government armed forces in conflict.
The concept note asks how best the campaign can be
supported. We believe that one effective way to do
so by States, civil society, international and regional
organizations, non-governmental organizations and
other stakeholders launching a sustained drive towards
the universalization of the Optional Protocol to the
Convention on the Rights of the Child on the involvement
of children in armed conflict. The General Assembly
adopted that instrument in May 2000, and in entered
into force in February 2002. There are currently 154
States parties to the Convention and 129 signatories to
the Protocol prohibitting the compulsuory recruitment
into the armed forces of States parties of persons below
the age of 18 as well as their direct involvement in
hostilities. A total of 42 African countries have signed
or ratified the Protocol. Nigeria signed it in September
2000 and ratified it in September 2012. We would
like to see all States ratify this important instrument
in the children and armed conflict agenda. As Special
Representative Zerrougui stated in September 2013 at
the annutal Treaty event, "The universal ratification of
the Optional Protocol would take us one step closer to a
world without child soldiers."

