Mr. Mayr-Harting (Austria): I would first like to
welcome the President of Serbia, Mr. Boris Tadie, and
the Foreign Minister of Kosovo, Mr. Skender Hyseni,
and to thank them for the statements. I also wish to
welcome Foreign Minister Vuk Jeremic'. Moreover, let
me express our deep appreciation for the work and
leadership of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Zannier, and the important
contribution of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) to peace
and stability in Kosovo. Austria fully supports
UNMIK's continuing efforts to facilitate dialogue
among all parties in the search for practical solutions,
and we are pleased to hear about the intensification in
relations between UNMIK and the Kosovo authorities
during the last reporting period, including through the
meetings of the Special Representative with President
Sejdiu and Prime Minister Thaci.

The successful organization of municipal and
mayoral elections in a relatively calm atmosphere and
without major incidents constitutes a significant step
forward in the consolidation of a democratic society.
We congratulate the Kosovo electoral authorities for
having taken ownership of the process and for the
assessment that effort has received. Austria would also
like to commend the mission in Kosovo of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) for working intensively and in coordination
with other international stakeholders in supporting and
assisting the Central Election Commission and the
Election Complaints and Appeals Subcommission.

We welcome the growing participation by
Kosovo Serbs in the newly established municipalities
in the centre and the south of Kosovo as an important
step for the integration of Kosovo Serbs in the
institutional structures of Kosovo. The low level of
participation in the elections by Kosovo Serbs in
northern Kosovo, on the other hand, is disappointing.
We call on Kosovo authorities to increase their efforts
to engage the Kosovo Serb population in continuing
the process of decentralization.

At the same time, we also believe that increased
efforts by all sides are necessary, in particular with a
view to the establishment of a fully functioning and
multi-ethnic judiciary in northern Mitrovica. Only by
renouncing parallel structures can legal certainty for
the local population be guaranteed.

A little more than a year after the deployment of
the European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo
(EULEX), by far the European Union's largest civilian
mission, Austria commends the progress achieved in
promoting the rule of law. We also appreciate the close
collaboration between the international actors in
Kosovo.

Austria fully supports the efforts of EULEX to
consolidate its presence and to exercise its mandate in
northern Kosovo. The continued monitoring of the
reintegration of over 300 Kosovo Serb police officers,
the prosecution and adjudication of war crimes and
organized crime cases and the fight against corruption
contribute to strengthening rule of law institutions in
the police and justice sector.

On 12 January, EULEX Supreme Court judges
completed the last of the 20 trial cases inherited from
UNMIK at this level, and the completion of inherited
general trial cases at the district court level is expected
in March. Moreover, the establishment of the human
rights review panel will constitute an important step
towards strengthening the accountability of EULEX.

Although violent incidents have not broken off,
we are encouraged by the relatively calm security
situation and the decrease in tensions between
communities. In this context, Austria supports NATO's
decision to restructure the Kosovo Force (KFOR) and
reduce troop numbers in Kosovo, which will also
enhance local responsibility. Austria, which is currently
the biggest non-NATO contributor to KFOR, is
determined to keep up its strong commitment to the
operation. Moreover, Austria will continue to provide
up to 30 experts for EULEX.

Austria would also like to highlight the valuable
contributions made by the OSCE mission, under
Ambassador Almhofer, in supporting the development
of democratic institutions as well as in the monitoring,
protection and promotion of human rights. As pointed
out in the report of the Secretary-General (S/2010/5)
and the recently published OSCE report assessing the
implementation of communities' rights by Kosovo
institutions, more efforts need to be made, inter alia, in
the following fields: the protection of cultural rights,
the protection of cultural and religious heritage sites,
and the creation of improved conditions conducive to
the return of internally displaced persons and refugees.

Let me say that I have listened very carefully to
President Tadie's comments on the protection of holy
sites in Kosovo. The authorities in Belgrade and
Pristina know how strongly Austria has been
committed and is committed to the protection of
religious communities and holy sites in Kosovo. As
many know, in the past we were able to facilitate
Kosovo legislation on this subject, and members of the
delegations of Serbia and Kosovo and UNMIK
representatives present at this table today were in fact
actively involved in these efforts. It is therefore evident
that we support any international involvement that
would help to improve the protection of cultural
heritage and, more particularly, of the holy sites of the
Serbian Orthodox Church in Kosovo, including
through increased efforts by the European Union.

We endorse the Secretary-General's call for

pragmatism and flexibility on all sides in order to find

solutions for outstanding practical issues, such as

Kosovo's participation in international forums and
mechanisms.

Finally, let me say once again that Austria
welcomes Serbia's application for membership in the
European Union, made last month. As we have
emphasized on many occasions, we clearly see the
future of Serbia and all other countries of the western
Balkans in the European Union.

