Sir John Sawers (United Kingdom): I would like
to join others in thanking our briefers today, perhaps
above all, the Secretary-General of the International
Maritime Organization (IMO), whose presence today is
very welcome. I thank him for his contribution.

We have seen the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2008/709). It gives us a thorough and realistic
analysis of what is clearly a very bleak picture on the
ground in Somalia. That situation on the ground seems
to be getting worse in three different dimensions.

First, in the area of security on land, our hopes
had been raised by the Djibouti agreement, and the
work to implement it was moving forward. But, the
hope that Somalia was finally turning a corner after
some 17 years of violence had not been followed
through on the ground. Despite the best efforts of
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Ould
Abdallah in mediating dialogue, the political process
now looks fragile, not helped, it has to be said, by the
divisions that have opened up within the Transitional
Federal Government (TFG). The recent reports of
heightened violence and territorial advances by the
Al-Shebaab movement suggest a worsening security
situation. So the situation on the ground in Somalia is
getting worse, not better.

Secondly, security at sea is also getting
dramatically worse, as colleagues have said. The
incidence of piracy off the Somali coast has reached
new heights in the last weeks. We deplore those acts of
piracy, which can only make it even more difficult to
bring stability to Somalia itself. The United Kingdom
is playing a full part in the international deployments
to try to combat this situation. We have a frigate of the
Royal Navy dealing full time with piracy and two
others frigates deployed in the area ready to act. We
have also offered to support the upcoming European
Union mission by providing the operational
headquarters and by commanding the operation.

Resolution 1816 (2008), due for renewal next
month, authorizes those operations. We need to look
carefully at it to ensure that the mandate for the naval
operations gives those in the field the means needed to
suppress and deter piracy. Addressing the piracy
problem cannot wait until peace and harmony return to
Somalia.

Thirdly, as the Secretary-General's report notes,
the humanitarian situation is getting worse again. Over
3 million Somalis are now dependent on food aid.
Securing humanitarian access remains a pressing and
difficult challenge. We would welcome advice from the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
(OCHA) in the near future on how to address this
problem.

So what do we do in the face of these difficulties?
I agree with my colleague, Ambassador Kumalo: the
problem of Somalia is not going to be resolved solely
by addressing the issue of piracy or tackling the
humanitarian problem on the ground. But equally, as
we have so often said in this Chamber and as we have
heard again today from several delegates, we cannot
just address this problem with a military solution.
There has to be a political framework.

From our perspective, we believe that the Council
should send a clear message that the best way forward
for Somalia is through the full implementation of the
Djibouti agreement, which would give the space for the
international community to assist.

But we still do have to deal with the Somalia that
we find, the Somalia that exists, and not the Somalia
that we would like to see, and that has to shape our
approach to the idea of an international force on the
ground.

The Secretary-General has invited the Security
Council to send a force to take responsibility for
security in Mogadishu and to enable the Ethiopian
forces to withdraw. The Secretary-General's report is
very clear about the options for such a force. Its firm
recommendation - which we think is based on sound
military analysis - is that a multinational force has to
go in first to secure the situation on the ground and

create the conditions that would allow a United
Nations peacekeeping operation to go in. Frankly, it is
hard to envisage a traditional United Nations
peacekeeping force having the capabilities or the
mandate required to deal with the challenges that
Somalia currently poses. This Council should not
mandate a force which we do not think is up to the
task. We must learn the lessons from elsewhere of what
happens when we send an underequipped force into a
theatre where conflict persists.

We therefore encourage the Secretary-General to
continue his efforts to identify States willing to
contribute to a multinational force as soon as possible.
In doing so, he will need high-level political support
from Council members. We have heard some fine
words around this table today; let us hope that
delegations can take the steps necessary to turn those
fine words into hard offers of military contributions.

We would also welcome further work by the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations to prepare for
the time when a peacekeeping operation is feasible,
including being ready to conduct a technical
assessment mission as soon as conditions on the
ground allow.

Somalia is arguably the most intractable
challenge facing the Security Council in the period
ahead. I know that all of us around this table feel the
need to act and to shoulder our responsibilities here,
but we have to learn the lessons of experience - not
only in Somalia, but also elsewhere, including, for
example, in Darfur. The report of the Secretary-
General may not satisfy all of us in all respects, but it
is a sober and responsible effort to identify the very
limited options that are available to the Council. We
believe that we should proceed with our deliberations
on the basis of this report.

