Nana Effah-Apenteng (Ghana): At the outset, I
would like to thank Mr. Tom Koenigs, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, for his
briefing.

Last month, my delegation joined other members
of the Security Council in hailing the Afghanistan
Compact, which built upon the Bonn Agreement as a
model of peacebuilding for fragmented societies
emerging from internecine conflict. We have noted that
the Compact is an ambitious five-year programme built

on four pillars - namely, governance, security,
counter-narcotics efforts, reconstruction and
development - which will need our support to be

implemented. Clearly, when the international
community is united in mind and purpose, there is
hardly any challenge that we cannot meet, including
working together to prevent the outbreak of such costly
and energy-sapping conflicts.

The latest report submitted by the Secretary-
General on the situation in Afghanistan (S/2006/145)
highlights the tremendous progress that has been made
in laying the foundation for a functioning democratic
State based on tolerance, the rule of law and respect for
human rights, all underpinned by a vibrant economy.

We note, at the same time, that progress has been
rather slow in tackling the huge and interrelated
problems of governance and security. In particular, my
delegation deplores the wanton killings resulting from
reckless acts of terror by remnants of extremist groups
such as the Taliban and Al-Qaida and other armed
bandits bent on undermining progress towards peace
and stability in Afghanistan. It is, indeed, worrisome to
note that the operational tempo and tactical
sophistication of the insurgents and other anti-
Government elements have continued to develop, and
that now the four principal threats are improvised
explosive devices, suicide bombings, kidnapping and
attacks on the education system.

Nonetheless, we are confident that the coalition
forces and the Afghan security forces will succeed in
suppressing the elements engaged in destabilizing the
country. We take this opportunity to call on the
Governments of Pakistan and Afghanistan to iron out
whatever differences they have and to cooperate in
improving security along their common border to their
mutual benefit.

In the same vein, we wish to underscore the grave
dangers posed to the reconstruction process by the
opium trade, which reportedly accounts for over 50 per
cent of Afghanistan's gross domestic revenues and
appears to be the lifeblood of criminal gangs and
illegal armed groups. We urge the Afghan Ministry of
Counter-Narcotics to redouble its efforts to end the role
of Afghanistan as the world's largest supplier of
opium, to say nothing of the fate of the large number of
Afghans who are habitual drug users.

In this regard, we welcome the positive role of
the coalition forces and the steady progress being made
by the International Security Assistance Force (ISAF)
and the United Nations Mission of Assistance in
Afghanistan (UNAMA), in collaboration with the
Government of Afghanistan, to extend their control
beyond Kabul. Needless to say, the vision of the
Afghan Compact can be realized only in a safe and
secure environment. My delegation wishes, therefore,
to salute those countries that have been at the forefront
of the reconstruction efforts in Afghanistan, notably
the United States, the United Kingdom, Germany, Italy,
Japan and several others, as well as, of course,
UNAMA, United Nations agencies and various non-
governmental organizations.

Another area of great concern is the human rights
situation. As stated in the report, this is mainly
attributable to the fragile security situation and
weaknesses in governance. It is disheartening to note
that women in Afghanistan continue to face serious
restrictions in the exercise of their rights, including
those that affect their freedom of movement and access
to education, as well as widespread discrimination and
pervasive violence, which also affect young girls.
Worse still, justice is beyond the reach of most Afghan
women.

Unless impunity is checked, factional
commanders, officials of the security agencies and
former warlords will continue to make arbitrary arrests
and engage in illegal detention and torture without
being held accountable. That is why it is imperative
that the adoption of the national Action Plan on Peace,
Justice and Reconciliation be accorded the highest
priority and that the Plan be vigorously implemented
so as to minimize human rights abuses.

Given the nature of the challenges that
Afghanistan currently faces, Ghana supports the
proposals made by the Secretary-General in his report
aimed at consolidating and tightening up the activities
of the United Nations agencies under the umbrella of
UNAMA.

In March 2002, when UNAMA was established
by Security Council resolution 1401 (2002), its
mandate focused mainly on the promotion of national
reconciliation and reconstruction, as well as on
humanitarian relief within the framework of the Bonn
Agreement. While the objectives of the Bonn process
have largely been achieved, the fact is that formidable
challenges remain, particularly with the adoption of the
Afghanistan Compact.

It is obvious, therefore, that UNAMA has to be
realigned in terms of its mandate and structure so as to

enhance its ability to meet the new challenges. We
therefore support the Secretary-General's request for
an extension of the mandate of UNAMA for a further
period of 12 months to enable it continue to provide
political and strategic guidance to the Afghan
leadership and its international partners as they embark
on the ambitious and vital next phase of State-building.

Having come thus far, it is important for us to
work together in ensuring that the fount of goodwill
that has sustained Afghanistan since the Bonn process
was launched continues to flow uninterrupted.

