I thank Special Representative Geir Pedersen for his continued work on this important file and for his briefing today. It is good to see him today, and I hope he is staying safe and healthy in these challenging times. Today the United States reaffirms its support for the Secretary-General's call for a global ceasefire. We agree wholeheartedly with Special Envoy Pedersen that there should be a complete and immediate nationwide ceasefire in Syria. That kind of ceasefire is necessary to enable an all-out effort to suppress the spread of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) among some of the most vulnerable people in the world. The spread of COVID-19, especially in north-west and north-east Syria, only increases the urgency of securing a sustained ceasefire to ensure effective responses. While we note that the so-called Astana guarantors held a teleconference last week to discuss the peace process in Syria, we firmly believe it is the United Nations that must be at the centre of any effort to establish a comprehensive, enduring and verifiable nationwide ceasefire. Special Envoy Pedersen has the authority to monitor existing lines of contact to ensure that ceasefire agreements are honoured, and it is the Organization's responsibility to advance stability in Syria with the aim of achieving a political solution, in line with resolution 2254 (2015). The Council should do everything in its power to support the United Nations in that endeavour. In its report released on 6 April, the Board of Inquiry found it was "highly probable" that the Al-Assad regime and its allies launched attacks that destroyed medical facilities - an utterly inexcusable action. We also note and welcome the Secretary-General's stated intention to appoint a senior independent adviser to address the board's recommendations. The Council must hold those who threaten Syria's peace and stability accountable. To that end, it is vital that the Board of Inquiry's evidence be shared with the commission of inquiry and the International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation and Prosecution of Persons Responsible for the Most Serious Crimes under International Law Committed in the Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011. If justice means anything to us, every Council member should support the Secretary-General's pursuit of it. In conclusion, the United States reiterates its call for the Al-Assad regime to protect the fate of thousands of civilians held arbitrarily in detention centres, in which crowded and inhumane conditions are prime for the rapid spread of COVID-19 - an outcome we can and must work to avoid. We demand the immediate release of all civilians detained arbitrarily, including women, children and the elderly. Moreover, the Al-Assad regime must immediately grant impartial and independent entities, including medical and health organizations, access to regime detention facilities. This is now more necessary than ever as we work to combat the spread of COVID-19. While these times are uncertain, the Syrian people can rest assured that the Trump Administration's commitment to them has never been stronger. In the days ahead, we urge each member of the Council to take the steps that will help the Syrian people move towards greater safety, prosperity and dignity. That is the future they have been asking for and it is the future we all have the responsibility to help deliver.
