Ms. Guadey (Ethiopia): I would like to begin by
thanking the Secretary-General for his comprehensive
report on a comprehensive approach to mine action
(S/2018/623) and Assistant Secretary-General
Alexander Zouev for his briefing.

We note from the report of the Secretary-General
that mines, explosive remnants of war and improvised
explosive devices (IEDs) continue to cause widespread
and indiscriminate injuries to civilian populations in
various parts of the world, in both conflict and post-
office situations. Ofparticular concern to us is the severe
humanitarian consequences, including the loss of life,
widespread suffering and its impact on humanitarian
assistance, as highlighted by the Secretary-General
in his report. We also note that the use of mines and
IEDs and explosive remnants of war continue to hinder
and obstruct the work of humanitarian actors, thereby
affecting humanitarian assistance.

We are alarmed by the impact of landmines,
IEDs and explosive remnants of war on peacekeeping
missions, particularly in the context of the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) and the African Union
Mission in Somalia. For instance, it is seriously
concerning to note that, according to the Secretary-
General's report, MINUSMA has experienced its
highest fatality rate since 2014. Comprehensive action
to address the impact of mines, IEDs and explosive
remnants of war requires a three-fold approach.

First, ensuring the full compliance with
international humanitarian law of all parties to an
armed conflict in their choice of weapons, including
by ensuring strict compliance with the principles
of proportionality, as well as distinctions, remains
central. Parties to an armed conflict should take every
necessary measure to protect civilians from the effect
of hostilities, particularly by refraining from using
weapons that could lead to an indiscriminate attack
against civilians, such as mines and IEDs.

Secondly, we recognize that explosive remnants
of war continue to be a serious humanitarian concern
with devastating short- and long-term consequences
on civilian populations, humanitarian actors and
peacekeepers deployed in post-conflict situations. It is
therefore critical to take concrete measures to address
existing cases of contamination. In that regard, we
welcome the measures taken by the United Nations
Mine Action Service to reduce the impact of landmines,
explosive remnants of war and IEDs on peacekeepers.
That takes me to my third point, on the impact of
landmines, explosive remnants of war and IEDs on
peacekeepers and the role of peacekeeping missions
in addressing those challenges. We recognize that
troop-contributing countries need to take every
necessary measure to better prepare their peacekeepers
deployed in conflict and post-conflict situations to
respond to threats posed by landmines, IEDs and
explosive remnants of war, including in the context of
asymmetrical warfare. Equally important is the need
to provide peacekeepers with the necessary capacity
and force enablers to respond to the challenges faced
by the use of such weapons by providing them with the
necessary training and capability to protect themselves
and civilians, as well as humanitarian actors.

I would therefore like to underscore the need to
provide peacekeeping missions that are deployed and
faced with risks associated with explosive remnants
of war and IEDs with the proper training and the
necessary capabilities that are critical in addressing
the threat posed by explosive devices to peacekeepers,
as identified by the Secretary-General in his report.
Furthermore, as pointed out in the report prepared by
Lieutenant General (Retired) Carlos Alberto dos Santos
Cruz, entitled "Improving Security of United Nations
Peacekeepers", it is critical to fully equip such missions
by providing them with appropriate mine-protected
vehicles and specialized weapons ammunition and by
including a small cell of military engineers who would
supervise anti-IED planning or operation procedures.
Concrete measures should also be taken to enhance the
intelligence capabilities ofsuch missions to detect IEDs.

As a follow-up of today's discussion, we encourage
these issues to be taken up within the appropriate
format. I would like to particularly welcome the
proposal by the Secretary-General to mainstream mine
action into relevant country-specific discussions and
the planning and mandate of United Nations responses,
as well as the inclusion of mine action into ceasefire
and peace agreements, where feasible and appropriate.
I would also like to lend my support to the proposal
of the Secretary-General to consider the issue in the
Council on an annual basis.

