Mr. Wetland (Norway): Thank you, Mr. President,
for allowing us to speak. In his briefing to the Security
Council on 24 November 2009 (see S/PV.6223),

Assistant Secretary-General Haile Menkerios stated
that Israeli-Palestinian negotiations had reached "a
deep and worrying impasse" and that without a
political horizon, destructive forces would gain ground,
putting both the Palestinian Authority and the two-

State solution in peril.

This morning, Assistant Secretary-General
Fernandez-Taranco delivered what was, in fact, the
same message. Consequently, two months have passed
and little has changed in reality, notwithstanding partial
measures on the ground, of which we have taken
positive note. Unfortunately, we have to acknowledge
that the current conditions do not yet allow for the
resumption of final status negotiations.

This is not to say that we can simply give in to
the seemingly insurmountable obstacles to getting the
negotiations restarted. Inaction is clearly not an option.
Other efforts must still be made to drive the process
forward towards a two-State solution. We hope that the
parties will respond positively and proactively to
parallel endeavours by the international community to
overcome the current political impasse in the peace
process.

All along, steps in the right direction in some
areas of the occupied Palestinian territories should not
be reversed by detrimental action in others, including
East Jerusalem. As for Gaza, the unacceptable and
counterproductive grip holding the civilian population
down must urgently come to an end.

As Chair of the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee for
the Coordination of International Assistance to
Palestinians, Norway has repeatedly stressed the need
for a clear political horizon in order to justify the high
levels of international donor support to the Palestinian
State-building project.

On the economic track, the donor community
remains committed to the effort to build a Palestinian
State from the bottom-up. The Ad Hoc Liaison
Committee has given its strong and unanimous support
to Prime Minister Fayyad's plan for preparing for
Palestinian statehood within two years. The
implementation of this work is ongoing, in close
contact with and coordination between the Palestinian
Authority and the donor community. The plan thus
forms an important platform for continued international
support, notably within a set time frame. To keep the
two-State solution clearly in sight, it cannot simply be
relegated to some distant and uncertain future, and the
momentum must be upheld.

