Mr. Ruiz (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset, I wish to thank Ambassador Rosemary DiCarlo,
of the United States of America, as President of the
Security Council, for the invitation to participate in this
open debate and for giving us an opportunity to share
the comments of the Government of Colombia with
regard to the protection of journalists.

The Government of Colombia promotes and
protects the freedom of the press. As President Juan
Manuel Santos Calderon - who is a journalist by
profession - has said on several occasions, journalists
in Colombia can rest assured that the Colombian
Government has arranged all the measures necessary
to promote and protect, at all costs, the freedom and
independence of their selfless work without exception,
to the extent that, as he reaffirmed, criticism from the
press, far from antagonizing us, serves to encourage
self-evaluation, self-reflection and the continued
improvement of the Government.

Colombia shares the concern expressed in various
Security Council statements with regard to violence
againstjournalists. Journalists covering armed conflicts
exercise the fundamental right of providing citizens
with necessary information when crises turn violent,
which in turn leads to conflicts and lends even more
urgency to journalists' work. In that context, Colombia
sees the Security Council's interest in those matters as
a contribution to the specialized work being carried out
in other forums that have the competence to speak and
act on such matters, such as the Human Rights Council,
the special rapporteurs and UNESCO.

My country considers it extremely important
that the bodies of the United Nations system, in their
spheres of competence and in accordance with their
mandates under the Charter, be fully familiar with
the work of national Governments in the field of the
protection of civilians when establishing priorities for
their own work and when informing the Organization
on the respective situations.

Colombia sees the freedom of speech and of the
communications media as a pillar of the democratic
system. In that line of thinking, and given the
challenges faced in a conflict environment, such as that
experienced in Colombia with its many violent factors,
the Colombian State decided to afford special treatment
to journalists, bearing in mind the threats they could
face. That special treatment is based upon article 20 of
Colombia's Constitution, which states that every person
is guaranteed the freedom to express and disseminate
their thoughts and opinions, to inform and receive
truthful and impartial information and to establish
mass communications media.

In 2010, Colombia also enacted Act 1426, by
which it established measures with regard to criminal
actions against the rights of legally protected groups
of human rights defenders and journalists. More
recently, the National Protection Unit was established,
under the Ministry of the Interior, to unify the State's
frameworks to protect civilians in order to provide
security to judges, prosecutors, human rights defenders
and journalists, among other vulnerable groups.

With that conviction, the Colombian Government
supports and vehemently defends the right to freedom
of speech in all its forms. Colombia believes that
the important role played by the United Nations to
identify national deficiencies and challenges should be
accompanied by a recognition of the progress achieved
in each country.

