Mr. Mahiga (United Republic of Tanzania): The
United Republic of Tanzania commends the Brazilian
presidency of the Security Council for what is a most
welcome and timely initiative of examining the work
of the Council in Africa. During a month in which the
Council has spent a significant proportion of its time
on African issues covering 10 countries, it is only
pertinent and healthy that the Council conduct this
evaluation. The transparent manner in which the
assessment is being undertaken will surely enrich the
work of the Council in its efforts to promote peace and
security in Africa. This is a very useful precedent for
the future.

The Council's engagement with African issues
under your presidency, Sir, continues to demonstrate
the significance of conflict prevention in conflict
management, which includes a number of wide-ranging
factors such as development, democratization, early-
warning systems, institutional capacity-building in the
areas of human rights and the rule of law, and assisting
regional organizations in mediation efforts.

Effective prevention requires the system-wide
involvement of the United Nations under the leadership
of the Secretary-General, in collaboration with
multilateral and bilateral actors. Moreover, experience
in conflict management shows that the Council can no
longer concentrate only on the effectiveness of
preventive-diplomacy missions and of peacekeeping
operations. Greater focus is also needed on longer-term
efforts to assist countries such as Guinea-Bissau in
enhancing durable structures conducive to peace and
democratic stability.

There is evidence which suggests that a country
emerging from conflict is most at risk of returning to
violent instability in the first four years after the
signing of a peace agreement. A great number of peace
processes in Africa are at or near that point. That
suggests that the Council must be willing to seriously
look into how it can help Africa and the countries that
are going through delicate transformation processes to
avoid falling back into chaos and anarchy after
considerable investment. The recommendation of the
High-level Panel on Threats, Challenges and Change
for a peacebuilding commission, endorsed by the
Secretary-General, ought to be advanced for quick
adoption and implementation.

It needs to be made clear that, as Africans, we
recognize that the primary responsibility for
peacebuilding and conflict prevention rests with us. It
is in that sense that, even in the midst of war and strife,
there is also a new era of peace and stability through
which Africa and its leadership have forged a common
vision and a shared commitment, as exemplified in the
African Union and the New Partnership for Africa's
Development. But, if Africa is to be successful, the
international community, the United Nations and
especially the Security Council must remain important
partners for peace and development.

The manner in which conflicts are addressed is a
critical component of conflict management: the process
is as important as the outcome. After the Naivasha
peace process gave way to the north-south peace
agreement, there was huge anticipation of action in
relation to the peacekeeping mission in southern
Sudan. The complexities presented by the situation in
Darfur posed a serious challenge to the Council's
effectiveness. They also illustrated that, when the
Council fails to respond in a timely manner to an
evolving political and humanitarian tragedy, it risks
being perceived as indecisive and ineffective. We are
too conscious that, when the Council lacks
effectiveness, it loses its credibility.

It is also true that the working methods of the
Council are characterized by dialogue, mutual respect
and a search for consensus. The pursuit for consensus
is at times criticized for generating inertia, but the
merited prize of unity is strength and credibility.
Although there are no quick fixes to complex
problems, the interlinked nature of threats to
international peace and security demand that the
Security Council demonstrate unity as well as urgency
in responding to situations of potential or actual
conflict.

Just as conflicts are caused, in many cases, by
poverty, so also poverty and social and economic
exclusion increase the risk of violent conflict. The
post-conflict strategies that the Council pursues must
seek to destroy the vicious circle of poverty, conflict
and underdevelopment. There are successful examples
of which the Council can be proud, such as those in
Angola and Mozambique. There are also encouraging
indicators to guide the Council towards a successful
partnership with Africa and its people.

First, the need for early action cannot be
overemphasized; the gap between early warning and
action must be reduced. Secondly, the need to exploit
and strengthen the partnership for peace and
development between the Council and the African
Union and its organs and regional organizations must
be encouraged. Thirdly, integrating a mutually
reinforcing approach into development and conflict
prevention should be seen not as stretching the
mandate of the Council, but rather as enhancing its
mandate in partnership with other United Nations
bodies and relevant partners.

