Mr. Queta (Guinea-Bissau) (interpretation from French): On behalf of the delegation of Guinea-Bissau, we
wish to join other speakers in congratulating you most
sincerely, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Council this month. Your personal experience, skills and
pragmatism guarantee the accomplishment of your task. Our
delegation therefore wishes to assure you and your
delegation of its full cooperation.

Through you, we also wish to thank Ambassador
Somavr'a of Chile and his delegation most sincerely for the
outstanding manner and wisdom with which they led the
work of our Council in April.

I further wish to welcome and congratulate Minister
Cameiro of Angola, who is honouring us with his
presence in this formal meeting of the Council.

Fifteen days ago, when the Council last considered
the situation in Angola, we felt that the peace process was
moving slowly. Unfortunately, we must note that the
situation has changed little. Progress in the
implementation of the Lusaka Protocol continues to be
slow, despite the commendable efforts of the Secretary-
General, his Special Representative in Angola, the
observers of the Angolan peace process - Portugal, the
Russian Federation and the United States of America -
and the Organization of African Unity to promote peace
in that country. In this respect, we wish to pay them all
a tribute for their dedication to the Angolan cause.

Despite the progress which has taken place recently,
according to the report given today by Ambassador
Gharekhan, the quartering and disarmament of UNITA
troops, which is one of the key elements of the peace
process, has not yet been completed. The desertion of a
considerable number of UNITA troops from the
quartering areas gives further cause for concern.

Guinea-Bissau again calls upon UNITA to discharge
by June 1996 its obligations to proceed, without
interruption, fully to quarter its troops, under the
verification of UNAVEM. III, and to hand over to
UNAVEM. III all arms, munitions and military equipment
possessed by its troops. It must also unconditionally
release all prisoners, in keeping with its obligations under
the Lusaka Protocol.

Guinea-Bissau welcomes the progress made by the
Angolan Government in quartering the rapid reaction
police, and we encourage it to complete this process and
to continue to withdraw forces from positions they hold
close to the quartering areas of UNITA.

We also hope that the Angolan Government will
take steps for the establishment of an independent United
Nations radio station.

More than ever, the Government of Angola, and
UNITA in particular, should redouble their efforts to
commit themselves to the peace process by scrupulously
complying with their obligations under the Lusaka
Protocol, as well as their commitments made in Libreville
on 1 March 1996 - in particular, the rapid formation of
unified Angolan armed forces and the creation of a
Government of Unity and National Reconciliation; steps
 

to ensure that UNITA deputies can take their seats in the
National Assembly; the cessation of hostile propaganda;
public measures to destroy the stockpiles of landmines and
to demine the whole country to enable the free circulation
of people and goods; and concrete measures to guarantee
the safety of all United Nations personnel and other
categories of international personnel, so that incidents such
as those which caused the death of two military observers
and a representative of Oxfam on 3 April 1996 during an
ambush by armed assailants are not repeated.

Despite the delays in the peace process in general, we
have also noted some progress in Angola in recent months,
which makes it incumbent upon us again to encourage the
international community to continue to provide the
necessary assistance to this fraternal country to facilitate the
revival and reconstruction of the Angolan economy, in the
hope that the two parties will honour their commitments,
which they are obliged to do under the Lusaka Protocol.

In the light of these observations, we will vote in
favour of the draft resolution before us.

