Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China supports the ability of the Panel of Experts of
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1718
(2006) to undertake its mandated tasks and voted
in favour of resolution 2464 (2019), renewing the
Panel's mandate.

According to the relevant resolution, sanctions
imposed on the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea should not impact the delivery of humanitarian
assistance to that country. The Panel of Experts and the
Committee should act strictly within the parameters of
their mandates. All parties concerned should implement
the resolutions concerning the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea in a comprehensive, complete and
accurate manner. The Council should remain united
and jointly advance the process towards a political
settlement of the issue of the Korean peninsula.

There is no alternative to a peaceful resolution to
the issue of the Korean peninsula, attained through
political dialogue. If the dialogue is to continue and
make headway, the key is to address the legitimate
concerns of the parties involved in a balanced
manner and consistent with the approach of phased,
synchronized steps as a package solution in order to
advance the process of denuclearizing the peninsula
and establishing a peace mechanism there.

China has been consistently committed to the
denuclearization of the Korean peninsula, to peace
and stability in that region, and to seeking a resolution
of the issue through dialogue and consultation. China
has been consistent in implementing the relevant
resolutions of the Security Council comprehensively
and to the letter. China sets great store by the work
of the United Nations and other humanitarian actors
in the Democratic People's Republic of Korea and is
ready to continue providing necessary support and
assistance. China will continue to engage closely with
the parties and play a positive role in achieving the
denuclearization of the peninsula and securing lasting
peace and stability in North-East Asia.

