Mr. Tanin: I am pleased to update the Security
Council on recent key developments in Kosovo since
the Secretary-General's previous report (S/2016/407)
and offer some observations.

The situation in Kosovo over the past three months
has been more stable than it had been during preceding
reporting period. Nonetheless, security threats and
political tensions remained beneath the surface.
Following a period of relative calm, after months of
unruly stand-offs in the Kosovo Assembly, a single
issue gave way to new controversy: the ratification
of the agreement on Kosovo's territorial delineation
with the Republic of Montenegro. Political arguments
and accusations followed, often straying far from
the underlying facts. That irritated public sentiment,
obstructed the functioning of the Assembly and delayed
work on more pressing issues. Although the agreement
had been arrived at with informed international support,
the consideration of its ratification by the Assembly
was postponed. No doubt, consensus-building efforts
ought to have been made much earlier, well before the
issue became a lightning rod for rancour and partisan
debate. Regardless, new efforts have been undertaken
by political leaders in order to ensure all additional
questions are answered.

Meanwhile, the opposition parties continue
working from the wings to try to generate, exploit
and, if possible, prolong such moment in the supposed
crisis. Whatever success they may ultimately achieve
in strengthening an alternate pole of influence, the
opposition appears to be more aware that the use of
violence is counterproductive to that objective. In
addition, acts of political violence, including three
incidents involving explosives in August that targeted
the Assembly, the home of a Kosovo official and the
headquarters of a public broadcaster, are absolutely
unacceptable. That is a problem that should continue
to be managed responsibly by the authorities. From
my recent talks with top leaders in Kosovo, I have
the impression that they understand the need to place
realism and practicality higher on their political
agenda. Many have their eyes upon emerging wider
trends, and the opportunity those trends offer to seize
levers of opportunity and remove old obstacles in order
to achieve faster progress.

I have gained the same impression about local
leadership during my visits to municipalities and
communities throughout Kosovo. In Gjakove/
Dakovica, the Mayor indicated that authority came with
responsibility, not just privilege. In North Mitrovica,
the main concerns were access to employment,
reliable public services, and confidence in governing
institutions. In Obilie/Kastriot, the impact of nearby
outdated energy facilities, over which the municipality
has had little or no say, endangers public health and
safety and reduces social cohesion and local economic
growth. In Vushtrri/Vucitrn, I learned that the different
communities are able to work together towards a
common future, and that inclusive governance is one
of the key elements needed for that work. I heard the
desire for improved relations and more confidence
among the ethnic communities. Behind all of that, it
is apparent that economic, educational and health-
care issues, as well as the rule of law and combating
corruption, are the dominant concerns of people at the
local level, not inter-ethnic politics. Recently, a young
man in the Prizren region approached me to say that
corruption was the biggest problem for his generation
and for all people in Kosovo, a message I have heard on
many occasions.

Throughout all of the former Yugoslavia, the
immediate post-conflict generation has now reached
voting age, and many are now graduating from tertiary
education. Many young adults have known little of
public life besides divisive post-conflict rhetoric. If
stability and prosperity are to be achieved, the post-
conflict generation is in need of clearer direction and
better opportunities as inhabitants of modern Europe
and as world citizens. A lack of promising trades
and professions, public corruption and extremes of
economic inequality all fracture the communities far
more than ethnic or religious nationalism. Therefore,
an impetus for reconciliation emerges from below, but
in my View it needs to be strengthened from above as
well by leaders. I already hear that clearly from some
leaders. But I have also heard it from other segments
of society as well, where individuals recognize the
centrality of putting the past behind if there is to be
meaningful movement forward.

Having returned from Belgrade just yesterday, I was
also struck during my conversations with top leaders by
the emphasis given to regional cooperation and better
understanding of the positions of other sides when
working to overcome the obstacles to trust and progress.
As in the case ofPristina, they also specifically stressed
the need for the European Union-led dialogue to be
successful. Prime Minister Vueic' in particular stressed
to me that too much time was being lost and that what
was needed was more serious and much more sustained
commitment and work on dialogue - not only from
leaders and negotiators but from the European Union
and from all of us in the international community
as well.

The European Union-led high level dialogue
remains a cornerstone in the road towards reconciliation.
It is the European Union perspective in the region that
continues to be a main driver of reform, particularly in
the vital areas of governance, the rule of law and human

rights. Progress continued to be made in some areas
during the reporting period, including the start of the
refurbishment of the Mitrovica Main Bridge, as well as
the narrowing of differences on the telecommunications
issue. With regard to other agreements, in particular
the agreement on the association/community of Serb
majority municipalities in Kosovo, more focused
work is clearly necessary. It is natural for delays in
implementation to lead to second-guessing of the
process itself by observers and participants alike.
Leadership from both sides is at least as important
as pragmatism and commitment, in order not only to
reinvigorate but possibly also to deepen the process
going forward.

Few of those displaced by the conflict have
returned to their homes, and of those who returned,
many have not stayed. Approximately 16,000 persons
remain displaced within Kosovo, with many more
outside. With the passage of time, many have by now
built new lives in their places of displacement. Yet
the voluntary, safe and dignified return of displaced
persons is a fundamental right, and that issue should, I
believe, be brought back into focus by all, including by
the international community.

In order to achieve returns, constructive engagement
is needed with returnees and receiving communities,
which must be matched by political commitment, but,
even more important, by the commitment of resources.
According to the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, some 9,400 displaced
persons are now registered to return. For that to take
place, clear and realistic commitments need to be
present, together with the allocation of the requisite
resources and efforts in order to ensure that the proper
conditions are in place.

Kosovo possesses a rich and diverse cultural
heritage that includes religious, linguistic, artistic and
social diversity. The Kosovo system has comprehensive
legislation protecting the freedoms of language use,
association and worship. It is the full implementation
and enforcement of those strong legislative frameworks
that remains an essential objective.

Over the past three months, there have been
no large-scale inter-ethnic disturbances, nor any
significant attacks against cultural sites. However,
vulnerable groups, in particular among non-majority
communities, have been subject to higher rates of
intimidation. Statistics in that area must always be
treated with enormous caution, but those available at
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) suggest that there are, on average,
around 25 potentially ethnically motivated crimes
recorded in Kosovo every month. All communities are
affected, and the primary motives behind the crimes are
frequently found not to have been political. But it bears
emphasizing that the victims of intimidation always
have a different perspective from those who have not
experienced it. More sensitivity to that essential truth
is needed by the authorities on all sides, as well as on
our part.

With respect to reconciliation, I wish to commend
the courageous initiatives taken by President Thaci.
On 21 July, he visited and paid respects at a memorial
commemorating 14 Kosovo Serb civilians from Staro
Gradsko who had been murdered in that village shortly
after the end of hostilities. A few days later, he visited
another memorial to an unsolved crime against Kosovo
Serbs in the village of GoraZdevac where, in 2003,
teenagers swimming in a river were murdered. Those
visits remind us also of the fact that all leaders share
a solemn responsibility to do more to help resolve the
missing persons cases, which date back from the time
of the conflict.

Seventeen years after the end of the conflict, the
fate of over 1,600 persons remains undetermined. All
communities are affected by the loss. The issue of the
missing should not be allowed to slip from the political
agenda, but the missing will be found, and their fates
determined, only if there is fundamental and sustained
commitment by all, including our Mission.

The phenomenon of violent extremism is a swiftly
evolving global challenge. The presence of radical
Islamist elements and organizers in Kosovo is known.
Local authorities have taken numerous strong measures
to mitigate the threat, but the presence of elements that
have participated in recent foreign wars gives us all
reasons to be vigilant and aware. The Kosovo authorities
have implemented a strong law enforcement approach
with respect to those who advocate violence and those
who facilitate volunteer fighters. As the authorities
have acknowledged, that can work only when it
goes hand in hand with a development approach that
effectively targets the specific socioeconomic drivers
of extremism in Kosovo. There is also an important role
to be played by the international community through
well-coordinated assistance, including from the United
Nations.

In recent days, we have been able to significantly
strengthen constructive engagement with Kosovo
leaders, which was reflected, among other things, in
substantive meetings with President Thaci, Prime
Minister Mustafa and Foreign Minister Hoxhaj. My
constructive engagement with Belgrade leaders,
including my discussions this week with President
Nikolie, Prime Minister Vucie and Foreign Minister
Dacie, remain essential for maintaining our balanced
and objective role within the framework of regional
interaction and towards the full realization of our
mandate.

In conclusion, I would like to highlight that, during
the past few months, we have thoroughly reviewed the
activities of the Mission and developed a focused vision
not only for recalibrating and optimizing our work, but
also for creating an atmosphere with all stakeholders
that allows the Mission to engage more efficiently and
effectively on both existing issues and emerging issues,
such as the global problem of violent extremism and the
development of workable frameworks for reconciliation.
In short, we will be implementing the objectives that
the Security Council has entrusted to us in a more up-
to-date manner.

I thank the Council for its continuing support for
UNMIK.

