The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of Equatorial Guinea.

Allow me to begin by thanking Mr. Zahir Tanin,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) for his briefing on
developments in Kosovo over the past few months.
Similarly, I thank His Excellency Mr. Ivica Daeie,
First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Republic of Serbia, and Her Excellency
Ms. Citaku, Ambassador of Kosovo to the United
States, for their briefings.

Our delegation welcomes the decision to convene
today's meeting to address the situation in Kosovo. We
believe that today's meeting has afforded the members
of the Security Council the opportunity to play a
constructive role in improving the situation on the
ground, and that it will serve to encourage both parties
to demonstrate their full commitment to reaching an
agreement on the Kosovo issue.

In line with that position, we take note of the report
submitted by the Secretary-General (S/2019/102) and
are particularly concerned about the tensions that arose
between Belgrade and Pristina in the reporting period.
Actions, such as the decision taken by the Kosovo
Government to raise the import tax on goods from
Serbia and Bosnia and Herzegovina to 100 per cent;
the decision of the mayors of the four Kosovo Serb-
majority municipalities to resign and cease official
communication with the authorities in Pristina; and
a series of intercommunity incidents clearly require
the Security Council's attention and commitment to
working with Belgrade and Pristina in the process to
normalize relations.

We therefore welcome the fact that the members
of the Security Council are ready to address the latest
developments outlined in the Secretary-General's
report. In the same vein, we share the Secretary-
General's remarks that, now more than ever, the leaders
of Belgrade and Pristina should avoid any action that
could further increase tensions and seek to re-engage
and work to advance the dialogue facilitated by the
European Union. In that regard, we encourage them to
step up their efforts in the quest for a political, inclusive
and peaceful solution to the Kosovo issue.

The Republic of Equatorial Guinea reaffirms its
respect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
the Republic of Serbia. We therefore urge the parties
to pursue the dialogue to promote the normalization
of relations, since ensuring security and stability in
Kosovo requires the commitment of both parties to
continuing political dialogue in the quest for a lasting
solution that is acceptable to all parties.

Lastly, we commend UNMIK's excellent work
on the ground and the support it provides to all
communities in Kosovo, as well as to regional and
international actors, in fulfilling the mandates set out
in resolution 1244 (1999), which is the legal basis for a
just solution to Kosovo. We therefore encourage them
to pursue their constructive engagement with Pristina
and Belgrade in order to pave the way for a solution to
the Kosovo issue.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

There are no more names inscribed on the list
of speakers.

The meeting rose at 5.40 pm.
