Mr. Lamamra (Algeria) (interpretation from French):
I begin, Sir, by expressing the warm congratulations of the
Algerian delegation on your assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council. Your professional and human
qualities guarantee the success of the Council's work at a
time when the international community is preparing to mark
further significant progress in the southern part of the
African continent - which includes your country,
Botswana - in the establishment of peace and stability
which Namibia, South Africa and Mozambique have
embraced one after the other, to general satisfaction.

I wish to convey my profound gratitude to your
predecessor, Ambassador cardenas, for the effective way in
which he led the Council last month.

The recent meeting of the Council of Ministers of the
Organization of African Unity fully appreciated the
significance and scope of the Lusaka Protocol of
20 November 1994 and the promising prospects thus
opened up for the restoration of peace, stability and security
in Angola. In dispatching a strong delegation comprising
several Foreign Ministers and the Secretary-General of the
Organization of African Unity to participate in this debate,
Africa has committed itself as a whole to the success of the
process of national reconciliation in Angola and to the strict
implementation of the Lusaka Protocol, with the invaluable
assistance of the United Nations. Moreover, the very
signing of the Lusaka Protocol was the result of efforts,
including those of the United Nations, focusing on a
regional negotiating mechanism led by the Secretary-
General's Special Representative, Maitre Alioune Blondin
Beye, to whom I am pleased to pay a well-deserved
tribute.

The Lusaka Protocol, an extension of the Bicesse
Accords of May 1991, embodies the will of the Angolan
Government and of UNITA to make full use of political
means to put an end to a particularly devastating
fratricidal conflict. It is thus an important development,
marking the point of no-return in the Angolan people's
march towards the achievement of a notably better
national future.

Indeed, despite the precarious situation and the
difficulties inherent in moving from confrontation to
cooperation on the path to national reconciliation, the
steps taken by both parties and the stages that have
already been passed have greatly helped to meet the
conditions for the systematic implementation of the
Lusaka Protocol, with a United Nations presence, whose
human and material resources can measure up to its tasks.

The cease-fire entered into force on
22 November 1994. In the view of the observers of the
United Nations Angola Verification Mission (UNAVEM. II), it has been generally effective, and any violations that
may have been committed are considered minor. The
Joint Commission, established in implementation of the
Lusaka Protocol and chaired by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, has held several
meetings and is accomplishing its work satisfactorily. The
meeting of the Chiefs of Staff held on 10 January allowed
important decisions to be taken with a view to
guaranteeing respect for the military provisions of the
Lusaka Protocol, particularly by initiating a
disengagement of the forces of the two parties and thus
contributing to the consolidation of the cease-fire and to
a climate of mutual trust. The expected meeting between
President dos Santos and Mr. Jonas Savimbi should
strengthen this climate of trust and give decisive
momentum to the peace process.

The international community and the United Nations
should, in the words of the Secretary-General in his most
recent report on Angola, respond positively to this
challenge. The United Nations should not only assist in
the implementation of the Lusaka Protocol in order to
speed up the peace process, but also coordinate and
facilitate humanitarian activities linked to that process.

 

The task is both urgent and essential. We must assist
refugees and internally displaced persons to return to their
homes. We must ensure the reintegration into civilian life
of the demobilized soldiers and de-mine parts of the
territory, in order to allow the safe movement of persons
and goods and help the economy to recover. These are
areas of work which are equally crucial for strengthening
peace and stability in the country.

In his conclusions, the Secretary-General very clearly
indicates that the situation in Angola is encouraging and
that the dynamic of peace is well under way there. On this
basis and to consolidate the process, the Secretary-General
proposes that a new United Nations operation, UNAVEM
III, immediately take over from UNAVEM. II, whose
mandate expires today.

Algeria endorses these conclusions, especially since,
as the Secretary-General has emphasized, the conditions
set by resolution 966 (1994) of 8 December 1994 for
deploying a new United Nations operation in Angola -
in particular, respect for the cease-fire - have been met.
UNAVEM. III should be deployed as soon as possible, for
any delay or additional conditions could raise unnecessary
obstacles to progress in the peace progress. To
consolidate such progress and make it irreversible requires
a clear message and a firm commitment from the
international community.

