Mr. Cohen (United States of America): I thank
Special Representative Chambas for his briefing here
today, which clearly outlined areas of progress as well
as the immense challenges that remain in West Africa.

We appreciate the work that the United Nations
Office for West Africa and the Sahel (UNOWAS)
does in support of international peace and security in
fostering freedom and good governance across West
Africa and the Sahel. We also recognize and pay tribute
to the sacrifices that thousands of security forces
members and peacekeepers make every day to create a
more prosperous and stable region. To those ends, I will
highlight a few core priorities that we believe merit the
attention of UNOWAS and the Security Council in the
coming months.

In the Sahel, we share Mr. Chambas' concerns
about the increasing intercommunal violence, the rise
in insecurity along the borders of Burkina Faso, Mali
and the Niger, the continued prevalence of terrorist and
criminal activity throughout the region and allegations
of human rights abuses by non-State armed groups and
security forces.

We share the concern expressed by the Secretary-
General regarding the growing sophistication and reach
of violent extremist organizations in parts of the Sahel.
Only by promoting good governance, addressing the root
causes of instability, creating economic opportunity,
respecting human rights and enhancing security can
the region make sustained progress towards addressing
those challenges. We are particularly concerned by
the increasing unrest in the central Sahel, which is at
least partly driven by the scarcity of resources. We
are concerned that over time, local communities may
begin seeing these disputes through an ethnic lens. In
that connection, we are pleased that UNOWAS recently
completed its study on pastoralism and security in West
Africa and the Sahel and look forward to coordinating
with it as it seeks to incorporate the findings into the
work that the United Nations is doing in the region.
Mali is at the centre ofthe region, with its own unique
political and security challenges and its Agreement
on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali emanating from
the Algiers process. We call once again on the parties
to that Agreement to make significant progress over
the next few months. In particular, we hope that they
implement the measures laid out in resolution 2423
(2018). Going forward, we cannot and should not
accept the unwillingness that we have seen in the past
by the parties to fully and rapidly implement the Mali
Agreement. The stakes are too high, both for the people
of Mali and for the region, and the Security Council
should consider using all available tools, including
sanctions, against those who obstruct implementation.

In the Lake Chad basin, the security and
humanitarian situations remain a concern. The lack
of humanitarian access to large parts of the region
continues to take a heavy toll on populations in need
of assistance, in particular women and children. While
the region has made progress in coordinating efforts
against Boko Haram and the Islamic State West
Africa Province, it is clear that those violent extremist
organizations remain dangerous threats.

Finally, we remain focused on Nigeria's February
national elections as a critical test of democracy in
both Nigeria and the wider region. The United States
continues to support the Nigerian goal of free and
fair elections, held in a peaceful and appropriately
transparent manner, that reflect the will of the Nigerian
people. Through diplomacy; robust public engagement,
including with youth and civil society; and democracy
and governance programmes, we are helping the country
to strengthen its democratic institutions and processes.

In advance of February's elections, we share many
ofthe concerns expressed by Nigerian observers and our
international partners regarding the political climate in
key areas of risk. Specifically, we are concerned about
reports of intimidation and partisanship by security
forces, heightened insecurity, the inability of internally
displaced persons or persons with disabilities to
vote, and the risk that widespread vote-buying could
challenge the integrity of the electoral process. We
urge the Nigerian authorities and political parties, civil
society and community leaders to address those risks in
the run-up to February's election and to ensure that the
election is genuinely free and fair and held in a peaceful
and appropriately transparent manner.

Twenty years after the country's return to
democratic rule, the upcoming elections provide
Nigerians with an opportunity to shape the future
of their country and further solidify its place as a
democratic leader in Africa.

