Mr. Grandi: I thank you, Mr. President, for inviting
me today and for representing a country that has been
and is one of the strongest supporters of the refugee
cause in your country itself, in Europe and globally.

From where I sit, and no doubt from where
members of the Security Council sit as well, times
are very challenging. I will focus on those challenges
seen from my perspective. I would like to flag, at the
beginning, a context in which there is unprecedented
stigmatization of refugees and migrants, a context in
which traditional responses to refugee crises appear
increasingly inadequate and a context in which there
is a sense around the issue of an overwhelming crisis.

I think it would be useful, before we start, to recall
for whom this is a crisis. It is a crisis for a mother who
is trying to flee gang Violence with her children. It is
a crisis for a teenager who wants to flee war, human
rights violations and forced conscription. It is a crisis
for Governments in countries with few resources that
open their borders to thousands of refugees every day.
For them, it is a crisis.

But to portray this as a global crisis that is not
manageable, in my opinion, is wrong. With political
will, which Council members represent at the highest
level, and with improved responses, as enshrined in
the global compact on refugees, which was adopted
in December by the General Assembly as resolution
73/151, it is possible and urgent to address those crises.

The Security Council has a critical role to play, as I
have said in the past. I will quickly focus on three areas:
first, a key function of the Security Council - solving
peace and security crises; secondly, supporting the

countries that host the largest numbers of refugees;
and thirdly, working together to remove obstacles to
solutions, in particular the return of people to their
own countries.

First, with regard to working together to solve crises,
I will focus on the situation in Libya. However, before
I go there, let me recall that, of the nearly 70 million
people who are displaced or refugees, most are fleeing
conflict. If conflicts were prevented or resolved, most
refugee flows would disappear. Still, from where
we are we observe very fragmented approaches to
peacemaking and very insufficient approaches to
peacebuilding. We see a lot of efforts to address the
symptoms without addressing the causes.

Libya is a case in point and I know very well that
it is an issue on the Council's current agenda, given the
events of the past few days. Let me talk about Libya
from our perspective. As members know, together with
the International Organization for Migration (IOM), we
are working not only with internally displaced Libyans,
but also refugees and migrants who are stranded
there. Many of them fled other conflicts and now find
themselves caught in another conflict.

Security has always been very fragile in Libya.
Now and over the past week, that security and those
conditions are reaching a breaking point. We have
reduced staff, like the rest of the United Nations. We
do not want to leave, if it is possible to stay, but work is
very difficult and dangerous. I visited twice and I have
hardly ever felt such a sense of insecurity. We tried to
gain access, even under the current circumstances, to
the detention centre where refugees and migrants are
held. We have been able to relocate 150 yesterday or
this morning to safety, but that is a drop in the bucket.

Libya is indicative of the challenges that we face
in many conflicts, for example in Yemen, which the
Council discusses so frequently. There are insecurity
and access issues faced by our personnel and relatively
few resources. The most urgent need with regard
to Libya is the Council's unified action to end the
current military escalation and its strong call to spare
civilians, including the refugees and migrants who
are blocked in the country. I echo, in that regard, the
appeal made yesterday by the Secretary-General. Then,
if the Council is successful, there will finally need to
be unified action to address the causes of conflict. It
will be more difficult now, but it will be necessary if
we want to avoid a protracted conflict, which no doubt
would create further displacement and impede any
action on refugees and migrants, with consequences
that are difficult to predict.
It is good to look at the lessons we have learned in
Libya over the past few months. Lots of resources have
been put into strengthening the coast guard to stem the
flows towards Europe and not much else has been done
by way of investment in bringing peace and stability
to the country. That has not been effective. The Libyan
coast guard is not an effective rescuer of people in
the sea and the detention of refugees and migrants,
under horrific and unacceptable conditions, is still the
prevailing mode in the country.

I really think that it is important, and we have
learned that lesson, to be more strategic at both ends of
those long flows. We must look at the root causes and
why people are leaving, such as conflict and poverty. In
Europe, where people inevitably will continue to arrive,
we must try to establish a reception system based on an
approach of shared solidarity, in spite of the difficult
politics around it.

My second point is about host countries. I know
that political solutions are not easy in today's world,
so we need to be realistic in our expectations. Forced
displacement will continue to be with us for some time
and we need to manage it well. Some countries have
adopted very good approaches, in partnership with
donors - some Council members are big donors - but
also with development actors, such as the World Bank
and the private sector. Ethiopia, Uganda, Kenya and
Niger: there are many very positive examples in Africa
and there are other examples as well. However, more
often than not, support is insufficient.

In that regard, I turn to the case of Venezuela. The
Council has focused a great deal on what is happening
inside Venezuela, and rightly so. I understand that,
tomorrow, there will be a special meeting of the
Security Council that will focus on that particular
issue. In that respect, we are aligned with the rest of
the United Nations. We must appeal, with the others,
for a political solution to be found quickly to that crisis.
But it is important not to forget - and sometimes I
worry that the Council is forgetting - about the other
dimension of that crisis: the outflow of people. Three
and a half million Venezuelans have left the country.
On refugees and migrants, IOM. and the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR) work together because it is a very mixed
group of people. Colombia, Peru, Ecuador and Brazil
are the countries most impacted, but there are about 15
countries in all that are receiving Venezuelans.

Latin American solidarity, once again, has been
outstanding. As we speak, countries of the region are
concluding an important meeting in Quito, as part of
the Quito process, to forge more regional cooperation
to respond to the situation in Venezuela. I appeal to
those countries to keep the doors open, in spite of
the burden, and to diminish the restrictions imposed
on Venezuelans.

Support for those countries needs to increase
bilaterally through United Nations channels - our
appeal for the humanitarian crisis in that region is one
of the most poorly funded globally - and of course,
most importantly, through the international financial
institutions. Failure to do so will also leave those
Governments exposed politically in their own countries
and under the burden of an unsustainable mass of
hundreds of thousands of Venezuelans.

Eighty-five per cent of the world's refugees are in
poor or middle-income countries. That is where the crisis
is, including the situation in Venezuela. My appeal is
therefore for support to be stepped up. That hospitality
must not be taken for granted, as we see not only in
Colombia or Peru, but also in Lebanon and Bangladesh.
I could cite many other examples. The global compact
provides a blueprint for better responses - a blueprint
that is not only humanitarian but goes beyond to the
medium and long terms. It is a type of response that
is key not only from the humanitarian point of view,
but also - and this is the Council's perspective - to
the stability of the entire region, and hence directly of
concern to the Council.

The third and last point I want to raise concerns the
fact that solutions to forced displacement exist and are
possible even in difficult circumstances, but we need to
work together to remove obstacles, in particular those
that prevent people from returning to their countries. In
the context that I have described, we are increasingly
challenged by one type of scenario, where peace is not
completely established but where circumstances are
evolving in that direction. That very often not only
translates into pressure on refugees to return under
less than ideal circumstances, but also leads to some
refugees deciding, in spite of those circumstances, to
do so.

Contrary to some perceptions, my organization
does not block returns. We do not block returns. We
think that return is a right, but it is equally a right to
make the choice not to return if circumstances are
not conducive to that, in the absence of security and
basic support. In other words, we want to appeal once
more for the free and informed choice of refugees to be
respected and for returns to be - in a phrase that we
use almost as a slogan - dignified, secure and safe.
Key to that is work that we can do together to remove
obstacles to return.

A case in point here is, of course, Syria. The vast
majority of the almost 6 million Syrian refugees in the
Middle East want to return. They tell us that in our
surveys, but not all of them agree. The majority are still
hesitant to do so now. It is important to look at this
from the refugees' perspective. They have three sets of
concerns: material concerns, such as shelter, services
and jobs; security concerns, including conscription
and retaliation in general; and legal and administrative
obstacles related to property and documentation. On all
these matters, we have established a fairly constructive
dialogue with the Government of Syria, and I would like
to thank the Russian Federation for having supported
that dialogue.

But we need faster action and faster responses on the
part of Syria, as well as access for UNHCR and United
Nations staff to the areas where people return in order
to create and build the confidence that they desperately
need to make that very difficult choice. Meanwhile, I
would be remiss ifI failed to say that support for the
countries hosting refugees - Lebanon, Jordan, Turkey,
Egypt and Iraq, which will host those refugees in large
numbers for some time to come - needs to continue.

I want to also mention, as I have several times here
in the Chamber, the situation in Myanmar. As Council
members know, the United Nations Development
Programme and UNHCR have had a memorandum of
understanding with the Government of Myanmar since
June 2018. The implementation has been very slow
and made slower by the security situation in northern
Rakhine, with the offensive of the Arakan Rohingya
Salvation Army, with which Council members
are familiar. We have received reports recently of
violence against civilians, which has provoked fresh
displacement, which is of course worrying.

I am glad to report, as I have not been able to
do previously, that the Government of Myanmar
very recently authorized the implementation of 34
projects. That may seem like a lot, but they are very
small compared to what needs to be done. We should
be carrying out hundreds of projects. It is good to
sustain that momentum. I hope to visit Myanmar soon
to do just that. Inclusive development, encompassing
the communities, is important, but as I have often
said, it is not enough to break that cycle of exclusion,
displacement and fragile return that has prevailed for
decades. At the risk of sounding repetitive here, let
me repeat nevertheless that returns must be voluntary.
I think everybody agrees on that. Restoring security
is key in that regard, as it is to implementing the
recommendations of the Advisory Commission on
Rakhine State, especially in terms of pathways to
citizenship, documentation, access to services and
ending the inequality before the law that has been
characteristic of that situation and has affected the
Rohingya community.

I think that it would be useful to continue to insist
that some visible signals be given by the Government
of Myanmar, including with respect to freedom of
movement for the Rohingya who have not left and are
still there; solving the problem of internally displaced
persons who are confined to camps in very difficult
circumstances; or tackling the hate-speech campaigns
that we are seeing periodically in social media, directed
at the Rohingya.

In the meantime, let us not forget that, similarly to
the situation in Syria, Bangladesh is hosting a million
people in difficult circumstances. I shall visit the
country, along with representatives of the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and IOM,
in a couple of weeks. That will be an opportunity for
me to recall that we need international support in order
to at least to give dignity to people who are living in
difficult exile.

I shall close with a few remarks that take me back
to my initial point. As Council members may know,
I have been an international civil servant and I have
worked with refugees for well over three decades.
In my career in this field of work, I have seen much
solidarity, and even heroism, in some of the responses
that are provided on the ground, with the support of the
Security Council. Make no mistake - I see that this
solidarity is still very strong when I go around the world
and talk about this issue, every day in many countries.

However, over the course of these three and a half
decades, I have never seen such toxicity, such poison,
in the language of politics, in the media, in social media
and even in everyday discussions and conversations
around this issue. This toxicity often focuses, sadly,
tragically, on refugees, migrants and foreigners. That
should be of concern to us all. What we have seen in
Christchurch, New Zealand, is also the result of that
toxic language of politics. But let us take a leaf from
the exemplary response of the people and the leadership
of New Zealand by responding to this toxic trend in
a firm and organized manner, restating the values
that underpin the solidarity provided to refugees, and
reaffirming - as do the Sustainable Development
Goals - that our societies will not be truly prosperous,
stable and peaceful if they do not include all.

