Mr. Rishchynski (Canada) (spoke in Spanish): I
wish to thank you, Mr. President, for this opportunity
to take the floor.

(spoke in English)

Canada recognizes the importance of inclusiveness
in conflict prevention and post-conflict peacebuilding.
Of importance to Canada's international efforts in this
regard is the promotion of religious freedom and the
participation of women.

Canada considers it of the utmost importance
that all individuals are able to practice their faith in
safety and security. We know that societies that protect
religious freedom are more likely to protect all other
fundamental freedoms and are typically more stable
and prosperous societies. Canada itself is a country of
many ethnicities and religions, sharing one common
humanity, one of tolerance, acceptance and peace.

Lasting peace and stability requires the full
participation of all of its citizens, especially with
religious groups. As demonstrated visibly by conflicts
across parts of the Middle East and Africa, there can
be no peace or security in regions where there is no
religious pluralism or dialogue, trust and stability
between the religious communities themselves.

(spoke in French)

Canada firmly believes that the full participation
of women and girls in all aspects of the social, political
and economic lives of their communities and countries
is a prerequisite to the attainment of sustainable peace,
prosperity and development. A community or country
cannot develop if half of its population is not allowed to
fully contribute.

That is why Canada calls for the elimination of the
legal and social barriers to the empowerment of women
and girls. Child, early and forced marriage, a permissive
attitude towards violence against women and girls, and
discrimination against women and girls, including with

respect to access to education, health services, justice
and economic resources, are simply unacceptable.

The role of women and girls is particularly
important in times of crisis. In crisis situations, women
and girls are usually agents of stability and resilience
for their families and communities and important voices
for moderation and peace. Yet, as we see all too often,
and most recently in the areas affected by the terrorist
group known as the Islamic State, in crises women and
girls are often subjected to terrible abuse, specifically
rape as a weapon war.

(spoke in English)

Inclusive development is especially relevant to
peacebuilding efforts. As Chair of the Sierra Leone
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC), Canada supports the Government of Sierra
Leone and will continue to work with it to ensure that
the necessary attention and resources are available to
support national peacebuilding efforts in the country.
The 2015 peacebuilding review will be an opportunity
to revisit how the PBC can and should change to
better advance peacebuilding priorities in conflict-
affected countries. As such, it must be consistent with
and complementary to parallel United Nations policy
reviews, including the review of peace operations and
the post-2015 development agenda.

Inclusive development is a key consideration. It is
also a core principle of the New Deal for Engagement
in Fragile States. For example, the New Deal puts
a premium on supportive and inclusive political
settlements. Building from that starting point, we
support each of the targets associated with goal 16
proposed by the Open Working Group on Sustainable
Development Goals to promote peaceful and inclusive
societies, provide access to justice and build effective,
accountable and inclusive institutions. However, we
strongly believe that one of the missing elements in that
goal is the inclusion of a target for increasing female
participation in peace processes.

(spoke in French)

In sum, the practice of exclusion is too common,
to the detriment of security. Religious communities,
women and girls, local stakeholders, civil society,
Governments and the international community must
cooperate fully in striving to understand each other's
perspectives in order to meaningfully effect inclusive
development, a concept that is critical to the promotion
of peace and security.

