Mr. Akbaruddin (India): We thank the delegation
of Equatorial Guinea for thoughtfully bringing much-
needed focus on an issue that reflects our collective
resolve to work together. We also thank the briefers for
their informative submissions.
We join in commending this unique and ambitious
effort, for which the whole continent of Africa is
committed to working together on the entire spectrum
of issues, including on peace and security through the
African Union (AU).

India welcomes the approach that provides for a
leading role of Africa in addressing African problems,
through African solutions. We also believe that this
is a work in progress and needs to be supported. On
the other hand, the maintenance of international peace
and security is one of the purposes and principles of
the Charter of the United Nations, which also entails
the collective responsibility of Member States to
extend mutual support for strengthening capacities
and capabilities to address threats to international
peace and security. Thus, the cooperation of the United
Nations with African efforts is a natural progression. I
will focus on three issues.

First, the AU is playing a critical role in its
contribution to conflict prevention in Africa, with a
focus on the prevention of the outbreak, escalation,
continuation and recurrence of conflict. The mediation
efforts by the AU and the regional and subregional
organizations in Africa are showing positive results. We
believe that such efforts, based on the interest, consent
and commitment of all parties, will lead towards a
sustainable and peaceful settlements. We appreciate
the measures taken by all stakeholders towards the
implementation of the AU Master Roadmap of Practical
Steps for Silencing the Guns in Africa by 2020.

Secondly, as the African Union continues to make
progress in addressing the resolution of conflicts, the
need for peacebuilding and development becomes a
priority. We believe that the commitment to support
peacebuilding is an imperative for sustainable peace in
Africa. While there is a broad consensus at the United
Nations to strengthen the work of the Peacebuilding
Commission, there is no agreement on increasing its
funding to even a 1 per cent level of that of peacekeeping
operations annually. Building peace cannot be a
voluntary pursuit; it has to be the common objective
of all.

For its part, India is a regular contributor to this
effort. As part of the traditional South-South solidarity
for development cooperation, at the Third India-
Africa Forum Summit, India extended concessional
credit worth $10 billion and doubled scholarships for
African students to $50,000 over a five-year period.
India's partnership with Africa is based on a model of
cooperation which is responsive to the needs of African
countries. It is demand-driven, free of conditions and
provided in a non-prescriptive manner.

Thirdly, ever-expanding terror networks have
endangered the peace and security of the African
region in unprecedented ways. From Boko Haram to
Al-Shabaab, these terrorist networks are more and
more connected to terrorist networks from all around
the world. Our response to terrorist threats remains
less than satisfactory. The price of that indifference has
been immeasurable. A scaled-up response is required.
No easy recipe exists. Scaling up requires working
through additional partners, both regional bodies and
States. Coalitions and bilateral relationships will be
critical for completing key tasks. A strong, effective
and coherent response that reflects the international
community's collective commitment to defeat the
scourge ofterrorism is essential, in Africa as elsewhere.

The complex nature of modern conflicts makes it
necessary to respond to the changing needs ofour times.
In the African Union, the United Nations has a willing
partner. We hope the adoption of resolution 2457 (2019)
today will lead to specific steps in that direction.

