Mr. Ntwaagae (Botswana): I have the honour to
deliver this statement on behalf of the member States
of the Southern African Development Community
(SADC).

SADC aligns itselfwith the statementjust delivered
by the Permanent Representative of Sierra Leone on
behalf of the African Group.

Allow me to join in expressing our heartfelt
condolences to the families and friends of the vicims
following the tragic events in France and elsewhere, in
which a significant number of human lives were lost as
a result of terrorism and violent conflict.

Allow me also to sincerely commend the British
presidency of the Security Council for the initiative
to hold this open debate at a time when there are
serious threats to international peace and security.
Today's open debate, on security, development and the
root causes of conflict, is very timely inasmuch as it
affords the international community the opportunity
to reflect on this important matter. The tragedies the
world is currently experiencing serve to underscore the
need to intensify global efforts towards the effective
management and prevention of conflicts and terrorism
in all their forms and manifestations. SADC sincerely
commends the Council's continued engagement with
Member States on pertinent issues concerning the
maintenance of international peace and security.

The discourse regarding security and development
is often a difficult one. While some would argue that
security is needed to enhance development potential,
others would advance arguments to the contrary. That
clearly demonstrates the fact that the two issues are
interrelated and that the attainment of both should be our
ultimate aim. A deficit in either could result in untold
suffering, leading to conflict. SADC believes that peace
and security are prerequisites for the attainment of
sustainable development. The two provide a conducive
environment for development, which in turn results in
improved quality of life for our citizens.

Many reasons have been advanced as root causes
of conflict throughout the world. We often see nations
and communities tear each other apart for reasons
such as the inequitable distribution of resources, the
lack of good governance, social exclusion, political
intolerance or environmental conflicts, among many
others. Consequently, where such conflict situations
exist, democracy and the rule of law are undermined,
resulting in the suppression of individuals by the very
machinery that ought to protect them. That glaring
failure by States to fulfil their obligations to protect
their citizens can be attributed to weak governance
institutions, poor leadership, the marginalization
of certain communities and the lack of inclusive
development. In essence, conflict can be attributed to
the absence of a positive social contract between those
in power and civil society.

As the United Nations marks its seventieth year
of existence, it remains as relevant as ever as the only
universally agreed platform for addressing international
disputes through peaceful means. In accordance with
the Charter of the United Nations, the Security Council
is entrusted with the responsibility for maintaining
of international peace and security. In that context,
the Council needs to be more proactive and to invest
more in conflict prevention, mediation and arbitration,
instead of attempting to manage conflicts that are
already raging.

As we scan the horizon, any scenario that exhibits
the potential for conflict should be met with unwavering
resolve and all appropriate tools at the disposal of
the international community should be put to use. In
that regard, it is important to address any simmering
situation before it escalates into a full-blown conflict
that could lead to untold suffering and devastation,
especially on the part of vulnerable social groups.

While acknowledging the primacy of the United
Nations in maintaining international peace and
security, there are equally more important partners that
must be involved. First and foremost, States and their
citizens must play a leading role in finding solutions
to their problems. Imposing solutions and maintaining
a monopoly on making peace is counterproductive.
It is therefore prudent for regional and subregional
mechanisms to be at the fore of efforts to promote
sustainable peace and development. For that reason,
SADC remains committed to contributing to a stable,
just and peaceful security architecture by strengthening
effective, inclusive and accountable national and
regional institutions. In that respect, the SADC nations
have entered into bilateral and regional peace and
security frameworks that seek, among other things, to
address conflict within and among States.

In conclusion, I wish to reiterate SADC's
constructive engagement with and commitment to
working with the United Nations and with our own
continental body, the African Union, to enhance
international security and development. Taking place
against the backdrop of devastating terrorism attacks
on innocent civilians, today's debate should serve to
strengthen our resolve to combat conflict and all other
forms of insecurity. We owe it to the multitudes of our
people, our children and posterity to ensure a safe and
secure environment that allows the human spirit to
thrive to its fullest potential.

