Mr. Bin Momen (Bangladesh): I would like to
begin by welcoming the Security Council presidency
of Indonesia for this month and thank the Indonesian
leadership for arranging this timely debate and for
the adoption of presidential statement S/PRST/2019/4
earlier this morning.

Peacekeeping has been a flagship undertaking of
the United Nations over the past 70 years and remains
one of its most visible contributions to multilateralism.
In the maintenance of international peace and security,
we take pride in our modest contribution of troops and
police to United Nations peacekeeping missions. We
currently have over 6,700 peacekeepers in 10 different
peacekeeping missions around the world.

We are also gradually increasing our female
peacekeepers, in keeping with our commitment
to the United Nations. Since 2010, we have been
sending 150 to 200 female peacekeepers every year.
So far, Bangladesh has deployed over 1,600 female
peacekeepers, and in 2018 Bangladesh stood fifth
among the troop-contributing countries (TCCs) and the
police-contributing countries (PCCs) in contributing
female peacekeepers. We currently send female
peacekeepers with all contingents.

There have been several efforts in recent years to
strengthen United Nations peace operations. Oflate, the
United Nations has unfolded many initiatives to face the
many challenges by which that multilateral endeavour
is beset. Bangladesh reiterates its strong support
for such efforts, including the Secretary-General's
initiatives on peace and security reforms, the Action
for Peacekeeping initiative, the Department of Peace
Operation's (DPO) uniformed gender-parity strategy
and the shared commitments laid out by the Council.

Bangladesh has always strongly supported the
Secretary-General's zero-tolerance policy against all
forms of sexual exploitation and abuse by peacekeepers.
Our Prime Minister, Sheikh Hasina, is a member of the
Circle of Leadership on the prevention of and response
to sexual exploitation and abuse by peacekeepers. We
are also party to the Secretary-General's voluntary
compact to eliminate sexual exploitation and abuse.

Peace support operation training is an evolving
concept. Every field situation is unique, as are the
mandates and dynamics of conflict. In Bangladesh,
while setting our training module, we follow the
guidelines of DPO. We provide generic training to
our officers in their capacities both as observers
and as contingent members. In addition, mindful of
context-specific requirements, we provide tailor-made
predeployment training, including language courses.
Those are useful tools in winning the hearts and minds
of local populations.

We train our officers and men in a way that, in
addition to their security duties, they must be able
to understand the role of other agencies involved in
the mission and support the political objective of the
mandate. We receive requests from the United Nations
for peacekeepers to work in different appointments
and responsibilities. Keeping that in view, we train
our peacekeepers to suit any particular United Nations
peace-support environment.

I would now like to highlight three aspects of
training and capacity-building.

First, on priorities for training needs, Bangladesh
organizes contingents for deployment based on the
United Nations format for 6 months. During that
time, contingents continue rigorous training, as per
United Nations-specified training curriculum. At the
Bangladesh Institute of Peace Support Operations
and Training, the training curriculum consists of
predeployment training, the potential observers
and staff officers course, the warrant officers and
non-commissioned officers peace support operations
course and the contingent members course. The
training curriculum is regularly reviewed, as per the
latest guidelines and policies of the Integrated Training
Service of DPO. The Bangladesh Institute of Peace
Support Operations and Training is also working to
incorporate the newly formulated United Nations
Military Units Manuals.

Wearealsoawareofthebarriersforwomen,including
sexual exploitation and abuse. We have therefore made
awareness of sexual abuse and exploitation cases an
important component of our predeployment training.
Considering the improvised explosive device (IED)
threat, Bangladesh also conducts IED training. We are
also providing training to our peacekeepers to handle
modern equipment, such as mine-protected armoured
personal carriers and medical-related training.

Secondly, partnerships are critical to the success of
United Nations peace operations. In many missions, the
United Nations continues to work alongside regional
organizations and bilateral partners for the delivery
of mission mandates. That is also true for training and
capacity-building initiatives. We believe that training is
not only an important component of peacekeeping, but
a shared responsibility as well.

On our part, last year Bangladesh and Germany
together conducted a training-of-trainers course on
IEDs. In December 2018, Bangladesh also hosted
a seminar on achieving operational readiness, in
collaboration with the United States Pacific Command
and DPO for the TCCs from the Asia-Pacific region.
The aim of the seminar was to achieve and enhance
operational readiness in peacekeeping operations.
Bangladesh will also conduct a comprehensive
protection of civilian's course from 9 to 20 June in at
the Bangladesh Institute of Peace Support Operations
and Training, under the supervision of the Integrated
Training Services of the United Nations Headquarters,
in which officers from 14 countries are expected to
participate. Bangladesh is committed to continuing
such collaborations.

Thirdly, on practices, despite our continuous efforts
to develop troop capacities, there remain training gaps
in the areas of human rights, the safety and protection
of troops and civilians and gender violence. Sharing
relevant experiences from other missions and the
recommendations of senior mission leaders is therefore
very important. There is also need for more data and
understanding on why instances of sexual exploitation
and abuse are occurring and whether the revision
of existing guidelines is required. Evidence-based
reports are also required to see whether any particular
mitigation measure can be put in place.

Training United Nations peacekeepers remains a
complex endeavour, as peacekeepers work in a foreign
country with a complex cultural and political situation.
Such training therefore requires cooperation and
partnerships among a range of stakeholders of various
standards. While the United Nations takes the lead in
instituting guiding principles for training and capacity-
building, it is the responsibility of the individual
TCCs to prepare their peacekeepers for deployment
in the field. Strong collaboration is therefore a must
among the Secretariat, Member States, TCCs, PCCs
and the Security Council to ensure the comprehensive
management of training needs.

