Mr. Hilale: In response to your request,
Mr. President, I will summarize my briefing.

At the outset, I am grateful for the kind invitation
to brief the Security Council on opportunities
and challenges to build and sustain peace in the
Central African Republic, in my capacity as Chair
of the Central African Republic configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission.
The fragility of the situation in the Central African
Republic remains a concern, with renewed fighting
and the emergence of new humanitarian hotspots. At
the same time, the combined commitment from the
Government, the United Nations system and all other
stakeholders to long-term solutions is starting to pay
off. Despite delays, the implementation of the National
Recovery and Peacebuilding Plan and the restoration of
State authority are progressing. Efforts are under way to
coordinate the deployment of internal security forces,
justice actors and providers of basic social services to
reinforce the social contract between the population
and the State. As we move forward, it will be important
to ensure the sequencing and complementarity among
reconciliation efforts, the restoration of State authority
and delivering peace dividends to the population.

The Central African Republic configuration
works to bring a long-term focus to stabilization,
reconciliation and development efforts in the country,
guided by national priorities. To that end, we provide
political accompaniment to the country, promote an
integrated and coherent approach to international and
regional peacebuilding efforts and draw attention
to glaring resource and capacity gaps in the Central
African Republic.

In 2017, the configuration focused on the Brussels
commitments to implement the National Recovery
and Peacebuilding Plan, primarily Pillar l, which
encompasses security sector reform; disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration; the rule of law and
reconciliation. In line with our commitment to assess
the Plan's implementation with multiple stakeholders, I
met with World Bank officials last week in Washington,
DC. During our discussions, we addressed resource and
capacity gaps that are hampering the implementation
of the National Recovery and Peacebuilding Planand
focused on the World Bank's role in its implementation.

I would like to present to the Council some
key observations.

First, Central African Republic is at a critical
juncture. The Government needs to be supported to
drive the reforms necessary for the implementation
of the National Recovery and Peacebuilding Plan. In
Bangui, New York and Washington, DC, and together
with the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, I have continued to urge the Government and
donors that a robust commitment from both sides is
critical for the Plan to succeed. Although $2.23 billion
was pledged at the Brussels conference, the delivery
rate of ongoing projects for which financing has already
been secured was only 16 per cent in 2017. From my
contacts with the United Nations, the World Bank and
other stakeholders, I understand that the absorption
capacity of the Central African Republic Government,
the lack of coordination across the line ministries and
the absence of the Government and the presence of
armed groups across the territory are also perceived to
hamper the effective and speedy use of resources.

Secondly, we need to encourage the positive
developments regarding the restoration of State
authority. There has been progress in the deployment
of prefects and sub-prefects in the provinces, and
coordination among national institutions has improved
at the national and provincial levels. The Government
is also engaged in redeploying the national army - the
Forces armees centrafricaines (FACA) - as well as the
national police and gendarmerie, within the broader
context of the security sector reform and the extension
of State authority. We encourage the Government
to both deploy civil servants and to try to provide
basic services. That is the only path to lasting stability.

Thirdly, long-term security depends on the
prioritization of justice and the fight against impunity.
In that regard, we welcome the extradition today from
the Democratic Republic of the Congo to Bangui of
the individual known as "Romaric". He is suspected
to be responsible for the massacre of Moroccan and
Cambodian Blue Helmets in Bangassou last May.
The national Special Criminal Court is an innovative
structure that will allow impunity to be addressed.
However, the Special Criminal Court faces multiple
challenges, including resource deficits for the next
five years.

While a strategy on witness and victim protection
both for the Special Criminal Court and the national
system more broadly has been developed, serious gaps
remain on witness and victim protection. The draft
rules of procedure and evidence, which will provide
guidance for witness protection mechanisms, should
be adopted soon. At the same time, we must balance
the focus on the Special Criminal Court by supporting
the Central African Republic's national justice system.
Despite the recent progress of the ordinary courts in
Bangui and Bouar, the resumption ofjustice activities
outside Bangui remains challenging. The challenges
are mainly due to insufficient security, difficulties in
paying salaries and the lack of equipment.

Fourthly, as the configuration committed to
fostering coherence among stakeholders, we strongly
support the African initiative that brings together all
peace efforts under the Libreville road map, based
on their comparative advantages. While maintaining
security outside of Bangui remains a challenge,
dialogue initiatives at the local level with armed groups
have proceeded with support from the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic towards violence reduction
and reconciliation. We look forward to seeing that
initiative contribute to the implementation and success
of the disarmament, demobilization, repatriation and
reintegration process.

The development and implementation of a realistic
and clear reconciliation strategy is a top priority for
2018. The creation of the truth, justice, reparation
and reconciliation commission announced during the
2015 Bangui Forum has been slow to be activated. It
is important that this structure be operationalized to
reassure victims waiting for justice pending the start of
trials by the Special Criminal Court.

Fifthly, and finally, economic recovery will be key
to maintaining faith in State institutions and overcoming
the humanitarian crisis. It is encouraging that President
Touadera has prioritized development efforts in the
north, where perceptions of marginalization have fuelled
conflict. Addressing such horizontal inequalities will
be critically important to sustain peace.

I would like to conclude by thanking the Central
African authorities for their commitment to the
implementation of the activities of the configuration.
I would also like to thank the members of the
configuration, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Onanga-Anyanga and his team, as well as the
Peacebuilding Support Office for its tireless efforts in
support of the people of the Central African Republic.

