Mr. McLay (New Zealand): New Zealand is deeply
concerned about the recent escalation of violence and
the deteriorating humanitarian situation in Gaza, in
a conflict that could and should have been avoided.
Yesterday, my Prime Minister, The Right Honourable
John Key, made a motion in the New Zealand
Parliament expressing that concern as well as grave
concern at the appalling and unacceptable number of
civilian casualties. The motion, which was adopted
unanimously, also gave strong support to international
efforts to obtain a ceasefire and to end hostilities so
that both parties could return to negotiations.

It is clear that the parties have fallen short of their
obligations to protect civilians, including through
indiscriminate firing into civilian populations. That
undermines basic precepts of acceptable international
behaviour. The rapidly escalating toll in death and
injury is, as my Prime Minister said, appalling and
unacceptable. There is an urgent need for immediate
steps to prevent further civilian casualties.

New Zealand urges all parties to take the necessary
measures to protect civilians, including through
further humanitarian pauses. There is also a need for

broader measures to alleviate the ongoing humanitarian
situation on the ground. In particular, urgent assistance
is required for overwhelmed medical services and for the
unprecedented number of displaced civilians * people
who, in the words of my Prime Minister, have nowhere
to go - numbers that are already double those displaced
during the 2009 crisis and are still growing rapidly.

To provide that urgent assistance, New Zealand has
agreed, and will very shortly be advising of, a further
financial contribution to United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East,
thus responding to the Secretary-General's statement
this morning urging that Member States do so.

Prime Minister Key said that New Zealand strongly
supported international efforts to obtain an immediate
ceasefire and joined the Council's continuing call for
an end to hostilities, adding that New Zealand had been
"deeply disappointed that, to date, ceasefire initiatives
have failed". We urge all parties to continue efforts to
de-escalate the situation.

The latest incidents reinforce the importance of a
sustainable resolution to the conflict between Israel
and the Palestinians. It should be clear to all now that a
continuation of the status quo is untenable. New Zealand
calls on both parties to return to the negotiating table
to work towards a meaningful and permanent two-State
solution. A credible political horizon is vital, including
a sustainable end to the blockade of Gaza.

The pattern of conflict has gone on too long, and the
cost to innocent civilians is just too high. The violence
only sows more seeds of resentment and revenge, which
will damage both sides and the wider international
community. We will reap the product of what is now
occurring in years to come.

In short, New Zealand endorses and supports
the Secretary-General's plea this morning to stop the
fighting, start the dialogue and tackle the causes of this
conflict.

