Mr. Fedotov (spoke in Russian): At the outset, I
would like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on your
successful presidency of the Security Council and on
its convening of this very timely consideration of the
issue of Afghanistan today in the Security Council. I
also thank you for inviting me to this meeting.

(spoke in English)
When I last addressed the Security Council on
the counter-narcotics challenges and responses in
Afghanistan in December 2017 (see S/PV.8147), I
highlighted the urgent need to step up international
action. In half an hour, I will join the President of the
General Assembly to launch the World Drug Report
2018, which is the flagship publication of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC). The
findings of the report indicate that last year, the total
global opium production increased by 65 per cent to
the amount of 10,500 tons. That is the highest number
recorded by UNODC since we started monitoring. Most
of that opium originates in Afghanistan, where, as the
Security Council is well aware, opium poppy cultivation
and production have reached unprecedented levels.

That situation clearly has a high destabilizing
potential for the country, the wider region and the
international community. Last month, UNODC
released a socioeconomic study that complements the
annual Afghanistan Opium Survey. The study clearly
underlines the multiple challenges to sustainable
development, peace and security posed by opium.
The linkages with terrorism and other forms of crime
have also been widely acknowledged, including by the
Council. Those problems require long-term engagement
and solutions in order to achieve results.

Today, I am pleased to note that since December,
we have seen some positive momentum with efforts
to respond to that global threat. Nevertheless, many
formidable challenges remain. Once again, I would like
to highlight the importance of shared responsibility
and international cooperation in addressing the many
security, safety, development and health challenges
posed by the situation. Unfortunately, the focus of the
international community has shifted away from the
priority of counter-narcotics in recent years. We cannot
afford such inattention. Moreover, sustained resources
are needed to address the situation.

In that context, UNODC has pursued efforts to
advocate for renewed awareness and support and to
strengthen regional and interregional dialogue and
responses to opium trafficking. UNODC and the
Afghan Ministry of Counter-Narcotics have worked
together to reinvigorate the Afghan commitment
to the issue, including in the broader context of the
Kabul peacebuilding process. That includes UNODC
support to the interministerial working group, led by
the Ministry of Counter-Narcotics, for the development
of a counter-narcotics strategy with a strong regional
cooperation component.

Furthermore, in close coordination with the
Government of Afghanistan, UNODC has developed
strategic actions to respond to the global threats of
opiates in order to step up regional and interregional
responses to counter the increases in opium cultivation
and production and to address the related threats of
crime, terrorism and corruption. Our efforts focus
on four identified priorities: first, the need for a
revitalized and strong Afghan lead in counter-narcotics
action; secondly, the importance of comprehensive
and balanced approaches, from the health sector
to law enforcement, under the principle of shared
responsibility and in line with the recommendations
of the seventeenth special session of the General
Assembly to consider the question of international
cooperation against illicit production, supply, demand,
trafficking and distribution of narcotic drugs and
psychotropic substances; thirdly, the need to target the
nexus between drugs, crime and terrorism as a spoiler
of the peace process; and, fourthly, the need to support
Member States, especially in Central and West Asia, in
strengthening mechanisms that contribute to preventing
conflict and destabilization related to the opiate threat
and the action of international terrorist groups based
in the region and beyond. The strategy seeks to further
enhance effective interagency coordination with the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
and the United Nations Regional Centre for Preventive
Diplomacy for Central Asia.

For maximum effectiveness and efficiency, the
strategy also aims to plug into existing coordination
and governance mechanisms, such as the Paris Pact
Initiative, the Heart of Asia-Istanbul Process on
Regional Security and Cooperation for a Secure
and Stable Afghanistan, the Regional Economic
Cooperation Conference on Afghanistan, the Regional
Anti-Terrorism Structure of the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization, and the Afghan Joint Coordination and
Monitoring Board, among many others.

The recent Paris Pact Policy Consultative Group
Meeting in Vienna noted the following strategic and
policy developments. UNODC remains fully engaged
in supporting Afghanistan and the neighbouring
countries in pursuing comprehensive counter-narcotics
action. That includes alternative development, regional
and interregional cooperation to deal with the illicit
trafficking of drugs and precursors, as well as to
intercept the financial flows, law enforcement capacity-
building, and the scaling up of drug-use prevention and
treatment services.

Looking ahead, the Ministerial Conference on
Afghanistan, to be held in Geneva in November,
represents an opportunity to highlight the importance
of counter-narcotics responses. I hope that we can
count on the assistance of the Security Council to draw
attention to the many threats to Afghanistan, the wider
region and beyond posed by opiates and to the need for
urgent and determined international action.

