Mr. Brencick (United States of America): We,

too, thank Under-Secretary-General Egeland for his

usual insightful and impassioned presentation to this
Council.

In April of this year, the Council produced a
thoughtful and comprehensive resolution recognizing
the threats faced by civilians in armed conflict and
condemning all acts of violence committed against
unarmed and vulnerable populations in violation of
applicable international law. In particular, resolution
1674 (2006) noted the dangers faced by women,
children, refugees and internally displaced persons,
who are all especially at risk in conflict. Resolution
1674 (2006) goes on to call for greater protection and
appropriate assistance in order to address the needs of
all affected civilian populations.

Unfortunately, the world continues to be plagued
by multiple violent conflicts. This Council has primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security; as part of that, the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations has currently been directed to
support 18 peacekeeping and political missions where
conflict has erupted. Many of those peacekeeping
operations now have as part of their mandate the
protection of civilians under imminent threat of
violence.

In those situations of violent conflict, an
important part of protecting civilian populations is to
work quickly and efficiently to repair the damage
already done and to do everything Within our means to
ensure that such conflict does not occur again. Nations
emerging from conflict need our strong support in
order to become fully functioning democratic societies,
but we must also be cautious that they do not become
completely dependent on the international community.
For it is a fact that the primary responsibility for
protecting civilians lies with those nations and their
Governments, and international efforts should only
complement such Government efforts. Protecting
civilians from the devastating effects of armed conflict
depends largely not on what we do or say here, but on
what Governments themselves do to protect their own
people.

We must also continue to focus our efforts on the
prevention of conflict itself. Civilians are now the
major category of casualties in conflict worldwide.
Even more critical are the signs that an
unrepresentative and corrupt Government is in place.

Demonstrated disregard for the rule of law, human
rights, and basic democratic values, such as freedom,
equality, transparency and the holding of free and fair
elections, are all clear indications that political unrest
may be festering. We are all aware of countries
exhibiting those traits. What we as a Council choose to
do about it in its earliest stages can make the difference
between life and death for countless innocents.

Let me now turn to some specific cases of
concern cited today. We continue to be gravely
concerned about the ongoing crisis in Darfur, and
especially about the impact of the conflict on civilians
in that region. While in some areas the scale of
violence has decreased, civilians continue to be
directly targeted and more than 2 million remain
displaced. In addition, humanitarian workers and
peacekeepers have been increasingly targeted. That
continuing insecurity has a direct and detrimental
impact on the international community's ability to
deliver assistance and provide basic services for the
victims of the conflict. The situation in Darfur well
illustrates the urgent role that States must play to
safeguard civilians, including those who are internally
displaced. It is also important to reiterate that
internally displaced civilians living in camps are not
always protected from serious human rights violations.
Several other countries, including the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, face delicate situations of
transition where serious protection challenges exist.
United Nations peacekeeping and assistance missions,
together with support from non-governmental
organizations, must help to ensure that civilians in
those regions are not denied the dividends of peace.

We are encouraged that the Security Council has
been more consistent in addressing the regional
dimensions of civilian protection. Resolution 1674
(2006) and recent mandates have highlighted the key
issues that affect civilians in armed conflict, including
the deliberate targeting of civilians, forced
displacement, sexual exploitation and abuse, gender-
based violence, the recruitment and use of child
soldiers in violation of international law, the need for
unimpeded access by humanitarian personnel to
civilians in need of assistance, and the need to promote
the safety of United Nations and associated
humanitarian personnel. It is also clear, however, that
we can and should do more.
As we once again reaffirm our commitment to
strengthening and reinforcing the protection of
civilians in armed conflict, let us ensure that our words
and intentions become action.

