The President (spoke in Spanish): As this is the
first meeting of the Security Council for the month of
August I should like to take the opportunity to pay
tribute, on behalf of the Council, to His Excellency
Mr. Wang Yingfan, Permanent Representative of China
to the United Nations, for his service as President of
the Security Council for the month of July 2001. I am
sure that I speak for all members of the Council in
expressing deep appreciation to Ambassador Wang for
the great diplomatic skills with which he conducted the
Council's business last month.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

Small arms

Letter dated 25 July 2001 from the Permanent
Representative of Colombia to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (8/2001/732)

The President (spoke in Spanish): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received letters from
the representatives of Argentina, Australia, Belarus,
Belgium, Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada, Chile, Costa Rica,
Egypt, Ghana, India, Japan, Mexico, Nepal, New
Zealand, Pakistan, Peru, the Philippines, the Republic
of Korea, Sierra Leone, South Africa, the Sudan and
Venezuela, in which they request to be invited to
participate in the discussion of the item on the
Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
discussion without the right to vote, in accordance with
the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Listre
(Argentina), Ms. Moules (Australia), Mr. Ling
(Belarus), Mr. De Ruyt (Belgium), Mr. Maura
(Brazil), Mr. Sotirov (Bulgaria), Mr. Heinbecker
(Canada), Mr. Valde's (Chile), Mr. Niehaas (Costa Rica), Mr. Bebars (Egypt), Mr. Efi'ah-Apenteng
(Ghana), Mr. Pal (India), Mr. Satoh (Japan),
Mr. Navarrete (Mexico), Mr. Sharma (Nepal),
Mr. MacKay (New Zealand), Mr. Ahmad
(Pakistan), Mr. Valdez Carrillo (Peru),
Mr. Manalo (Philippines), Mr. Sun Joun-yung
(Republic ofKorea), Mr. Kamara (Sierra Leone),
Mr. Kumalo (South Africa), Mr. Erwa (Sudan)
and Mr. Alcalay (Venezuela) took the seats
reserved for them at the side of the Council
Chamber.


The President (spoke in Spanish): The Security
Council will now consider the item on its agenda. The
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.
Members of the Council have before them a letter
dated 25 July 2001 from the Permanent Representative
of Colombia to the United Nations addressed to the
President of the Security Council, document
S/2001/732.

I welcome the distinguished presence of the
Secretary-General at this meeting. Before giving His
Excellency the Secretary-General the floor, I would
like to make some introductory remarks.

I would like to start my presentation by telling
you how honoured Colombia is to be presiding over the
Council for the month of August. We are undertaking
this responsibility with the firm conviction that this
organ has an indispensable part to play, through the
mandate entrusted to it by the Charter, to preserve
international peace and security. Colombia, as is
traditional in the many times that it has served on the
Council, will act in strict accordance with the rules and
principles contained in the Charter. As Minister for
Foreign Affairs in the Republic, I am convinced that
we will be able to benefit from the cooperation of the
other members of the Council and the other States
Members of the Organization and the staff of the
Secretariat, whose work is indispensable for carrying
out the mandates of the Council.

The problems that arise from illicit trafficking in
small arms and light weapons and their impact on
conflict situations have been the focus of growing
world attention. Global, regional, subregional and
national initiatives in this field call for efforts of
international cooperation and the support of the organs
and programmes of the United Nations, including the
Security Council.

The debate proposed by Colombia has several
general objectives. The first is to follow up on the
small arms issue, almost two years after it was
incorporated in the agenda of the Security Council, on
24 September 1999. The second is to critically examine
how the issue is handled in specific conflict situations
that are being considered by the Security Council. The
third is to deepen understanding of this topic in the
Council, broadening the discussion with the clear and
active participation of countries not members of this
body. The fourth objective is to examine the role of the
Security Council in implementing the Programme of
Action that was just adopted, in July, by the United
Nations Conference on the Illicit Trade in Small Arms
and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects, taking advantage
of the momentum generated by that Conference.
Finally, this debate should produce a series of practical
and workable recommendations that we hope can be
enshrined in a presidential statement to set out the
activities of the Council and define the nature of its
participation in this field.

In order to achieve these objectives, we have
suggested some topics for consideration in this debate:
the relevance of small arms in conflicts being
considered by the Council; the contents of the reports
of the Secretary-General; greater access to information
on the illicit trade in small arms; strengthening regional
and subregional mechanisms; the impact of small arms
embargoes; the dispatch of assessment missions to
countries requesting them; and, as I have said,
implementation of the outcome of the United Nations
Conference on the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and
Light Weapons in All Its Aspects. I invite participating
delegations to refer to these topics in their statements.

I now call on the Secretary-General.


