Mr. Ciss (Senegal) (spoke in French): My
delegation thanks you, Mr. President, for organizing
today's briefing. I would also like to welcome the
Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs of Ukraine to the
Council.

The outbreak of the crisis in Ukraine two years
ago testifies to the seriousness of the issue of conflict
prevention, the Security Council's responsibility for the
maintenance of peace and how urgent it is that we step
up its efforts in that regard. That was why my delegation
welcomed the meeting the Council held in this Chamber
in February (see S/PV.7635) with Mr. Franz-Walter
Steinmeier, Chairperson-in-Office of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), one of
whose priorities, rightly, is the crisis in Ukraine, with
the triple goal of renewing dialogue, re-establishing
confidence and restoring security.

That is why my delegation, which continues to
be deeply concerned about the reports of repeated
violations ofthe ceasefire, would like to recall Senegal's
commitment to promoting dialogue and international
cooperation as means to help resolve disputes. In that
regard, I would like to reaffirm my country's support
for the Minsk agreements, signed in September 2014
and finalized in February 2015, which constitute a
solid basis for reaching a sustainable and credible
political solution to the situation in eastern Ukraine. It
is therefore vital that the parties join their efforts, with
the support of the negotiating frameworks already in
place, with the aim of fostering a climate conducive to
the diplomatic solution that we all want. In that regard,
we should support the efforts that have already been
made to reduce tensions and promote peace, stability
and security, as well as to facilitate dialogue among
the authorities, civil society and ethnic and religious
groups.

We hope that the various initiatives will contribute
to stabilizing the ceasefire more effectively, ensuring
the withdrawal of heavy weapons and solidifying
a national dialogue, in accordance with the Minsk
agreements and within the framework of the Normandy
format and the Trilateral Contact Group on Ukraine. In
that context, I would like to emphasize the importance
of the extension by the Permanent Council of the OSCE
of the mandate of the Special Monitoring Mission to
Ukraine to 31 March 2017. Given the Monitoring
Mission's impact on the de-escalation and withdrawal
of weapons, we believe that the OSCE monitors should
continue to benefit from free access to the area in
order to better fulfil their role and ensure the effective
implementation of the Minsk agreements, particularly
the ceasefire. Bearing in mind the importance of
establishing credible and legitimate institutions in
the current situation, it seems equally crucial to make
appropriate arrangements for the holding of local
elections in accordance with the provisions of the
Minsk agreements.

I would like to conclude by urging the parties to
renew their commitment to dialogue and by assuring
them of Senegal's full support in their efforts to reach a
negotiated and sustainable political solution.

