Mr. Moreno-Ocampo: Thank you, Mr. President,
for this opportunity to brief the Security Council on the
activities of my Office. Since my report of December
last year (see S/PV.5589), I presented evidence, on
27 February 2007, to the judges of the International
Criminal Court.

The judges rendered their decision on 27 April
2007. The judges found that the evidence presented
2

offered reasonable grounds to believe that Ahmad
Muhammad Harun, former Minister of State for the
Interior of the Government of the Sudan, and Ali
Muhammad Ali Abd-Al Rahman, otherwise known as
Ali Kushayb - a militia/Janjaweed leader - joined
together to persecute and attack civilians in Darfur.

The Prosecution's case demonstrated how Ahmad
Harun organized a system through which he recruited
militia/Janjaweed, funded militia/Janjaweed and armed
militia/Janjaweed to supplement the Sudanese Armed
Forces and incited them to attack and commit massive
crimes against the civilian population in Darfur. The
prosecution's case demonstrated that Ali Kushayb, by
personally delivering arms and leading attacks against
villages, was a key part of that system. Acting together,
they committed crimes against humanity and war
crimes.

The judges have issued arrest warrants against
Mr. Harun and Mr. Kushayb. In accordance with the
Court's decision, the Registry is in the process of
transmitting requests for cooperation to execute the
warrants.

The ongoing situation in Darfur remains
alarming. There are 4 million people in need of
humanitarian assistance in the region. There are
2million internally displaced people, immensely
vulnerable. There are continuing attacks against them
and against international workers, as well as frequent
impediments by the authorities to the delivery of
assistance. Presiding over this dire situation is Ahmad
Harun, the same individual sought by the Court.
Ahmad Harun is now Minister of State for
Humanitarian Affairs. This is the same man who in
2003, at a public meeting, declared that in being
appointed to the Darfur security desk, he had been
given all the power and authority to kill or forgive
whoever in Darfur, for the sake of peace and security.

The law requires the appearance of Ahmad Harun
and Ali Kushayb in court. That major challenge
demands the unconditional cooperation of all. The
Security Council and regional organizations must take
the lead in calling on the Sudan to arrest the two
individuals named and surrender them to the Court.
The territorial State, the Sudan, has the legal obligation
and the ability to do so. And we count on every State to
execute an arrest should either of those individuals
enter their territory. We hope that the cooperation of
the Sudan with the International Criminal Court can be
07-3718]
addressed during the Security Council's mission to
Khartoum.

The Darfur situation requires a comprehensive
solution. The International Criminal Court is doing its
part. The Office will complete its first investigation
and will continue to evaluate information about current
crimes. As the Rome Statute emphasizes, justice for
past and present crimes will enhance security in Darfur.

The Darfur investigation has been ongoing for
just over two years. My Office has conducted an
independent and impartial investigation. We have
focused on some of the most serious crimes and on the
individuals who, according to the evidence collected,
bear the greatest responsibility for those crimes. Our
case focuses on incidents in 2003 and 2004 when the
highest number of crimes was recorded. Crimes were
committed in Darfur in the context of an armed conflict
between the Sudanese security forces, along with the
militia/Janjaweed, and organized rebel groups,
including the Sudan Liberation Army and the Justice
and Equality Movement.

From 2003 on, the conduct of the counter-
insurgency campaign resulted in attacks against mainly
the Fur, Masalit and Zaghawa civilian populations who
were deemed to support or sympathize with the rebels.
Acting together in that campaign the Sudanese Armed
Forces and the militia/Janjaweed carried out attacks in
Kodoom, Bindisi, Mukjar and Arawala approximately
between August 2003 and March 2004. They did not
target any rebel presence within those villages. Rather,
they attacked these villages based on the rationale that
those civilians were supporters of the rebels. That
strategy became the justification for the mass murder
and mass rape of civilians who were known not to be
participants in any armed conflict. It achieved the
forced displacement of entire communities.

In its decision on 27 April, the Pre-Trial Chamber
determined that there were reasonable grounds to
believe that Ahmad Harun and Ali Kushayb are
criminally responsible for the crimes described by the
prosecution, namely 51 counts of crimes against
humanity such as persecution, murder, rape and other
forms of sexual Violence, torture, cruel treatment,
unlawful imprisonment, pillaging and forcible transfer
of civilians, and war crimes such as rape, intentionally
attacking civilians and pillaging.

Ahmad Harun was appointed Minister of State for
the Interior shortly after the April 2003 rebel attack on
07-3718]
the Al Fashir airport. Ahmad Harun was also tasked to
head the Darfur security desk. He had gained
experience mobilizing and recruiting militia to serve in
counter-insurgency efforts whilst in Kordofan, South
Sudan, during the 1990s.

In our cases, State and local security committees
in Darfur, which were comprised of representatives of
the army, the police and intelligence agencies, reported
to Ahmad Harun, especially on matters relating to the
staffing, funding and arming of the
militia/Janjaweed in the context of the counter-
insurgency. Ali Kushayb - "Aqid al Oqada" or
"colonel of colonels" in the Wadi Salih locality of West
Darfur - personally led militia/Janjaweed during
attacks on the four villages mentioned, presiding over
summary executions and mass rapes.

The next step should be the arrest of Mr. Harun
and Mr. Kushayb and their appearance in court,
followed by proceedings relating to confirmation of the
charges. In parallel, to uphold its duty to protect
victims and witnesses, my Office continues to monitor
the security of witnesses and to implement protective
measures. Let me also reiterate in that context the
importance of witness relocation agreements.

In addition, as indicated in my December 2006
report, the Office is continuing to gather information
about current crimes committed by all the parties to the
conflict in Darfur and is monitoring the spillover of
violence in Chad and the Central African Republic,
which are both States parties to the Rome Statute. Let
me emphasize, in that respect, a number of strong
concerns.

First, in Darfur there are serious allegations of
indiscriminate and disproportionate Sudanese
Government air strikes from January through April,
with some villages bombarded for as long as 10 days.
There are allegations of crimes by rebel forces,
including against international personnel. There are
reports of attacks against internally displaced persons,
in particular the rape of women venturing outside the
camps. And there is information about local clashes,
some allegedly motivated by efforts to reward those
collaborating with the militia/Janjaweed. We are
conducting a preliminary judicial analysis of all of that.

From the information gathered, it appears that the
parties to the conflict continue to violate international
humanitarian law. The Office reiterates that those
bearing the greatest responsibility must be brought to
3
justice. It is of particular concern to my Office that
Ahmad Harun, an individual sought by the Court for
atrocities committed against the civilian population -
atrocities that forced their displacement - is still
today Minister of State for Humanitarian Affairs in the
Government of the Sudan, with the responsibility to
watch over these vulnerable people and the
international personnel helping them. I ask the Council
to address that unacceptable situation during its next
mission to Khartoum.

Secondly, in eastern Chad the Office has gathered
data on reported attacks in the villages of Tiero and
Marena in March 2007 and attacks on refugee camps.
Incursions from militia/Janjaweed from the Sudan have
been reported, as well as the presence of Sudanese
rebels in Chad and the presence of Chadian rebels in
the Sudan. Any alleged crimes taking place in 2007,
since Chad became a State party, are subject to the
jurisdiction of the International Criminal Court.

Thirdly, on 22 May my Office announced the
opening of an investigation in the Central African
Republic. That investigation is focused on crimes
allegedly committed during the years 2002 and 2003,
when there was a large-scale commission of crimes
including a huge number of rapes. My Office is also
monitoring the situation throughout the Central African
Republic, including reports of violence in the north
since 2005. On the border with Darfur, there have been
incidents of violence in the context of allegations of
support for rebel groups from the Sudan.

Since my first report to the Security Council, in
June 2005 (see S/PV.5216), the Office has devoted
considerable efforts to assessing whether its case was
admissible under the Statute. Let me emphasize, as I
have in the past, that this admissibility assessment is
not a judgement regarding the Sudanese justice system
as a whole, but an assessment of whether the case
selected by the Prosecution has been or is being
investigated by the Sudan.

The Prosecution has followed closely all
accountability initiatives of the Sudanese authorities.
In a series of exchanges with the Government of the
Sudan, the Office sought updates on the status of
national proceedings. The Sudanese Ministry of Justice
reported in a 9 December letter that 14 persons had
been arrested in relation to incidents in South Darfur
and West Darfur. Ali Kushayb was one of those named
in connection with those incidents.
In a mission to Khartoum carried out from
27 January to 7 February 2007 to analyse those
developments, the Office met with the Minister of
Justice, the Under-Secretary for the Ministry of Justice,
the Chief Justice of West Darfur and the President of
the Special Court for West Darfur. We interviewed the
three special advisers of the Judicial Investigation
Committee.

The Prosecution's case is concerned with Ahmad
Harun and Ali Kushayb joining together as part of a
systematic and organized initiative to attack civilian
populations in Darfur. There is no investigation in the
Sudan into such criminal conduct. No proceedings
have taken place in relation to Ahmad Harun. And the
investigation concerning Ali Kushayb does not relate to
the same incidents as those investigated by the Office;
it does not connect Ali Kushayb to Ahmad Harun. The
Sudanese investigations do not encompass the same
persons or the same conduct that are the subject of the
case before the Court. The Pre-Trial Chamber
concluded that the case against Ahmad Harun and Ali
Kushayb falls within the jurisdiction of the Court and
appears to be admissible.

Paragraph 2 of resolution 1593 (2005) requires
the Government of the Sudan and all other parties to
the conflict in Darfur to cooperate fully with and
provide necessary assistance to the Court and the
Prosecutor. Since the beginning of our investigation,
the participation of the Government of the Sudan in the
process has been important to ensure a full picture of
the events in Darfur. A degree of cooperation has been
forthcoming. However, requests for assistance -
including requests to question Ahmad Harun and Ali
Kushayb - remain outstanding. In a 15 February
letter, Mr. Ali Karti, Minister of State for Foreign
Affairs, confirmed the Government's refusal to allow
for such questioning.

Major interlocutors with the Government of the
Sudan have encouraged them to assume their
responsibility to cooperate with the International
Criminal Court. We are grateful for their support. In a
17 April letter, the Office sought clarification from the
Sudanese Government as to its intention whether or not
to cooperate. No response was forthcoming; on the
contrary, a number of statements were made publicly
and continue to be made to the effect that the
Government of the Sudan will not work with the Court.
07-3718]

Resolution 1593 (2005) invites the Court and the
African Union to discuss practical arrangements for
facilitating the work of the Prosecutor and the Court.
The Office has met regularly with African States and
with representatives of the African Union. The
President of the Court, the Prosecutor and the Registrar
were invited to brief the African Union's Permanent
Representatives Committee on 1 March. I am grateful
for the support of the African Union presidency in that
regard. The President of the Court, the Registrar and I
will meet with the President of the African Union,
Ghanaian President John Kufuor, on 20 June.

Discussions are also progressing in relation to the
conclusion of a memorandum of understanding dealing
with the general relationship between the Court and the
African Union. Other contacts have been helpful. The
Office has benefited from exchanges of views with
Special Envoys Jan Eliasson of the United Nations and
Salim Salim of the African Union. I am regularly
briefing the Secretary-General of the League of Arab
States, as well as the States members of the League.
Their understanding of the independence and
impartiality of the Office is, and will continue to be,
crucial.

The Court continues to improve its understanding
of local communities; that was the purpose of the
07-3718]
Registrar's recent visit to Chad. Relevant Court
documents have been translated into Arabic and
disseminated, also for that purpose.

In resolution 1593 (2005), the Security Council
concluded that justice and accountability are critical
components to achieving lasting peace in Darfur. The
Office is now moving forward to finalize its
preparations for pre-trial proceedings against
Mr. Harun and Mr. Kushayb. The key is their arrest and
surrender.

The Office relies on the Security Council, on
United Nations Member States, on the States parties to
the Rome Statute and on its key partners - the African
Union and the League of Arab States - to continue to
encourage the Sudan to arrest and surrender Ahmad
Harun and Ali Kushayb to the International Criminal
Court.

