Mr. Safaei (Islamic Republic of Iran): I wish to
thank you, Mr. President, for organizing today's debate,
which offers us a timely opportunity to exchange views
on the narratives and ideologies of terrorism. I also
thank Mr. Jan Eliasson, Sheikh Mohi El-Din Afifi
and Mr. Steven A. Crown for their comprehensive
briefings, and commend Al-Azhar University for the
steps that it is taking to thwart extremist narratives.
I must also condemn the terrorist attacks by Da'esh,
today, in Baghdad and last week against police officers
in Egypt, and offer my condolences to the peoples and
Governments of Egypt and Iraq and the families of
the victims.

Violent extremism is the most critical challenge
currently facing the Middle East, and as borders
worldwide go unrecognized, many other parts of
the world are threatened as a result of the spreading
scourge. Syria, followed by Iraq, is among those
nations that have borne the brunt of the atrocities and
barbarity practiced by extremist groups. At the same
time, the blind violence committed by the individuals
and groups affiliated with Da'esh in various parts of the
world highlight the widening scope of the threat posed
by the rise of violent extremism.

It is evident that the takfiri ideology, which
has nothing to do with Islam, lies at very core of
the predicament that we now face. Therefore, the
international community needs, first and foremost, to
focus on that vicious ideology and its proponents, who
seek to instil hatred and anger in the hearts and minds
of young people everywhere in the Islamic world and
beyond. Those with wealth and power have undertaken
for many decades to diffuse that mode of thinking in
the larger Muslim community and around the globe and
force it upon peoples and communities near and far,
thereby advancing their shortsighted agenda. Al-Qaida
and the Taliban represent their first so-called successes,
and Da'esh and the Al-Nusra Front and its affiliates are
the latest.

For many decades, the proponents of that perverse
ideology have pinpointed individuals susceptible to their
schemes, then bankrolled them, providing all necessary
cover and support, in order to bring pressure to bear on
various Governments to condone their activities, and
so on. And the results have been the atrocities, rapes,

slavery, burnings, beheadings and innovative, creative
ways of killing that we have sadly come to learn about
through the media.

The opponents of the takfiri or excommunicative
ideology include those who do not believe in that
ideology, who are on a very long list of so-called
non-believers, which includes Shiites, Christians, Jews,
and moderate Sunnis, and the list continues on and on.
The atrocities committed against the Yazidi people
reflect the intentions and behaviour of adepts of the
takfiri ideology towards minorities. The social-media
accounts glorifying the horrific massacre of 1,700 Iraqi
air-force cadets in Tikrit in June 2014 portended what
those extremists intend to do wherever they prevail.

In parallel with the need to highlight the roots of
Da'esh and its affiliates in the historic development of
their extreme ideology, we must also be mindful of the
strong impact of Iraq's recent bloody history on the
formation and growth of the current violent extremist
groups. Political and military interventions in the
region, especially in the past decade, have exacerbated
the situation, created an enormously fertile breeding
ground for extremists and helped the most radical among
them to grow. With the Syrian crisis and the support
that the extremists have received from some wealthy
individuals, quarters and States within and outside the
region, they have found a new breeding space.

As in any war, in order to defeat violent extremism,
the battle must be fought, first and foremost, on a
cultural and ideological front. Those who have so far
supported that extreme ideology should reconsider. It
is very encouraging that Islamic community leaders
everywhere, including Sunni scholars and clerics, have
defied Da'esh's threats and denounced and rejected its
ideology.

At the same time, full compliance with international
law and the Charter of the United Nations is also a must,
as it helps drain the breeding ground for extremism.
The contributing factors that help create space for
extremism, such as the occupation of the Palestinian
land by Israel, which constitutes the greatest form of
terrorism, must also be addressed. Other contributing
factors like dictatorship, poverty, corruption,
discrimination and marginalization are also important.
And so is the need to counter Islamophobia, which plays
right into the extremists' hands and lends credence to
their messaging. Likewise, funding extremists and
condoning their recruitments through lax border control
should end. Anything that undermines the unified front
against extremists and provides them with space, such
as the invasion of Yemen, should be halted as well.

Finally, Iranians of all ages and affiliations,
particularly the youth, have been consistent in rejecting
and fighting violent extremism from the Taliban and
Al-Qaida in Afghanistan to Al-Qaida in the Arabian
Peninsula, Da'esh and others similar forces in Yemen,
Iraq and Syria. We also have tried to help fight
extremists on the ground and provide a path to combat
their ideology, including through promoting Dialogue
among Civilizations and A world against violence
and violent extremism (General Assembly resolution 70/ 109).

Let me conclude my statement by rejecting the
baseless and worn-out accusation by the representative
of the Israeli regime against my country and my
Government. When it comes to terrorism, that regime
has to be accountable for two reasons. First, it has been
engaged in all sort of terrorist activities to create the
regime and, thereafter, in suppressing the legitimate
resistance ofthose whose lands are under its occupation.
Secondly, this regime should also be held accountable as
its occupation and the misery and grievances it creates
are exploited by extremist groups for recruitment and
to justify their crimes.

