Mr. Duclos (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
appreciate the convening of this meeting and thank
Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix and Mr. Nicholas Haysom for
their important briefings.

First, we want to highlight the role that the United
Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA)
plays in Abyei in maintaining relative security in
the Area and in allowing communities access to
humanitarian aid. We believe, however, that it is
imperative to revive the political process and fill the
governance and administrative vacuum in Abyei.
In the light of that, we wish to express our support
for the Secretary-General's recommendations for a
reconfiguration of the UNISFA mandate. We trust
that a more active role for UNISFA in supporting the
implementation of the agreements between the Sudan
and South Sudan, and its coordination and cooperation
with the African Union Commission and the African
Union High-level Implementation Panel, will enable the
final objective of the mission and guide Abyei towards
the consolidation of sustainable peace.

We deem it appropriate that UNISFA be able to
contribute to the resolution of border disputes and, as
recommended by the Secretary-General, that it be able
to concentrate its military component in the border
areas where security threats are greater. In that regard,
we must recognize the important role ofthe Joint Border
Verification and Monitoring Mechanism to maintain
stable relations between the Sudan and South Sudan,
and express our concern about how little progress has
been made in implementing the measures established
by the Council in resolution 2412 (2018).

We hope that the recent developments in the Horn
of Africa subregion will provide the necessary impetus
to the Governments of the Sudan and of South Sudan
to move forward with concrete measures leading to the
resolution of the question of the status of Abyei and
the establishment of the common border. At the same
time, we think it desirable that UNISFA support the
strengthening of institutions that guarantee governance,
the rule of law and public order in Abyei. In that sense,
we value the recommendation to deploy police units in
the main population centres and specialized agents in
all the bases of operations.

In line with the need to address the root causes of
the conflict, we hope that the measures recommended
by the Secretary-General, such as the creation of a
specific programme for the Ngok Dinka and Misseriya
communities, will be taken into account to promote
development and reconciliation in Abyei.

