Mr. Al-Nasser (Qatar): Allow me at the outset to
salute you, Mr. President, and congratulate you on your
appointment as Permanent Representative of the
Socialist People's Libyan Arab Jamahiriya to the
United Nations in New York. I wish to congratulate
you on assuming the presidency of the Security
Council for this month and to commend you for all
your efforts and endeavours on this item: the situation
in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question. I

would also like to thank Mr. B. Lynn Pascoe, Under-
Secretary-General for Political Affairs, for his briefing
on behalf of the Secretary-General.

This is the first time that the Security Council is
holding an open debate since the end of what the
Israeli occupation forces dubbed "Operation Cast
Lead" in the occupied Gaza Strip. It is needless to
remind the Council of the deaths, destruction and
tragedies that resulted from that three-week military
campaign launched by the Israeli authorities on a
people that are suffering the worst humanitarian
situation in the world. Nor do I think that I need to
repeat what the Council has been hearing frequently
over many months about the serious consequences of
the Israeli blockade and siege imposed on Gaza Strip
and the grave humanitarian situation resulting
therefrom.

While the worst forms of aggression have
stopped, the aggression is still continuing today.
Indeed, it has been going on for years, for the siege,
the blockade, the starvation imposed on the people of
Gaza are a form of aggression. Consequently, the
cessation of hostilities in itself is not enough. It is
necessary now to lift the siege on Gaza, to open the
crossings and to ensure the freedom of movement of
persons, goods, materials and of the equipment
necessary for reconstruction. In general, we must put
an end to this policy of collective punishment and
ensure the protection of Palestinian people.

The end of military aggression does not
necessarily mean that we forget about the terrible
atrocities that have been committed by the Israeli war
machine against the unarmed civilians in the stricken
Palestinian territory. The Israeli aggression on Gaza
has been marked by many war crimes and crimes
against humanity. Worse yet, the entire war constituted
a war crime, because it included violations of
international law, international treaties, relevant
international humanitarian law and even the norms of
warfare. The military operation was not balanced, but
rather a unilateral massacre, as described by Dr. Kevin
Cahill, Chief Adviser for Humanitarian Affairs of the
President of the General Assembly. Therefore, we must
investigate those Violations and bring their perpetrators
to justice in order to do justice for the victims and
prevent such criminal acts from ever being committed
again.

Many serious human rights violations were
clearly evident, including the use of prohibited
chemical weapons such as white phosphorous and the
targeting of densely populated buildings and even
houses of worship, hospitals and schools. The human
conscience demands that we uncover the facts
concerning all the human rights violations committed
during that armed aggression and that we deny
impunity to the perpetrators of those crimes.

Targeting a school with an artillery shell is a
heinous crime. Nothing could be worse than the
targeting of a school used as a shelter for defenceless
civilians fleeing the shelling of their homes. What
makes it even more heinous is the fact that the targeted
building was clearly marked as a United Nations
facility. Worst of all, the attacks were repeated. The
repetition of those war crimes underscores the fact that
they were premeditated and coordinated acts.

Her Highness Sheikha Mozah bint Nasser
Abdullah Al-Misnad, Consort of His Highness the
Emir of Qatar and UNESCO Special Envoy for Basic
and Higher Education, promptly condemned the
destruction of educational institutions in the Gaza
Strip, calling on the Security Council to develop
without delay a plan to identify those schools and
educational institutions and to mark them in a
conspicuous manner so that they might serve as safe
havens for students and their parents. She also stressed
the importance of allowing humanitarian aid and basic
materials to enter those schools and institutions and of
allowing the sick and injured to be transported out of
them. Prior to that, Her Highness addressed a letter
(S/2009/12) to the Security Council calling on it to
shoulder its responsibilities and investigate the crimes
committed by the Israeli occupation forces against
Palestinian civilians, including women and children.

We are now hearing calls from several quarters
urging that the perpetrators of war crimes and other
violations that occurred in Gaza be brought to justice.
Mr. Richard Falk, Special Rapporteur on the situation
of human rights in the Palestinian territories occupied
since 1967, recently reported that there was sufficient
reason to conclude that the Israeli military operations
in Gaza constitute crimes against humanity. The same
conclusion has been reached by a number of
non-governmental organizations active in the human
rights field, including Amnesty International, which
indicates that the devastation caused by the recent
Israeli invasion of Gaza constitutes a war crime.
Likewise, the organization Physicians for Human
Rights believes that the Israeli army violated the rules
of ethics and international law by targeting paramedics
and by preventing injured people from receiving
treatment. Well-known persons such as Archbishop
Desmond Tutu and Ms. Mary Robinson have called for
the establishment of a board of inquiry to shed light on
the war in Gaza, to conduct an accurate,
comprehensive and fair investigation into all
accusations related to the commission of serious
violations of international humanitarian law by all
parties to the conflict and to make recommendations
regarding appropriate measures to ensure the
prosecution of the perpetrators of those violations.

In particular, there is a need to investigate the
Israeli army's direct attacks on schools of the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East in Gaza in order to
determine who was responsible for those crimes and to
bring the perpetrators to justice. Given the seriousness
of targeting United Nations facilities and staff and the
need to ensure their safety, we welcome the Secretary-
General's establishment of a Board of Inquiry and look
forward to its findings.

The dire humanitarian situation facing the
Palestinian people in the occupied Palestinian territory
requires that international donors meet Palestinians'
basic needs and finance the reconstruction of what was
destroyed by the Israeli war machine. The State of
Qatar played a leading role in the international efforts
that brought about an end to the Israeli aggression
against Gaza - efforts culminating in the adoption of
resolution 1860 (2009) on 8 January 2009. Similarly,
the State of Qatar has been among the leading
supporters of the Palestinian people, both bilaterally
and through the decisions of the Council of the League
of Arab States. His Highness Sheikh Hamad bin
Khalifa Al-Thani, Emir of Qatar, took the initiative of
convening an emergency Arab summit in Doha to
support the Palestinian people, at which he announced
the establishment of a fund for Gaza's reconstruction,
to which he donated $250 million. In addition, the
State of Qatar has sent in-kind assistance to the
Palestinians by sea and air and has provided support
through the United Nations, the Emir having
contributed $40 million to United Nations
humanitarian agencies and programmes providing
emergency assistance to civilians in Gaza. In addition,
long before that, the leadership of the State of Qatar
launched the Fakhurah campaign, named for the school
shelled by the Israeli army, which raised $110 million
through a telethon.

The situation prevailing in the occupied
Palestinian territories highlights once again the
importance of achieving peace in the Middle East
through the peace process, which requires the utmost
efforts of the international community. The Security
Council must put an end to the double standards and
reluctance with which it has addressed an issue that not
only poses a direct, serious and clear threat to
international peace and security, but also constitutes a
grave humanitarian situation. We therefore demand that
the Council fully shoulder its responsibilities under the
Charter of the United Nations.

If the peace process is to succeed, all segments of
the Palestinian population must be involved. It is
unacceptable that some are attempting to divide the
Palestinian people into Hamas and Fatah factions, as
the occupation does not distinguish between the
parties, but affects everyone. No national differences
should serve as a pretext for Israel to continue its
occupation and aggression against unarmed civilians or
to divide the Palestinian people or the Palestinian
territory. Nor should the Palestinian people be
punished for exercising their right to vote in
accordance with the principles of democracy that we
all advocate.

We call on the Palestinians to achieve unity and
reconciliation. In addition, we call on all friendly
nations to show their solidarity with the Palestinian
people in their plight and to support them in their just
struggle to enjoy their legitimate and inalienable rights,
in particular the right to independence and self-
determination and the right to establish their own State
on their national soil, with Jerusalem as its capital.

