Sir Jeremy Greenstock (United Kingdom): My
delegation has listened very carefully to the briefing of
this Council by the High Commissioner, and I pay a
sincere and very warm tribute to the energetic way in
which she has headed the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) over a
very difficult period. Behind that tribute lies huge
United Kingdom respect and admiration for the
courage and selflessness of the whole UNHCR team,
whose security, in particular, is of continuing concern
to us.

Mrs. Ogata has presided over UNHCR through a
decade of enormous change and growth, both in
UNHCR itself and the United Nations system as a
whole. Dealing with refugees has always attracted the
highest public profile, and it is a sad fact of life that
UNHCR is more likely to be blamed when things go
wrong than given credit for a job well done against the
odds.

The year 2000 marks the fiftieth anniversary of
the creation of UNHCR. Its key aim of providing
international protection to refugees remains as relevant
now as it was in 1950. I think it is particularly fitting
that we should be meeting under your presidency, Sir,
when it is the Netherlands that provided the first, and
has now provided the next, United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees.

But the issue of internally displaced persons is
now just as much in the spotlight. Internally displaced
persons now outnumber traditional refugees. There is
agreement that this is not an issue on which UNHCR
should act as the lead agency, but we do look to it to
play a prominent role in relieving the plight of
internally displaced persons, who suffer as much as
traditional refugees.

The United Kingdom welcomes the global
consultations exercise on which the UNHCR has
embarked, the aim of which is to revitalize the
international protection regime and to discuss measures
to ensure international protection for all who need it.
As leading donors and supporters of UNHCR, we in
the United Kingdom look forward to taking a full and
constructive part in the next stages of the process, and
we take careful note of the warnings Mrs. Ogata has
given us today on the funding aspects of the whole
process.

Sadly, this is Mrs. Ogata's last appearance before
the Security Council. She has witnessed the steady
expansion, in her time as High Commissioner, of the
Council's humanitarian agenda. We are now finally
tackling, perhaps, the challenges in the Brahimi report
and, on a wider basis, those of coordinating
peacekeeping, human rights and the humanitarian and
development aspects of the United Nations work -
challenges which she has constantly kept before our
eyes and which she has again today enjoined us to
address with energy.

I would just like to pick up a couple of points
from her address to us today.

The first is West Africa and her focus on Sierra
Leone and across the borders from Sierra Leone. We
take very much to heart - as did the Security Council
mission to the region - the security as well as the
humanitarian aspects of that flow of refugees. We will
look very closely at the proposal she has made - quite
a brave proposal against the background of the
traditional approach of the United Nations to
peacekeeping, but one which we have to take seriously
in this Council.

It is against that background that I would like to
inform her, as well as colleagues on the Council who
have not yet heard the news, that there is an agreement
today between the Government of Sierra Leone and the
Revolutionary United Front (RUF), signed in Abuja,
for a ceasefire over the next 30 days, in which the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) has played a leading part, as we enjoined it
to do on our mission.

My delegation will pass out copies of this
agreement to members of the Council - it is going by
fax now. I would just point out to the Council that the
ceasefire is for 30 days, and that it is agreed, among
other things, that the United Nations Mission in Sierra
Leone (UNAMSIL) should be deployed to the diamond
areas, and that the two parties should immediately
recommence the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration (DDR) programme, upon which
Mrs. Ogata put her finger in a more general sense in
her address to us this afternoon.

There is a further clause that ensures access for
humanitarian agencies to refugees and displaced
persons and to those who need humanitarian assistance,
so it is an agreement which we have welcomed from
London this afternoon. But we will have to look very
carefully at its implementation, because we cannot yet
trust the RUF to live up to all aspects of what has been
agreed in this particular document.

The DDR aspects are what Mrs. Ogata has been
talking to us about this afternoon and are extremely
important. We endorse what she has said about a
stronger focus on reintegration. We have seen this in
Sierra Leone. We have seen the way in which it has not
worked in other peacekeeping operations, and it is
something we should return to not just in the Security
Council but in other agencies and in other parts of the
United Nations system. It is something to which the
World Bank and other donors must pay close attention.
There is no point in two Ds without the R, and it is the
R that is particularly lacking in addressing the concerns
which particularly affect UNHCR.

I conclude by again thanking Mrs. Ogata for her
great achievements and wishing her well in her future.

