Mr. Al Bayati (Iraq): Allow me, at the outset, to
congratulate you and your country, Mr. President, on
India's assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for this month. I would also like to extend my
thanks to the previous Security Council President, the
Permanent Representative of Guatemala, for his efforts
during the month of October. I would also like to thank
Mr. Martin Kobler, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Iraq, and his team in Baghdad
and New York for their tireless efforts to assist the
Government and people of Iraq.

Having reviewed the report of the Secretary-
General on the work of the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq, contained in document S/2012/848, I
would like to put forward the following comments.

On the political and security situation, Iraq has
made significant progress in its endeavour to establish
a democratic and federal State on solid foundations.
In the past few months, the political parties and blocs
have conducted talks and meetings to achieve political
reform, in line with the requirements for the next
stage in Iraq, and to reach a united national position to
ensure the success of the upcoming national meeting.
Despite the differences in opinion on how to hold that
meeting, all political parties agreed on the need to
solve the political crisis within the framework of the
Constitution.

In that context, the President of Iraq, Mr. Jalal
Talabani, continued his efforts to bring together political
rivals and to bring together the positions of the different
political blocs. In the same context, on 22 October, the
Prime Minister of Iraq, Mr. Nuri al-Maliki, welcomed a
delegation comprised of representatives of the political
parties in the Kurdistan region and another led by
the Deputy Prime Minister of the Kurdistan Regional
Government to discuss the elements of the reform paper
presented by the National Alliance.

In the context of efforts to solve the political
stalemate, on Wednesday, 21 November, the Prime
Minister met the Speaker of Parliament, Mr. Oyama
Al-Nujafi. They discussed the internal situation, the
latest developments and the efforts of the Speaker,
who had been commissioned by the heads of the
political blocs to solve the problems with the Kurdistan
Regional Government. The Prime Minister stressed
the importance of avoiding the language of threats and
war because Iraqis have passed that stage and should
not return to it. He also stressed the need to return
to the 2009 agreement regarding the responsibility
of managing security in the ethnically mixed areas.
That agreement calls for establishing joint checkpoints
consisting of the Iraqi army and the Kurdish Peshmerga
forces to reassure all Iraqi citizens and that the
management of those checkpoints should be under the
supervision of the Federal Government.
With regard to efforts to strengthen relations
between the executive and legislative authorities in
the country, the Prime Minister met the Speaker of
the Council of Representatives on 3 November. They
agreed to promote cooperation between the legislative
and executive authorities to support the Government's
efforts in accelerating the reconstruction process.

Despite the steady improvement in the security
situation, Iraq still suffers from terrorist attacks
targeting Iraqi citizens. That led the Government to
increase the capabilities of its security forces through
the continuation of its disarmament plans to enhance
the security and sovereignty of Iraq in the face of all
internal and external threats. The Government also
worked on modernizing its security plans to confront
terrorist attempts to disturb peace and stability.
Security forces have arrested several groups that were
involved in committing terrorist attacks, kidnappings
and assassinations using silencers and targeting citizens
and members of the security forces. At the beginning
of this week, the Ministry of Defence announced that
the military intelligence had arrested two groups of
terrorists linked to Al-Qaida. The first is called the
financing group and has been involved in kidnappings
for ransom. The second group consists of assassination
squads using silencers.

After the tensions in the city of Tuz in Kirkuk on
16 November, which resulted in one Iraqi citizen killed
and 11 others injured, a solution was reached within
48 hours with an agreement between the Ministry of
Defence and the Kurdish Peshmerga forces to withdraw
all militants that entered the area in order to avoid
similar incidents.

Furthermore, technical meetings were held in
Baghdad on 26 November to put an end to the tension.
The two parties also discussed possible ways to
de-escalate the recent tension.

After lengthy discussions, the Iraqi Parliament
agreed on the number of new members of the
Independent High Electoral Commission in Iraq. The
voting for nine new members of the Commission took
place between 19 and 27 September, ensuring balanced
representation for the different components of Iraqi
society.

In continuation of the democracy-building process
that has been under way in Iraq since 2003, all
requirements necessary to hold the next elections for
all provincial councils have been met and the date of
the elections has been set for 20 April. Iraq is currently
witnessing increased political activities among all
political blocs to prepare the lists, entities and coalitions
that will participate in those elections.

Regarding developments relating to the residents
of Camp New Iraq, formerly Camp Ashraf, more than
3,000 members of the Mujahedin e-Khalq organization
were transferred peacefully to Camp Hurriya.
Approximately 200 residents remain in Camp Ashraf
to deal with logistical issues and the liquidation of
the organization's possessions in the camp. In that
connection, I would like to express my Government's
position and the need to find a sustainable solution to
the problem through resettling the camp's residents
in other countries, as stated in the memorandum of
understanding signed with the United Nations in 2011.

On the social situation, in the framework of efforts
to promote the political and legal awareness of Iraqi
citizens, Iraq signed an agreement with the United States
Agency for International Development on 4 October,
aimed at increasing the level of public awareness
about legal protections available to vulnerable groups,
including the disabled, widows, orphans and children.
The agreement is also aimed at establishing laws and
regulations to protect those vulnerable groups and to
involve non-governmental organizations, civil society
organizations and Iraqi citizens in the legislative
process.

In an important step forward in the development
of the Ministries of Education and Higher Education
towards more institutional work and towards advancing
the educational process in Iraq to meet modern
international standards, a strategic national document
for education and higher education in Iraq was adopted
for the period 2012-2022. The document assesses
the situation of the education and higher education
sectors in Iraq and identifies current weaknesses. The
document sets out a policy to face the shortcomings
by creating a healthy environment meeting current
scientific, educational and technological developments
and practices in the world.

On the economic situation, the Government realizes
Iraq's important and vital role in ensuring the stability
and security of international oil markets, given their
effect on world economic prosperity and the urgency
of ending the recession caused by the international
financial crisis. From that perspective, Iraq is moving
forward to implement its plans to increase oil and gas
production and to improve its hydrocarbon capabilities.
These steps will generate the revenue necessary
to support reconstruction and social and economic
development, raise the standard of living for citizens,
and promote political stability in Iraq. In addition, it will
promote stability in the energy market and lead Iraq to
play a new international role, assuming responsibilities
commensurate with its actual capabilities.

Based on those initiatives, the positive results of
Iraq's energy policy of increasing oil production to
the highest level possible to meet the growing global
demand have started to appear. For the first time in years,
in August Iraq became the second-largest exporting
country among the countries of the Organization of the
Petroleum Exporting Countries.

In the context of efforts to develop the Iraqi oil
industry, the Ministry of Oil announced on 30 August
the beginning of preparations for the fifth round of
contracts for gas fields to meet the needs of domestic
markets and to operate the power plants. It also has
become mandatory for contracted companies to produce
the natural gas associated with oil production and not to
waste it through flaring, as they had done for the past
80 years, causing billions of dollars in losses.

Iraq is aiming to increase its refining capability
to 750,000 barrels per day by establishing four new
refineries in Karbala, Kirkuk, Maysan and Dhi Qar
provinces. In that context, on 21 October the Ministry
of Oil launched the Nasiriyah Integrated Project to
develop the Nasiriyah field, which has a proven reserve
of more than 4 billion barrels, and to construct and
operate a new refinery with the capacity to refine
300,000 barrels per day.

In the context of the tireless efforts made by the
Iraqi Government to solve our electricity shortages,
two new power plants were inaugurated, in Karbala
and Babil provinces, with a production capacity of
250 megawatts each. On 10 October, the Minister of
Electricity announced that the electricity shortage
problem will be solved by the end of 2013. That will be
an important achievement, with vast implications for all
other service sectors. It is worth mentioning that Iraq is
currently producing more than 8,000 megawatts, which
is around triple the amount produced by the national
electric grid in 2003.

In a unique event, the International Energy Agency
published a special report about the future outlook of
energy in Iraq, during a ceremony under the auspices
of the Iraqi Council of Ministers on 10 October. The
ceremony was attended by Mr. Hussain Al- Shahristani,
Deputy Prime Minister for Energy Issues; Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Martin Kobler;
Ms. Fatih Birol, Chief Economist at the International
Energy Agency; a number of Iraq parliamentarians,
the Secretary General of the Council of Ministers, and
representatives of companies.

The report affirms that current contracts between
Iraq and international companies call for a steady
increase in oil production close to five times the current
level of 3 million barrels per day. It also mentions that
the 9 million barrels per day production level required
by those contracts will represent the highest sustainable
increase in production in the history of the global oil
industry. With that increase, Iraq will become the
largest contributor to growth in international supply,
producing approximately 45 per cent of global growth.
The Deputy Prime Minister stressed that optimizing
exploitation of oil resources will permit an increase in
Iraq's general budget to about $500 billion.

Relations between Iraq and Kuwait relations have
witnessed positive developments and concrete steps
towards Iraq's fulfilling its remaining international
obligations and settling unresolved issues related to
resolutions under Chapter VII resulting from Saddam's
invasion of Kuwait in 1990. Those steps will lay the
foundations for cooperation between the two countries.
In that context, the Iraqi Government has made tireless
efforts to maintain the momentum achieved in repairing
relations between the two countries since the beginning
of this year.

On 27 November, Minister of Foreign Affairs
Hoshyar Zebari met in Baghdad with Ambassador
of the State of Kuwait Ali Al-Momen. During the
meeting, the two discussed mechanisms to implement
the arrangements and bilateral understandings that led
to the meeting between an Iraqi delegation headed by
Iraqi Vice-President Khudair al-Khuzaie and a Kuwaiti
delegation headed by the Prime Minister of Kuwait,
Sheik Jaber Al Mubarak Al Sabah. At the meeting,
the two sides agreed to settle the issue of Kuwaiti
Airlines after reaching an agreement on a financial
settlement. That decision, once implemented, will
lift all restrictions and complications associated with
rebuilding Iraqi Airways and restore its freedom to
purchase new airplanes to re-establish its fleet.

On another note, from 18 to 20 September,
the Ministry of Foreign Affairs republished an
advertisement related to Kuwaiti property and
missing Kuwaitis on the Ministry's website and in
several Iraqi daily newspapers. The advertisements
called on Iraqi citizens to come forward and provide
information regarding missing Kuwaitis and property
and documents belonging to the State of Kuwait.

In further positive steps, on 1 October a contract
was signed with an engineering and surveying company
to complete the maintenance of border pillars between
the two countries. Also, on 18 October Iraq announced
its agreement with Kuwait on having an international
oil company manage joint oil fields between the two
countries. The Iraqi Cabinet approved on 27 November
a draft law on the ratification of the agreement
establishing a joint commission for cooperation
between the Governments of Iraq and Kuwait.

In addition to those positive developments, the
Prime Minister of Kuwait is expected to visit Iraq in
December. The two sides hope that the visit will result
in resolving all outstanding issues and launch a new era
in Iraqi-Kuwaiti relations based on mutual respect and
common interests.

As Mr. Kobler mentioned, the Iraqi Government took
the necessary steps to name technical representatives to
join the United Nations team in order to start the third
stage of maintenance of the borders pillars between Iraq
and Kuwait. In addition, the competent Iraqi authorities
started the final checking of the list of Iraqi farmers
affected by the demarcation of the borders between Iraq
and Kuwait.

At the regional and international levels, Iraq is still
working to regain its proper position in the international
community. Iraq was elected to the Executive Board of
the World Food Programme in Rome in September, and
to the position ofVice-President of the Executive Office
of the Strategic Approach to International Chemicals
Management, which is a body of the United Nations
Environment Programme in Nairobi.

As part of Iraq's continuous commitment
to its international obligations, the Council of
Representatives took the following decisions in the past
four months. It joined the Convention on the Protection
and Promotion of the Diversity of Cultural Expressions;
ratified the Convention on Cluster Munitions of 2008;
ratified the Arab Anti-Corruption Convention; joined
the International Convention for the Suppression of
the Financing of Terrorism; ratified the Additional
Protocol to the Comprehensive Safeguards Agreement
of the International Atomic Energy Agency; ratified the
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty; and issued
Law No.48 of 2012, regarding the establishment of a
national monitoring authority on banning nuclear,
chemical and biological weapons.

Iraq participated in the Summit ofthe Non-Aligned
Movement held in Tehran on 25 August, through a
delegation headed by Prime Minister Nuri al-Maliki.
During the summit, Iraq announced its complete
alignment with the uprising of Arab nations since its
first spark in Tunisia to achieve freedom, democracy
and justice and that a State based on citizenship is the
only choice in modern State-building.

Iraq also pointed to the dangerous phenomenon
of taking a stance based on sectarian calculations
in dealing with sensitive issues relating to peoples
and countries of the region. Iraq strongly warned
all concerned parties that if a sectarian war erupted,
the peoples and countries of the region would be at a
dangerous junction and that their interests would be
affected in ways not seen even in the worst situations
that have occurred since the First World War.

Iraq participated in the third Arab-Latin American
summit held in Lima on 2 October, with a delegation
headed by Hoshyar Zebari, Foreign Minister of Iraq.
The Foreign Minister delivered a statement at the
opening meeting, on behalf of the presidency of the
Arab summit, in which he pointed to three regional
issues that had been discussed at the Baghdad Arab
summit, namely, the issue of Palestine, the situation
in Syria and the issue of nuclear disarmament in the
Middle East.

During the work of the Golden Table conference
held at the Russian Foreign Ministry on 9 October,
Prime Minister Nuri al-Maliki pointed out that the new
Iraq constitutes a break from the old Iraq and that the
current Iraq is seeking friendship, not enemies, among
all peoples and countries of the world. In harmony with
that principle, we have adopted an open-door policy and
a quest for common interests in our foreign policy. We
have established Iraq's defence and military strategies
in accordance with that policy. We are determined that
our forces will be defensive forces, and we will strive
to equip them with all necessary weapons for defensive
and deterrence purposes.

Foreign Minister Zebari met on 26 November with
the non-resident Ambassador of the Kingdom of Saudi
Arabia to Iraq, Mr. Fahd al-Zaid, and they agreed on the

importance of the complete normalization of relations
between the two countries. The two sides stressed the
importance of ratifying a prisoner exchange agreement
and seeking a common cooperation mechanism.

The Government of Iraq also decided to give Jordan
100,000 barrels of oil as a gift to our neighbourly
country to help solve the fuel shortage crisis that
has caused problems there. This is an indication that
prosperity in Iraq will benefit the Iraqi people and
other friendly nations.

In conclusion, I reaffirm Iraq's commitment to
its international obligations and my Government's
appreciation of the role played by the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq, especially the efforts
of Mr. Martin Kobler and the Mission team, for the
support they are providing at the request of the Iraqi
Government.

