Mr. Baja (Philippines): Along with other
members of the Council, we congratulate you, Sir, on
your assumption of the presidency for this month and
commit our cooperation and support to you and to your
presidency.

We also congratulate Ambassador Munoz and the
Chilean delegation on a successful presidency last
month.

We thank the Secretary-General for his recent
report and his Special Representative, Ambassador
Harri Holkeri, for his informative briefing to us today.

We also join other Council members in
expressing outrage at and condemnation of the suicide
bombing in Moscow today and extend our condolences
to the families of the victims and to the Government
and people of the Russian Federation. Of course, these
expressions would acquire added feeling and meaning
if the international community were able to work out
measures to pre-empt such terrorist acts.

Being the thirteenth speaker on this agenda item
and speaking after France and Brazil does not leave us
with much to say over and above what others have said
already. Nevertheless, we would like to offer some
observations and ideas.
First, the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) is no ordinary
peacekeeping mission. Capacity-building and
development are important components of the mission.
Here, one of the objectives of Security Council
resolution 1244 (1999) is to build autonomous
institutions of self-government and transfer
administrative responsibility to those institutions.

Secondly, we welcome the positive developments
that have taken place in Kosovo in the past several
months. The most encouraging sign of progress is the
renewed atmosphere of cooperation between UNMIK
and the Kosovo Government, resulting from the
launching in December of the "Standards for Kosovo"
formula and the announcement, a month earlier, of a
mechanism that would review Pristina's
implementation of the standards. We also note other
positive developments in such areas as legislation, at
both the central and local levels of self-government, as
well as the transfer of non-reserved responsibilities to
the Provisional Institutions of self-government.
Minority returns are also on the rise. The other day,
UNMIK and the Danish Refugee Council were reported
to have made possible the safe and successful return of
four Kosovo Serbs four years after they fled their
homes in Pristina. Nevertheless, much more needs to
be done.

Third, the report introduced by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General (8/2004/71)
shows that much more work is needed to reach the
benchmarks in preparation for any form of final status
for Kosovo. These areas include the judiciary, the
police service, the penal system and the rights of
minorities and displaced persons. Paragraphs 53 to 55
of the report mention that parallel administrative
structures as well as lack of participation in the
Provisional Institutions and of engagement in the
political process by local leaders and institutions hinder
real progress. All delegations have mentioned these
parallel structures, and we would like to know how
extensive these parallel structures are, what their
impact is on the political process, how they can be
dismantled and how to engage the local leaders and
institutions in the political process.

Fourthly, we welcome the statement by the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General that
efforts will be made to open dialogue - or reopen
dialogue - between Belgrade and Pristina. The report
also said that Belgrade still finds the "Standards for
Kosovo" document unacceptable and was of the view
that the consultations had not been sufficient. It also
stated that the Kosovo Serb leadership had distanced
itself from the document, as had some Albanian
leaders. Why is this? UNMIK is more that four years
old and has had two Special Representatives of the
Secretary-General. Since much has been improved
there, this issue of an impasse should not be allowed to
sit on the wall of distrust and should, like Humpty-
Dumpty, have a great fall. Such a fall would have
positive implications, not only for Kosovo, but for the
entire region. We suggest that, in addition to the
working groups, focal points of contact would promote
confidence-building measures and cooperation on
issues of common concern. I recall that when the
Association of South-East Asian Nations (ASEAN) and
China were negotiating a code of conduct for the South
China Sea, focal points were very useful.

Fifthly, as of 31 December 2003, we have 55
Filipinos in the UNMIK police. We would like to know
how the UNMIK police is ensuring peace and stability
and combating organized crime. As the representative
of the United Kingdom stated, the actors in the area -
the politicians, including UNMIK, the Kosovo Force
and the Provisional Institutions of Self-Government
and the diplomatic officers - need to develop greater
cooperation and partnership amongst themselves. The
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
exercises praetorian authority over 2 significant
number of sectors of Government and therefore plays a
key role in ensuring a safe and secure environment in
which institutions can function. At the end of the day,
the United Nations is legally responsible for what
happens in Kosovo. At the end of the day, the
credibility of such future peacekeeping missions of a
similar nature depends on a successful UNMIK.

Finally, the international community must remain
engaged in Kosovo and committed to its international
and internal development. The international civil and
military commitment to Kosovo should be maintained
for as long as the internal security situation requires.
Kosovo needs the strong and sustained political will
and commitment of the actors on the issue and the full
engagement and support of the international
community, particularly on ways to implement the
standards or reach the benchmarks. In this way, we
may no longer have to avoid any longer the discussion
of the issue of final status for Kosovo.

