The Czech Republic aligns itself with the statements submitted on behalf of the European Union (annex 38) and the Group of Friends of Women, Peace and Security (annex 27). This year we celebrate several important gender-related anniversaries. We commemorated the twenty-fifth anniversary of the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action during the recent special high-level meeting of the General Assembly. Twenty years ago, resolution 1325 (2000) became the first step in creating what we today call the women and peace and security agenda. Resolution 1325 (2000), on women and peace and security, and the nine follow-up resolutions have brought women's full and meaningful participation to the very centre of both peacebuilding and conflict prevention. We thank the Secretary-General for his timely report on women and peace and security, in which the Secretary-General states the regrettable fact that "Twle still live in a world where women face exclusion from peace and political processes; where the number of attacks against women human rights defenders, humanitarians and peacebuilders continues to rise; where the attempted erosion of international human rights standards persists; and where xenophobia, racism, intolerance, homophobia, transphobia and violent misogyny continue to spread." (S/2019/800, para. 3) The Secretary-General's statement also presented a _ range of concerning statistics to help us identify some of the implementation gaps of resolution 1325 (2000). According to the report, between 1992 and 2019, only 6 per cent of mediators, 6 per cent of signatories and 13 per cent of negotiators of peace processes were women. Furthermore, between 2015 and 2019, only 11 ceasefires and 26 other peace agreements included gender provisions. That shows that women's participation remains disproportionately low and that women's needs and voices are still not adequately reflected. That is true even 20 years after the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), which recognized the role of women in conflict prevention, peacebuilding and peacekeeping, and called on us to take action. This sobering reality has indeed been aggravated by the coronavirus disease pandemic, which has not only deepened pre-existing inequalities but also, in many ways, now jeopardizes the fragile progress made in some areas. As for the Czech Republic, we are meeting our commitments. As we speak, the second national action plan, for the years 2021-2025, is being approved by our Government and will be adopted by the end of this year. It sets out general goals, as well as specific targets and concrete measures, to reach those targets. The preparation of that document was a joint effort of various stakeholders, including the Government, the non-governmental sector and academia. The document is the primary national instrument to strengthen accountability and improve monitoring of our progress in implementing the women and peace and security agenda. Mainstreaming the gender agenda and achieving the women and peace and security agenda continue to be among our top priorities. We would like to once again urge all States that have not yet done so to join more than 80 Member States in adopting and acting upon their national action plans in order to improve the implementation of the women and peace and security agenda. We must all redouble our efforts to make sure that the solemn promise of the women and peace and security agenda is fulfilled.
