Mr. Skraeic' (Croatia): I would like to join other
delegations in thanking the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Victor Da Silva Angelo, for
presenting the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2009/359).

Like other delegations, we welcome the progress
that has been made in implementing the 13 August
2007 agreement between the Government and political
opposition groups in Chad, especially with regard to
the status of the opposition, as well as to the adoption
of implementing modalities for the electoral code and
the successful launching and completion of the general
population census.

As stated by the Secretary-General, the successful
holding of national elections, if they are free, fair,
inclusive and transparent, could not only provide a
fresh chance for national reconciliation, but also prove
to be decisive in strengthening the internal political
dialogue and therefore political stability throughout
Chad. We urge the Chadian Government to build upon
this positive momentum to create the conditions for an
inclusive and comprehensive political process and, it is
to be hoped, address the root causes of conflict in the
eastern parts of the country.

As has been previously stated, the key to
overcoming Chad's internal weaknesses and
vulnerability is through an inclusive political dialogue.
We encourage all groups to work together on such
issues as the increased protection of human rights -
including the rights of refugees and internally
displaced persons, especially women and children -
and the fight against impunity for crimes committed.
It is unfortunate that the aforementioned positive
political momentum in Chad has not been duplicated at
the subregional level. The relations between Chad and
the Sudan seriously deteriorated during the reporting
period, and the security situation in north-eastern
Central African Republic has deteriorated considerably
owing to banditry and armed robbery.

With regard to Chad-Sudan relations, while we
welcome the initial success in reaching the Doha
agreement on 3 May this year, there was an almost
concurrent attack by Chadian armed opposition forces
of the Union des forces de la resistance from western
Darfur deep into eastern Chad, with the stated aim of
overthrowing the Chadian Government. That incursion
not only caused an immediate breakdown of the
aforementioned, hard-fought Doha agreement, but also
precipitated a Chadian armed reaction against targets in
western Darfur, including through airstrikes, which
served only to exacerbate an already precarious
security situation in both countries. Like the Secretary-
General, Croatia calls upon the two Governments to
stop supporting each other's rebel groups and to
redouble their efforts to build mutual confidence and
ease tensions in the region so as to try to restore some
semblance of order and stability.

Croatia is also concerned at the grave
humanitarian situation in eastern Chad, with up to
400,000 refugees and internally displaced persons
(IDPs) seeking aid of some sort. The long-term
presence of refugee and IDP camps in eastern Chad not
only puts pressure on the local populations, but also
provides ample room in which bandits and armed
groups can operate. We therefore very much welcome
the deployment of security elements of the
Detachement integre de securite (DIS) in 12 refugee
camps and some key towns in eastern Chad to provide
security. We also welcome and appreciate
MINURCAT's efforts to help ensure that DIS receives
the support and training it needs. We note, however,
that DIS is a community policing force and is not
equipped to react to large-scale military incursions.

Finally, while acknowledging that MINURCAT is
still at less than 50 per cent capacity - which could
definitely have an impact on its effectiveness - we
hope that possible contributions on the part of a
number of troop-contributing countries by sending
troops to bring MINURCAT up to full strength will be
realized by the end of this year. We also acknowledge
that MINURCAT is suffering from a lack of some key
enablers, including military helicopters, and express
the hope that new troop-contributing countries will
consider this when making their pledges.

