Mr. Jurica (Croatia): Allow me to begin by
welcoming Under-Secretary-General Pascoe and
thanking him for presenting us with an analysis of the
challenges that the Middle East region is presently
facing. I would also like to acknowledge the presence
of the Ambassador of Israel and the representative of
the Palestinian Authority.

In the aftermath of the violence in Gaza, two
priorities deserve our continuing attention: responding
to the humanitarian and reconstruction needs of Gaza
while keeping the conditions in place for the
revitalized peace process to continue as soon as
possible. Gaza is facing the enormous challenge of
reconstruction. We recognize that there is a continuing
need for the unimpeded provision and distribution of
humanitarian aid and reconstruction material.

Let me underscore our appreciation for the work
being undertaken by the United Nations agencies and
their personnel on the ground, who continue to work in
challenging circumstances. We expect all parties to act
responsibly in order to facilitate humanitarian access
and the work of those United Nations agencies.
However, the diversion and instrumentalization of aid
are not acceptable.

We were heartened by the outcome of the recent
Sharm el-Sheikh conference, which helped to raise
much-needed financial support for the urgent recovery
and reconstruction of Gaza and sent a strong message
of international solidarity with the population of Gaza.
While the pledges exceeded anticipation, the
operationalization of assistance remains a challenge. In
order to have a tangible impact on the daily lives of
those in need, we hope to see the rapid implementation
of the Palestinian National Gaza Early Recovery and
Reconstruction Plan, under the Palestinian National
Authority. It is needed not only to boost the economy,
but also to help heal Palestinian society.

Croatia remains convinced that the full
implementation of resolution 1860 (2009) remains
essential in order to avoid earlier patterns of behaviour
that led to the latest violence. In parallel with
humanitarian assistance and recovery, it is important to
secure a prolonged ceasefire. Given the precarious
state of calm in Gaza, we condemn all attempts to
reignite violence by launching rocket attacks on Israel
amid efforts to secure such a durable ceasefire. If there
is to be a credible and durable ceasefire, it is essential
that the capability of Hamas and other militant groups
to launch rocket attacks against Israel be put to an end.
Similarly, arrangements for the sustained reopening of
crossing points also need to be put in place. Resolution
1860 (2009) is clear on this.

Croatia appreciates the active and dedicated
engagement of Egypt to put in place conditions for a
durable ceasefire, as well as its efforts to secure intra-
Palestinian reconciliation, particularly with a view to
securing the long-term recovery and stability of Gaza.
We regret that an early agreement to release captured
Israeli Corporal Gilad Shalit could not be reached.

The recent military hostilities in Gaza only
underscore the need to continue to work towards a
political solution and a lasting peace in the Middle East
based on the two-State solution. We understand that the
current period is beset by challenges, given the
political uncertainties on both the Israeli and the
Palestinian sides. This makes it all the more important
that the international community, including this
Council as well as an active Quartet, remain guided by
the objectives reaffirmed in resolution 1850 (2008)
and encourage the continuation of negotiations and the
reduction of all measures likely to erode confidence.
We are encouraged by the early engagement of the new
United States administration. We look forward to the
forthcoming summit of the League of Arab States to
advance intra-Palestinian reconciliation as a step that
will advance the overall peace efforts.

On Lebanon, let me convey our satisfaction with
the improved, but still fragile, political and security

climate in that country. We deplore all attempts to
undermine the prevailing atmosphere of calm,
including this week's terrorist attack against Mr. Kamal
Medhat. The June elections will be not only a key test
but also an opportunity to consolidate stability and the
constitutional order in Lebanon. We are encouraged by
the improvements achieved in Lebanese-Syrian
relations, which come at a critical time, and expect to
see them translated into further tangible steps towards
full normalization.

Developments on the regional front and the
support of the region's leaders for peace remain a
crucial part of the bigger picture and will inevitably
have a bearing on efforts to achieve a comprehensive
peace anchored in the two-State solution and the Arab
Peace Initiative.

