Mr. Hussein (Ethiopia): At the outset, my
delegation would like to congratulate you, Sir, on
Cameroon's assumption of the presidency of the
Council for the month of October. We also wish to
thank you for organizing this open meeting of the
Council and hope that others after you will also
continue in this tradition.

Many have referred to the terrible and horrible
events of 11 September. Allow me to touch on another
aspect related to that date. For us in Ethiopia, that date,
prior to September 2001, was always associated with
the beginning of the Ethiopian New Year, and hence
was normally a joyous day. However, it is no longer
celebrated in the same manner as in the past, in
deference to the people of the United States and of
other countries, including my own, whose nationals
were among the victims of the incidents in New York,
Pennsylvania and Washington.

Yet it has also reinvigorated our previous fight
against terrorism. Before 11 September 2001, my
country and Government had for 10 years been fighting
terrorists in our own country and within the region.

May I at this juncture commend the Security
Council Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC) and
in particular its Chairman, Ambassador Jeremy
Greenstock, for diligently carrying out their mandate.
Their work has been exemplary, in our view.

In his statement last Friday, the Chairman of the
Committee stated:

"The CTC is not a tribunal and does not
judge States, but it does expect every State to
work at its fastest possible speed to implement
the far-reaching obligations of resolution 1373
(2001) There is still much more work to do
before terrorists find that there is no safe haven,
because the bar against terrorism has been raised
in every country." (supra)

We fully agree with him. In this context, I wish to
address only one small part of the commitments that
we all made because we supported resolution 1373
(2001): the raising of funds in all of our countries -
maybe more in some. Nevertheless, this is an area in
which all of us have to do something.

Under that resolution, we are expected to take
measures against those in our territories who provide or
collect funds with the intention of using these funds or
of making them available to organizations bent on
carrying out terrorist acts in other countries. I think
that we should abide, where we have not done so, or
continue to abide, by the decision that is implied
clearly in that resolution.

My delegation welcomes the initiative by the
CTC to deepen its relationship with subregional,
regional and international organizations. We welcome
it because it is a new initiative. This, in our View, will
induce countries involved in such organizations -
subregionally, regionally and internationally - to
coordinate their own activities against terrorism more
effectively.
At the same time, I should like to call on the CTC
and on others in a position to do so - in order for this
to really be very effective - to give whatever technical
assistance may be possible in the combat against
terrorism. Here let me take my own subregion - the
Inter-Government Authority on Development (IGAD)
subregion in north-eastern Africa - as an example:
while we are doing something on our own, certainly we

would welcome assistance in this regard. Indeed, we
have been receiving bilateral assistance from certain
countries, some of which are Council members. But we
would like the CTC to coordinate this. We also want
the Secretariat to be involved, through them.

Finally, I should like to state that Ethiopia will, as
in the past, continue to cooperate with the CTC and
others in the fight against terrorism. I am reiterating
that position today.

