Mr. Kobayashi (Japan): I would like to express
my delegation's gratitude to you, Mr. President, for
convening this very timely meeting on the Balkan
region. I also appreciate the Council's decision to
enable Japan to express its views on this issue of
critical importance for international peace. As Mr. Carl
Bildt, the Secretary-General's Special Envoy for the
Balkans, has stated on various occasions, in addition to
responding to problems specific to the situation in
various parts of the Balkan region, it is important to
consider the region as a whole, in a comprehensive
manner.

Sharing this perception, Japan has sought to
develop the discussion on how the stability of the
entire Balkan region might best be realized. This past
May, for example, it convened in Tokyo a high-level
conference on South-East Europe, which was attended
by representatives of countries in the region and by
many other dignitaries, including Mr. Carl Bildt and
Mr. Bodo Hombach, Special Coordinator of the
Stability Pact for South-eastern Europe. At that
meeting, Japan's Foreign Minister, Mr. Yohei Kono,
stressed the importance of building a community where
different ethnic groups can live in harmony and the
importance of developing a peace-oriented society. The
ensuing discussion focused on how to promote
reconciliation among diverse ethnic communities
through cultural activities, education, independent
media, environmental protection and a market-based
economy.

As we survey the Balkan region, positive
developments are clearly discernible in certain areas.
As to Bosnia and Herzegovina, at the ministerial
meeting of the Peace Implementation Council that was
held at Brussels in May, the importance of economic
reform, the repatriation of refugees and displaced
persons, and the establishment and strengthening of
common institutions was reaffirmed. In that
connection, I wish to express my delegation's support
for the active efforts which Mr. Wolfgang Petritsch,
High Representative for the Implementation of the
Peace Agreement on Bosnia and Herzegovina, has
made in each ofthese important areas.

Although there continues to be an international
military and civilian presence in the region, as again
authorized by the Security Council on 21 June, it
cannot remain there indefinitely. Japan shares with Mr.
Petritsch the view that it is important for the people of
Bosnia and Herzegovina themselves to make greater
efforts to assume "ownership" of the peace process.
Only in that way can lasting peace and security be
achieved.

In Kosovo, although Japan appreciates the
progress which the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo has so far achieved,
several problems still remain. Japan cannot condone
the acts of intolerance by nationalistic extremists
against other ethnic groups. Japan attaches great
importance to the municipal election planned for this
autumn in order to establish a democratic, multi-ethnic
society in Kosovo, and it calls upon the Serb
community to cooperate. We also call upon the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia to cooperate in registering the
Serbian population to enable them to participate in the
election.

Finally, concerning the situation in Croatia, we
welcome the victory in the recent election by political
parties that emphasized cooperation with the
international community, and we earnestly hope that
this development will have ramifications in the
neighbouring countries.

Japan has contributed to the stability and
development of the Balkan region through its financial
assistance. In 1996, Japan pledged about $500 million
for economic rehabilitation in Bosnia and Herzegovina
and has been working steadily to implement that
assistance. In addition, Japan has already disbursed a
total of approximately $177 million for assistance to
Kosovo and has also pledged $60 million to
neighbouring countries. We intend to continue to
remain actively engaged in international efforts to
enhance peace and stability throughout the Balkan
region.

I cannot conclude my remarks without
commenting on the situation in the Republic of Serbia.
Despite the progress that has been made in various
parts of the Balkan region, it must be recognized that
the further development of those areas cannot be
attained without the democratization of Serbia. I
believe, therefore, that it is incumbent upon the
international community to cooperate in fostering
democracy in Serbia; only then will lasting peace and
stability prevail throughout the Balkan region.

