Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
voted in favour of draft resolution S/2014/916 on the
question of Palestine submitted by Jordan on behalf
of the League of Arab States. The draft reflects the
reasonable demands of the Arab States, including the
Palestinian people, and is in accord with the relevant
United Nations resolutions, the principle of land for
peace, the Arab Peace Initiative, the road map for peace
in the Middle East, and China's consistent position.
We express deep regret over the failure of the draft
resolution to be adopted. China is highly attentive to
the Palestinian-Israeli question and has always made
constructive efforts to advance the Middle East peace
process.

In 2013, President Xi Jinping of China put forward
four proposals on the Palestinian-Israeli question. This
year, Minister for Foreign Affairs Wang Yi of China
proposed five points for resolving the Palestinian-Israeli
conflict. China supports the just cause of restoring the
legitimate national rights of the Palestinian people;
establishing a fully sovereign and independent State
of Palestine, based on the 1967 borders and with East
Jerusalem as its capital; and Palestine's accession
to membership of the United Nations and other
international organizations.

China hopes that Palestine and Israel will resume
peace talks as soon as possible, end the occupation at
an early date and achieve peaceful coexistence. The
Middle East peace process is now in deep stalemate and
the tensions between Palestine and Israel persist. We
call upon the international community to redouble its
efforts to help Palestine and Israel to end the cycle of
violence and return to the correct track of peace talks.
We call upon the Security Council to effectively assume
responsibility for the Palestinian-Israeli question and to
play its due role.

China is willing to join the relevant stakeholders
within the international community in their common
efforts, and will continue to play a constructive role in
promoting a just and lasting settlement of the question
of Palestine.

