Mr. Gilmour: It is an honour to brief the Council,
building on the important briefing by Mr. Lacroix, with
which we fully agree. I shall speak about the human
rights issues impacting peace and security in Darfur.

Violence between armed militias and State security

forces in Darfur, as well as among communities, has
decreased. We welcome that. At the same time, we are
concerned that the human rights situation in Darfur
has continued to deteriorate in recent months, with
increased reports ofkillings, abduction, sexual violence
and other violations.
Since April, country-wide protests and political
developments in the capital have had some ripple effect
in Darfur, with thousands of protestors demonstrating in
its major towns and a rise in the number of documented
violations. Many of these protests in Darfur were
violently repressed by State security forces, including
Rapid Support Forces. In this connection, the human
rights component of the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) documented
the killing of 47 and the injury of 186 civilians in
various regions of Darfur between 11 April to 12 June.
In Zalingei, Central Darfur, 10 civilians were killed
and 93 injured as a result of what is seen to be excessive
use of force.

There are reports that State security entities have
resorted to arbitrary arrests and detentions to restrict
freedom of movement and assembly, as well as to
suppress dissent or acts of solidarity with the protest
in Khartoum In the past two months, 163 civilians
have been arrested and detained in relation to protests
in Darfur. The human rights section of UNAMID has
received accounts of intensified attacks and harassment
of civilians and the looting of houses and livestock by
Rapid Support Forces. Those same forces are widely
reported to have been involved in violent repression
of the protests in Khartoum, which led to numerous
deaths of peaceful protesters.

We believe that many cases in Darfur remain
invisible and underreported due to lack of access to
some parts of the region. In some areas of Jebel Marra,
the sole representatives of Government present are
the security forces, but they are reported to be the
main perpetrators of violations against the civilian
population - that is, the people they are there to protect.

Clearly, this does not lead to increased trust of
the population in law enforcement bodies. UNAMID's
presence and its important work on human rights and
the protection of civilians have had a positive effect,
as confirmed by internally displaced persons and local
communities. During this period, UNAMID, including
the human rights section, was able to act to defuse
conflict and violence through its interaction with the
population and advocacy with State security forces and
judicial authorities.

In an atmosphere of violence and uncertainty,
upholding the priorities of the protection of civilians
and of human rights in the mandate of UNAMID is of
paramount significance, including through continued
monitoring and reporting of the human rights situation
in the whole of Darfur. We believe that the Mission's
strengthened civilian presence will have a positive
impact on protection of civilians. Meanwhile, the
UNAMID human rights section continues to reinforce
the capacity of national institutions to protect and
promote human rights through State liaison functions.

Of particular note is the positive collaboration we
have with the National Human Rights Commission,
with which UNAMID has established a framework
of cooperation to further build the national capacity
to protect human rights. UNAMID, through its
human rights component, is closely engaging with
the Sudanese Armed Forces, in particular in North
Darfur, and the Demobilization, Disarmament and
Reintegration Commission to mainstream human rights
in their activities.

The violence and uncertainty that have erupted in
Darfur in the past few months are unfortunately likely
to continue until the root causes what Mr. Lacroix
has just called the "conflict drivers" - of the conflict
are addressed. The tragic incident in Deleij village,
in Central Darfur, on 9 and 10 June that resulted in
deaths of at least 17 persons related to intercommunity
violence, but involving State actors, illustrates that
point, as well as the direct link between human rights
and security.

 

We strongly hope that any transition road map will
include measures that permit the population of Darfur
to regain confidence in law enforcement bodies, the rule
of law and broader State institutions, as well as a belief
that there will be some accountability for excessive use
of force and serious human rights violations.

To conclude, we strongly support what yesterday's
communique issued by the African Union Peace and
Security Council on Darfur called "the imperative for
the Republic of Sudan to ensure the full protection of
civilians and respect for human rights and freedoms".

