Ms. Viotti (Brazil): Madame President, I thank
you for convening this meeting on an issue of
increasing concern to all of us. I also thank the
Secretary-General for his presence among us today and
for his remarks.

I am also grateful to the Commissioner for
Political Affairs, Peace and Security of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) and to
the Deputy Executive Secretary for Political Affairs of
the Gulf of Guinea Commission for their presentations.
Piracy and armed robbery at sea in the Gulf of
Guinea are a matter of concern, especially owing to
their damaging impact on security, trade and economic
activities in one of the world's emerging trade hubs.
We should not forget that the security situation in West
Africa was already fragile and complex, even before
the relative intensification of cases of piracy and armed
robbery.

Issues such as transnational organized crime
compound the challenges typical of post-conflict
situations in some countries of the region, resulting in
a very disquieting picture. Efforts to combat piracy and
armed robbery in the Gulf of Guinea must therefore be
conducted in a concerted manner with a strategy for
stabilizing the region as a whole. International
cooperation in this field must take into account issues
related to national sovereignty and ownership, as well
as regional leadership. One cannot overemphasize the
importance of regional cooperation and leadership in
any comprehensive strategy to address this challenge.

We praise the efforts being undertaken by the
countries concerned, by ECOWAS and by the
Economic Community of Central African States to
combat piracy in the Gulf of Guinea.

We believe that a close dialogue between the
United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa, the
United Nations Overseas Development Council, the
United Nations Office for West Africa and the
International Maritime Organization can help intensify
the efforts of West African countries to combat
terrorism. We encourage regional and subregional
organizations and national authorities to engage in a
coordinated response from the region that takes into
account the specificity of West Africa and the
aspirations and concerns of the countries in the region.

We concur with the Secretary-General that
combating piracy must not be limited to attacking the
problem at sea. Efforts must be made to address the
root causes, which are usually found on shore.

In many cases, piracy and armed robbery at sea
are criminal manifestations of economic hardship and
lack of opportunity, posing serious challenges to
effective law enforcement by coastal States. The
adoption of a comprehensive strategy must therefore
consider political as well as socio-economic factors. It
must integrate deterrence, security, the rule of law and
socio-economic development. Efforts to develop
regional cooperation that supports national policies
aimed at enforcing security and the rule of law must be
coupled with support for economic opportunities and
job creation, especially for young people.

Brazil shares with the countries in the Gulf of
Guinea the same ocean, through which we received
strong human and historical ties. We fully support the
sovereign right of those nations to determine the best
means to exploit the natural resources in their
exclusive economic zones, including fisheries, in
accordance with international law.

The fight against piracy and armed robbery in the
Gulf of Guinea should lead to initiatives that are in full
harmony with and supportive of the objectives and
spirit of the zone of peace and cooperation of the South
Atlantic. Brazil stands ready to contribute to that fight.
We are also prepared to cooperate with the countries of
the Gulf of Guinea region to stem armed robbery at sea
within their national jurisdiction, in coordination with
other international partners, particularly the
Governments of the region, our fellow members of the
Community of Portuguese Language Countries and
member States of the zone of peace and cooperation of
the South Atlantic.

