Mr. Ciss (Senegal) (spoke in French): First of all,
the Senegalese delegation would like to commend the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), Mr. Zahir Tanin, for the
clarity of his presentation of the report (S/2017/640)
of the Secretary-General. We once again would like
to assure him of our full support. Our thanks also go
to the First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Serbia, Mr. Ivica
Dacic, and Ambassador Citaku, whose statements we
have just heard.

Senegal would like to commend the smooth holding
of legislative elections on 11 June, which were held
without major incident or irregularities. We would also
like to take this opportunity to congratulate all the local
and international stakeholders who made that success
possible. Nevertheless, on the heels of those elections,
we cannot but regret the low representation of women,
as was indicated the report that was just presented to us.
We also hope that the current difficulties concerning
the formation of a new governing majority will be dealt
with swiftly.

The limited progress with regard to the dialogue
between Pristina and Belgrade facilitated by the
European Union is a source of concern for my
delegation. We therefore encourage the parties to
redouble their efforts accordingly and welcome the
ongoing efforts of the European Union in that regard,
in particular the high-level meeting held on 3 July in
Brussels and organized by Ms. Federica Mogherini,
High Representative of the European Union for Foreign
Affairs and Security Policy.

We agree with the Secretary-General that another
important issue deserves our full attention. In that
regard, I wish to address the question of missing
persons, which must be an urgent priority and which
demands of the leaders of both parties to demonstrate
political will so as to give answers to the families who
have been waiting for a very long time. My delegation
would also like to commend the work carried out in the
country to counter threats involving violent extremism.
Moreover, in our view, the activities carried out within
the framework of the European Union Rule of Law
Mission in Kosovo (EULEX), the mandate of which has
been extended to 14 June 2018, have been commendable
in terms of bolstering achievements in defending and
promoting the rule of law and human rights, as well as
combating terrorism and organized crime. Furthermore,
we welcome the activities of UNMIK in the area
of capacity-building with regard to young people,
promoting reconciliation, transitional justice, human

rights and providing support for the normalization of
relations between Belgrade and Pristina.

In addition to encouraging dialogue, Senegal urges
all stakeholders to take further steps towards peace
and development, in particular by focusing on the full
implementation of agreements that have already been
reached. In that regard, we reiterate our unreserved
support for the joint European Union-United Nations
programme aimed at strengthening trust at the
community level by protecting cultural heritage, and
we recommend strengthening cooperation with regard
to sharing information.

In conclusion, my delegation reiterates its
congratulations to, and its full support for, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head
of UNMIK. We would also like to commend the
constructive work of the Kosovo Force, the European
Union Rule ofLaw Mission in Kosovo, the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe and, of course,
the European Union itself, as they are all committed
stakeholders constructively involved in promoting
peace and progress in Kosovo.

