Mr. Jerandi (Tunisia) (spoke in French): I too
would like to thank you, Madam President, for having
convened this open meeting and to thank Mr. Annabi
for the exhaustive statement he has just made to us.

Not long ago, on the occasion of the first
anniversary of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), the
Council focused in detail on the evolution of the
situation. At that time, in the light of the report of the
Secretary-General and the statement of his Special
Representative, the Council conducted a minute
analysis of the situation. The situation has certainly
improved, but it remains fragile and unstable. Like
other delegations we feel that this was an interim report
and that it behoves the international community to
continue to track the situation steadily and periodically.

The critical emergency phase in Kosovo has
passed without major incident. The number of refugees
and displaced persons returning to Kosovo has reached
900,000, and basic social services have been restored
and are functioning better, promoting a return to
normalcy.

These grounds for hope, however, should not hide
the often tragic reality in Kosovo and the tense
relations among the communities. We would like here
to express our concern about the wave of violence
targeting the United Nations Mission and other
international organizations that are coming to the aid of
the inhabitants of this region. This wave of violence is
unacceptable and is jeopardizing the joint efforts of the
international community, as is the ethnic violence
spurred by hatred and intolerance and directed at
minorities. These things are to be condemned, and the
authors of such acts should be prosecuted so as not to
be allowed to act with impunity.

I would also like to address the question of the
organization of the municipal elections. We think this
is a decisive stage that should make it possible for the
minorities to be represented in the municipal councils
and in the decision-making bodies, and thus help
establish the principles of multi-ethnic peaceful
coexistence. We hope that the electoral campaign will
focus on the future of the region and on the protection
of minorities. We will follow with interest the
registration process and the establishment of electoral
lists.

The United Nations Mission should give priority
to the issue of demining. We appreciate the work being
done by those countries that are actively participating
in the demining operation, and we urge the
international community to support the efforts of
UNMIK and of the Kosovo Force (KFOR) in this area,
so that the minefields that remain in Kosovo can be
completely cleared.

We have already spoken on the question of the
detainees and displaced persons. For us this is a
constant source of concern. The inhabitants of Kosovo
cannot become reconciled with one another if this
question is not definitively resolved. An investigation
should be carried out regarding disappeared and
missing persons so as to learn what has happened to
them. So long as this wound is not healed, it will be
difficult to establish a truly multi-ethnic Kosovo. We
reiterate here our support for the nomination of a
special envoy for missing persons.

It is also important to note that the economic
situation in Kosovo continues to improve. Economic
prosperity will promote stability and social well-being.
In this respect we feel that UNMIK must play a leading
role in restoring confidence among investors in the
future of this region.

We cannot overemphasize the need to promote a
culture of peace, tolerance and multi-ethnic peaceful
coexistence as the foundation for any lasting solution,
not only for Kosovo, but for the entire region of the
Balkans.

Lastly, I would like once again to pay tribute to
the United Nations Mission in Kosovo and to the
dedication of its staff, as well as to all those who are
active in the field. I would like to recall the positive
role being played by moderate parties that have
decided to work with UNMIK to achieve a better future
for the entire region.

