Mr. Suarez Moreno (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): The Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela is honoured to see a Latin American
country presiding over the Security Council.

Building peace in countries emerging from
armed conflict is one of the fundamental tasks of the
United Nations system and deserves our full attention.
Venezuela would like to thank Ambassador Antonio
Patriota for his briefing, and we acknowledge the
important work the Peacebuilding Commission is
doing. We would also like to take this opportunity to
thank Deputy Secretary-General Jan Eliasson for his
statement.

Venezuela acknowledges the United Nations
system's peacebuilding efforts, including its recent
successes in countries such as Sierra Leone. At the
same time, however, we are aware of the current
setbacks and challenges in other countries, such as
the Central African Republic, which has reminded
us that dealing with the underlying reasons for the
emergence of conflicts and countries' relapse into
them continues to be a significant challenge to the
system. My country supports the decision to evaluate
the performance of the United Nations peacebuilding
architecture. In that regard, we reaffirm the importance
of keeping the centrality of the principles of national
sovereignty and self-determination constantly in mind.
We also recognize the need for improving women's
participation in peacebuilding activities and taking into
account their ability to contribute, among other things,
to expanding access and support for women at the local
level, facilitating the submission of complaints, and
enhancing women's empowerment in affected areas.

Venezuela has contributed significantly to
peacebuilding efforts in Haiti since the earthquake that
devastated our sister nation in 2010. Besides forgiving
a debt of more than $395 million, we contributed more
than $3 billion in aid to Haiti's recovery between 2010
and 2014, while always respecting Haiti's own primary
role in peacebuilding and the Haitian Government's
fundamental authority in defining the purposes and
objectives of the peacebuilding process. Our efforts
have focused on strengthening the institutional capacity
of the State in the areas of development, inclusiveness
and human rights.

Peacebuilding can succeed when the underlying
causes of conflicts are properly addressed. Sustainable
development and putting an end to every sort of
exclusion and discrimination are essential conditions
for a peaceful and prosperous society.

The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela awaits
the report on the review of the United Nations
peacebuilding architecture with anticipation, and we
trust that the process will produce concrete initiatives
aimed at dealing with the reasons for the emergence
of conflicts and countries' relapse into them, including
poverty, inequality, the legacy of colonialism, foreign
interference, economic dependence, the illegal
exploitation of natural resources and the asymmetries of
power that govern contract negotiations for extracting
such resources.

In conclusion, Mr. President, Venezuela would like
to take this opportunity to affirm its full support to you
during your presidency and to wish you every success.

