Mr. Gasana (Rwanda): Mr. President, I thank you
for convening this meeting. Let me also thank Assistant
Secretaries-General Taye-Brook Zerihoun and Ivan
Simonovic' for their respective briefings on the political
and human rights situations in Ukraine. We commend
the Secretary-General for his good offices and for
his unwavering efforts to find a lasting political and
diplomatic solution to the Ukrainian crisis.

As we meet today, we are encouraged by several
steps taken by the parties in the region to de-escalate
the situation. Rwanda supports the 15-step plan of
President Petro Poroshenko to end the crisis and
welcomes the unilateral ceasefire he announced on
Friday, 20 June. We hope that the plan will serve as
a stepping stone for all parties involved to commit to
finding a long-term peaceful solution to the crisis and
the suffering of Ukrainians. In that regard, we welcome
the decisions by the separatist groups to observe a
ceasefire until Friday, 27 June. We see these parallel
ceasefires as providing new momentum for the political
talks in the framework of the peace plan presented by
President Poroshenko. At the same time, we commend
today's decision of President Vladimir Putin of the
Russian Federation to request the Federation Council to
revoke his right to use force in eastern Ukraine, as well
as for his call on all parties to the Ukrainian conflict to
cease hostilities and sit down at the negotiating table.

Despite the aforementioned possible developments,
we are concerned at the alarming level of escalation,
particularly criminal activities and reports of serious
human rights violations. We condemn the continuing
abductions, detentions, acts of ill treatment and torture,
arbitrary arrests and sexual harassment. The reported
cases of forced disappearances are extremely worrying.
We urge the United Nations human rights monitoring
mission in Ukraine and the National Preventive
Mechanism, in cooperation with the Ombudsperson,
to continue their efforts to ensure that human rights of
those who remain detained are upheld.
We further call for the immediate release of
the monitors of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe, held captive since 26 and 29 May.
The reported increase in the number of internally
displaced persons is also concerning, but even more
so are the reports of limited access to humanitarian
actors, who are unable to reach the internally displaced
persons in the Donetsk and Luhansk regions. We urge
all actors to ensure that those in need have access to
humanitarian support. We equally urge the Government
of Ukraine to establish a corridor for the safe passage
of civilians and to provide the necessary security. The
consequences of the violence in southern and eastern
Ukraine have impacted the already dire economic
situation, with a poverty rate of 24.7 per cent in youth
unemployment and a lack of access to medical services.
The delivery of medication and other necessities has
been challenging as a result of instability.

In conclusion, I would like to emphasize that the
Council needs to unite and rally behind the people of
Ukraine. We must show them that we are committed
to the unity, sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Ukraine, as well as to our own responsibility to maintain
international peace and security. Let me reiterate our
call on the armed groups to disarm and adhere to the
ceasefire, engage in constructive dialogue, and support
the ongoing efforts to de-escalate the crisis.

