Mr. Gokool (Mauritius): Let me first of all
convey my deep appreciation to you, Sir, for holding
this public meeting on Afghanistan. I thank Sir Kieran
Prendergast for his informative briefing today.

We have noted the general improvement of the
situation in the country and welcome in particular the
positive efforts of the Afghan Interim Administration,
under the leadership of Ambassador Lakhdar Brahimi
and Chairman Hamid Karzai.

The political situation looks much brighter since
the conclusion of the Bonn Agreement, thanks to the
positive attitude and conciliatory approach of the
parties involved in the peace process. We note with
satisfaction the manner in which arrangements are
being made for the organization of the loya jirga early
next month. We are confident that this traditional
political process will help in the formation of a new
government and take the country one step further
towards a stable democracy based on the principles of
non-discrimination and fair representation of all ethnic
groups.

Political stability and social harmony are
extremely important factors in the decisions of
multilateral and bilateral donors. In his observation last
Sunday, Mr. Malloch Brown, Administrator of the
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP),
rightly stressed the need for a viable and rule-based
Afghanistan for instilling confidence in the donor
community. We do hope, however, that donors will take
account of the special situation of Afghanistan, and the
amount of $4.5 billion pledged over five years for
reconstruction at the Tokyo donors Conference will not
be withheld for any special reason. At the same time,
we hope that the necessary mechanisms for
accountability and transparency will be put in place in
Afghanistan for the proper utilization of these funds.

The recent meeting on the security sector, held in
Geneva last week, underscored the importance the
international community attaches to the security
concerns in Afghanistan and confirmed its strong
commitment to the maintenance and promotion of
security in Afghanistan. We commend and support in
this respect the Interim Administration's decision to
create a new Afghan armed force and develop a
strategy for the demobilization and reintegration of ex-
combatants. But, until this process is completed,
Afghanistan will continue to require the support of the
international community.

My delegation therefore extends its full support
to the draft resolution on the extension of the
International Security Assistance Force (ISAF) for a
period of six months. Maintenance of peace and
stability is imperative for Afghanistan to succeed,
whether in Kabul or beyond it. Training the Afghan
army and the national police, we all recognize, will
take some time, and until such time the Afghan Interim
Administration should be fully supported.

The humanitarian situation in Afghanistan - the
result of more than two decades of war and political
turmoil and further complicated by natural disasters
such as earthquakes, severe drought and heavy
flooding - continues to deserve special attention. The
plight of refugees and internally displaced people
should be urgently addressed. We commend the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA)
and other United Nations agencies for their relentless
efforts to extend the basic necessities to these needy
people, especially in the highly volatile and difficult
environment. For the maintenance of social stability, it
is important that the international community continue
to be engaged with a view to improving the life of
these refugees and internally displaced persons. We
commend the constructive role played by neighbouring
countries in this regard.

My delegation strongly supports the efforts made
by the organizations and agencies to address the
problem posed by poppy cultivation in Afghanistan.
We believe that continued support should be extended
to the poor peasants who have agreed to stop the poppy
cultivation and move towards food production.

Before concluding, I wish to express my
delegation's particular appreciation of the good work
being done by the United Kingdom as the head of
ISAF. The task ahead remains challenging and
daunting, but we are confident that ISAF, under the
command of Turkey as of next month, will continue to
provide much needed support for the promotion and
maintenance of peace and stability in Afghanistan.

