Sri Lanka warmly congratulates Germany on its assumption of the presidency for the month of July 2020 and is confident that it will be a successful tenure. The year 2020 is pivotal for the women and peace and security agenda, particularly with the commemoration of the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of the landmark resolution 1325 (2000) on this subject, and the twenty-fifth anniversary of the adoption of the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action. As such, we believe that the convening of this important debate is timely. Women play an important role in the prevention and resolution of conflicts and in peacebuilding. Their equal participation and involvement in all efforts for the maintenance and promotion of peace and security are also essential. Therefore, Sri Lanka calls for an increase in the role of women in decision-making, not only in processes related to conflict prevention and resolution, but in all aspects related to governance at all points. While recognizing that vital steps have been taken by the global community towards achieving gender equality and empowering women and girls, it remains ominous that this segment of society is disproportionately and adversely affected by armed conflict and remains increasingly targeted. This situation has unfortunately been exacerbated by the current coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. Having experienced an armed conflict borne out of a decades-long fight against terrorism, the Government of Sri Lanka fully recognizes the devastating, multilayered impact of conflict on women and girl children. They were and remain a vulnerable group of the population during the armed conflict and in the post- conflict context. The Government is fully committed to prioritizing the addressing their grievances, ensuring their protection and mitigating the continued harmful effects of the prolonged conflict, compounded by periodic natural disasters, through inclusive processes and proactive measures. As we are deeply cognizant of their unique and differentiated needs and vulnerabilities, as well as the invaluable contribution of women to the social and economic development of the country, measures have been put in place for their empowerment by integrating gender-related priorities into Government plans and legal frameworks and gender-sensitive budgeting. Universal adult franchise was introduced in Sri Lanka in 1931; free education for both boys and girls and free health care were introduced very early after the country's independence in 1948. These positive policies implemented over the years have resulted in achieving gender parity in education, with 68.5 per cent of university undergraduates being women. Furthermore, Sri Lanka adopted a Women's Charter two years before the Beijing Platform for Action and a national plan of action on women is in place. We are of the firm resolve that preventing and addressing sexual violence is an integral part of achieving Sustainable Development Goal 5 on gender equality and empowering all women and girls. Sri Lanka maintains a zero-tolerance policy on sexual abuse and exploitation and has adopted a number of best practices. As a manifestation of this commitment, Sri Lanka also endorsed the Group of Eight Declaration on Preventing Sexual Violence in Conflict in January 2016, signed the Secretary-General's voluntary compact on preventing and addressing sexual exploitation and abuse, contributed $10,000 in August 2017 to the Trust Fund in Support of Victims of Sexual Exploitation and Abuse and joined the Secretary- General's Circle of Leadership. Sri Lanka works with UN-Women on several projects related to the empowerment of women in Sri Lanka. With the support of the Government of Japan and UN-Women, in September 2019 the Government commenced the second phase of an ongoing programme for the implementation of the women and peace and security agenda, carried out by the Ministry of Women and Child Affairs and focusing on women's participation and empowerment in efforts to prevent and resolve conflicts and in the drafting of the National Action Plan on Women, Peace and Security in accordance with resolution 1325 (2000). A policy Framework and National Plan of Action to Address Sexual and Gender-based Violence has been adopted and is being implemented. This plan of action seeks to address the issue of sexual and gender-based violence against women through a three-pronged approach of prevention, intervention and policy advocacy. Nationally, human rights, including provisions of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women, have been included into the training programmes of the security forces and the police, and a Directorate of Human Rights and Humanitarian Laws has been established for the security forces. Sri Lanka recognizes that the inclusion of women in peacekeeping missions in civil, military and police functions allows women and children in the host country to feel more secure, particularly with reporting any abuse. With regard to peacekeeping missions, the country deployed its first woman peacekeeper in June 2017. Currently, there are 10 nursing and technical female officers with the level-2 hospital in South Sudan, and we stand ready to contribute more with the aim of helping to build a security sector that is accessible and responsive to all, especially women. In addition, a vetting procedure has also been put in place in the selection of members of our armed forces and police to serve as peacekeeping troops. Predeployment training includes sensitizing both officers and troops on sexual harassment and abuse; the training manual of the Army and Air Force includes sensitizing and creating awareness of sexual exploitation and abuse and directives by the Integrated Training Services of the Department of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs have been incorporated into training schedules. Safeguards that enable victims to make complaints and seek redress are key components in addressing sexual violence in Sri Lanka. As such, a hotline has been established for this purpose and legal aid centres throughout the island provide support to women victims. Six shelters have been established in the country by the Government to provide them with safety and protection. This is supplemented by shelters maintained by recognized women's organizations operating in Sri Lanka. Counselling is also extended through officers attached to each divisional secretariat. In addition, the female officers assigned to children and women's desks at every police station are given special training on counselling. As the world endeavours to meet the multifaceted challenges of COVID-19 and grapples to get back on track to meet the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, Sri Lanka reiterates its firm commitment to promoting and supporting the role of women in the prevention and resolution of conflicts and in peacebuilding, and their equal and active participation and involvement in all efforts for the maintenance and promotion of peace and security. Sri Lanka strongly believes that the meaningful, enhanced participation of women in the international peace and security agenda will bring effective change and can play an important role in its long-term success.
