The President (spoke in Arabic): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of Kuwait.

Atthe outset,Iwouldlike to joinotherrepresentatives
in thanking Ambassador Gustavo Meza-Cuadra, Chair
of the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC), for his
valuable briefing on the most recent updates regarding
the implementation of resolution 2341 (2017), on
protecting critical infrastructure from terrorist attacks.
I wish him every success as Chair of the CTC.
I would like to focus in my statement on three main
issues: first, the need to protect critical infrastructure;
secondly, relevant United Nations efforts; and,
thirdly, international cooperation in the protection of
critical infrastructure.

First, it is imperative to protect critical
infrastructure from terrorist attacks, as it constitutes
an easy and attractive target for terrorist groups, which
are increasingly developing their capacity and modus
operandi. Critical infrastructure is important because it
is part ofour daily lives. Among other things, it includes
public facilities such as energy and water supply
networks; schools and hospitals; air, maritime and
rail transportation systems; and telecommunications
networks. The targeting of infrastructure could result
in heavy losses and lead to consequences with a direct
impact on us as users. It is also important to note that it
is the responsibility of every State to define the concept
of critical infrastructure and determine the best ways
to protect it.

Kuwait is among the States whose infrastructure
has been targeted by terrorists, including an attack
on a religious site in 2015 that resulted in a number
of deaths and injuries and was intended to sow strife
within Kuwaiti society. Consequently, we have sought
to heighten our prevention efforts by enacting a number
of laws pertaining to preventing terrorist attacks
on critical infrastructure, in line with the relevant
Security Council resolutions. That includes legislation
on combating cybercrimes that penalizes anyone who
sets up a website on behalf of a terrorist organization
or individual, posts information about them online or
through other information technology means, whether
under areal or fictitious name, facilitates communication
with a terrorist organization or its members, promotes
their ideology or facilitates their funding, or transmits
information on the making of explosives or any device
used in a terrorist act.

Secondly, it is imperative to adopt common
measures to prevent and address terrorism, including
denying terrorists' access to any means of carrying
out their attacks, in line with the second pillar of the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. We
also support the actions and efforts of the CTC, the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
and the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force.
We urge Member States to continue working together
to facilitate technical assistance, capacity-building
and awareness-raising on the protection of critical
infrastructure, including by engaging with other
regional and international organizations to exchange
best practices.

Thirdly, we stress the need to encourage
international cooperation among States and
international organizations, including INTERPOL and
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, in order
to exchange information and expertise and implement
joint programmes to combat terrorism and to improve
protection for critical infrastructure. We encourage
Member States to make use ofthe programmes provided
by the United Nations and its specialized agencies, as
well as those of all other international organizations.

We also stress the need for the implementation of
resolution 2286 (2016), which calls for the protection
of medical infrastructure, facilities and humanitarian
personnel and their means of transportation during
times of war. We also call for implementing resolution
2309 (2016), on the protection of civil aviation, and
resolution 2322 (2016), on international cooperation
in counter-terrorism, and any other relevant Security
Council resolution.

The State of Kuwait today hosted a ministerial
conference of the Global Coalition against Da'esh,
during which more than 70 States and four organizations
took part in establishing counter-terrorism strategies
and plans. At this first conference of its kind since
the defeat of Da'esh in Iraq, participants adopted the
Kuwait declaration, which includes a number of the
Global Coalition's guiding principles.

The interdependence of critical infrastructure
makes it more vulnerable to terrorist attacks. Such
attacks using information and communication
technology might also undermine the stability notjust of
the country concerned, but also neighbouring countries.
It is therefore important to step up cooperation among
Governments and between the private and public
sectors. Governments must also adopt emergency
preparedness plans.

In conclusion, we reiterate our principled and
firm position in condemnation of all terrorist attacks
against innocent people and critical infrastructure
in violation of international humanitarian law, the
Geneva Conventions and the relevant Security Council
resolutions. We look forward to further cooperating
and coordinating with Member States and the United
Nations to combat this phenomenon and reduce the
threat it poses to international peace and security.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
There are no more names inscribed on the list
of speakers.

The meeting rose at 4.40 pm.
