Mr. Esono Angue (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): Given the topic's importance for the African
continent and the international community, Equatorial
Guinea thanks Russia for having organized this
ministerial meeting, together with the three African
countries elected to serve on the Council. We also thank
Ms. Maria Luiza Ribeiro Viotti, Chef de Cabinet of the
Secretary-General, and Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat,
Chairperson of the African Union Commission, for
their detailed briefings on the issue before us today.

Formerly, African conflicts were characterized
by ethnic and tribal wars for access to and control of
land and natural resources, as well as other factors
such as politics, culture, beliefs and social needs.
Those traditional African conflicts underwent a radical
change upon the arrival of new phenomena that have
exacerbated violence, such as terrorism, which has
many forms and is involved on active fronts throughout
the world through its affiliates Al-Qaida, Al-Shabaab,
Boko Haram and groups linked to the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Shams, all currently based in Africa.

Other no less relevant phenomena are the increase
in illicit arms trafficking and trade, piracy, the growth
of armed groups, sexual violence, illicit trafficking in
diamonds and other minerals and more. Their effects
pose a significant threat to peace and security in Africa
and its economic development projects, creating chaos

and causing displacement, poverty, disease, hunger
and death.

Arms proliferation, the exploitation and illicit
trafficking of natural resources and competition for
them, poverty and weak State institutions are the main
causes of conflicts that create ongoing instability in
conflict-prone areas or regions in Africa. Despite the
progress made towards peace and security by regional
and subregional bodies and their international partners,
those causes have been exacerbated by the growth of
extremism, terrorism, transnational organized crime,
violence between communities and the effects of
climate change, such as drought, floods, increased land
degradation and desertification affecting agriculture,
which is the main livelihood for the vast majority
of Africans.

The consequence of climate change and armed
conflicts is reflected in the increase in the number of
refugees and internally displaced persons. This forced
displacement, be it internally or externally, is a crisis
that mainly affects Africa. In order to give visibility to
this crisis, the theme of the African Union for 2019 is
"Year of Refugees, Returnees and Internally Displaced
Persons: Towards Durable Solutions to Forced
Displacement in Africa", by His Excellency Mr. Obiang
Nguema Mbasogo, President of the Republic of
Equatorial Guinea.

Every year, the Security Council holds several
sessions and debates on issues related to peace and
security, focusing mainly on Africa. These ongoing
meetings demonstrate that both the Security Council
and the international community recognize that
the peace operations of the African Union are key
instruments for the establishment of peace and security
on the African continent.

Peace and security in Africa are important for
global stability, and Equatorial Guinea gives top priority
to African issues in its foreign policy. That is why,
during our presidency of the Council, we had the high
honour of presenting, on behalf of the African Union,
resolution 2457 (2019), on the Silencing the Guns in
Africa by the Year 2020 initiative. The implementation
of that resolution would be a solid foundation for
Africa's economic development. The African Union
itself must ensure political and operational synergy and
coordination among the regional economic communities
and regional mechanisms.

We also need to increase consultations between the
African Union's peace and security bodies and economic
communities and thereby improve and strengthen
the strategic partnership to jointly address and better
coordinate coherent and effective initiatives to prevent,
resolve and manage conflicts on the continent, as we
believe it important and necessary that collaboration in
conflict prevention, resolution and management include
the regional economic communities and regional
mechanisms as important partners in the global peace
and security architecture.

The participation and empowerment of women and
young people in Africa's development are crucial to
laying strong foundations for conflict resolution and
peacebuilding on the continent.

