Mr. Woldegerima (Ethiopia): We would like to
thank the Secretary General for his comprehensive
report on the situation in Afghanistan (8/2018/824) and
the activities of the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA). We appreciate the briefing
by Special Representative Yamamoto and are grateful to
Ambassador Saikal and Mr. Bakhtiar for their remarks.

There is no doubt that Afghanistan still faces
multiple and complex challenges to its security,
stability and development. Its people continue to pay
a heavy price for the instability and violence, not least
from the use of indiscriminate improvised explosive
devices - the leading cause of civilian casualties
during the first half of this year. We reiterate our strong
condemnation of the recent terrorist attacks in Kabul
and other parts ofthe country. Once again, we must take
this opportunity to express our sympathy and solidarity
with the people and the Government of Afghanistan for
the loss ofa high number of civilian lives.

The long-term security and stability of Afghanistan
can be ensured only through a comprehensive and
inclusive Afghan-led and Afghan-owned reconciliation
and political process. We reiterate our appreciation for
the proposal by President Ghani for direct negotiations
with the Taliban. We note that it has been receiving
broad and strong support from Afghans and the
international community. However, that will not make
any difference unless and until the Taliban accepts
the offer and engages in direct peace talks without
any preconditions.

The holding of peaceful and democratic
parliamentary and district council elections within the
proposed time frame is indeed important, as Special
Representative Yamamoto said. The peaceful conduct
of any electoral process is critical to enabling people
to exercise their right to vote freely, without fear or
threat of insecurity, but implementing an inclusive
and credible electoral process in that context remains
a challenge.

There has certainly been progress in the preparation
for the elections, but there is a need to accelerate those
efforts and build confidence in the electoral process
through the involvement and participation of all
relevant stakeholders. That is key to ensuring the timely
and successful holding of the elections. All Afghan
stakeholders have very important responsibilities
in that regard. We hope they will demonstrate the
necessary political will and commitment to contribute
their part for the sake of lasting peace and stability
in Afghanistan.

The peace and security challenge faced by
Afghanistan cannot be effectively addressed
without sustained and inclusive economic growth
and development. That is why the National Unity
Government needs the coordinated and comprehensive
support of the international community. We must
provide every support to encourage and assist the
Government in its political reforms and the national
development priorities laid out in the Afghanistan
National Peace and Development Framework. It is vital
that the international community sustain its engagement
and deliver on its commitments. We sincerely hope that
the Geneva Ministerial Conference on Afghanistan will
provide an opportunity for the international community
to renew its political commitments to Afghanistan and
encourage their implementation.

The continued engagement of the United Nations in
support ofAfghanistan is absolutely vital at this critical
juncture. We commend UNAMA's active engagement
with the Government and the people of Afghanistan,
in line with its mandate. We hope it will continue to
maintain and extend its efforts to promote and support
peace talk initiatives, reconciliation and dialogue,
as well as its support for the social and economic
development of Afghanistan.

