Mr. Jagne (Gambia): It will be recalled that
following the recent visit to Afghanistan and the
neighbouring countries by the Secretary-General' s Special
Envoy for Afghanistan, Ambassador Brahimi, my
delegation, having listened to him with rapt attention
congratulated him warmly on what he had been able to
achieve during that delicate and difficult mission. It was
successful by all accounts. Yes, it could be described as
modest, but at the same time, it provides us with some
concrete elements to build upon if we wish to exploit the
window of opportunity that has been opened.

In the face of the overwhelming evidence that the
Taliban control most of the national territory, vain threats,
ultimatums and inflammatory language might be counter-
productive. It must also be made very clear that a military
solution to the Afghan crisis is certainly not the best
option and it is not in the long-term interest of the people
of Afghanistan. The delegation of the Gambia is in favour
of a negotiated settlement through the "six plus two"
talks, not a military onslaught.

It should be recognized as well that the six plus two
process has thus far achieved little. Moving the peace
process forward depends largely on that process adopting
one attitude and speaking with one voice. We wonder
how the legitimate concerns of the countries concerned
can be addressed if they themselves do not take the
process seriously.

This is why my delegation looks forward to the next
meeting of the six-plus-two to be held in the region, with
the participation of all the interested parties.

We have no doubt that if all the parties concerned
muster enough political will, there will be a radical
departure from the stage of mere damage control to the
serious quest for conflict resolution. In our view, this is
where the emphasis should be placed.

Let us face it: demonizing the Taliban alone will not
yield the desired results; the six plus two talks hold the
key to a lasting solution in Afghanistan. Let all the parties
concerned redouble their efforts in order to jump-start the
process. This offers a better prospect for the formation of
a broad-based Government, not only to guarantee a lasting
peace in Afghanistan, but also to respond adequately to
the security concerns of the neighbouring countries.

 

The draft resolution before us should have put more
emphasis on the achievements made by Ambassador
Brahimi. All the same, we will vote in favour of it in the
hope that it will be implemented in that spirit.

