Mr. Shen Guofang (China) (spoke in Chinese):
At the outset, I should like to thank Under-Secretary-
General Guehenno for his comprehensive briefing.

The Chinese delegation remains concerned at the
current situation in Kosovo. We condemn the acts of
terrorism that have occurred recently in Mitrovica.

The Chinese delegation is of the view that the key
issue now facing Kosovo is the violent conflict
between ethnic communities, and in particular the fact
that the life and security of ethnic Serbs cannot be
guaranteed. Long-term efforts must be made to resolve
this question in order to promote harmony and
tolerance between ethnic communities so that they can
live in peace.

Effective measures must be taken to end the
violence and improve the security situation.

We have noted the recent efforts made by
UNMIK under the leadership of Mr. Haekkerup, the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, and
the four priorities that it has identified in its work. We
hope that the steps being taken by UNMIK will
contribute to harmony and tolerance among the ethnic
communities so that they can live together peacefully.
At the same time, we hope that UNMIK will cooperate
with the Kosovo Force (KFOR) in taking specific and
effective measures to ensure that all the residents of
Kosovo can live in an environment free from violence,
intimidation and harassment; to effectively protect
ethnic minorities, and especially to ensure the safety of
ethnic Serbs; to speed up the safe return of ethnic
minority refugees; to curb extremist nationalist forces;
and to ease the tension in Kosovo, so that Security
Council resolution 1244 (1999) can be implemented in
a comprehensive manner.

Elections in Kosovo are another focus of
attention for the international community. The briefing
by Under-Secretary-General Guehenno will help us to
understand the developments in this field. We hope to
receive further briefings about how UNMIK is
cooperating with the other parties concerned in
preparing for elections so as to ensure that the whole
population, especially the ethnic Serbs, can participate
in them on an equal footing and that their outcome is in
compliance with resolution 1244 (1999).

In this regard, the Chinese delegation encourages
UNMIK to further strengthen its dialogue with the
Government of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. We
have taken note of the reference to the actions taken by
UNMIK to this end. The Chinese delegation believes
that dialogue is not enough; it is more important to
undertake cooperation and to pay serious attention to
the views of the Government of the Federal Republic
of Yugoslavia. At the same time, we hope that UNMIK
will actively encourage and urge ethnic Albanians in
Kosovo to engage in dialogue with the Government of
the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and study how to
solve the question of Kosovo at its roots in a fair and
reasonable manner. A comprehensive resolution of the
question of Kosovo must involve the full participation
of the Government of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia.

In resolving the question of Kosovo, the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia must be fully respected. The
Chinese delegation is very concerned about the volatile
situation in the Presevo Valley. China appreciates the
restraint shown so far by the Government of the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and its commitment to
a peaceful settlement of the dispute. We welcome the
peace plan proposed by that Government. This
demonstrates the readiness and goodwill of the Serbian
side to achieve conciliation with the ethnic Albanians
in the region. We hope that the proposal will be
received positively by the Albanian side. At the same
time, the international community, including the
Security Council, should also support the positive
efforts of the Government of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia.

The Chinese delegation supports the proposal of
Ambassador Lavrov to send a Security Council mission
to Kosovo, to the capital of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia and to the Presevo Valley, and we hope that
the Council will give it serious consideration.

With regard to the question of depleted uranium
munitions, we hope that the investigation conducted
under the auspices of the United Nations will proceed
smoothly and that we will be informed promptly of the
harm caused to the population and the environment of
Kosovo.

