Ms. Londofio (spoke in Spanish): First of all, I am
grateful for the opportunity that the Security Council
has given us to participate in such an important forum. I
express special thanks go to the Government of Sweden,
which invited us and helped us travel from Colombia, as
well as to the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Children and Armed Conflict.

I am speaking in the first person plural as I am
representing the Group of Young Consultants on
Childhood, Adolescence and Armed Conflict, and I
am also speaking on behalf of children and adolescents
who are tragically experiencing recruitment and
exploitation by armed groups and grave violations of
their rights in various parts of the world.

Under the slogan "Our Voices Count", the Group
of Young Consultants was spawned by an initiative
of the civil society organization Benposta and relies
on the support of the European Union, which has
joined in recognizing, supporting and encouraging
other organizations, such as Oxfam International,
Humanidad Vigente and the Coalition Against
Involving Children in Armed Conflict in Colombia
and the Watchlist on Children and Armed Conflict in
New York. In my particular case, Ijoined the Fuerzas
Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejercito del
Pueblo (FARC-EP) at the age of 13. I cut ties with
the latter in very strange circumstances after having
seen combat, and subsequently went through various
programmes. Today I am pursuing a law degree and I
am currently in my ninth semester. In 2014, I had the
opportunity to travel to Havana and participate as a
victim of recruitment in a delegation at talks between
the Colombian Government and the FARC-EP.

I am grateful to the countries represented in the
Chamber for their representatives' willingness to listen,
as my message is mainly addressed to States, which are
responsible for developing and implementing policies
aimed at the prevention and protection of children
and adolescents.

As the Secretary-General states in his recent report,

"Preventing violations against children
affected by conflict should be a primary concern
of the international community We must do
more to address this challenge by ensuring that
child protection is made an integral part of any
comprehensive strategy to prevent and resolve
conflict in View of enabling sustainable peace and
by promoting the close involvement of children
during the development of such strategies."
(S/2018/465, para. 11)

In that regard, I am speaking as an advocate for the
following recommendations.

It is essential that the root causes that compelled us
tojoin such groups be resolved, as most ofour pasts have
been marked by the violation of our rights, including
access to education, health care, housing, employment,
our families' livelihoods, security, participation in
cultural life and sports and recreation, among others.
We are deeply concerned that the failure to change the
social and economic conditions of our families and
communities seriously hinders our social integration,
thereby giving way to our constant temptation to rejoin
those groups. We therefore underscore that the best way
to prevent the recruitment of children is by guaranteeing
their rights on the ground. Similarly, Governments
must ensure the relevant security conditions to protect
our physical, personal and psychological integrity.
Unfortunately, many children who have disassociated
themselves from such groups are currently facing
problems, including the threats that they receive when
they return to their local areas, and, often times,
institutional support from the Government is scarce or
non-existent.

It is also essential that, in the various phases
of the process of reintegration, we be given the
opportunity to express our opinion and decide our
lives, thereby ensuring our participation in developing
and implementing public policies related to our rights.
Educational programmes involving psychological
support, skills acquisition and comprehensive training
must consider our particularities and include a gender
and ethnic approach that allows us to exercise our right
to integration, social inclusion, education and housing,
among others, in decent conditions, while respecting
our professional aspirations.

It is important to address the specific needs of
girls in developing reintegration programmes, given
that the way in which we are affected is different from
that of boys. It must be remembered that, in terms of
reintegration, there is no one-size-fits-all approach to
every case. We also recommend that our families be
included and, in as much as possible, participate in the
reintegration process, while trying to repair, rebuild and
strengthen the bonds between them and the community.

It is worrisome that schools and educational centres
are being affected and/or occupied by armed actors,
thereby seriously affecting the learning process of
children and their and their teachers and professors'
physical integrity. In that regard, we ask Governments
that have not yet signed the Safe Schools Declaration to
do so, and we have been waiting on a deferred response
from Colombia, among other countries, since 2015.

We call on Governments to fulfil their commitments
regarding children and adolescents, including their
right to be treated as victims and thereby entitled to
full reparations. In situations of conflict, when they
are implicated in the actions of armed groups, many
children are treated as delinquents and are unable to
acquire the status of crime victims and included in
Government protection programmes for children. On
the contrary, we wind up in detention centres. It is worth
highlighting that Colombia has enacted the victims
law, which constitutes an advanced and sophisticated
legal framework for the protection of victims. That
framework can contribute to the exchange of good
practices and lessons learned among countries that face
similar problems so as to ensure that all children are
treated primarily as victims.

Lastly, concerning full reparations, unfortunately,
several of our colleagues, after having left the group
more than 10 years ago and been acknowledged as
disassociated from it, have yet to receive the resources
due to them within the framework of the victims law in
Colombia. It is therefore important that all State actors
uphold their commitments with regard to children and
adolescent victims at risk. If that is not done, their life
ambitions will be seriously affected. In addition, they
will be revictimized and remain at risk.

Once again, we are grateful that the voice of
children and adolescent victims of armed conflict has
been heard in this forum, and we hope that they will
be considered. We ask that Governments not see us
as a problem, but provide us with an opportunity to
demonstrate to them our proactive abilities, embodied
by such entities as the Group of Young Consultants in
Colombia and what we are doing. I want to underscore
the happiness that I feel in sharing with everyone
present the experience that I underwent for 13 years
during my association with the FARC-EP. The reality
is that many of us live in very remote areas in which
there is no State presence, and therefore run the risk of
undergoing such experiences. It is not fair for children
to be seen as a sacrifice or crime, rather than as a hope
for the future. Given that I am currently pregnant, I
think I have the additional responsibility of changing
both my world and my daughter's, so that she can live in
a better world. While that is my responsibility, I believe
that everyone here has the tools to help shape the lives
other children who do not have a voice.

