Mr. Ward (Jamaica): We join in thanking the
Secretary-General for his interim report, and Mr. Annabi
for his briefing.
My delegation welcomes the recent holding of
parliamentary elections in Tajikistan, as this represents an
important step in the democratization process. The
resolution of the conflict and the establishment of peace
in Tajikistan constitute an important step towards stability
in Central Asia. The inclusion of the different parties in
the election process signals the commitment of the people
and the Government of Tajikistan to the creation of a
multi-party democracy.

We note that the electoral process was not without
problems. The report of the Secretary-General points to a
number of shortcomings in the electoral law and process,
and we hope that steps can be taken to correct these
inadequacies. We recognize the need to make allowances
for the transitional process that has taken place in
Tajikistan. Improvements in the electoral process should
be undertaken as a matter of priority. It is important that
the electoral process be one of legitimacy and integrity in
order to secure peace and security for the people of
Tajikistan. Existing political institutions must be
strengthened to ensure that they are capable of
undertaking the important task of governing, with the
support of the Tajik people.

We commend the United Nations Mission of
Observers in Tajikistan (UNMOT) for the success that it
has achieved in implementing its mandate, in accordance
with the provisions of the 1997 General Agreement on the
Establishment of Peace and National Accord in Tajikistan.
My delegation also wishes to acknowledge the

 

contribution made by UNMOT and the United
Nations/Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe Joint Electoral Observer Mission in the recent
elections, and we hope that their findings can be taken into
account as we work towards a more transparent electoral
process. My delegation looks forward to the holding of
elections for the upper house, scheduled for Thursday, 23
March.

We need to move quickly to cement the gains made in
the peace process and to foster greater democracy in the
region. The Secretary-General has advised us of his
intention to withdraw UNMOT when its mandate expires on
15 May. In the light of the positive developments in
Tajikistan, therefore, we must now turn our attention to the
future role of the United Nations. We agree that there is
still much to be done.

A change in the role of the United Nations is
inevitable, as we seek to move towards peace-building. We
support the intention of the Secretary-General to consult
with Tajikistan in that regard. A peace-building United
Nations mission after the withdrawal of UNMOT is
essential, in order to prevent a return to conditions which
foster conflict and to facilitate national reconciliation and
the creation of a sustainable system of government.

We look forward to working with all concerned
towards a peace-building agenda for Tajikistan, one that
includes all the factors we have outlined, as we build on the
work done to bring lasting peace and security to the people
of Tajikistan.

Finally, we support the elements of the presidential
statement proposed by the Russian Federation.

