Mr. Urbina (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): I
was recently able to speak with the President of Cote
d'Ivoire, President Gbagbo, and I told him that my
country, as a nation of Latin America, did not have any
strategic involvement in Africa. When we examine
African realities, we try to do so in a spirit of good
faith and we truly try to make a contribution to the
peace processes in the region.

It is with that same attitude that we approach the
issue of Sudan and the region. We have advocated
many times in this Council for a regional approach.
There are bandits such as Joseph Kony skipping around
from one country to another in the region to elude his
pursuers. Today the United Nations Mission in the
Sudan (UNMIS) is searching for him, tomorrow it
could be the United Nations Mission in the Central
African Republic and Chad (MINURCAT) or the
United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC).
Everyone is after him, but our efforts remain
disjointed. Today we have heard the Special Envoys
state that the problems in the region are really one
problem. The international community must first deal
with this entire, singular problem in all its complexity.

I should briefly like to emphasize the need for the
Government of the Sudan to provide certain conditions
that seem to us fundamental: working conditions for
the United Nations missions, security for the missions
and security for humanitarian workers. When we talked
with representatives of humanitarian organizations in
Darfur - and with the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) itself - they
told us about the loss of almost $2 million in vehicles
and equipment. Humanitarian organizations told us
about the lives lost and the times they were attacked.
They also told us about the restrictions on movement
imposed on them and how it was impossible to go
about in rented vehicles beyond certain areas. In other
words, there are too many restrictions. I believe that
primary responsibility falls on the Government of the
Sudan, which must have a more open attitude towards
the international community.

In Friendship Hall, we 15 ambassadors heard
presidential adviser Mr. Nafi Ali Nafi speak without
hesitation about his Government's major concerns and
reservations with regard to United Nations actions.
Listening to and reading the reports of the Special
Envoys, I am now struck by their assessment of the
internal divisions within the various movements and

08-3959]
their will, or lack thereof, to participate. I truly
understand what they have both said. I feel that their
reports contain little assessment of the attitude of the
Government of the Sudan. As understandable as that
may be, it nevertheless seems to me that the Council
can hardly act consistently without a fairly clear
picture of the Government of the Sudan's attitude with
regard to the efforts of the United Nations.

It is worth recalling that the United Nations will
spend $2.3 to $2.4 billion in the Sudan this year. As the
representative of a country that does not have strategic
interests in the region, I genuinely feel that this is a
Government with deep distrust of the actions of the
United Nations. It is a Government that ignores the
resolutions adopted by the Security Council under the
provisions of Chapter VII of the Charter. It is a
Government that does not make any link between
peace and justice. It is a Government that, with a
certain degree of insolence, continues to keep
Mr. Ahmad Harun as its Minister for Humanitarian
Affairs and has not brought to justice Mr. Ali Kushayb,
a well-known member of the Janjaweed who is also the
subject of an arrest warrant issued by the International
Criminal Court. One therefore legitimately wonders
about the meaning of such action.

I agree with Mr. Eliasson and Mr. Salim that it is
necessary to achieve consistency at the various levels of
action. I believe there needs to be consistency in the
international community and in regional efforts. We
have not achieved that yet, but those are areas in which
we can continue to work. I believe that achieving
consistency in international efforts vis-a-vis the
Government of the Sudan is an enormous task at the
moment. We must approach it positively and in a spirit
of cooperation and of making a contribution and
building confidence. In that connection, we welcome the
idea of a joint mediator. We are certain that, along with
the work of the two Special Envoys, that should
contribute to creating trust between the United Nations
and the Government of the Sudan. Such understanding is
absolutely essential. If we can achieve it, I am sure that
the movements, militias and groups disrupting the peace
in Darfur and the Sudan can see their problems resolved.
Do forgive me, Mr. President, for deviating from
my written statement. Having listened to my colleagues
and the Special Envoys, my delegation and I would be
very grateful if the Special Envoys, if they deem it
appropriate, could give the Council an assessment of
how they feel about the Government of the Sudan.
