Mr. Mohamad (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): Our
delegation is pleased to see you, Sir, presiding over this
important meeting of the Security Council. This is a
clear reflection of your country's firm commitment to
the activities and programmes of the United Nations. I
wish at the outset to say, Sir, that your country's
presidency has been marked by a spirit of purposeful
initiative, as reflected in the concept paper (S/2007/72, annex) that you kindly distributed to Member States on
security sector reform (SSR), which is a central
element of the maintenance of international peace and
security.

I should like also to pay tribute to you for
reaching out to my country and working to restore
peace there - even before you assumed the Council

presidency. My tribute is particularly heartfelt because,
through political will and persistence, my country put
an end to one of the longest-standing conflicts in
Africa by signing the Comprehensive Peace Agreement
of 9 January 2005 with the Sudan People's Liberation
Movement/Army (SPLM/A) - in addition to signing
the Darfur Peace Agreement on 5 May 2006. We are
making every effort to convince all parties that have
not yet signed the latter agreement to do so as soon as
possible so that the peace process in the Sudan can be
completed.

We are grateful for the assistance we receive from
Mr. Jan Eliasson, Special Envoy of the Secretary-
General, and from Mr. Salim Ahmed Salim, Special
Envoy of the African Union. They have the full support
of my Government. The Government of the Sudan is
playing its part in efforts to speedily achieve success in
the security sector. Here, let me share some
information with members of the Council. The
President of the Sudan today led a high-level
delegation to the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya in the
context of peaceful dialogue with non-signatories to
the Abuja Agreement, with a view to successfully
completing the peace process in the Sudan.

Any discussion of security sector reform should,
first and foremost, be undertaken within a clear frame
of reference and should be based in particular on the
purposes and principles of the Charter, including:
respect for State sovereignty, territorial integrity and
national unity; respect for the national choices made by
countries and for their economic and social systems;
and non-interference in the internal affairs of States. In
discussing reform in this sphere, we should not focus
immediately on the military, security and judiciary
sectors: security is an indivisible whole. Everybody
agrees that security is a comprehensive system that can
endure only with the support of all of its pillars:
sustainable development; poverty alleviation; support
for the economies of countries emerging from conflict;
and bridging the digital divide through exchanges of
information and know-how and through technology
transfers between developed and developing countries.
Only with all of those factors can we attain the
political, economic and social stability that is needed to
establish institutions of good governance, with
executive and legislative branches, and to ensure the
rule of law, respect for justice and human rights, and
gender equality.
As you, Mr. President, say in your concept paper,
"SSR is context-specific" (S/2007/72, annex, para. 8).
I entirely agree. Indeed, the kind of support a country
can provide to security sector reform depends on the
situation in the country concerned and on the nature of
its urgent needs. The highest priority of a country
barely emerging from conflict is to achieve peace
through speedy implementation of disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration, reconstruction and
rehabilitation programmes so as to avoid relapsing into
war. The priorities are different in a country that has
passed through that stage and is experiencing
democratic stability, whose institutions are nearly fully
established and which is aspiring to the establishment
of the full range of security and oversight bodies and
judiciary institutions. Hence, SSR cannot be a one-
size-fits-all enterprise: needs and priorities vary from
case to case.

Security sector reform is never an immediate
process that will bear fruit in the short term. Rather, it
is a gradual, phased process. Hence, the only guarantee
of its viability is the implementation of such reform by
the national institutions of the country concerned, in
accordance with the principle of respect for State
sovereignty and legitimacy. That is especially true
because such reform focuses on sensitive sovereign
institutions; this requires unequivocal national
ownership of the implementation of reforms.

Security sector reform should be the subject of an
in-depth and transparent study, to be carried out by all
Member States. Carrying out such a study should not
prejudice the other principal organs of the United
Nations with a stake in this matter: the General
Assembly, the Economic and Social Council and other
relevant bodies. Nor should it fuel the impression that
the Security Council is increasingly interfering in
legislative matters that fall within the mandates of
other United Nations bodies. Reform of the Security
Council itself exemplifies the kind of reform that all
Member States seek for United Nations institutions in
general.

I wish to conclude by reiterating our appreciation
to you, Sir, for your meaningful initiative and for your
valuable ideas, which provide a substantive framework
for the Council's consideration of this item.

