Mrs. Fisher: On behalf of the Special Court for
Sierra Leone, I thank the Council for this opportunity
to address members on the achievements of the Special
Court and the upcoming completion of our mandate.
We are especially privileged to be speaking during the
presidency of Guatemala, a nation that shares with us
a commitment to fighting impunity and to striving for
gender justice.

We are also very pleased to address the Council on
the twelfth anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000). The
Special Court of Sierra Leone is a living example ofthe
progress of the resolution. For the first time in the history
of international tribunals, all four principals - the
President, the Prosecutor, the Registrar and the Principal
Defender ~ are women. We owe a special thanks to
UN-Women, Women's Initiatives for Gender Justice
and the United Nations Development Programme, first,

because of their tireless efforts in advancing the goals
of resolution 1325 (2000). On a more personal level,
we thank them for financing our journey here, without
which we could not appear before the Council today.

The Special Court for Sierra Leone will soon
complete its final case. We will deliver the final
judgement in the appellate proceedings in the case of
Mr. Charles Taylor, former President of Liberia. That
final judgement will determine Mr. Taylor's guilt or
innocence. The Court Will then transition to residual
status and close its doors. It will be the first international
criminal tribunal to do so.

I could say that the Special Court has delivered on its
mandate, that it has contributed to ending impunity and
that it has brought justice to the people of Sierra Leone.
I could say that but I think that it is more important that
members hear it from the people of Sierra Leone and
Liberia themselves.

At the end of May, with funding from the European
Union, an independent nationwide survey was conducted
in Sierra Leone and Liberia. It was designed to measure
the impact and legacy of the Special Court for Sierra
Leone. Some 79.16 per cent, that is, almost 80 per cent,
of the people surveyed believe that the Special Court
had accomplished its mandate.

The document rightly attributes such results to the
vision established during the early stages of the Court
of it being an institution embedded in and responsive to
the expectations and needs of the people of Sierra Leone
and Liberia.

For that, credit and thanks are owed to the
Registrar, Ms. Binta Mansaray, whose vision it was
to take the Court to the people and who designed an
outreach programme that was both geographically and
demographically inclusive and participatory.

When questioned on what that mandate entailed,
the people surveyed expressed their understanding that
it was to prosecute those with the greatest responsibility
for the war from all factions, without regard for the
side on which they fought or the power of the position
they held. For that, credit and thanks are owed to the
Prosecutor, Ms. Brenda Hollis, and her predecessors.

But the people surveyed also indicated that they
believed the mandate was to bring justice and the rule
of law to their war-torn part of the world. It cannot be
forgotten that faith in the outcome of those cases depends
on faith in the process - that it be fair, that the rights
of the accused be respected and that they be zealously
represented. For that, credit and thanks are owed to the
Principal Defender, Ms. Claire Carlton-Hanciles, and
the dedicated defence teams she oversees.

Most heartening and humbling is the fact that the
survey found that 91 per cent of people in Sierra Leone
and 78 per cent of people in Liberia believe that the
Special Court has contributed to bringing peace to their
countries. The Court that the United Nations established
and has supported for the past 10 years has been judged
by 91 per cent of the people surveyed to have contributed
to bringing peace to Sierra Leone. For that, credit and
thanks are owed to the Security Council. The Special
Court's successes are truly the Council's. Celebrating the
success of the Special Court is celebrating the Council's
steadfast commitment to the work of the Court. On
behalf of the Special Court, the four Principals would
like to thank the Council, the States Members of the
United Nations and the international community as a
whole for their enduring support and assistance over
the past decade. We congratulate them on their vision
and dedication, and we encourage them to recognize the
immensity of our joint achievement.

Because of that vision, the Special Court for Sierra
Leone is the first of its kind. It is the first partnership
between national authorities and the United Nations
to create a credible system of post-conflict justice
that meets international standards. It is the first hybrid
tribunal created to assist a State that desired post-conflict
justice but did not have sufficient capacity to ensure it.
It is the first United Nations-sponsored tribunal to carry
out its work in the territory Where serious violations of
international humanitarian law were committed, thereby
ensuring that the survivors of conflict are participants in
justice, and not mere bystanders to it.

And it has been successful. That success is not only
an accomplishment for the present, but an important
one for the future as well, because it is a proven model
for positive complementarity. As the Special Court's
success proves, complementarity is a reality, not just
an aspiration. My colleagues and I, the four Principals
of the Court, are visible evidence of that reality. We
are two Sierra Leoneans and two internationals united
in our commitment to post-conflict justice. What is
special about the Special Court is the synergy of local
commitment, knowledge and talent with international
financial and human resources. Complementarity works.

The Special Court's example should dispel doubts
that positive complementarity can succeed in difficult
environments. It must be remembered that the Court
came about because the Government of Sierra Leone
had the courage and innovation to request a partnership
with the international community at a time when the
situation in Sierra Leone continued to constitute a
threat to international peace and security in the region.
The conflict had destroyed national legal and judicial
institutions, and Sierra Leone alone did not have the
human and financial resources to realize its desire for
justice.

Confronted with challenges, the Special Court
innovated. Faced with isolated communities, a
multiplicity of languages and limited communications
infrastructure, the Special Court's outreach programme
innovated. Under the leadership of Registrar Mansaray,
a Sierra Leonean who knows her country and its people,
it literally took the Court to the people. Traveling over
roads that were no more than trails, outreach workers
crisscrossed the country again and again with the latest
video summaries of the actual trials, in mobile units
consisting of video players and a generator they carried
with them.

When, from the first, the unique concerns and
experiences of women and girl survivors of the war were
recognized, as were the personal and cultural barriers to
participation in the justice process, the Court innovated.
Gender-sensitive approaches to witness support and
outreach were developed in partnership with local
women's organizations and resources. Accommodations
were made by judges in the courtroom to encourage
women's voices to be heard. Those voices have been
reflected in the jurisprudence of the Court, which was
the first to recognize forced marriage as a crime against
humanity and sexual violence as a form of terrorism.

Other jurisprudential firsts have been truly
remarkable. The Special Court was the first to
develop jurisprudence on the recruitment and use
of child soldiers - jurisprudence that was used and
acknowledged by the International Criminal Court in
its first trial judgment in the case of The Prosecutor vs.
Thomas Lubanga Dyilo. The Special Court was the first
to rule on the effect of national amne sties in international
law, on the issues of immunity involving sitting Heads
of State, and on a matter close to the hearts of those in
this Chamber - the crime of attacks on peacekeepers.

On front after front, the Special Court has developed
not only jurisprudence but also tools, practices
and programmes to address the specific needs of a
post-conflict society. The Special Court stands ready
to share the knowledge and expertise it has gained. We
invite Member States to draw on the Court's work and
to utilize its programmes as part of their own national
strategies.

We must keep in mind how fragile our
accomplishment will be if we fail to keep faith with the
people of the region who put their trust in the Council
and the Court. Our responsibility to those people will
not cease. It must be taken up and advanced by the
Residual Special Court of Sierra Leone.

Residual responsibilities are not an afterthought
or burden. Ensuring the protection of Witnesses who
appeared before the Special Court encourages more
people to come forward and to be witnesses in other
courts involved in fighting impunity. Failing to ensure
their protection will guarantee the opposite result.
Preserving the archives ensures that the work of the
Special Court remains an accessible, unequivocal
record of the war. Failing to preserve them invites
revisionist history and denial of the suffering endured
by Sierra Leone's people. Supervising the enforcement
of sentences ensures that the Special Court continues
to lead by example in protecting the human rights and
dignity of all people, as demanded by the rule of law.
Failure to provide that oversight erodes our reputation
as a just institution and undermines the moral authority
of all our work.

The Residual Special Court will face particular
challenges in obtaining voluntary contributions to fund
its operations. The support of the Security Council will
be essential to ensuring that it can carry out its important
responsibilities.

On behalf of the Special Court for Sierra Leone,
we once again extend our sincere thanks to the Security
Council, the States Members of the United Nations
and the international community as a whole for their
enduring support and assistance. And we congratulate
them on that accomplishment.

