Mrs. Alingue (Chad) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank Mr. Ivica Dacic, First Deputy Prime
Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Republic of Serbia and Chairperson-in-Office of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) for his briefing and wish him every possible
success in his new mission.

The end of the Cold War saw the emergence
of a new global order where the maintenance of
international peace and security has become more
complex. In a multipolar world, and despite a global
vision and capacity, the United Nations increasingly
requires cooperation with regional and subregional
organizations to achieve the objectives of global peace
and stability. To that end, the provisions of Chapter VIII
of the Charter define the framework for cooperation
between the United Nations and regional organizations,
and especially with the OSCE, which plays such an
essential role in maintaining peace and security in
Europe.

In that respect, we congratulate the OSCE for
its mediation, assessment and verification efforts
undertaken to minimize the impacts of the crisis
in Ukraine and throughout the region. That work is
carried out in very difficult conditions, such as threats
and kidnapping of the personnel of the organization.
Faced with the resurgence of the fighting following the
adoption, on 17 February, of resolution 2202 (2015),
which supports the package of measures aimed at
the implementation of the Minsk memorandum and
protocol for a peaceful settlement of the conflict in
Ukraine, Chad encourages the OSCE to step up its
efforts to achieve a ceasefire and a complete cessation
of hostilities as well as the implementation of the
aforementioned agreements.

Chad is concerned by the very serious situation
prevailing in eastern Ukraine, where the civilian
population continues to find itself in the crossfire
between the various combatants. We urge all parties to
show restraint, and we reaffirm that the only solution
of the crisis can be a political one with respect for the
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Ukraine.
Still on the topic of Ukraine, we commend the
OSCE Special Monitoring Mission for its support when
it comes to the crash ofMalaysia Airlines Flight MH-17,
with the experts deployed at the crash site to be able
to recover the bodies and investigate the causes of the
accident despite the difficulties encountered in the
conflict zone.

Beyond Ukraine, we welcome the role placed by
the OSCE in terms of national dialogue, peacebuilding,
the rule of law and restoring links of trust in the region.
The conflicts and crises that occurred in Europe during
the 19905 have deeply marked and divided the peoples
and communities of the Balkans. Reforging links
of trust is a fundamental prerequisite for peace and
stability in the region. To that end, we encourage the
OSCE to continue its work in northern Kosovo, on the
situation between Armenia and Azerbaijan and on the
resumption of negotiations within the framework of the
5+2 conflict settlement processes with respect to the
Transnistria issue.

In the area of humanitarian assistance, we also
congratulate the OSCE for the assistance provided to
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Serbia and Croatia in May
2014 during the terrible flooding, which left hundreds
of thousands of individuals without shelter or jobs.
Despite the effectiveness of the work carried out by the
OSCE, that work often faces complex and varied threats.
Chad welcomes the fact that among the priorities of the
Serbian chairmanship is the topic of terrorist attacks
and threats, which have had a cruel impact on a number
of countries in the region. Special attention should be
devoted to the issue of foreign terrorist fighters and the
resurgence of violent extremism and the radicalization
of conflicts.

In Africa, the strategy in the Sahel region for
the fight against terrorism is one that is aimed at a
comprehensive approach, which includes economic,
social and human aspects, especially targeting youth.
In that regard, we welcome the desire shown and the
efforts made by the OSCE to assist youth in terms of
promoting their employment, their participation in
political life and their inclusion in decision-making
processes in order to counter the recruitment of young
people by terrorist networks and organizations.

Attacks against the media remind us and continue
to demonstrate the need to preserve and promote
the freedom of expression and the protection of
journalists, just like the promotion of the principles
of gender equality, the rights of minorities, tolerance
and non-discrimination. We welcome the taking into
account of threats such as transnational organized crime,
human trafficking and illegal migration, as well as the
issues of combating corruption, water management and
the prevention of natural disasters.Since the topics are
cross-cutting and recurrent throughout a number of
regions in the world, especially in Africa, we encourage
the OSCE to expand its cooperation to other regional
organizations, especially in sharing its experience with
the African Union.

In conclusion, I would like to underscore that all
of the achievements and prospects I have mentioned
mean that the OSCE is a key ally of the United Nations.
The search for peace and stability requires knowledge
of the situation on the ground and of the deep-rooted
causes of conflicts. The expertise and the legitimacy
of the OSCE, in the year of the fortieth anniversary of
the Helsinki Final Act, consolidates the foundation of
this collective action in favour of peace and stability
throughout the world.

