Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): I would
like to thank the Secretary-General for his briefing.

China remains deeply concerned about the situation
in various parts of Syria, including Aleppo, and would
like to express its profound sympathy for the Syrian
people, who have suffered dire misery as a result of the
conflict there.

The way that the situation in Syria has evolved
so far is the result of the interplay of a host of factors
operating in many dimensions. The international
community should think deeply about the underlying
causes of the situation and take concerted measures
aimed at reaching a comprehensive, fair and appropriate
solution. The complexity and sensitivity of the current
circumstances make it even more important to ensure
that the international community does not diverge from
a path that can lead to our overarching goal, which is
to seek a political settlement. We should work together
to move the Syrian crisis back on to a path of dialogue
and consultation, with a view to reaching a lasting
solution to the war and chaos as soon as possible. Any
efforts on the part of the international community
should encourage efforts on all four of the relevant
tracks - restoring the ceasefire, resuming the political
talks, re-establishing joint counter-terrorism efforts
and providing humanitarian aid. The role of the United
Nations as the chief provider of good offices should be
upheld, and the Geneva talks resumed without delay.

Fighting terrorism is part and parcel ofa solution to
the Syrian issue. The Islamic State terrorist organization
has recently been launching repeated attacks, and the
risk that terrorist forces may become more powerful
and spread is growing. The international community
should give priority to combating terrorist forces on
Syrian soil, strengthening its coordination of counter-
terrorism efforts, adhering to uniform standards and
standing firm against the Islamic State and every
other group designated as terrorist by the Security
Council. China is ready to work with the international
community to urge for a political solution to the Syrian
crisis as soon as possible.

