Mr. Salgueiro (Portugal): Mr. President, I would
like first to thank President Xanana Gusmao and
Foreign Minister Ramos-Horta. I also wish to express
my appreciation for President Gusmao's most valuable
contribution to this debate.

I would like to thank the Secretary-General for
his latest report on the situation of Timor-Leste and to
thank Special Representative Hasegawa for his
excellent presentation. I take this opportunity to praise
the dedicated efforts of the civilian, military and police
components of the United Nations Office in Timor-
Leste (UNOTIL) and to congratulate them on their
many achievements in Timor-Leste.

Portugal subscribes to the statement made by the
representative of Austria on behalf of the European
Union. Therefore, I will only add a few comments of
our own.

First, we agree with the evaluation by the United
Nations of the situation of Timor-Leste and that the
successful conclusion of local elections, the
strengthening of the legal framework through the
adoption of key legislation and the improved
observance of human rights by the police are good
examples of progress. We share the view that the
overall situation in Timor-Leste remains stable, except
for a few incidents involving the incursion of former
militias into Timor-Leste and a serious border incident
a few weeks ago that resulted in the death of three
infiltrators. In that context, I would like to emphasize
that even relatively low-level incidents could have -
we hope not - a significant impact on and
consequences for the stability of Timor-Leste.

My second point is a direct consequence of this
perception. Timor-Leste is in a critical period of its
peacebuilding process, and the report of the Secretary-
General clearly outlines a number of areas that are in
need of international assistance beyond the mandate of
UNOTIL, namely, justice, finance, police training and
border management. Another challenge facing Timor-
Leste will be the preparations for and conduct of the
presidential and parliamentary elections scheduled for
2007 - the first since the country assumed
independence in 2002.

While the future of the country rests first and
foremost with the Timorese people and their
Government, under the present circumstances Portugal
supports the Secretary-General's proposal that the
international community should remain engaged in
Timor-Leste beyond 20 May 2006, when UNOTIL's
mandate expires. Portugal believes that we must
determine what kind of international presence will be
appropriate to assist Timor-Leste on its way to long-
term stability and development and in the tasks in
which the Timorese Government finds it more urgently
needs United Nations support.

We welcome the steady and positive development
in the relationship of Timor-Leste and its neighbour,
Indonesia. An example is the effort to finalize the
demarcation of the remaining 1 per cent of the border,
which is the result of the consistent commitment by the
leadership of both countries.

Portugal also welcomes the recent signing of the
agreement between Australia and Timor-Leste, which
will provide much-needed resources to sustain the
economic progress of this new country. We
congratulate the Government of Timor-Leste for its
initiative in creating a mechanism to ensure
transparency in the management of those resources.

We must acknowledge the importance of
continuing bilateral assistance and underline the
responsibility of the international community in
relation to Timor-Leste. I would just like to point out
that last week Portugal signed an assistance plan with
the Timorese Government wherein it committed $32.6
million in development assistance to Timor-Leste for
2006.

My final remarks relate to the responsibility of
the international community and of the Security
Council in relation to Timor-Leste. In that regard, we
reiterate our support for the report of the Secretary-
General's Commission of Experts, and we note the
request of the Security Council that the Secretary-
General submit a report on justice and reconciliation
for Timor-Leste with a practically feasible approach, so
that the expectations of the people are met.

