Mr. Prendergast: There have been a lot of
questions and I will try to answer as many of them as I
can. First, let me say we are very grateful for the many
expressions of appreciation for the work of Noel
Sinclair and his team. I know they work in very
difficult conditions. It has been quite disruptive for
them. For example I had to ask Noel Sinclair to cancel
his participation in the meeting we had last month in
Mont Pellerin, Switzerland, of representatives and
special representatives of the Secretary-General,
because of the timetable. We may have to ask him to
cancel his Christmas leave for the same reason, and I
know he and his team work with enormous dedication.

The first question was from the Ambassador of
Mexico about the impact of the delay in certification of
containment of weapons, the completion of stage II. If
you would like to look at the aide memoire circulated
by the Ambassador of New Guinea yesterday, you will
find at the top of page 3, confirmation that the
operation of the provisions on autonomy, in the Papua
New Guinea constitution, and the guarantee of a
referendum among Bouganvilleans on Bougainville's
political future, which are in part XIV of that
constitution, depend on verification and certification by
the United Nations Political Office in Bougainville
(UNPOD) that stage II of the agreed weapons disposal
plan has been achieved. Obviously the practical
implication is that weapons disposal must be completed
before the regional autonomous government can be
elected. Delay in completing the weapons disposal plan
will inevitably mean delay in holding the elections.

The Ambassador of Mexico's second question
was about the 30 June 2003 target. I think for reasons
already explained, it is going to be difficult to meet that
deadline, but we very much hope the delay will not be
long. The Ambassador had a third question about the
consequences of withdrawal of the Peace Monitoring
Group. Our view would be that Papua New Guinea has
a clear and irreplaceable role in weapons disposal and
it would be very difficult, not impossible, but very
difficult to complete weapons disposal without them.
The Peace Monitoring Group is less centrally involved,
less relevant to other aspects of the exercise, such as
elections and the drafting of the constitution.
The second group of questions involve whether it
is right or necessary to extend UNPOB for 12 months,
when the Council was told by Ambassador Sinclair a
while ago that the exercise would be completed by the
end of 2002. Unfortunately, I think we know from
much of the business of this Council that international
affairs do not unroll in a tidy, predictable and
mechanical way. As Robert Burns said "The best laid
schemes 0' Mice an' Men gang aft agley". I do not
think anyone can argue that Bougainville was unique or
even unusual in this. The Council has been quite
understanding, in other conflicts, of the fact that
timetables slip. I think it would be particularly
unfortunate if the Council were not understanding in
the case of a small operation in a country which is far
from the centre of world affairs, whereas it is
understanding in the case of countries which are more
centrally situated, particularly since, as the
Ambassador of Singapore mentioned, the cost of the
operation for a whole year is very little more than the
cost of the operation of larger missions for one day. If
my memory serves me right, for example, United
Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUC) costs about $1.63
million per day. We have certainly had delays in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, and not only there.

We agree very much that there needs to be an exit
strategy, there need to be benchmarks and the parties
need to be kept to their obligations, but I think we need
to recognize at the same time that progress in these
matters is not linear. I think our preoccupation should
be with the benchmarks and with pressing the parties to
keep to those benchmarks, rather than trying to set
more or less arbitrary timetables.

We would argue that the exit strategy should be
linked to the election of an autonomous government, as
indicated in the Bougainville Peace Agreement. There
are concrete plans which have been made by
Bougainvilleans themselves to complete weapons
disposal by 24 December 2002. I described the two
meetings that were held to that effect in my statement.

The Mission has concrete plans for carrying out
certification and verification of stage II once it has
been completed, and we would be happy to provide
details of that.

If I may talk you through the arguments as to
why, in our opinion, it will be necessary to have a 12-
month extension to complete the process, rather than
six months, I think the first point is that if the parties to
the Bougainville Peace Agreement complete stage II by
24 December 2002, certification of the completion of
that part of the weapons disposal plan could not begin
until the Alfa Company of Francis Ona reconciles with
its neighbours and contains its weapons as well. That
means all of Bougainville could only be covered by
stage II of the weapons disposal plan by March 2003.

Certification of stage II of the weapons disposal
plan would require UNPOB to consult all Bougainville
communities regarding their views and perceptions of
the Peace Process in general and of implementation of
the weapons disposal plan in particular. The objective
of those consultations will be to establish whether, at
the grassroots level, people feel safe and secure and
conditions are conducive to holding the elections for
the Bougainville autonomous government. We estimate
it could take up to three months to finish this exercise,
assuming the weather would allow the use of
helicopters. We are in an environment where there is
very little infrastructure, particularly transport
infrastructure and therefore we are heavily dependent
on use of the helicopter to get around Bougainville.

On that timetable, by say May or June 2003, the
certification should be submitted to the Papua New
Guinea Government and then preparations could begin
for holding the elections for an autonomous
Bougainville government.

I think we would argue - and I have done so
already - that the withdrawal of UNPOB should be
tied to the election of a Bougainville autonomous
government. As we see it today, that seems likely to
take place only in the second half of 2003. Past United
Nations experience in other areas shows that the
mission should stay for a little while after the election,
as a confidence-building measure, prior to its
disengagement. If we take all of that as a whole, we
would conclude that, with good luck and some
determination and effort, the peace process ought to
become irreversible by the end of next year, which
would trigger the withdrawal of UNPOB.

I do not want to give the Council too many
British maxims, but there is another one about not
spoiling the ship for a ha'p'orth of tar. We have come a
long way, and I think it is worthwhile seeing this
process through to the end. In the time that I have been
working in the Secretariat, one has seen instances
where the Council has not stayed the course; and we
are having to live with the consequences of that. I am
thinking, for example, of the Central African Republic,
where there is a very wide perception that
peacekeepers were put in reluctantly and withdrawn
prematurely - meaning therefore that we more or less
guaranteed the failure of the post-conflict period. I
think it would be a great pity to do that in
Bougainville, when we are talking about an operation
that costs about $2 million for a whole year.

