Mr. Tafrov (Bulgaria) (spoke in French): Thank
you, Sir, for presiding over the Council this morning, at
a moment when we are discussing an important
problem - that of Eritrea and Ethiopia.

Like the others, I should like to express the
gratitude of Bulgaria for the important role played by
Norway in the Council's efforts to bring about a
settlement of this conflict. The leadership of
Ambassador Kolby in the mission was remarkable. We
warmly thank him and his associates for the
extraordinary work they have done.

Bulgaria associates itself with the statement that
will be made shortly on behalf of the European Union
by the Ambassador of Spain, but I should like to make
some brief remarks on behalf of my country.

My country welcomes the results of the mission
and believes that it has fulfilled its task of preparing
for the next stage of the peace process, which should
come at the end of March 2002, after the
announcement of the definitive juridical decision of the
Boundary Commission. We note with satisfaction the
public announcements by the Prime Minister of
Ethiopia and the President of Eritrea during the
mission, reaffirming that the decisions by the Boundary
Commission would be final and binding. These
announcements allow us to hope that the two parties
will seriously seek a durable solution to their territorial
dispute.

Now it is fundamental to focus the attention of
the international community and the Security Council
on the importance of the application of the
Commission's forthcoming decision. The Council
should make its own contribution. We believe that the
United Nations Mission in Ethiopia and Eritrea
(UNMEE) must continue to carry out its mandate
throughout the period of implementation of all the
commitments deriving from the decision of the
Boundary Commission. The Temporary Security Zone
should remain in place throughout the demarcation
process.

The problem of demining is crucial not only for
the success of the demarcation process but also for the
return of refugees. While the essential responsibility
for the task lies with the two parties, as indicated by
the Algiers Agreements, it is important that UNMEE
provide all the necessary support so that the demining
can be a success in terms of allowing the demarcation
process to be completed.

Bulgaria encourages both Governments to
continue to promote mutual trust and the establishment
of a favourable climate. We welcome the mission's
fruitful meetings with the religious leaders of the two
countries, and we emphasize the positive effect of
those meetings on reconciliation and rapprochement
between the two peoples.

My delegation is deeply concerned at the grave
humanitarian consequences of the conflict. That
conflict has given rise to massive population
displacements and a great increase in the need for
emergency food aid. The international community must
make all its resources available to ease the crisis. We
support the report's recommendations in that regard
and call on Member States to make generous
contributions to the consolidated appeals for 2002. My
delegation welcomes the close and productive
cooperation among humanitarian agencies and non-
governmental organizations, which is a true example of
partnership.

Let me conclude by paying tribute to the civilian
and military men and women of UNMEE for their
professionalism and commitment. During our visit, we
were impressed by the remarkable results that UNMEE
has attained and by the Mission's contribution to the
peace process. My country is grateful to the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Legwaila,
for his tireless efforts to help create conditions
conducive to the establishment of lasting peace in the
area. I reaffirm my delegation's full support for the
efforts he is making in difficult conditions.

