Ms. DiCarlo (United States of America): I would
like to thank Prosecutor Moreno-Ocampo for his
briefing and for keeping the Council informed of
developments on the Sudan.

Today I would like to make four points.

First, the United States expresses its grave
concerns over the situation in the Sudan, in particular
in Darfur. The humanitarian situation remains dire, and
attacks on civilians by both Government of the Sudan
forces and rebel groups alike continue.

Secondly, we support the Darfur peace process
efforts of the Joint African Union-United Nations Chief
Mediator Bassole. Our primary and immediate goal is
to see measurable improvement of the situation on the
ground for the people of Darfur, not mere declarations
or promises.

Thirdly, we note with interest the announcement
by the Government of the Sudan of a unilateral
ceasefire in Darfur and its recognition that such a
ceasefire should have a monitoring mechanism to
enforce it. However, we are deeply disappointed by the
continued violence in Darfur, including attacks by
rebel movements and the Sudanese armed forces. A
viable and lasting ceasefire is a vital step towards
establishing peace in Darfur and in the region as a
whole.

Fourthly, the United States remains steadfastly
committed to promoting the rule of law and helping to
bring violators of international humanitarian law to
justice, and it will continue to take a leadership role in
righting those wrongs. We applaud efforts to identify
and bring to justice any persons perpetrating crimes
against the people of the Sudan. Our previous actions
with respect to the terrible crimes being committed in
the Sudan should leave no doubt about the strength of
our commitments. The international community has not
ignored the atrocities and massive human suffering that
has occurred during the ongoing conflict in Darfur,
which the United States has declared to be a genocide.

The United States has domestically designated,
and thus barred from the United States financial
system, seven individuals and multiple entities for
conduct or financing related to the conflict in Darfur.
The United Nations Security Council sanctions
committee is able to designate those who impede the
peace process, constitute a threat to stability in Darfur
and the region, commit violations of international
humanitarian or human rights law or other atrocities,
violate the arms embargo or are responsible for
offensive military overflights. The United States urges
the sanctions committee to use responsibly the tools at
its disposal in order to prevent further violence in
Darfur. We encourage members of the sanctions
committee to allow for meaningful follow-up to the
recommendations of the Panel of Experts on the Sudan,
and we urge the Council to request briefings from the
Permanent Representatives of the Sudan and Chad.

