Mr. Allen: (United Kingdom): At the outset,
let me take the opportunity to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Shearer,
and President Mogae for their briefings. I reiterate the
full support of the United Kingdom for the vital work of
the United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS)
and the Joint Monitoring and Evaluation Commission
in difficult circumstances in South Sudan.
Two years ago, the people of South Sudan rejoiced
at the signing of the 2015 Agreement on the Resolution
of the Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan. It was
a symbol of hope for the young country, which had so
quickly been plunged again into war by the rivalries
of its leaders. Now, that document is a stark reminder
of all that the Government has failed to deliver for
South Sudan. As the Secretary-General said, the
signatories to the peace agreement have demonstrated
time and again that they are deaf to the distress of their
own people and unmoved by calls for peace from the
international community.

Conflict, hunger and horrific sexual violence have
become commonplace. There has been gang rape, the
recruitment of child soldiers and attacks on schools
and hospitals. Nearly 2 million people are on the brink
of famine and half of the population is food insecure.
Yet, non-governmental organizations report that those
starving are often too afraid to collect life-saving aid
for fear of being attacked on the way home by those
charged to protect them. We cannot even begin to
imagine the choices that the people of South Sudan are
being forced to make.

The suffering is forcing millions of civilians to
flee, creating the largest refugee crisis in Africa and
the fastest growing refugee crisis in the world. Today,
we have been presented with a yet another set of reports
that demonstrate that the Government's declared
ceasefire is meaningless. Government forces continue
large-scale military operations, which have caused dire
humanitarian consequences and disrupted life-saving
humanitarian operations. Suffering on such a scale
cannot be allowed to continue. South Sudan cannot
continue on its current path.

As President Mogae has rightly stated, the
international community must act and speak with
one voice. In that vein, the United Kingdom strongly
welcomes the joint efforts of the United Nations, the
regional countries of the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development (IGAD) and the African Union to bring
the suffering of the South Sudanese people and the
fighting to an end. Those messages were reiterated at
the high-level meeting on South Sudan on 20 September
and echo of the calls that the Council made in March in
our presidential statement S/PRST/2017/4.

We welcome the leadership shown by the
regional countries of IGAD in launching the high-
level revitalization forum and offer our full support,
as I believe all members of the Security Council do,
to this initiative's objective of revitalizing the peace
agreement. If it is to succeed, it will take a concerted
and united push from all countries in the region and
a commitment to staying the course. The first priority
for that process must be the laying down of arms once
and for all. There is no military solution to this crisis,
and lasting peace will be achieved only through the
inclusion of all groups, armed or not.

We cannot expect success overnight. We must see
the revitalization forum as a process, not a one-off
meeting, although we must also guard against drift.
Success will require all the parties, particularly the
Government, to demonstrate the commitment and
the political will to pursue peace, which have been
lacking so far. The United Kingdom therefore calls
on all parties to the Agreement, as well as estranged
and other opposition groups, to respond positively and
constructively to this opportunity for dialogue. We
agree with others that at this stage elections would be
premature. The United Kingdom has repeatedly stated
that there must be consequences for those who seek to
obstruct peace, and we have long called for sanctions
against spoilers.

We therefore support last week's African Union
Peace and Security Council communique and its call
for all the necessary steps, including sanctions, to
be considered against all who continue to obstruct
efforts to restore peace and security in South Sudan.
The international community, including the Security
Council, must be prepared to act against those who
continue to impede progress towards peace and make
the people of South Sudan suffer. We should make
it clear to them that they will face sanctions if they
do not participate fully in the IGAD process. As the
communique says, South Sudan can no longer be treated
in a routine manner. The United Kingdom stands ready
to support the region and use all the tools at its disposal,
collectively and individually, to compel the parties to
choose peace.

