Mr. Mounzer (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): I would first like to thank you, Mr. President,
for organizing today's important meeting. I would like
to affirm Syria's support for the Security Council's
credible and genuine efforts to combat terrorism, which
reflects the international unanimity about the fact that
today terrorism is one ofthe world's greatest challenges,
and that the international community, through the
United Nations and the Security Council, must do its
part to coordinate our efforts and cooperation aimed at
countering terrorism and extremist ideology. The war
against terrorism is a cultural and information battle,
not just a military one.

For the sixth consecutive year, my country has been
a target for terrorism through the systematic destruction
of its technological and educational installations,
economic, cultural and social infrastructure and
historic sites. This atrocious assault has targeted dozens
of hospitals, medical buildings, schools, universities
and other centres of culture and education, besides
destroying power stations, road networks, bridges,
railways and telecommunications and Internet links.

Terrorist armed groups, with the support of
known Governments, have continued to commit their
terrible acts, some of the worst of which have been the
targeting of historical, religious and civilizational sites
in Syria, particularly in Palmyra, Aleppo, Maaloula
and Idlib, destroying or mutilating many ancient and
historic sites and monuments - churches, convents,
mosques, temples, mausoleums and theatres, all
defaced or destroyed in a barbaric manner. None of this
has anything to do with human civilization. From the
very beginning, certain Governments have partnered
terrorists in Syria by financing and manipulating them,
or by imposing coercive, unilateral economic measures
against the Syrian people. That has had a devastating
effect on various service sectors, on the economy,
education and health, and on Syrians' lives. It also
reduced the Syrian Government's ability to meet its
citizens' needs. To all that must be added the crimes
committed by armed terrorist groups against Syria and
its people and infrastructure.

The unfortunate irony is that the very Governments
that utilize the United Nations as a platform attempt
to talk about the humanitarian tragedy experienced
by the Syrian people are themselves causing it. In
the framework of the very same policy, they target
Syrian infrastructure. Illegal military intervention
occurs under the guise of what is referred to as the
international coalition, which violates the Charter of
the United Nations and international law and targets
Syria. These individuals justify their actions - which
violate Article 51 of the Charter and the sovereignty
of Syria - by professing to fight Da'esh or against
terrorism in general,

We have sent many letters to the Secretary-General
and to the President of the Security Council that contain
accurate information and statistics on the harm inflicted
on civilian Syrians and the damage to economic
infrastructure, social services, education and oil and
gas refineries, damage totalling more than $120 billion.
Such damage was caused by the atrocities, the military
and air strikes by the so-called international coalition,
targeting the Syrian people and their infrastructure.

The Syrian Arab Republic reiterates its appeal to
the United Nations and the international community
to implement Security Council resolutions seeking to
combat terrorism so as to prevent terrorists, sponsored
by others, from receiving financial, technological,
telecommunications and other support given in the
name of personal agendas. Those Governments should
compensate the Syrian people and the Syrian Arab
Republic itself for destruction of Syrian infrastructure.
If not, Security Council resolutions and statements
by the representatives of Member States will not go
beyond the Council Chamber and the Organization's
official records and other documents. That would
send the wrong message to terrorists and the sponsors
of terrorism.

