Mr. Dabbashi (Libya) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to start by congratulating you, Madam President,
on your accession to the presidency of the Security
Council for this month. I wish you and your team
every possible success, and I am convinced that you
will achieve the best possible results. I would also like
to thank Mr. Bernardino Leon, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, and to thank him for his
briefing, which was most interesting and instructive. I
would like to congratulate him on his recent assumption
of office as new Head of the United Nations Interim
Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL), and wish him
every possible success. My gratitude also goes out to
the Chair of the Security Council Sanctions Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011) for his
briefing on the work of the Committee.

It is a great regret for me to have to say that the
fratricidal war that has continued in the city of Tripoli
and its suburbs since 13 July has claimed more than
500 lives and injured more than 1,000 young people
and other civilians. This war has destroyed public and
private infrastructure whose value has been estimated
in the billions of dollars. Similarly, the Libyan social
fabric has been torn to shreds. Today kidnapping,
torture and assassinations, based merely on what is
written on one's identity card, are all common place,
and strikes at all those who harbour different views and
who back the legal authorities. Nothing today indicates
that these practices are going to soon come to an end,
either in the capital or its suburbs, which are controlled
by armed groups in the absence of the Libyan State.
The Libyan Dawn Coalition is present there and they
use heavy weapons. The same is true of other armed
groups, which are all part of the Libyan Dawn Coalition
and responsible for an increasing number of civilian
victims in Tripoli and its suburbs.

Human rights today are no longer respected,
neither are fundamental freedoms. Unfortunately, the
various prisons and detention centres of the various
armed groups are filled with detainees who have been
arrested based on the information on their identity
cards, without any judicial justification.

What happened under the Al-Qadhafi regime is
happening again today. It takes different forms but it is
more violent and more widespread. Even Al-Qadhafi's
hangings in public squares are back. Their aim is
to intimidate the average citizen. All this is being
encouraged by the Mufti of Libya and his gang.

Various public institutions and public building
have been seized, and civil servants can no longer enter
them. They can no longer enter even the temporary
ministries in the cities of Al-Baida because of
threats targeted against them if they were to back the
legitimate authorities, represented by the Government
and the recently elected House of Representatives. That
has deprived the Government of most of its staff and
personnel, and impedes the drawing up of an interim
Constitution and an interim Government in its interim
headquarters to allow it to discharge its work effectively.

Furthermore, we hope that the role of the United
Nations Support Mission in Libya will be different
and will change according to the new priorities,
while remaining within the framework of its current
mandate. The Mission's mandate is focused on
providing assistance and support to the legitimate
Libyan authorities in specific areas so as to ensure that
they can carry out their duties and serve as effective
institutions during this transition period. The Mission
is also supposed to provide support to the House of
Representatives and the Government appointed by that
body, and to help them implement the decisions they
may take. In particular, it is supposed to help them put
an end to the clashes between the armed groups and to
protect civilians, to disarm every armed group, without
exception, and integrate their elements into State
institutions, to work to expel the armed groups from
the various cities and to liberate the State institutions in
order to enable them to function unaffected by threats
and arms, especially in the capital of Tripoli.

The House of Representatives and the Government,
as the legitimate authorities pursuant to the will of
the Libyan people, cannot accept any armed group,
whether the Libya Dawn coalition or any other armed
group, being treated as being on an equal footing
with them. The legitimate authorities wish to warn
against any alteration of the United Nations Mission
in that regard, because any treatment that equates the
various belligerent parties with the authorities would
be seen as a clear violation of the Mission's mandate,
of the principles guiding its work and of resolution 2174
(2014). It would also create an obstacle to the political
process, go against the interests of the Libyan people
and encourage fighting between brothers in order to
achieve illegal material gains. I emphasize this because
such gains are the main cause of the clashes in and
around the capital.

The Parliament and the Government wish to send
the following clear message to the Security Council.
First, the Libyan people respect the Council's role in
supporting their legitimate desires and aspirations,
and hope to see continued support for the legitimate
authorities in order to put an end to terrorism, promote
security and stability and enshrine the authority of the
legitimate Government throughout Libya's territory.

Second, for three years now successive Libyan
Governments have attempted to promote dialogue
and show tolerance in the face of crimes committed
by armed groups. They have sometimes even turned
to those armed groups in efforts to maintain security,
but the fact is that our security is threatened by such
elements. These Governments have paid armed groups
for their services, and paid them far more than the
police and the armed services, but instead of obeying
the Government these groups now pose a genuine threat
to national security and stability. What we are seeing is
the complete destruction of the gains of the revolution
of 17 February and of the aspirations of the Libyan
people, thousands of whom have been martyred.

Third, the House of Representatives and the
Government will not engage in dialogue with the armed
groups on any political demands imposed by force.
The only acceptable dialogue is on how to implement
the resolutions of the House of Representatives on the
armed groups, on ending hostilities, on dismantling
and reintegrating the armed groups into civilian and
military institutions and above all, evicting them from
Government seats and infrastructure.

Fourth, the House of Representatives and the
Government reaffirm that it is the right of every
Libyan to participate in the decision-making process.
The Parliament represents all Libyans. It was created
through free and fair elections. For those who have
not been able to elect their preferred representatives
for security-related reasons, the legal authorities
must be able to ensure that the necessary procedures
will be in place in order to enable them to elect their
representatives to Parliament, and to do so as soon as
possible. The House of Representatives hopes that those
members who could not participate in the meetings in
its new headquarters will also be able to do as soon as
possible.

Fifth, all Libyans have the right to a Government
that represents them all and that runs the country
without discrimination and without marginalizing any
component of Libyan society.

Sixth, the judicial authorities will bring to justice
and prosecute all individuals, entities and groups that
have attacked institutions and civilians, occupied
public buildings or damaged public infrastructure and
resulted in sanctions. We will also cooperate with the
Panel of Experts of the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya in order to
provide information on individuals who should be on
the Committee's list, in accordance with resolution
2174 (2014).

Seventh, if the armed groups do not withdraw from
the cities, if dialogue does result in the implementation
of Parliament's resolutions, and if all possible efforts
have been made within the framework of the authority
of the State and the Government's obligations, steps
will be taken to preserve the State's unity and authority

over the whole of its territory, including through the
use of force, and with recourse to the international
community if necessary.

Eighth, any armed group reaching an agreement
with another armed group that does not support the
State's authority and resorts to terrorism will also be
considered to be a terrorist group and will be firmly
dealt with by the State.

Lastly, all those who wish to help the Libyan
people emerge from the dark tunnel in which they find
themselves as a result of the proliferation of weapons
and the intransigence of the armed groups should
provide all possible support to the Libyan national
armed forces, and should do so immediately, before it
is too late.

Turning to the arms embargo, I should like to
reiterate that there is a need to provide military
equipment to the national army in order to ensure that
it is in a position to effectively confront terrorism and
to promote the State's authority throughout Libyan
territory. The procedures adopted today concerning
the Sanctions Committee pose an obstacle along the
path to equipping and arming the national army in an
appropriate and adequate way - this at a time when the
army is at its weakest in terms of facing terrorists and
illegal groups. That is all the more so as such groups are
illegally, yet regularly obtaining weapons from at least
two States. Such groups are also making use of several
airports and air fields under their control, especially
the Misrata airport and Mitiga airport in Tripoli.

I should also mention that the occupation of the
headquarters of the Defence, Interior and Justice
Ministries in Tripoli poses an obstacle to the work ofthe
focal points. We will provide the Sanctions Committee
with information concerning Government procedures
pertaining to the focal points. The Libyan Government
will of course carefully study the report of the Panel of
Experts and its recommendations.

