Mrs. ngu (Nigeria): I want to thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this seminal meeting to
undertake a strategic review of emerging challenges to
international security. I am grateful to the Secretary-
General for his statement. I also thank Mr. Fedotov,
Ms. Chan and Mr. Guterres, whose incisive
contributions have immensely enriched today's
discussions.

The nature and content of international security
have continued to evolve and expand over the years.
Today they encompass a variety of interconnected
issues in the world that have an impact on survival.
They range from traditional or conventional modes of
military power, the causes and consequences of war
between States and economic strength to ethnic,
religious and ideological conflicts, trade and economic
conflicts, energy supplies, technology, food and threats
to human security. Such issues have evolved to include
threats to the stability of States from environmental
degradation, from infectious diseases, from climate
change and from the activities of non-State actors. Our
evolving international security landscape is marked by
multiple threats that have no boundaries and respect
neither borders nor nationalities. This certainly
includes the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction, the illicit trade in and proliferation of
small arms and light weapons, drug and human
trafficking, as well as the use of sexual violence as a
weapon of war.

Since ours is a world of extreme inequality,
deprivation, marginalization and exclusion, those
problems are compounded by systemic issues, such as
underdevelopment, pressure on natural resources and
difficulties related to social cohesion and governance.
The spread and nature of conflicts and their spillover
have, in their turn, reshaped the international security
paradigm.

Those complex challenges call for vision,
creativity, commitment and leadership from the United
Nations and Member States. The Council should
consider repositioning itself to deal with the evolving
nature of international security. The interconnected
nature of security and development underlies the theme
of today's meeting. Appreciating the threat caused by
environmental degradation, illicit trafficking and
HIV/AIDS and other global pandemics entails
recognition of the fact that developing societies are
more vulnerable to insecurity brought about or
exacerbated by that underdevelopment itself.

In effect, there is a chilling symbiosis between
conflict and underdevelopment. We live in the era of
environmental refugees. The changing climate has a
direct impact on agricultural productivity, animal
health and access to clean water. The resulting food
insecurity has in many countries forced communities to
become nomadic in search of an environment that can
sustain them and their livelihoods. In many cases,
people walk across borders, concentrating the pressure
on already scarce resources in a bid for survival. Such
environmental challenges are magnified by political
instability and insecurity. There is a clear and
substantive overlap between our efforts to target

criminals and our efforts to better protect their victims.
The recent signing of the memorandum of
understanding between the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime (UNODC) and the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR) marks a major shift in the approach to
addressing the threat posed by human and arms
trafficking. We welcome that development. The illicit
trafficking of people and weapons constitutes an
affront to the dignity and autonomy of the person. The
criminal networks responsible are far-reaching, well-
funded and well-connected, yet they can be broken
down.

There must be a collective effort to address both
the magnitude and the transnational nature of those
emerging challenges. As Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon actually observed in a message to the second
International Meeting of High Representatives on
Security Issues in September of this year, "No single
country can address transnational threats on its own;
only joint efforts at local, national, regional and
international levels will suffice ". That is why we must
cooperate more effectively with our partner organs
within the United Nations to delineate a concerted,
comprehensive response, one that supports States in
their efforts to head off emerging challenges to
maintaining peace and stability in an increasingly
changing world. We would accordingly welcome
serious consideration of an ad hoc working group to
monitor those emerging challenges and assist the
Council it its response.

Our international efforts must also be replicated
at the national level. With an appropriate level of
political commitment and support from the
international community, States can prepare themselves
for and guard against those threats to security, both
from within and from without their borders. The threats
that we now face are globalized, and their human
agents are getting more sophisticated. We cannot allow
our collective response to be outpaced.

