Ms. Lee (Singapore): First of all, I would like to
join my colleagues in welcoming the Minister of
External Relations of Angola to the Council, as well as
the other ministers who are present here today. We also
thank Under-Secretary-General Gambari for the
statement that he made at the beginning of the meeting.

From the outset, we would like to refer to the
situation on the ground in Angola. That is the backdrop
to our meeting and the reason why we must work
urgently towards achieving peace in Angola. In this
respect, we would like to highlight some figures
concerning the humanitarian situation faced by the
people of Angola on a daily basis. According to a Save
the Children Fund report earlier this month, one in
three children in Angola will not live beyond 5 years
old, and 34 per cent of families do not have easy access
to potable water. Furthermore, 44 per cent of the
population does not have the benefit of proper
sanitation facilities. These are sobering figures,
particularly for a country so richly endowed with
natural resources, including two of the most valued:
diamonds and oil.

At first glance, the conflict in Angola appears to
be relatively straightforward. There are only two major
antagonists: the Government in Luanda and the UNITA
rebels in the jungles. Yet the fighting has been going on
for 26 years. It must be clear by now that a solution to
the conflict does not lie in the use of force. This
Council has reiterated on several occasions that there is
no military solution to the conflict in Angola.

Let us look at the positive factors that we have at
our disposal. First, the Government of Angola is
committed to peace and has made laudable efforts to
promote the peace process. Secondly, we already have
in place sanctions against UNITA, which have
succeeded in curtailing its ability to wage conventional
war against the Government. Thirdly, Angolan civil
society has also played a positive role in trying to
achieve peace and stability in Angola. However,
UNITA has begun to move back towards guerrilla
warfare, which will only perpetuate the cycle of
violence. We therefore need to look at how we can
combine the pressure of sanctions with other
approaches to bring about national reconciliation and
peace in Angola.

We note that the draft presidential statement to be
adopted at the end of this meeting will express the
Council's support for the efforts of the Angolan
authorities, in consultation with all political parties and
civil society, in their efforts to achieve national
reconciliation. In order for this to be achieved, the most
important reconciliation that has to take place is that
between the two major antagonists, which have not
engaged in direct dialogue.

In the initial stages, perhaps Angolan civil society
could assist the Government in its efforts achieve a
peaceful settlement by trying to build up UNITA's
confidence in the peace process. For his part, the
Secretary-General's Special Adviser on Africa, Under-
Secretary-General Gambari, during his forthcoming
visit to Angola, could also explore with the
Government the possibilities of bringing UNITA to the
negotiating table.

Although we are aware that in the past
negotiations have been unhappy experiences for the
people of Angola, we cannot avoid negotiations in the
search for peace. Negotiations are likely to be
protracted; there are no quick solutions to the conflict.
All parties must remain firmly committed to a political
settlement.

The United Nations has played its part. The
international community could also play its part in
directly impressing on UNITA, by fully complying
with existing sanctions against UNITA, that it should
respond positively to overtures seeking to bring it to
the negotiating table. UNITA has repeatedly claimed
that it, too, wants peace; this claim should be put to the
test once again. If UNITA responds positively,
negotiations could proceed within the framework of the
Lusaka Protocol. Until such time, we urge the
Government of Angola and the international
community to continue to address the dire
humanitarian situation in Angola. In this respect, we
encourage the Government of Angola to give priority
to the repair of the airport in Kuito, which is in a
serious state of disrepair. This has put the humanitarian
staff at risk, as well as hampered the operations of the
aid agencies in delivering assistance to the large
number of displaced persons in the province.

Finally, we would like to reiterate our support for
the initiatives of the Government of Angola in the
search for peace for Angola.

