Mr. Varghese (Australia): I thank you, Mr. President,
for this opportunity for Australia to participate in this
meeting.

The nations of North Africa and the Middle East,
home to many of the world's oldest human civilizations,
are at a critical point in their history as the region
struggles to contain conflict and violent extremism.
Some conflicts, such as between the Israelis and the
Palestinians, have defied decades of efforts to resolve
them. Australia has consistently supported a long-term,
enduring, sustainable peace in the Middle East. We
support a two-State solution, which recognizes that
Israel is a vibrant democracy in the region and that both
the Israeli and the Palestinian peoples have an inherent
right to exist within secure borders.

Other conflicts - in Libya and Yemen, for
example - may have flared in comparatively recent
times, yet their root causes have been many years in
the making. The underlying causes of these conflicts
are diabolically complex. The need for an effective
international response is most urgent in Iraq and Syria,
where Daesh is inflicting unspeakable brutality on
innocent people. The human costs of these conflicts
have escalated to horrific proportions. The destabilizing
effects have radiated across the region and beyond,
encouraging violence in scores of countries worldwide.

Australia is not immune from these conflicts.
Around 120 Australian citizens have travelled to Syria
or Iraq, many to fight for Daesh. With our partners,
Australia has responded to the crisis. We are a leading
contributor to the global counter-Daesh coalition. This
month, Australia extended air operations to target
Daesh in Syria, building on our operations in Iraq and
consistent with Article 51 of the Charter of the United
Nations.

Australia strongly refutes any criticism of the legal
basis for our operations in Syria. Our action is designed
to cut off Daesh's capacity to sustain its operations
in Iraq, including the use of Syrian territory to train,
prepare attacks, resupply and move fighters across the
border. Article 51 of the Charter clearly recognizes
the inherent right of States to act in self-defence.
The Government of Syria has failed to constrain
Daesh's continued attacks in Iraq from safe havens in
Syria. Australia, together with coalition partners, is
acting in response to the request for assistance by the
Government of Iraq, and is undertaking necessary and
proportionate military operations against the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant in Syria in the collective
self-defence of Iraq.

The Russian Federation has advised us of its
intention to undertake air strikes in Syria against
terrorist targets. Ifthis is Russia's real intent, its strikes
must focus on Daesh, which, by any measure, is the
most significant terrorist threat in Syria and Iraq.

Military action is a necessary but in no way sufficient
response to Daesh. Sustainable political settlements are
required to end the conflict. We support the efforts of
Iraq's Prime Minister Al Abadi to seek reconciliation
and deliver inclusive governance for all Iraqis. We
continue to advocate for a political solution that can
bring an end to the brutal conflict in Syria, where
horrific atrocities by the parties - particularly the
Al-Assad regime, Daesh and Al-Qaida affiliate Jabhat
al-Nusra - have taken a devastating humanitarian
toll. We support the efforts of United Nations envoy de
Mistura towards a negotiated political transition. We
believe all transition options should be considered.

Australia is also working to meet the humanitarian
needs generated by the conflicts, permanently resettling
an additional 12,000 refugees drawn from Iraq and

Syria's most vulnerable. We are working with the United
Nations to deliver food, water, health care, education,
emergency supplies and protection to more than
240,000 Iraqis and Syrians. This will bring Australia's
contribution to help address the humanitarian crises in
Syria and Iraq to around $230 million since 2011.

We commend Iraq and Syria's neighbours, notably
Jordan, Lebanon and Turkey, for the burden they have
shouldered.

Much more needs to be done. We encourage
Member States to give generously to the Iraq and Syria
humanitarian appeals. We must all support the Iraqi
and Syrian people in their desperate hour of need.

