Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): Let me start by thanking the Special Representative of the Secretary- General, Mr. Ghassan Salame, for his briefing and for the ongoing efforts of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL) to broker an end to the conflict in Libya. I would like to assure Special Representative Salame of the United Kingdom's full and unwavering support and appreciation for his untiring efforts in this regard. Let me also thank Germany for hosting the Berlin Conference and for all its efforts to bring international leaders together in order to create the right environment for a ceasefire and a resumption of the political process. Let me start with Berlin. We particularly welcome the conclusions document agreed in Berlin, which includes a commitment by all to refrain from interfering in the conflict or in the internal affairs of Libya. It is essential that these commitments are adhered to. It has been only 11 days since Berlin, but it is clear from Special Representative Salame's briefing that the Libyan people are in grave peril and that the situation has become more fragile and more dangerous. Libya stands on the brink of disaster, and we are gravely concerned by reports of breaches of the arms embargo in recent days. Member States have obligations to abide by the arms embargo imposed by the Security Council. We are also deeply concerned by reports of increased fighting over recent days, which underlines the urgency of the Joint Military Commission's 5+5 meeting, convened by UNSMIL, to agree to a permanent ceasefire. It is essential that both sides commit to participating in these talks without delay. Wealso support UNSMIL's work to convene the political forum and to establish the Libyan expert economic commission. Both initiatives will provide opportunities to address the political and economic questions that lie at the core of the conflict. We condemn the blockading of oil terminals in the east of Libya, which has led to the declaration of force majeure by the National Oil Corporation. The consequent loss of oil revenue will lead only to the further suffering of Libyans. The report of the Secretary-General (S/2020/41) underlines the worsening human rights situation in Libya. Let me, at this point, echo Special Representative Salame's call for clarity on the whereabouts of Siham Sergewa. It is particularly distressing that there have been at least 50 attacks on health-care facilities, health-care workers and ambulances since April last year. All parties to the conflict must comply with their obligations under international law, including international humanitarian law. The Berlin Conference was a vital step in bringing together key international players. They agreed to support the United Nations-led political process and they pledged to respect the United Nations arms embargo. However, as Special Representative Salame just highlighted, the situation on the ground is extremely worrying. The risks in Libya are high. It is vital that the international community and the Council show unity and put momentum in support of UNSMIL and the United Nations-led political process. There is no alternative solution. We should send a clear message.
