Mr. Amde (Ethiopia): I would like to thank
Mr. Darusman for his briefing. We have been following
the situation in Myanmar very closely since we joined
the Council. We believe that so far the Council's
constructive engagement has had a positive impact
in terms of addressing the humanitarian situation in
Rakhine state. We note the progress that has been made
but also recognize the enormous challenges that still
lie ahead.

The human rights situation in Myanmar is indeed
a matter for serious concern and we understand that
the relevant and appropriate United Nations bodies are
handling the matter. The issue with respect to whether
or how the Security Council should directly address
human rights issues has been a matter of debate in the
Council and there is no consensus among members
on it, as we have clearly seen today. The situation in
Myanmar is extremely complex and difficult, and a
sustainable solution to the root causes of the problems
that led to this humanitarian disaster must be found. In
that context, we do not believe that our course of action
will help to make progress in ongoing efforts where
building mutual confidence and trust among those
concerned is so critical. That is the main reason why
we decided to abstain in the voting on the agenda item.

We believe that ensuring accountability through a
transparent and independent verification mechanism
is absolutely critical. In that regard, we recognize the
efforts that the Government of Myanmar is making
and underscore the importance of speeding them up in
order to ensure peace and reconciliation in the country.
We would like to take this opportunity to appreciate the
role of Special Envoy Christine Burgener, and we have
seen the outcome of her third visit to Myanmar and
the region, which enabled her to engage with various
stakeholders. As she emphasized during her visit, the
issues of accountability and inclusive dialogue are
indeed important pillars for national reconciliation.
We could not agree more with her on the need for
credible and reliable fact-finding as a first step towards
accountability. We believe the Council should continue
to support her important efforts.

We are also pleased to note the recent bilateral and
regional engagement aimed at repatriating refugees and
addressing the complex issue of Rakhine state. In that
context, the three-point consensus reached between
China, Myanmar and Bangladesh during the informal
meeting held on the sidelines of the General Assembly
is indeed encouraging. We look forward to the outcome
of the third joint working group meeting, to be held on
29 October in Dhaka. We hope it will help in making
further progress with regard to the process of voluntary,
safe and dignified repatriation.

The enormous burden that Bangladesh has taken
on in providing safety and humanitarian assistance
to refugees is indeed commendable. However, the
magnitude and scale of the humanitarian situation
means that Bangladesh requires further financial and
logistical support. We therefore hope that bilateral
and multilateral partners will scale up their support to
the country.

Finally, without a united Security Council there can
be no meaningful progress in support for the efforts to
find a sustainable solution to the situation in Myanmar.
We hope we will be able to restore that unity ofpurpose
despite our divergent views.

