Mr. Tshibanda (Democratic Republic of the Congo) (spoke in French): I would like to thank all of
today's speakers for the outstanding quality of their
statements and their contributions to the debate.

ll-34509
I am gratified to note that we have been able to
achieve consensus in at least two areas, namely, on the
progress made and on the challenges still before us. I
note that the assessment we have made here on both
sides of the table is almost the same and that there has
been a great deal of resolve to jointly continue our
work, solidifying and making more effective the
partnership between the United Nations and the
international community, on the one hand, and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, on the other.

I would like to reassure the Council yet again of
the resolve of the Congolese Government to continue
its efforts to build peace and democracy and, more
specifically, to organize over the next few months
elections that will be fair and democratic, and therefore
credible. Those elections must be open to all and take
place with guarantees of freedom of expression, access
to the media, as broad participation as possible and
security for all. We have indicated what type of
assistance we would like to receive from the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO). I
hope that we will very soon have the assistance we
need from MONUSCO for logistical support. The
challenge is not to make the resources available, it is to
make them available on time so as to prevent a
negative impact on the already very tight schedule that
has been set for the elections. Having heard the various
statements, I am sure that both at the level of the
United Nations and the Council and at the level of the
various partnerships, the figure I mentioned earlier for
the budget necessary to organize the elections properly
will in fact be made available.

I would like briefly to revisit a few issues
referred to by representatives of various States today,
especially the matter of rape and sexual violence. I
would like to reassure the Council that this issue is of
the very highest concern to the Government. The same
is true of the recruitment of children by armed groups.
To ignore the rape of even a single woman would be a
tragedy, and the fact that there are so many of them
keeps us, the leaders of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, from sleeping at night. The fact that progress in
resolving this issue is slow in no way reflects a lack of
political will. It is a function of the very complex
nature of the problem and of our limited capacity. We
are working to reform our judicial sector and
attempting to improve the ability of our army and our
police forces to ensure security in regions where it is
now lacking in order to reduce the conditions of
lawlessness that breed the tragedy of rape.

I would like to say that we understand the need to
raise public awareness by citing statistics. But I beg an
equal understanding that the problem itself is tragic
enough as it is. I understand the positive motive of
consciousness-raising behind some of the statistics
cited. But I believe that they need to be taken in
context, as the figures go back to 2006. I think some
progress has been made since then. But I say context
also because, if one were to add up the figures, the
results would mean that every single woman in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo would have been
raped. I certainly do not say this because I want to
minimize the problem in any way. But I believe that
together we should strive to avoid stigmatizing both
the country and its women. We welcome the work
carried out by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Combat,
whom we recently hosted in our country and to whom
we would like to reiterate our readiness to cooperate to
ensure that together we come up with the most
effective ways to put an end to this scourge.

On the subject of the illicit exploitation of natural
resources, which was mentioned throughout the day, I
would like to say that the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo is very actively
engaged in the issue. We played a decisive role in the
preparation and adoption of instruments adopted at the
Summit in Lusaka. Since then, the Government has
championed the effective implementation of those
instruments. I am gratified to be able to say here that
thus far all the States in the region have shown
understanding and a readiness to cooperate. I think that
this cooperation is important in halting illegal
exploitation. In that regard, I should like to take this
opportunity to take note of the support and measures
being taken elsewhere at the international level, in
particular by the United States.

With regard to the return of refugees and
displaced persons, I should like to reassure the Council
that this is being organized in line with the provisions
of refugee law through meetings of the joint
commission involving my country, countries hosting
refugees and the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees. This process is under way
and provisions are being made on the ground for the
dignified and safe return of refugees and displaced
persons.
In conclusion, I would like to say a word on the
suggestions made by the representatives of the World
Bank, the European Union and the United Nations
Development Programme. I should like to commend
their notable contributions in rebuilding and bring
peace to my country. These are our country's main
partners. We welcome not just their contributions but
also the suggestions and proposals they make to us in
the context of our dialogue with them. I take note of
the suggestions that have been made. I am aware of
their importance to the Government's efforts under
way. I also note that many of them incorporate
elements to which I referred with regard to my
Government's priorities in various areas, including
improving growth and continuing economic
development throughout the country, including the
so-called missing middle, namely, the role of small-
and medium-sized businesses to generate wealth and
opportunity as widely as possible throughout
Congolese society.

I would like to conclude by reiterating my
gratitude to you, Mr. President, for your initiative in
organizing this special meeting of the Security Council
on the Democratic Republic of the Congo. I would also
like to assure you that the Congolese Government very
much appreciates the contribution of the United
Nations system, the Security Council and the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. We hope that, in
the coming weeks and months, we will make progress
in our dialogue on redefining our cooperation in the
coming years.

