The President: As this is the first meeting of the
Security Council for the month of March, I should like
to take the opportunity to pay tribute, on behalf of the
Council, to His Excellency Mr. Adolfo Aguilar Zinser,
Permanent Representative of Mexico to the United
Nations, for his service as President of the Security
Council for the month of February 2002. I am sure that
I speak for all members of the Council in expressing
deep appreciation to Ambassador Aguilar Zinser for
the great diplomatic skill with which he conducted the
Council's business last month.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

Letter dated 26 February 2002 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President
of the Security Council (8/2002/209)

The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia,
Spain, Ukraine and the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
in which they request to be invited to participate in the
discussion of the item on the Council's agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives
to participate in the discussion Without the right to
vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Kusljugic
(Bosnia and Herzegovina) took a seat at the
Council table; Mrs. Simonovic' (Croatia),
Mr. Arias (Spain), Mr. Kuchinsky (Ukraine) and
Mr. Sahovic' (Federal Republic of Yugoslavia)
took the seats reservedfor them at the side of the
Council Chamber.


The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations and in the absence of objection, I shall
take it that the Security Council agrees to extend an
invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of
procedure to Mr. Wolfgang Petritsch, High
Representative for the Implementation of the Peace
Agreement on Bosnia and Herzegovina.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite Mr. Petritsch to take a seat at the Council
table.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations and in the absence of
objection, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Jacques Paul
Klein, Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Coordinator of United Nations Operations in
Bosnia and Herzegovina.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite Mr. Klein to take a seat at the Council
table.

I should like to inform the Council that I have
received a letter dated 1 March 2002 from the
Permanent Representative of Spain to the United
Nations, which reads as follows.

"I have the honour, in my capacity as
representative of the Presidency of the Council of
the European Union, to request that Javier Solana,
Secretary-General of the Council and High
Representative for Foreign Policy and Common
Security, be allowed to participate in the Council
meeting to be held on Tuesday, 5 March 2002, on
Bosnia and Herzegovina, in accordance with rule
39 of the provisional rules of procedure of the
Security Council."

That letter has been published as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol S/2002/218. IfI
hear no objection, I shall take it that the Council agrees
to extend an invitation under rule 39 to Mr. Javier
Solana.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite Mr. Javier Solana to take the seat reserved
for him at the side of the Council Chamber.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2002/209, which contains the text of a
letter dated 26 February 2002 from the Secretary-
General, transmitting the report of the High
Representative for the Implementation of the Peace
Agreement on Bosnia and Herzegovina.

Members of the Council also have before them
document 8/2002/221, which contains the text of a
draft resolution prepared in the course of the Council's
prior consultations.

I welcome the presence at this morning's meeting
of the Secretary-General, His Excellency Mr. Kofi
Annan, and I give him the floor.


