Mr. Eide: I really asked for the floor in order to
be the last person to whom you give the floor in any
Security Council meeting. I have achieved that. I want
to echo the best wishes that have been expressed by so
many around the table, and I am honoured to be
present at your last meeting, Sir. I wish you all the
best.

I have just two or three very brief comments.
Some speakers have mentioned the need to look
beyond the election period. I agree, and I touched upon
that in my statement. I think it is important that we
start thinking about it, because I believe that, with a
new Government in place, whoever the new President
may be, it will be important to have a vision to build
on very soon that ensures continuity with our current
situation. That is important.

The question of donor coordination has been
raised again a number of times. It scares me sometimes
to hear of the kind of expectations some have, given
our ability to do magic with limited resources. But I
think that we will certainly have to do that in the
future. Ambassador Rice and others noted that we need
to get together at a much earlier stage when we
formulate our aid programmes, and to think together
much more before we carve our programmes in stone,
so to speak. When we do not, it makes it much more
difficult for us to be flexible afterwards. We will try to
learn from what we have seen in the past.

We will open new offices and I do need more
personnel, but I would like to urge all Council
members and other colleagues who have participated in
this meeting to see if they have personnel with the right
qualities whom they could offer to us - not as gratis
personnel, but to be recruited. It is not only a question
of the number of personnel for me; it is a question of
the quality of people and the expertise and resources
that they represent. That is particularly true for the new
offices to be established. We will undertake that as well
as we possibly can.
14

Finally, the benchmark issue has been raised by
many. I repeat that I take it very seriously, but it is
interesting to see how many different versions there are
around the table of what "benchmarks" means. I will
conclude by saying that I will take all those ideas with
me and be inspired by them. Hopefully, we will also
come to our own conclusions so that the Security
Council can receive a decent report in September -
not you, Mr. President, but many others who will
remain here. I thank them all for their kind words to
me and my staff.

