Mr. Ging: I thank you, Mr. President, for this
opportunity to brief the Security Council on the
humanitarian situation in Ukraine on behalf of Under-
Secretary-General and Emergency Relief Coordinator
Valerie Amos.

Ongoing efforts to find a political solution to the
crisis in Ukraine have borne little fruit. Therefore,
insecurity and violence prevail in conflict areas,
resulting in a steadily worsening humanitarian
situation, which will continue to deteriorate for as long
as violence persists.

An estimated 3.9 million people live in areas
directly affected by violence. Those remaining in
the conflict zone face imminent security threats
from the fighting, which is increasingly occurring in
more-densely populated urban areas. Fighting has
caused significant damage to infrastructure, affecting
the power and water supply and access to basic
services. In Donetsk and Luhansk, home to a total of
1.5 million people, the water supply is reduced to a few
hours per day. Health supplies are running low and an
estimated 70 per cent of health personnel have fled
the area, leaving access to medical care significantly
reduced. Damage to housing has so far affected 1,600
families. Supply routes are increasingly disrupted by
conflict, and coping mechanisms among the affected
populations are inevitably deteriorating.

The protection of civilians is a key concern. As
conflict intensifies, casualties are on the rise. The
human rights monitoring mission of the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
and the World Health Organization (WHO) report that
at least 1,367 people, both civilians and combatants,
have been killed and 4,087 people have been wounded
by the fighting in eastern Ukraine since mid-April.

Since the latest humanitarian briefing to the
Security Council by Under Secretary General Amos,
on 16 June, the number of internally displaced persons
(IDPs) has increased significantly. An additional 58,000
people have fled their homes since the start of July.
Reportedly, more than 1,000 people are leaving the
conflict zone every day. Today there are 117,910 people
registered as internally displaced throughout Ukraine,
87 per cent of whom are from the east of the country.
Most have left with few belongings and are in need of
shelter, food and other essential assistance. That places
pressure on host communities in neighbouring regions.

At the same time, many people from areas affected
by fighting in the Donetsk and Luhansk regions are
fleeing to the Russian Federation. Since the start of
the year, 168,677 Ukrainians have registered as having
crossed into the Russian Federation, with nearly 60,000
having applied for refugee status and a further 115,952
having applied for other forms of legal stay.

However, that is not the full picture, as many
Ukrainians who have fled their homes do not register
with Ukrainian authorities or officially apply for
assistance. The Russian Federation is reporting that
740,000 people have crossed their borders since the
start of the year, availing themselves of the special
270-day visa programme for Ukrainians. UNHCR has
also reported that figure.
The majority of the humanitarian response to date
has been delivered through local and community-
based organizations. The local authorities have been
successful in restoring water and power to areas where
fighting has subsided. However, as prolonged fighting
starts to exhaust the capacity of the local authorities to
respond, United Nations partners are scaling up their
support to those response efforts.

Over the last weeks, humanitarian organizations
have been working with a broad range of partners,
including national and local authorities, civil society
organizations and community-based organizations,
to undertake emergency preparedness measures and
address the most urgent needs of affected people.
The Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees is reaching hosting areas for internally
displaced persons and areas to which people are able to
return with food, hygiene kits and essential household
items. UNICEF is working with national partners in
the provision of health services to displaced persons.
A United Nations-led response plan, with detailed
planning and planned interventions sector by sector,
will be published this week.

The Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs (OCHA) has deployed a humanitarian advisory
team to Ukraine to assess the needs and support the
coordination of the response. Two senior missions
from OCHA headquarters have been deployed in
recent weeks to further reinforce and strengthen the
response capacity. Our priority remains to support the
Government-led humanitarian response effort and to
ensure that we are ready to complement that response
effort with direct support to people as the need arises.

Humanitarian corridors from badly affected
areas to areas under Government control are open for
several hours each day, but those are regularly blocked
by combatants, and the evacuation of people through
those channels is regularly impeded. We therefore call
upon all sides to the conflict to enable the free and safe
movement of the population, while at the same time
ensuring full access by humanitarian organizations to
the affected population remaining behind.

We call on the Ukrainian Government to address
some key challenges in implementing relief activities.
A unified registration system for IDPs is crucial to
enabling a comprehensive analysis and understanding of
the existing needs. Humanitarian assistance should also
be exempted from tax, and the signing and ratification
of the United Nations-Government customs agreement
facilitating the entry of humanitarian workers and the
import of humanitarian goods should be expedited.
Finally, we request the Ukrainian Government to
adopt a temporary exemption to facilitate the import
of medical supplies certified by the World Health
Organization, which are required in response to the
immediate health needs of the affected population.

In conclusion, the humanitarian situation is
deteriorating, and the worrying increase in violence
in urban areas puts a greater number of people at risk.
Until the violence has ended we will continue to see
an increase in the numbers of people being killed and
a deterioration of the overall humanitarian situation.
Immediate action is therefore required to prevent that.

