Mr. De La Sabliere (France) (spoke in French): I
should like at the outset to say that France associates
itself fully with the statement to be made later by the
representative of Italy on behalf of the European
Union.

I should like to thank the Secretary-General's
Special Coordinator, Mr. Roed-Larsen, for his briefing.
France shares his analysis and agrees with his
recommendations. I should also like to thank you, Sir,
for having organized this public debate. On Friday the
Arab Group asked for the Council to meet and to take
immediate action. The extreme gravity of the situation
on the ground requires the entire international
community to make its voice known and to search for
collective solutions. The matter is one of great urgency,
given that we are now - in September 2003 -
entering the fourth year of the intifada and that 10
years ago the Washington Declaration was signed by
Mr. Arafat and Mr. Rabin.

What is the current situation? What are the
remedies? The situation is one of Violence on both
sides; insecurity is growing and peace seems far away.
We are at a critical point. Barbaric terrorist acts
perpetrated by armed Palestinian groups hostile to
peace continue against Israeli civilians. Israeli civilians
are living in daily anxiety and fear for their lives and
the lives of their children. Palestinians also live with
the same fear and anxiety. Targeted killings organized
by the Israeli army continue; just as children are killed,
houses are demolished, farmland is destroyed and other
acts of collective reprisals continue. The Israeli
authorities are building a separation wall that impinges
upon Palestinian lands and encircles the population.
Some towns, in particular Qalqiliya, have become
ghettos. Settlement activity is growing and settlements
are growing larger, particularly in Jerusalem, which is a
Holy City three times over and which the Council has
always said had a special character whose nature
should be respected.

Against that backdrop, the Israeli decision in
principle to remove Yasser Arafat, who is the
legitimately elected President of the Palestinian
Authority, is contrary to the basic rules of international
law. It is also a grave political mistake. Announcing
that decision, and its possible implementation, can only
be counterproductive for Israeli security and for the
prospects for peace. One does not get to choose the
people one deals with in a peace process. By definition,
in a conflict one makes peace with one's enemies. It is
not by avoiding those Palestinian political realities that
we will be able to arrive at an independent, viable and
democratic Palestinian State that co-exists with the
State of Israel, which has a legitimate right to live in
security and within internationally recognized borders.

Stopping terrorism cannot be done solely through
the logic of military and police security. Making
security a precondition for launching political dialogue
is tantamount to allowing the entire peace process to be
highjacked by extremists, thereby letting terrorists
impose their own timetable and interests, as opposed to
those of the Palestinian people. Security and policy
must go hand-in-hand in pursuing the peace process.

The response to the problem of the terrorism
embraced by some Palestinian groups must be
comprehensive. The Palestinian people must be
mobilized for peace and must stand behind their Prime
Minister and Government. That presupposes that
Palestinian energies not be polarized by internal power
struggles and that the President, Prime Minister,
Government and Parliament act under basic Palestinian
law and in a spirit of unity to implement the road map.
The new Prime Minister and his Government must be
able to take all necessary measures to reform and unite
the security apparatus. They must also do their utmost
to arrest and bring to justice the perpetrators of terrorist
acts and to dismantle the infrastructure supporting
them. Palestinian institutional reforms must then be
carried out, and free, transparent and democratic
elections held as soon as possible.

It is just as crucial that Israel make the necessary
gestures so that the Palestinian people can see the
tangible and immediate fruits of the peace process and
of dialogue, as opposed to frustration, anger and revolt.
The Israeli army must withdraw from all autonomous
Palestinian areas and close targeted killings, which are
contrary to international law and fuel the cycle of
violence. Roadblocks, sieges, curfews and other
restrictions against the Palestinian people must be
lifted. Israel must discontinue all settlement activities
and construction of the separation wall.

That comprehensive and non-sequential approach
is the logic advocated by the Quartet's road map, which
is not being implemented on the ground due to the lack
of a genuine implementation mechanism. France has
always called for determined action by the Quartet -
which is made up by the United States, the United
Nations, the European Union and the Russian
Federation - in accordance with the role set forth for
it in the road map. France has also called for the
holding of an international conference to put the peace
process back on track, as well as for the establishment
of an effective international monitoring mechanism to
ensure that the parties respect their commitments. Both
of those elements are called for in the road map. We
also believe that an international interposition force
that ensures the interests of both parties must be
contemplated, but they must both accept it.

France is a friend of Israel, the Arab world and
Palestinians. The gravity of the situation on the ground
requires extra effort and courage on the part of all of
us. We all expect a great deal from the United States
and the Quartet, who are the parties principally
engaged on the ground and whom we support fully. A
silent Security Council would be shirking its
responsibilities. The Council must speak for what is
right and lend its support to peace efforts. France
welcomes the initiative of the Arab Group and is
prepared to work on that basis to adopt a consensus
Security Council resolution that is commensurate with
the seriousness of the situation and that makes a
contribution to peace.

