Mr. Minami (Japan): Allow me to express my
gratitude to the President for convening this meeting,
and to Secretary-General for his briefing.

We continue to witness a series of conflicts in the
Middle East and North Africa with repercussions that
extend far beyond the region. The rise of terrorism,
and the mass exodus of refugees, is a clear sign of the
gravity of the situation. The effective responses against
it may not be easy to ascertain. However, one thing is
certain: e must not only confront the challenges at hand,
but also address the underlying factors that fuel them.

Japan has been swift and steadfast in its response
to the current refugee crisis. Yesterday, Prime Minister
Shinzo Abe announced that Japan would provide
approximately $810 million dollars in assistance this
year to refugees and internally displaced persons
(IDPs) from Syria and Iraq - a three-fold increase over
2014. In addition, approximately $2.5 million dollars
in assistance will be extended to European countries,
such as the Republic of Serbia and the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, which are receiving refugees.

News of refugees and terrorism is coming from
communities where economic prospects are truncated,
civilians are indiscriminately attacked and families
uprooted. In response, Japan seeks to empower
individuals and build economically sustainable
communities. That is in line with the concept of human
security that we have been advocating for decades.
Therefore, the $2.5 billion dollars in assistance that
Japan is extending to the Middle East and North
Africa region targets not only Governments but also
the most vulnerable in society, such as women and
children. Women and children, however, can also work
against the spread of extremist ideologies and serve as
effective drivers of peace. Malala Yusafzai's story best
epitomizes that. A Nobel Laureate, Malala feared no
bullet in defense ofher right to education. She is now an
inspiration for millions. We all remember at the opening
day of the sustainable development Summit, when she
emphasized that education was hope and peace. Let us
heed her courageous call.

In Syria, where access to education has been
severely hampered, Japan has helped reach more than
2.6 million children with textbooks and educational
programmes under the "Back to Learning" programme,
in partnership with UNICEF and others. In Palestine
and neighboring countries, Japan has long been one of
the principal contributors to the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East, which provides education to 480,000 Palestinian
refugee children.

Mothers, wives and daughters, with influential

voices within the family, can serve as bulwarks against
the spread of extremist ideologies. However, atrocious
acts committed by groups such as the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant and Boko Haram attest to how
women are frequently abused in conflicts. Japan will
continue to support the Office of Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Zainab Hawa Bangura, as its
largest contributor. Moreover, we have increased our
contribution to UN-Women by lO-fold over the past
two years, and supported the economic empowerment
of refugees and IDPs through vocational training and
other programmes.

Japan firmly believes that empowering individuals
and strengthening communities, in line with the
concept of human security, will facilitate political
solutions, which are ultimately needed in the region.
Japan therefore supports the good offices of the
United Nations in the Middle East and North Africa
region, including in Syria, Yemen and Libya. We also
look to the Security Council to play an increasingly
constructive role in achieving political solutions. Japan
will continue to tackle the imminent challenges at hand
and cement the foundations for sustainable peace and
prosperity in the region.

