Mr. Lambertini (Italy): I would like to congratulate
you, Madam President, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council for the month of April. Of
course, it is not the first ever United States presidency,
but it is your first, so I wish you every success in what
we hope will be a long list of successful presidencies
of the Council. I would also like to thank Ambassador
Rycroft and his team for their hard work in March
during the brilliant British presidency. And I join
others in expressing our condolences to the delegation
of the Russian Federation in the wake of yesterday's
senseless attack in Saint Petersburg. They can count on
our Government's support.

It is a pleasure to welcome back Ambassador
Mamabolo, whom we thank for his briefing and
congratulate on his appointment as Joint Special
Representative and Head of the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID). We
are ready to work with him.

The situation in Darfur is changing rapidly and
unevenly. Nevertheless, Italy's assessment of it remains
clear and is based on three crucial aspects - the
political and security dimensions; the root causes of
instability in Darfur, starting with the humanitarian
and human rights situations; and the strategic review
of UNAMID.

First, with regard to the political and security
dimension, in the past year the Sudanese Government
has demonstrated its wish to find a political solution
to the Darfur question, as attested to by the unilateral
ceasefire and the pardoning of more than 250 rebels.
This is further confirmed by Khartoum's signing
of the road map and the willingness it has shown so
far to negotiate with the non-signature parties on
their association with the Doha Document for Peace
in Darfur.

Despite the commendable efforts of President
Thabo Mbeki, Head of the African Union High-level
Implementation Panel, which Italy supports, the
non-signatory groups continue to delay. We renew our
invitation to the Sudan Liberation Army/Abdul Wahid to
abandon military means and tojoin the political process,
and we renew our call on the Sudan Liberation Army/
Minni Minawi, the Justice and Equality Movement and
the Sudan People's Liberation Movement-North to sign
the road map.

The time has come to assess the credibility of those
who claim support for peace on the basis of their broad
commitment to the pacification of Darfur through
peaceful means and for achieving political solution.
The Government must also persist in the approach it is
taking. We hope that the implementation of the Doha
Document can be rapidly completed, which could
send a clear signal in the right direction on the part of
Khartoum - one that the Council could not ignore.

Secondly, with regard to the humanitarian and
human rights situation, despite progress made at the
military level, peace continues to evade Darfur. The root
causes of the instability have not been addressed yet.
This scenario is not helped by the ongoing impediments
that UNAMID has to face, despite recent, positive
measures by the Sudanese Government. Darfur suffers
from a lack of development. In this regard, my country
will continue to do its part, helping the Sudanese
Government at the bilateral level, as well as through
programmes of the European Union and the United
Nations. But there are other areas where the Government
is called upon to act without delay: inter-community
conflicts; banditry; human rights violations, including
gender-based Violence and military use of schools;
impunity and the lack of accountability; attacks on
internally displaced persons, such as recent episodes
at the Sortony Camp in northern Darfur. Italy stongly
condemns these crimes. There can be no solution to the
problems that foment instability in Darfur without an
inclusive, conciliatory and constant action led by the
Sudanese Government.

In closing, with regard to the strategic review
of UNAMID, the recommendations, which will be
delivered to the Council by May, will provide us
with options to discuss the continuation or the exit
strategy of the mission. The Sudan has demonstrated a

constructive spirit in breaking the impasse in the United
Nations-African Union joint review process. We attach
great value to the collaborative approach of the Sudan
and its involvement in the exercise. We also thank the
Secretary-General for his personal contribution in
this regard.

While waiting to receive and carefully assess
the recommendations, we take good note, with a
spirit of openness, of the assessments made in the
Secretary-General's most recent report (S/2017/250).
Improvements still need to be made in the political,
humanitarian, security and rule of law areas, while
progress has been achieved in meeting the benchmarks
for a future phased drawdown of the mission.

