Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): The
Security Council is meeting today to discuss and hear
the diverse positions and opinions on the Palestinian
question. I can assure the Council that what we will
hear and say will not differ very much from what we
have heard and reiterated over the past 10 years.

The indivisible rights of the Palestinian people have
been recognized and documented in the Organization,
and most notably within its two principal bodies, the
General Assembly and the Security Council, as well as
in the international conventions that have been deposited
with the United Nations. The recognition of those
rights by the international community was not intended
to remain theoretical or to mitigate the suffering of
the Palestinian people simply by expressions of our
condemnation of the occupation and its practices.
Rather, the goal was, and remains, to take the necessary
measures to end the occupation in all of its forms,
thereby ensuring international peace and security. That
would be in the service humankind's conscience, but we
seem to have forgotten the Palestinians and their right
to establish an independent State, based on the 4 June
1967 borders and with Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its capital.

The increase in occupation activities within the
Palestinian territories - whether through colonization,
the appropriation of land, the demolition of homes or
the forced exodus across the Green Line, including
Al-Quds Al-Sharif, is simply the natural consequence
of the international community's shortcomings with
regard to implementing and defending the right of the
Palestinian people to the two-State solution. Allow me
to share with everyone very briefly the legal foundations
established by the international community and the
Security Council for settling the issue in the Middle
East.

There are legal bases and resolutions whose
implementation we are still waiting for. Some believe
that they have been successful in diverting the attention
of Arab countries and the international community
away from those resolutions. As an example, I will read
out paragraphs 5, 6 and 7, respectively, of resolution
465 (1980), which was adopted unanimously and states
that the Security Council,

(spoke in English)
"Determines that all measures taken by Israel
to change the physical character, demographic
composition, institutional structure or status of
the Palestinian and other Arab territories occupied
since 1967, including Jerusalem, or any part thereof,
have no legal validity and that Israel's policy and
practices of settling parts of its population and new
immigrants in those territories constitute a flagrant
violation of the Fourth Geneva Convention relative
to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of
War and also constitute a serious obstruction to
achieving a comprehensive, just and lasting peace
in the Middle East;

"Strongly deplores the continuation and
persistence of Israel in pursuing those policies and
practices and calls upon the Government and people
ofIsrael to rescind those measures, to dismantle the
existing settlements and in particular to cease, on
an urgent basis, the establishment, construction
and planning of settlements in the Arab territories
occupied since 1967, including Jerusalem;

"Calls upon all States not to provide Israel with
any assistance to be used specifically in connexion
with settlements in the occupied territories".

(spoke in Arabic)

What I have just read out is not an illustration
of the position of Egypt alone, or that of the Arab
States alone. It is a position that enjoys international
status commensurate with the Charter of the United
Nations. It is the view of the international community
as reiterated by the Security Council in many of its
resolutions, albeit one that still needs to be fully
implemented. The resolution is very clear with regard
to the legality of the occupation, including Al-Quds
Al-Sharif. The Security Council has called upon Israel
to dismantle the settlements and has called upon States
not to provide aid to Israel in connection with those
actions. That reiterated position is in clear support of
the Palestinian people regarding their right to protection
under the articles of the Fourth Geneva Convention
relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of
War. Resolution 465 (1980), among others - especially
resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973) - applies to all
occupied Arab territories, including the Syrian Golan.
Some think that they can exploit the Syrian crisis to
divert the attention of the international community
away from the right of the Syrian people to recover
their territory. Egypt reiterates that Israel is obligated
under those resolutions to withdraw from the occupied
Syrian territories in the Golan.

Despite those clear rights and the fact that Israel
was supposed to initiate reforms and alter the situation,
and despite the injustice that the Palestinian people have
been suffering and the continued occupation of Arab
territories, including the Golan, the Arab States decided
to make a goodwill gesture by proposing the historic
initiative of 2002, the Arab Peace Initiative. It affirmed
Israel's right to exist in complete security in the region
and the right of Israel's people to normalize relations
with the people of neighbouring States after ending
the occupation. We have therefore been surprised by
the attitude and indifference of the Israeli Government
with regard to the Initiative over the past years. I ask
the following question: Does the Government of Israel
prefer to continue the occupation and defy international
law, to the detriment of this historic opportunity, which
is still available and would allow for the normalization of
relations with other countries of the region and thereby
allow its people to live in lasting peace and security?

We are not asking anyone to share in expressions of
sympathy or condemnation, nor are we searching for a
temporary painkiller, the effect of which only weakens
over time and cures nothing. The pain ofthe Palestinian
people is becoming increasingly acute. We are asking
the Security Council to undertake a genuine review in
complete transparency and implement the two-State
solution before it is too late. That can be done during
this sensitive period by establishing a comparison
between the situation that we were supposed to have
achieved, had the Security Council resolutions and
the Oslo Accords been implemented, and the current
situation. We simply wish that the Security Council
would respect its obligations with regard to preserving
international peace and security and put an end to the
Israeli occupation in conformity with international law,
which is of timeless nature. We ask members of the
Security Council to review their positions. We also ask
Israel to review its position and to ensure that it upholds
international humanitarian law and international
human rights law. The protections offered by such laws
must be provided to all individuals without distinction.

Allow me to conclude by referring to what the
representative of Israel said in the Council today when
he stated that Jordan and Egypt had laid down their
arms to wager on peace instead. I would like to share
with the Council what the actual context was, namely,
that that peace, as chosen by Israel, was not a peace in
terms of our laying down our arms; that we did not do.
It was a forced peace aimed at restoring stability in the
region, but we have still not officially resolved the issue
that led to the conflict in the first place, that is, the
occupation by Israel of our Arab territories to this day.

