Mr. Moncada (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): Venezuela is today at peace, which
is safeguarded by the constitutional Government of
President Nicolas Maduro Moros, who is in full exercise
of his legal powers and is guaranteeing the protection
of the Venezuelan people and territory and the effective
control of the country. We repeat - there is no violence

of any kind in Venezuela. If there are any threats to the
peace, they are coming from abroad.

With regard to draft resolution S/2019/186,
submitted by the United States and the Government of
President Trump, we denounce, first, the falsification
of the content of the resolutions of the Organization of
American States (OAS), which are mentioned in the
draft resolution, as the very Charter of that regional
organization establishes that States do not have the
authority to determine the legitimacy of the electoral
processes of another country. That authority does not
exist. And, if a group of countries decided to ignore
the election results, the countries of that group did
so in their national capacities, which do not apply
whatsoever to that regional forum. This being about a
failed operation of political aggression, our country is
today fully exercising all its rights and privileges at the
Organization of American States. Therefore, it is not
true that we have been sanctioned or disregarded by the
OAS. That is false, yet it is cited as an example in draft
resolution S/2019/186.

We also reject the fact that our Constitution
continues to be used in an attempt to justify a colonial
intervention, while supporting a fictitious entity that
does not exist in our basic law. The self-proclaimed
Government constitutes a dictatorship, which has no
legal basis in Venezuela. Its spokespeople have even
already abandoned all intentions of calling for elections
and are intending to hold on to power for years without
consulting the people. For them it is enough to have the
support of President Trump.

The European countries that support the
Government of President Trump in this adventure do
so in spite of the fact that the legal experts of their own
Parliaments are warning them that their interference
in our internal affairs and their coercive illegal actions
constitute hostile and illegal acts against our nation. The
international community cannot understand how the
Security Council can allow the deliberate Violation of
the Charter of the United Nations by Council members,
which have an obligation to enforce it.

We denounce the fact that no mention has been
made of the violent acts that occurred last weekend
from Colombian territory to Venezuelan territory.
That was an international incident, not a national
one. As an international incident, it falls under the
responsibility of the Security Council, but it has been
deliberately ignored. The Colombian Government still
has not submitted the protocols and photographs that
it threatened to show a few days ago that allegedly
prove that it was a humanitarian operation and not
an operation of aggression. We are still awaiting that
alleged evidence. There is no international law that
protects a Government from presenting itself at the
border of another country and trying to force unknown
cargo into that foreign territory using unknown
protocols. Three days after the attack, there are still
people with masks on at those bridges - protected by
the Colombian Government - throwing firebombs
from Colombian territory at the Venezuelan forces of
public order. We still have not seen a single mention
of that, not to mention any condemnation of those acts
of aggression.

We want the world to know that, when some
countries in this Chamber express concern about the
humanitarian situation in Venezuela, they never refer
to the causes of the problem. It is illegal for acts of
economic war to be perpetrated against our country, in
violation of the human rights of our people and while
using them as hostages in a policy of calculated cruelty,
in total violation of the Charter of the United Nations.
In addition, after that policy of calculated cruelty, there
is concealment of the responsibility of the primary
perpetrators of that crime, which are - we will name
them here in the Chamber - the Government of the
United States and Government the United Kingdom.

We also denounce the fact that those two
colonial Powers - one still quite strong, the other in
decline - have, in the course of one week, carried
out the biggest robbery in our history - more than
$30 billion was stolen from the Venezuelan people. And
they want to conceal that pillage of historic proportions.
If they have a genuine interest in the humanitarian
situation and the well-being of the Venezuelan people,
the first thing they should do is to return what they
stole. The United States and the United Kingdom are
committing acts of looting and pillaging that cannot be
concealed under the cloak of humanitarian assistance.
It is the same colonialist plundering from two centuries
ago, but now it is disguised with a racist and messianic
ideology that proclaims itself to be saving third-world
countries. We do not need those saviours. We do not
need those saviours, who are motivated by greed and
end up destroying every nation they enter. We do not
need those saviours.

They are at this moment carrying out a massive
extortion operation against every country legally trading
with Venezuela. The United States and Europe are not a

world Government that regulates trade throughout the
rest of the world, and their illegal acts are the primary
cause of our people's suffering. The Security Council
must ensure compliance with international law in the
face of the use, by the United States and the United
Kingdom, of international economic institutions as
weapons of mass destruction. Modern wars are not
conducted only with bombs, but also with banks. They
are using banks to destroy our people.
Given that the primary function of this organ is
the maintenance of international peace and security,
the world cannot understand why President Trump's
Government refuses to adopt a draft resolution
prohibiting the use and threat of use of force in the
case of Venezuela. Do Council members know why it
does not do that? Because President Trump continues
to publicly threaten the Venezuelan people with the
military option. It is immoral and irresponsible to
blackmail an entire population in total violation of
international law and the Charter of the United Nations.

The President of Costa Rica pointed out yesterday
that he did not endorse the communique issued by the
group of countries that met last Monday in Bogota to
discuss the situation in Venezuela, because the issue of
the use of military force against Venezuela was openly
discussed. Both Costa Rica and other countries in the
region refuse to support the violence of the United
States and its allies against our people.

We want to denounce - and it is a very important
denunciation - the fact that there is an ongoing military
threat against Venezuela. It is for that reason that the
United Kingdom deployed a warship last Saturday less
than 80 kilometres off our coast. It still has not been
able to justify its presence. It is for that same reason
that the United States made a show of troop movements
on Colombian territory near our border, while at the
same time threatening to kill our Head of State.

We also denounce the fact that the spokespeople
of President Trump's Government are currently
fabricating a narrative alleging an absurd number of
supposed defectors from the National Bolivarian Armed
Forces so as to justify the formation of a so-called
liberation army of Venezuela on Colombian territory,
with the aim of infiltrating our country and destroying
the peace of our nation. The organizers of that armed
criminal group flagrantly brag with total impunity in
the Colombian media. That is public data. We are not
saying that we have secret information. We will share
all the information with the Council. It is no longer
about publicly using military force but instead of its
covert use in a war using paid mercenaries, in the same
manner as was done in Nicaragua during the cruel war
by the Contras. And, in a cruel twist of fate, the person
put in charge by the United States of the operation by
the Contras in Nicaragua was Elliott Abrams, who
is present here. He himself is today responsible for
the operation against Venezuela. He is the one who
used airplanes loaded with weapons disguised as
humanitarian aid to foment death and destruction in
Nicaragua. And he would have us believe that he is very
keen to send monetary assistance to Venezuela using
masked men throwing Molotov cocktails.

In conclusion, we demand from the Security
Council a clear statement condemning and prohibiting
the use of military force in all its forms and
manifestations against Venezuela. It is already publicly
known that the United States is right now attempting
to put together an indirect mercenary war using
irregular armed groups, which will make it possible
for it to seem - perversely - to be part of a colonial
humanitarian operation and thus the supposed saviours
of our nation. In brief, we are here to call for what
any other country or responsible State Member of the
United Nations would call for, that is, defence of the
principles of our founding Charter, including respect
for sovereignty, political independence, territorial
integrity, non-interference in internal affairs, the right
to the self-determination of peoples and the right of
States' legal equality. But, above all, we have come to
request that Security Council uphold our right to peace.

