The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of the
Plurinational State of Bolivia.

Bolivia thanks the Under-Secretary-General
for Peacekeeping, Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix, for his
briefing on the situation in the Republic of Mali and
the activities of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA)
on the ground. We also welcome the presence of the
Permanent Representative of the Republic of Mali,
Ambassador Konfourou. We echo other delegations that
have expressed their support for the Chadian members
of the Mission who were wounded in the course of an
attack using an improvised explosive device and wish
them a speedy and full recovery. We would like also to
express our condolences in connection with the death
of a member of the Barkhane force during the discharge
of the force's mission.

We would like to begin by underscoring the
important progress made in the political sphere in Mali.
In the framework of the provisions of resolution 2423
(2018), we commend and welcome the signing ofthe pact
for peace a few days ago in Bamako, on the margins of
the meetings of the Agreement Monitoring Committee.
We fully agree with the delegations that have stressed
the importance of that event, as it offers an opportunity
to revitalize the peace process in that brotherly nation.
We also agree with the Secretary-General's statement
in paragraph 87 of his report (S/2018/866) that the pact
for peace should not "duplicate structures or replace
the Agreement". The pact is, in any case, simply an
instrument that represents a positive complement
to the interests and efforts of the Malian people, the
United Nations and the international community, as it
contributes to defusing tensions and to building a system
of democratic coexistence that will help to alleviate the
difficult situation that prevails today in Mali.
Furthermore, we commend the efforts of the
Government of the Republic of Mali regarding, first
and foremost, the definitive cessation of hostilities
on the basis of national plans and the taking of
fundamental political measures aimed at achieving
peace and stability in the country. Regarding the
elections that took place in July, we commend the
fact that in spite of certain difficulties, the elections
took place in satisfactory conditions and in a peaceful
environment, in the presence of international observers
and in the context of the deployment and active role of
the Malian security forces and the crucial support of
MINUSMA, which included mainly logistical support
and technical assistance.

We wish also to stress the progress that the
Government of Mali has been spearheading in areas
such as the appointment and deployment of interim
authorities in 21 districts of the five northern regions, as
well as the progressive operationalization of the mixed
units of the Operational Coordination Mechanism.

It has been five years since the creation of
MINUSMA and three years since the signing of the
Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali. Mali's
efforts to achieve the necessary stability still require
the full support of the Council and of our Organization
as a whole. The complex and fragile humanitarian
and security situation in Mali has spread throughout
the Sahel region as a result of the interventionism
and regime-change policies in Libya. The situation
has had repercussions on the volatile security sector,
compounded by the presence of terrorist groups and
transnational criminal organizations in the country.

Asymmetric and terrorist threats, continuing
clashes between armed groups, and intercommunal and
sexual Violence continue to threaten the safety and lives
of civilians and to hinder the economic growth and
development of the country. We note with deep concern
that in northern and central Mali, the criminal activities
of mercenaries, drug and arms traffickers, and those
who traffic in human beings have become a way of life
that is hampering the full implementation of the Peace
Agreement and contributing on a daily basis to the
deteriorating security situation and political process.

For all of these reasons, it is vital to highlight and
express appreciation for the work of the personnel
of MINUSMA, which has stepped up its efforts to
ensure not only the definitive implementation of the
Peace Agreement through monitoring the latter and
facilitating a political dialogue through its mediation
and good offices in coordination with the Malian
Government, but also the restoration and extension
of State authority in the northern and central parts
of the country. Similarly, the work of the Mission in
the development of the reform of the security sector
action plan, the implementation of the national vision
for the reconstitution and redeployment of the Malian
defence and security forces, and the development of
the conceptual framework for the territorial police
in the regions of Gao, Mopti and Timbuktu is of
critical importance.

In conclusion, we cannot ignore the outstanding
contributions made by the regional and subregional
organizations, led by the African Union, in cooperation
and coordination with the European Union and
the International Organization of la Francophonie.
We strongly urge and encourage the international
community to continue to contribute, with technical
support, economic and humanitarian cooperation, to
all initiatives to benefit the population by establishing
stability and permanent peace in Mali and the
Sahel region.

I shall now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I now give the floor to the representative of Mali.

