Mr. Yao Shaojun (China) (spoke in Chinese): At
the outset, I thank Special Envoy Geir Pedersen and
Under-Secretary-General Mark Lowcock for their
briefings. We appreciate the constructive efforts of the
United Nations and all parties concerned in promoting
a political settlement to the Syrian issue and improving
the humanitarian situation on the ground.

The protracted conflict in Syria has brought about
untold suffering to the country and its people and has
become one of the major challenges hampering the
return of security and stability to the Middle East.
China supports the settlement of the Syrian issue
through political means and calls on the international
community to scale up its humanitarian assistance
to Syria. In that regard, I would like to make the
following points.

First, based on the principle of a Syrian-led and
Syrian-owned process and resolution 2254 (2015),
we should continue to promote a political settlement
to the Syrian issue. The priority now is to establish
a representative constitutional committee accepted
by all parties. That is the most realistic way forward
to launch a political process in Syria. For some time,
Special Envoy Pedersen has been in close contact
with all parties with regard to the establishment of the
constitutional committee through his tireless efforts.
At present, only a few outstanding issues remain. Hope
is within sight.

The international community should stand firmly
behind the Special Envoy and support the continued
role of the Astana process. Security Council members
should remain united and speak with one voice.
All parties in Syria should continue to resolve their
differences through dialogue and consultations and
increase mutual trust through measures such as the
exchange of detainees.

Secondly, rampant terrorism poses a major threat
to the Syrian political process. Combating terrorism is
an important aspect of resolving the Syrian issue. Idlib
is part of Syria. A proper solution to the issue of Idlib is
closely linked to the territorial integrity of Syria, as well
as the country's future. The international community
should work in accordance with the relevant Security
Council resolutions and international law, uphold
unified standards and combat terrorist organizations in
order to prevent the resurgence of terrorist forces.

Recently, Russian President Putin met with Turkish
President Erdogan, and they agreed to take joint
measures to promote the normalization of the situation
in Idlib. In mid-September, Russia, Turkey and Iran will
hold a summit. China applauds such diplomatic efforts
and looks forward to seeing their positive outcomes.

Thirdly, based on the situation on the ground,
we should take tailored measures to address the
humanitarian issues in various regions as well as in
camps for internally displaced persons throughout the
country. China supports efforts to protect innocent
civilians and provide them with decent living conditions.
Based on a long-term perspective, we should support
the Syrian Government's reconstruction efforts in areas
where the security situation is relatively stable.

The international community bears a moral
responsibilitytohelpSyriarestoreeconomicdevelopment
and social stability, instead of relying solely on exerting
pressure. China has been providing humanitarian
assistance to Syria in several areas, including food
assistance, power supply, public transportation and
personnel training. China is currently in contact and
coordinating with the Syrian Government. The focus of
our plan is to launch livelihood projects to support the
post-war reconstruction of Syria.

In the process of promoting a political settlement of
the Syrian issue and providing humanitarian assistance
to Syria, we must respect its sovereignty, independence,
unity and territorial integrity. We cannot allow Syria
to be fragmented by separatist forces. All the relevant
parties of the international community should work
together to build up the momentum and create the
necessary conditions for achieving apolitical settlement.

Recently, the Special Envoy of the Chinese
Government on the Syrian issue, Mr. Xie Xiaoyan,
visited Iran and Syria. He met with Special Envoy
Pedersen in Geneva and had an in-depth exchange
of views with all sides concerned. As always, China
stands ready to play a constructive role in achieving a
political settlement to the Syrian issue.

