Miss Durrant (Jamaica): Let me thank the
delegation of the Netherlands for organizing this open
briefing on an issue which is of critical importance to
the process of peace in the Horn of Africa and to the
African continent as a whole. The fact that you, Sir,
have taken this opportunity to brief the Council on
your own visit to Ethiopia and Eritrea and to suggest
confidence-building measures to give impetus to the
peace process clearly reflects the constructive approach
which the Netherlands has taken to issues of
international peace and security.

We also thank the Secretary-General for his
report on developments between Ethiopia and Eritrea
since the adoption of resolution 1312 (2000). We
welcome the appointment of the Force Commander as
well as that of Ambassador Legwaila Joseph Legwaila
as Special Representative of the Secretary-General. We
are sure that his diplomatic skill and experience will
enable him to gain the trust and cooperation of both
parties as he leads the United Nations Mission in
Ethiopia and Eritrea.

We also wish to commend those countries which
have provided troops, and we look forward to the full
deployment of the Mission. We note that by next
Monday, the third phase of the deployment in both
countries will be fully under way, leading to the
establishment and monitoring of a temporary security
zone, in keeping with the Agreement on Cessation of
Hostilities.

My delegation is encouraged by the fact that both
countries have, over the past five months, maintained
the ceasefire successfully brokered by the Organization
of African Unity (OAU), and we commend the OAU
and its special representative, President Bouteflika of
Algeria. The involvement of the United Nations and
the OAU in seeking to resolve this dispute is a good
example of the relationship between the United Nations
and a regional organization in cooperating in the search
for peace.

We agree, however, that much remains to be done
to reach a comprehensive and final settlement. This
will involve the delineation and demarcation of the
borders, and in this regard we are pleased to note that
proximity talks have already begun.

Jamaica continues to be extremely concerned
about the dire humanitarian situation in both Eritrea
and Ethiopia. The Secretary-General, in his remarks,
pointed to the large numbers of displaced persons and
to the presence of landmines and unexploded ordnance.
We support his call to alleviate the human suffering,
which has been exacerbated by the fighting, and to
implement the demining programme.

In conclusion, let me again thank you, Mr.
President, and the delegation of the Netherlands for
addressing this issue in such a thoughtful manner. We
support the inclusion in a presidential statement of the
confidence-building measures suggested by you to the
parties and look forward to working with your
delegation in completing the statement.

