Mr. Cunningham (United States of America):
Today I am speaking on behalf of the troika of observer
States to the Lusaka Protocol: Portugal, the Russian
Federation and the United States.

President Jose Eduardo dos Santos recently
delivered a major speech in Caxito, Bengo Province,
that should be brought to the attention of the Council.
In that address, President dos Santos said that the
Lusaka Protocol remains valid, and he once again held
out an olive branch to UNITA, saying, in effect, that
Angola's tragic descent into chaos could be reversed if
all agreed to carry out the fundamental tasks that this
Council has stressed since 1994. These include the full
extension of State administration and the
comprehensive demilitarization and disarmament of
UNITA and its full transformation into a political party.

The troika has never wavered in its commitment
to the Lusaka Protocol, which, along with its
predecessor, the Bicesse Accords, continues to offer
the best framework for the restoration of peace and
national reconciliation. We remind all concerned that
the Lusaka Protocol remains our collective
fundamental expectation. It is also important to
safeguard the gains of the last five years, including the
Government of Unity and National Reconciliation, the
multi-party National Assembly and the integrated
armed forces.

The Council's present level of engagement is
through the United Nations Office in Angola, and we
are pleased by the work done by Under-Secretary-
General Gambari. We urge him to continue and
intensify his productive engagement in this issue.

For the past five years both the troika and this
Council have expressed the view that the responsibility
for the breakdown of the Lusaka Protocol rests
primarily with UNITA leader Jonas Savimbi. We have
taken a number of steps that reflect this belief,
including the passage of three sets of sanctions. The
troika believes that these sanctions should be fully and
unconditionally implemented. At this point the troika
once again expresses its support for the work of the
sanctions Committee, chaired by Ambassador Fowler,
whom we sincerely thank, and that of the Panel of
Experts, as a major contribution to achieving the wider
goal of bringing peace to Angola. We look forward to
the continued efforts of the follow-on mechanism
authorized during the Canadian presidency to sustain
the momentum towards addressing the deadly link
between illegally mined diamonds and conflicts in
Angola, Sierra Leone and the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.

Although the Council has assigned responsibility
for the ongoing tragedy in Angola, it has never
wavered in its belief that there is no viable military
solution to the present crisis. We urge the Government
of Angola to ensure that all those who wish to lay
down their arms will be welcomed. We also urge the
Government to ensure that all those who genuinely
wish to participate in the democratic political life of
the country are able to do so with full confidence in the
protection of their constitution.

The troika encourages a dialogue between all
sectors of Angolan society towards finding the means
of bringing a just and lasting peace to Angola-
searching for a means to end that country's cycle of
violence. In this context, the troika welcomes the
recent convening of the Congress for Peace and
Democracy, attended by Government officials, political
party representatives, civil society activists and
religious leaders. The Congress's message of
democracy, tolerance, non-violence, human rights,
dialogue and reconciliation should be taken up
enthusiastically by Angolans, and deserves the support
of the international community.

A dialogue such as the one called for by the
Congress for Peace and Democracy can succeed only if
all concerned adhere to the principles of the Lusaka
Protocol. The participation of Mr. Savimbi in such a
dialogue can be considered only once Mr. Savimbi
takes irreversible steps to implement fully the Lusaka
Protocol. Mr. Savimbi's obligations to the people of
Angola and the international community remain
unchanged and non-negotiable. The troika issues an
appeal to all armed UNITA elements to lay down their
arms and participate in the civil life of the country. We
note that what military force has always failed to
achieve in Angola's tragic history can nonetheless be
obtained through the provision of schools, clinics,
economic opportunities and the democratic process.

Members of the troika call on the international
donor community to expand its humanitarian assistance
to the Angolan population and to intensify cooperation
with the Government of Angola to overcome the
consequences of the long-lasting conflict, with
particular attention to the socio-economic rehabilitation
of areas previously under UNITA control. The need for
humanitarian assistance to Angola does not detract
from the Government's responsibilities in this area.

Your country, Madam President, has skilfully
used its time in the presidency to focus attention on the
humanitarian dimension of the crises we face in this
Council, and it is the profound suffering of the
Angolan people that must continue to direct our
actions. The level of that suffering has been frequently
described to this Council, but we must never become
indifferent to its devastating impact. For this reason,
the fact that the Government of Angola has sent
Minister Malungo to represent it at this meeting today
is an important signal. We thank him for being here.

Minister Malungo has been an effective advocate
of the international relief community, in good times as
well as in times of crisis. He has helped us with
difficult questions of humanitarian access, security of
United Nations and associated personnel and the
myriad challenges of conducting relief operations in
his country. There remain numerous obstacles to
effective relief operations, but we are satisfied that he
and his Government will continue to engage us in good
faith in resolving all problems.

Members of the troika call for continued
investigation into the downing of United Nations
aircraft over central Angola. We are also reminded of
the necessity to urge continued efforts to determine the
fate of the crews and passengers of Russian and
Ukrainian commercial aeroplanes downed under
suspicious circumstances over territory then controlled
by UNITA, as well as the fate of other foreign nationals
missing in Angola. Finally, we remember the tragic
loss that continues to haunt the Council: the crash of
the plane carrying the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Alioune Blondin Beye, and his
companions. Although, unfortunately, we allowed the
second anniversary of his death to pass without
comment, we cherish the memory of Maitre Beye and
view a just and lasting peace in Angola as his best
possible memorial.

