The President (interpretation from Spanish): I should
like to inform the Council that I have received letters from
the representatives of Afghanistan, Argentina, India, the
Islamic Republic of Iran, Japan, Malaysia, Pakistan,
Tajikistan, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan and Uzbekistan
in which they request to be invited to participate in the
discussion of the item on the Council's agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives to
participate in the discussion, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and
rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

On behalf of the Council, I welcome the Vice-Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Afghanistan.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Ghafoorzai
(Afghanistan) took a seat at the Council table;
Mr. Cardenas (Argentina), Mr. Shah (India),
Mr. Kharrazi (Islamic Republic of Iran), Mr. Konishi
(Japan), Mr. Razali (Malaysia), Mr. Kamal (Pakistan),
Mr. Alimov (Tajikistan), Mr. Abdellah (Tunisia),
Mr. Celem (Turkey), Mrs. Ataeva (Turkmenistan) and
Mr. Vohidov (Uzbekistan) took the seats reserved for
them at the side of the Council Chamber.

The President (interpretation from Spanish): I should
like to inform the Council that I have received a letter
dated 8 April 1996 from the Charge d'affaires a.i. of the
Permanent Mission of Guinea to the United Nations, which
reads as follows:

"I have the honour to request that the Security
Council extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to His Excellency
Ambassador Engin A. Ansay, Permanent Observer of
the Organization of the Islamic Conference to the
United Nations, during the Council's discussion of the

1"

item entitled 'The situation in Afghanistan.

That letter has been issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/ 1996/252.
If I hear no objection, I shall take it that the Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 to
His Excellency Mr. Engin Ansay.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on the agenda.

The Security Council is meeting in accordance with
the understanding reached in its prior consultations.

The first speaker is the Vice Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Afghanistan, His Excellency Mr. Abdul-Rahim
Ghafoorzai, on whom I now call.


