Mr. Pujalte (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): I would
first like to thank your delegation, Mr. President, for
including on the Council's agenda such an important
item relating to human rights in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. I would also like to thank
Under-Secretary-General Guehenno and Mr.
Ramcharan for the very detailed information they have
just given us.

My delegation has a few comments and questions
in connection with this subject. First, the situation of
human rights in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
was already partly known thanks to the reports
provided to the Council by the Secretariat itself and
information emanating from non-governmental
organizations and news agencies. If there is anything
new in what we have heard it may be the now-
confirmed reports of premeditated violence and the
planning behind them. As every delegation to have
spoken before me has pointed out, the violence will
continue so long as we do not punish those responsible
for these crimes in order to end impunity. In order to
avoid sham trials that merely seek to exonerate or
justify the crimes of those responsible, justice requires
independent courts that impose sentences
commensurate with the gravity of the crimes, and that
pass judgement in accordance with what actually took
place, namely, crimes against humanity and war
crimes. Likewise, justice must reach the high
command, and not just the actual perpetrators of these
crimes: it must actually reach those who gave the
orders to go forward and who allowed the crimes to
take place.

We would like to ask the following questions. We
would first like to know about the extent to which the
presence of troops inhibited the submission of
testimony, and therefore the results of the investigation.
Could that have been more widespread than we are
aware? Secondly, could Mr. Ramcharan tell us what
authority he believes could assume responsibility for
following up these cases; in other words, on whom
does it fall to follow up the complaints? Thirdly, I
would like to know whether there is a strategy in place
to address each of the matters discussed in the report.
We would also like to know whether the transitional
Government has proposed a strategy for action in that
regard.

I wish to indicate that it is extremely important
for Mexico that the transitional Government establish
jurisdictional mechanisms to address grave violations
of human rights and that the launching of the National
Truth and Reconciliation Commission be carried out.
No effective justice can be administered without these.
We also note and support follow-up of these cases by
the Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court. This
is fundamental to reaching the goal of bringing those
responsible for these crimes to justice.

