Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank the Italian presidency
for convening today's meeting. I thank you, Sir, for
honouring the Council with your presence and for
leading today's meeting.

The Mediterranean is in a strategically unique
geographic location. It is the heart of the old world. It is
the cradle and intersection of civilization. It has been a
cultural beacon for the entire world. The Mediterranean
has been a source of inspiration for peoples in the West
and the East. It has been a bridge of communication
between the West and the East. It has had a very unique
cultural nature for the peoples of the Mediterranean
that is based on diversity, tolerance and acceptance
of others.

The crisis that we are witnessing in the
Mediterranean has made the region a destination for
foreign terrorist fighters. It is also a destination for
returnees. Various terrorist organizations have found
new ways to finance their terrorist activities, such as
trafficking in petroleum, the destruction and trafficking
in cultural artefacts and trafficking in persons, not
to mention that some Governments are sponsoring
terrorism in order to achieve political aims. They
are providing terrorists with arms and funds. They
also facilitate the transit of foreign terrorist fights.
Combating terrorist challenges in the Mediterranean
requires adopting a comprehensive approach. We also
need to address the root causes of terrorism without
any discrimination. In Iraq and Syria, we cannot focus
on combating the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL) if its fighters can escape to Libya and the Sahel.
That would not lead to combating terrorism. Rather,
it would temporarily export the problem to a different
region. We must combat the root causes of terrorism
and halt any support that is being given to terrorists.
We must ensure compliance with Security Council
resolutions, especially those relating to counter-
terrorism and combating terrorist discourse. We must
also ensure the implementation of relevant sanctions.

The Mediterranean intersects the Sahel region.
That is why it is an important priority to ensure
stability in the Sahel. It affects security and stability
in the Mediterranean. Recently, we have seen that
the security of the Sahel affects the security of the
Mediterranean. We are witnessing the deterioration of
the security situation in Libya and Mali, as well as the
emergence of a security vacuum. It is hard to control
the borders, especially in remote deserts. That has led
to the creation of safe havens for terrorist organizations
and organized crime networks.

At this juncture, I would like to emphasize the
importance of the Group of Five for the Sahel Joint
Force in combating such threats. The international
community has a responsibility to support such an
ambitious initiative. It is important to invest in the
Joint Force. It will yield positive results, and such an
investment would bear fruit.

It is also important to redouble efforts to implement
the United Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel.
It addresses the different challenges in the region
from a comprehensive, holistic perspective that takes
into account development, security and humanitarian
dimensions, which are all interrelated and intertwined.

The Mediterranean suffers from water scarcity,
especially in the Southern and Eastern Mediterranean.
Egypt believes that any serious approach to preventing
crises cannot overlook water scarcity. We are witnessing
increasing challenges to development that are related
to environmental challenges. Therefore, water scarcity
might be a reason for future wars. That is why it is
incumbent upon us to work together to guarantee
cooperation among different Mediterranean countries,
so as to ensure development and the availability of water.
That is why Egypt has signed bilateral and multilateral
agreements with its neighbours and with other
countries along the Nile River to ensure cooperation
without causing harm to the environment and based on
the principle of prior notification. In that way, countries
can use the water in a reponsible manner.

Forced displacement is a direct result of the
security and development challenges we are witnessing
in the Mediterranean. Every year, millions of people
escape from armed conflict, persecution, violence,
terrorism, destitution and lack of food security, or they
are escaping from the negative repercussions of climate
change, natural disasters or other factors. Egypt
believes it is important to adopt a holistic approach to
address the root causes of forced displacement. Such an
approach should focus on the development dimension
in the countries of origin and in the host countries.
Countries hosting refugees and migrants should make
efforts to create more possibilities to welcome migrants
and refugees. We cannot focus only on security
solutions and close our borders. That runs contrary to
the 1951 Geneva Refugee Convention. Egypt welcomes
the efforts to adopt a global compact for safe, orderly
and regular migration. In that way, countries can share
the burden and the responsibilities. It will ultimately
ensure the dignity of refugees and migrants.

In conclusion, the security approach in dealing
with the problems in the Mediterranean has proven to
be flawed. It is not conducive to restoring stability in
the region. All parties must cooperate to combat the
serious challenges and to address the root causes of
the problems. We will overcome the challenges only
through a genuine partnership based on capacity-
building, and in a way that ensures stability in the
Mediterranean. It will again make the Mediterranean
a bridge for cultures, a bridge for development rather
than being an open grave for ambitious young people
who yearn for a better future. We cannot waste this
human potential, which could completely change the
landscape in the Mediterranean.

