Mr. Missaoui (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): Let
me begin by congratulating you, Sir, on your wise
presidency of the Council for this month, and thanking
you for convening this open debate on the situation in
the Middle East, including the Palestinian question.

I would like to align my delegation with the
statements made on behalf the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation and the non-aligned countries.

I would be remiss ifI failed to condemn the recent
terrorist attacks in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia,
Iraq, Turkey and Bangladesh. I would like to offer our
condolences to those brotherly and friendly countries.

The first report of the Quartet, published early this
month, affirms that the ongoing occupation policies,
the expansion of settlements in the West Bank and
Gaza, and the confiscation of Palestinian property by
Israelis imperil the current search for a settlement.
Israel continues to unilaterally claim territory. There
are some 370,000 settlers living in Area C in the
West Bank. The report confirms that such practices
undermine the potential for a two-State solution desired
by the international community, raising questions
about Israel's intentions and commitment to a two-
State solution, especially in the light of the position of
certain Israeli Ministers who reject the establishment
of a Palestinian State.

Despite calls in the Quartet's report for an end to
settler activities, the occupation authorities declared,
only days after the report was published, that they
intended to build 560 residential units in addition to 240
previously announced units in East Jerusalem, which
was criticized by the Secretary-General in his briefing
this morning. These practices violate all international
laws and conventions and confirm beyond any doubt
that Israel is continuing its fait accompli policy to gain
more time, annex more Palestinian territory and force
the population out. The policy impedes any attempt to
open new horizons for peace consistent with the two-
State vision. Such a vision has eroded and with it so
have the prospects for peace.

Regrettably, all these practices continue unabated
while the international community, in particular
the Security Council, remains silent. However, my
delegation believes that it is no longer acceptable to
remain silent before thesefaits accomplis. The time has
come for the international community, in particular the
Security Council, to shoulder its responsibility and put
an end to the unprecedented occupation and the settler
activity. We all agree that the settlements are illegal
and illegitimate. We further agree that they are the crux
of the matter and the true reason for the tensions in the
territories and in the region.

The time has come for a real change in the way the
Security Council addresses the question of Palestine.
It is time for the Council to deliver justice to the
Palestinian people and enable them to recover and fulfil
their legitimate rights. The current situation is clearly
threatening to create further tensions in a region that has
already had enough. Continued feelings of resentment
and helplessness before historical injustices are what is
causing extremism and Violence.

There is no hope if we do not address the
situation in a just manner. First and foremost, we must
seriously and responsibly work to put an end to settler
colonialism as a precondition for achieving a just and
comprehensive solution. Only this will guarantee the
Palestinian people's ability to build a State on its own
land, on contiguous territories, on territories that have
been occupied since 1967, with East Jerusalem as its
capital, in accordance with the Arab Peace Initiative
and the Madrid terms of reference.

My delegation supports any international effort that
can contribute to achieving this objective. We welcome
France's call at the Paris meeting on 3 June for the
convening of an international conference on this issue.
The final communique ofthe Paris meeting stressed the
need to end occupation as well as the importance of
the Arab Peace Initiative in the realization of a peace
consistent with the vision of the two States. Tunisia
supports the Palestinian demand for protection for its
civilians in the Palestinian territories, in accordance
with the principles of the Charter of the United Nations,
international law and international humanitarian
law, including the Geneva Conventions and other
international conventions. In addition, my delegation
welcomes the intention of the Special Rapporteur to
visit to the region for the purposes ofpreparing a report
to be submitted to the General Assembly in October.

In conclusion, I would like to stress that the general
and comprehensive peace process in the Middle East
region needs to be a comprehensive one. Peace cannot
be achieved without Israel's complete withdrawal
from all Arab and Palestinian territories, including
the Syrian Arab Golan and the territories that are still
under occupation in southern Lebanon.

