Mr. Voto-Bernales (Peru)(spoke in Spanish):
First of all, I would like to express the gratitude of the
delegation of Peru for the work done by the Security
Council mission to Afghanistan, led by the Ambassador
of Japan, Mr. Kenzo Oshima, and I would like to thank
him for the report he has given us this morning.

We believe that the work that was done by the
mission, which is condensed in the report he presented
to us, is useful in order to understand the situation on
the ground. In this way, the Security Council has news
of the process in Afghanistan, which is necessary in
order to support the efforts of the Government and
people of Afghanistan to build a democratic and Viable
State, one which is fully integrated in its region and in
the international system.

The report on the Security Council's mission
acknowledges a few encouraging advances in
infrastructure, true economic and trade progress, as
well as in basic social services. However, it also
confirms that the situation is basically fragile in
Afghanistan as this year comes to an end. Despite the
optimism generated by the adoption of the Compact
last January, the reality presents a picture where the
political and social order faces serious threats that
endanger what has been achieved until now.

The Afghan authorities have made efforts in order
to find a way out of the crisis. However, as the report
says, these efforts until now have been insufficient in
consolidating the rule of law or establishing firm
governance with prospects of Viable economic
sustainability. There are many problems that are facing
Afghanistan and endangering its viability as an
emerging nation, a nation integrated constructively
within the region.

The difficult transition in this country does not
only generate a situation of crisis within its territory
but also raises the risk of instability at the regional
level. The intensification of the extremist insurgency,
led by the Taliban, and the increasing insecurity in the
southern and eastern parts of Afghanistan endanger the
new institutions in this country. Narco-trafficking,
corruption and crime in general provide fertile ground
for the activities of illegal armed groups. I am not
going to repeat figures that we find in the mission's
report, in the report of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime, and in other international studies
with which we are all familiar.
This is in contrast to four years of efforts at the
United Nations and in the international community to
bring stability to that country. It is enough to point out
that it is very disturbing to see that opium cultivation
represents 60 per cent of the gross domestic product
(GDP) of Afghanistan. No State can be in a position to
function in a stable manner when it must face such a
huge challenge.

As we have seen in other regions of the world,
crime, corruption and drug trafficking are activities
that go hand in hand. When we fail to halt them in time
with coherent policies, they seriously affect security,
the development of democratic institutions, economic
reconstruction, the rule of law and human rights.

Measures designed to improve civil security are
necessary but insufficient conditions. It is critical for
that country to find alternative modes of legal
economic activity if it is to be sustainable as a State.
Social indicators reveal high rates of illiteracy and low
rates of human development, which generate structural
underdevelopment that hampers reconstruction in that
country. In that context, I stress the importance of
improved training of human resources in Afghanistan.

Development assistance is absolutely crucial. In
item 41, the mission's report refers to that aspect in
recommending that emphasis be placed on the
development of the provinces and the implementation
of employment-generating programmes, given that the
lack of job opportunities contributes significantly to
the recruitment of insurgents and exacerbates poverty
and the conditions that have fuelled drug trafficking
and corruption.

Lastly, we join the appeal to the international
community to step up its efforts to identify measures to
stabilize Afghanistan, improve security conditions
there, strengthen and define the institutional
framework, and lay the foundations of sustainable
economic growth based on productive and viable
activities.

