Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I
would like to begin by reading out the text of a
statement that has been agreed on by the Foreign
Ministers of China, France, Germany, Russia, the
United Kingdom and the United States, with the
support of the High Representative of the European
Union. The statement reads as follows:

"We, the Foreign Ministers of China,
France, Germany, Russia, the United Kingdom
and the United States, would like to take this
opportunity to reaffirm our determination and
commitment to seek an early negotiated solution
to the Iranian nuclear issue.

"The adoption of United Nations Security
Council resolution 1929 (2010), while reflecting
the international community's concern about the
Iranian nuclear programme and reconfirming the
need for Iran to comply with the United Nations
Security Council and IAEA Board of Governors
requirements, keeps the door open for continued
engagement between the E3+3 and Iran. The aim
of our efforts is to achieve a comprehensive and
long-term settlement which would restore
international confidence in the peaceful nature of
Iran's nuclear programme, while respecting Iran's
legitimate rights to the peaceful use of atomic
energy. We are resolute in continuing our work
for this purpose. We also welcome and commend
all diplomatic efforts in this regard, especially
those recently made by Brazil and Turkey on the
specific issue of the Tehran Research Reactor.

"We reaffirm our June 2008 proposals,
which remain valid, as confirmed by resolution
1929 (2010). We believe these proposals provide
a sound basis for future negotiations. We are
prepared to continue dialogue and interaction
with Iran in the context of implementing the
understandings reached during the Geneva
meeting of 1 October 2009. We have asked
Baroness Ashton, the European Union High
Representative for Foreign Affairs and Security
Policy, to pursue this with Mr. Saheed Jalili,
Secretary of Iran's Supreme National Security
Council, at the earliest opportunity.

"We expect Iran to demonstrate a pragmatic
attitude and to respond positively to our openness
towards dialogue and negotiations."

That concludes the statement on behalf of the six
Foreign Ministers.

I should now like to make some remarks in my
national capacity.

Today, the Security Council adopted resolution
1929 (2010) as a result of the international
community's ongoing serious concerns about the
proliferation risks of the Iranian nuclear programme.
Once again, the Security Council has sent a strong
message of international resolve. It is a clear signal
that Iran's continued failure to comply with its Security
Council and IAEA Board requirements to cease its
enrichment-related activities cannot be tolerated.

The Security Council last addressed this issue in
September 2008 in a clear statement that we wish to
resolve our serious concerns through dialogue and
negotiation (see S/PV.5984). Since that time, we have
made several efforts to achieve that. When E3+3
Foreign Ministers met in New York on 23 September
2009 they reiterated their wish to negotiate a
comprehensive long-term agreement to resolve the
Iranian nuclear issue. But they also made clear that this
could only be achieved if both sides were willing to
approach these matters in a spirit of mutual respect and
were committed to looking for solutions going forward.
At last October's meeting in Geneva we reached
agreement on three important issues. First, Iran agreed
to hold a further meeting on its nuclear programme

within one month. Iran also said that it would
cooperate fully and immediately with the IAEA on the
enrichment facility near Qom. It also agreed in
principle to a deal to resupply its Tehran Research
Reactor (TRR).

We welcomed those commitments and made clear
that we hoped that it would be the start of a period of
intense negotiation. We regret that that did not prove to
be the case. Iran has stated repeatedly that it will not
discuss its nuclear programme, claiming that our
concerns are baseless. They are not. They are fully
documented in reports from the IAEA Director General
going back several years and the subject of Security
Council resolutions since 2006. The purpose of the
facility at Qom remains unestablished. The February
2010 IAEA report made clear once again that Iran had
not answered a number of key questions.

On the TRR, three days of talks in Vienna
produced a detailed proposal from the IAEA that all
parties present agreed. Iran then withdrew its initial
acceptance of the TRR proposal and in February
started to enrich low-enriched uranium to 20 per cent,
despite having neither the need to do so nor the means
to fabricate the fuel for use in the reactor. Iran also
announced the construction of further enrichment
facilities.

We acknowledge the good-faith efforts of Turkey
and Brazil to persuade Iran to engage with the IAEA on
the Tehran Research Reactor. However, we cannot
accept Iran's attempts to use these efforts to justify its
continued defiance of successive Security Council
resolutions that mandate a suspension of Iran's
enrichment operations. We have said many times that
we do not question Iran's right to peaceful nuclear
energy. But with those rights come responsibilities.

Today's resolution has been made necessary by
Iran's actions. Once again, the resolution restates our
willingness to engage in dialogue to address the
substance of our concerns. The measures adopted in
this and previous resolutions can be suspended when
Iran suspends its proscribed activities.

We remain ready to resume the talks on Iran's
nuclear programme that we started in Geneva on
1 October 2009. We believe that such talks can lead to
a solution as long as they are purposeful, discuss both
sides' concerns and make swift progress. In extending
our hand, we show our determination to resolve these
matters through dialogue and diplomacy, and in
adopting this resolution we show equal determination
to continue to respond robustly to Iran's refusal to
comply with its international obligations.

