Mr. Jinga (Romania): Allow me first to commend
the Dominican Republic for organizing this meeting on
such an important matter.

Romania associates itself with the statement
delivered on behalf of the European Union.

Climate change is not an immediate cause of clashes
or disrupted peace. It acts gradually and imperceptibly.
In its own way, climate change embodies the crisis to
come, whose slow progress often escapes our attention
but can be just as dangerous as open conflict. In the
Sahel region, in Central Asia, the Middle East, the
Caribbean region or the Pacific Islands, climate change
and its effects are ofgreat concern. Sometimes it is even
an existential issue, as is the case for the group of small
island States, which are fighting for survival, faced with
the risk of submersion caused by rising temperatures.

Climate change directly impacts the number of
displaced populations, food insecurity, the lack of
water, drought and rising sea levels. It may also be a
threat to regional stability by creating political and
diplomatic tensions between neighbouring countries,
internal clashes between herders and farmers, and the
major displacement of populations. According to a
recent report by the World Bank, 140 million people
are expected to be displaced by 2050 as they seek to
avoid the impact of climate catastrophes.

Climate change is now a priority for the United
Nations, as underscored by the Paris Agreement on
Climate Change, the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change. Romania is fully
committed to those cornerstone documents. In
December 2018, my country participated in the twenty-
fourth Conference of the Parties to the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change and signed
the Ministerial Katowice Declaration on Forests for the
Climate and the Silesia Declaration on Solidarity and
Just Transition.

During our presence in the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti and its successor
mission, we witnessed the evolution of a humanitarian
crisis having at its core climate-related security risks.
Romania also stood by its friends in the Caribbean
region by offering financial support to Dominica,
Antigua and Barbuda and Saint Kitts and Nevis right
after the devastating Hurricanes Irma and Maria.

Current humanitarian crises around the
world demonstrate that climate-related security
risks are becoming more prevalent and require
integrated security, economic, political, military and
environmental responses. Having a deep understanding
of the multidimensional root causes of insecurity in the
Sahel region, as Chair ofthe Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC) Romania took the initiative to build more on
this topic and proposed as theme for the joint PBC-
Economic and Social Council meeting on 13 November
2018 "Linkages between climate change and challenges
to peacebuilding and sustaining peace, with a particular
focus on the Sahel". We are very grateful that our
proposal was accepted by consensus by all members
of the Economic and Social Council and the PBC and
that the meeting contributed to raising awareness of
the adverse effects that climate change has on stability
in the Sahel, of the challenges to peacebuilding in
the region and of the need for coherence, cooperation
and coordination in strengthening resilience to
climate change.

Romania attaches great value to international
cooperation, and we believe that multilateralism is the
proper framework for addressing threats to international
peace and security. In that spirit, we have engaged in
the Group of Friends on Climate and Security as part
of our commitment to maintaining, developing and
achieving sustainable peace and development in an
inclusive manner. Moreover, we believe in prevention
and building resilience as concrete solutions.

In that regard, last month our Mission organized,
here at United Nations Headquarters, a side event on
strengthening preparedness against natural disaster.
On that occasion, the Chief of the Romanian Office
for Emergency Response presented our experience in
the field of preparing institutions to respond to natural
disasters and shared best practices on the protection of
civilians, including the most recent exercise that took
place in Romania, in partnership with the European
Union and seven other States, and which involved an
extensive component of international cooperation.

In conclusion, climate change not only exacerbates
threats to international peace and security, but is itself
a threat to international peace and security. Therefore,
we believe that the international community needs to
better assess the connections between climate change
and security risks and to offer support to countries and
regions most affected.

