Mr. Bolton (United States of America): The draft
resolution does not display an even-handed
2

characterization of the recent events in Gaza, nor does
it advance the cause of Israeli-Palestinian peace to
which we aspire and for which we are working
assiduously.

We join our fellow Council members in deeply
regretting the injuries and loss of life on 8 November
in and around Beit Hanoun. We note that the Israeli
Government is conducting an investigation and has
announced its intent to suspend all artillery fire into
Gaza as a result. We hope that the investigation will be
completed quickly and that appropriate steps will be
taken to avoid a repetition of the tragedy.

First, we are disturbed at the language of the draft
resolution that is, in many places, biased against Israel
and politically motivated. Such language does not
further the cause of peace, and its unacceptability to
the United States in previous resolutions is well
known.

Secondly, the draft resolution remains an
unbalanced text. Among many such examples are the
following. The preambular text equates Israeli military
operations, which are legal, with the firing of rockets
aimed at civilians into Israel, which is an act of
terrorism. Moreover, its characterization of Israeli
military actions as excessive and disproportionate
constitutes a legal judgement that the Security Council
would be ill-advised to make.

Thirdly, the proposed draft resolution calls for the
establishment of a fact-finding mission, which is
unnecessary and will do nothing to improve the
situation on the ground. The draft resolution further
promises to consider the establishment of an
international mechanism for the protection of civilian
populations - a promise which is unwise and
unnecessary and, at any rate, raises false hopes.

At the same time, we are disturbed that there is
neither a single reference to terrorism in the proposed
draft resolution, nor any condemnation of the Hamas
leadership's statement that Palestinians should resume
terror attacks on a broad scale or of calls by the
military wing of Hamas to Muslims worldwide to
strike American targets and interests. More terror,
whether directed at Israel, the United States or others,
is not the solution, nor will it enable the Palestinian
people to achieve their aspirations.

It is the responsibility of any Palestinian
Authority Government to prevent terror and to take the
06-61238
necessary steps to stop attacks and dismantle the
terrorist infrastructure. Hamas has failed utterly in that
regard by continuing to play a role in perpetuating
instability and violence. The Palestinian people deserve
leaders who are prepared to renounce terror, accept the
Quartet principles, and become a legitimate partner in
peace.

The United States remains committed to
supporting a negotiated solution between Israelis and
Palestinians. The road map and the principles
contained therein remain the only agreed international
basis upon which to move forward towards the two-
State goal. We call upon all members of the
international community to support the road map
unequivocally. To that end, the United States will vote
against the draft resolution.

