Mr. Natalegawa (Indonesia): Let me join
previous speakers in thanking you, Mr. President, for
convening this important debate on United Nations
peacekeeping operations. We would also like to thank
Under-Secretaries-General Alain Le Roy and Susana
Malcorra for their important remarks. My delegation
associates itself with the statement delivered earlier by
the Permanent Representative of the Kingdom of
Morocco on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.

We welcome the Council's recognition that
United Nations peacekeeping is a unique global
partnership that brings together the commitments and
contributions of the entire United Nations system. In
this shared effort, all stakeholders need to be on the
same page, working in concert and with a sense of
common purpose to effectively address the
peacekeeping challenges.

Indeed, there has not been a shortage of ideas and
initiatives. We have seen many processes initiated by
the Council, individual Member States and the
Secretariat to improve the global partnership.
Nevertheless, it is essential that, at the end of those

processes and in order to ensure the ownership of all
stakeholders, there should be one agreed framework
encapsulating those many initiatives on how to make
progress.

We note that the Council, for its part, has recently
laid down benchmarks in a number of its resolutions
relating to specific peacekeeping operations. The focus
on timelines and strategic workplans, with tracking of
progress, is, indeed, a positive development. We also
recognize the efforts of the Council to develop
practices to improve collective oversight. We appreciate
the efforts of the Council to enhance dialogue with
stakeholders for better planning and oversight of
peacekeeping operations.

In that context, we thank Under-Secretaries-
General Alain Le Roy and Susana Malcorra for their
non-paper, entitled "A New Partnership Agenda:
Charting a New Horizon for United Nations
Peacekeeping". The non-paper is, indeed, an important
contribution to the wider deliberation processes on how
to better address the challenges of peacekeeping. The
non-paper could also be used as a basis for further
concrete efforts. It is our hope that its contents will be
duly discussed by Member States and feed into the
comprehensive review undertaken by the Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations (C-34).

Indonesia believes that, in order to arrive at a
clear, credible and achievable mandate, there should be
meaningful and multistage consultations by the
Council with stakeholders at an early stage.

On the operational aspect, benchmarks set up by
the Council should be the basis for deciding whether a
mission has achieved its objectives. In addition, greater
effort should be made to fill the gaps between the
Council's mandates vis-a-vis the concept of operations
and the rules of engagement, which serve as the
manual for peacekeepers in the field. There is often an
absence or lack of clear parameters on the number and
types of personnel and equipment to cover the vast and
complex mandate of a mission to protect civilians.

Clarity of parameters is also needed to ascertain
the success of a peacekeeping mission, thus ensuring a
seamless transition from the peacekeeping to the post-
conflict peacebuilding phase. The importance of
coherence and integration among peacekeeping,
peacebuilding and development must be emphasized.

We share the view contained in the New Horizon
non-paper on the need to define, with Member States,
the logistical, training and equipment requirements for
missions. We look forward to the development of the
draft strategic guidance note from the Secretariat on an
approach to robust peacekeeping before the end of
2009.

We encourage further systematic collaboration
among peacekeeping stakeholders, which could be
mapped out by the Security Council Working Group on
Peacekeeping Operations and the C-34. While we note
the assurances of the Council that it will strive for
more meaningful engagement and better information-
sharing with troop-contributing countries (TCCs), one
key challenge remains - how to ensure that inputs
from TCCs or potential TCCs are fully utilized in the
Council's decision-making process.

I have some concluding thoughts. Indonesia
welcomes the continued support of the Council for
partnership in peacekeeping with relevant regional and
subregional organizations. It is our firm belief that
such organizations have much to contribute, not least
to the full range of responses when addressing a
situation that may endanger international peace and
security. A full range of responses suggests that a
peacekeeping mission by itself is not a panacea for
conflict resolution. It has to be, and usually is, an
integral part of the broader political solution.

