Mr. Argiiello (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to begin by joining previous speakers in
thanking the Republic of Costa Rica and its President,
Mr. Oscar Arias sanchez, for having organized this
open debate on maintenance of international peace and
security: strengthening collective security through
general regulation and reduction of armaments. We
certainly believe that this is a timely initiative because
of the fact that many of the issues under discussion are
very topical.

Allow me to recall the clear and committed
policy of Argentina with respect to disarmament and
non-proliferation, which aims at achieving a
multilateral consensus to secure international peace
and security.

The concept paper presented by Costa Rica for
this meeting (S/2008/697, annex) properly stresses
Articles 24 and 26 of the Charter of the United
Nations, in particular with respect to the Military Staff
Committee, which should have assisted the Security
Council in the formulation of plans to be submitted to
the Members of the United Nations for the
establishment of a system for the regulation of
armaments. However, for the use and command of the
forces placed at the disposal of the United Nations, the
Organization had to establish different arrangements
throughout its history to overcome the impossibility
that the Military Staff Committee could fulfil its
mandate. The current structure of United Nations
peacekeeping operations arose from the need to
perform some of those functions foreseen in the
Charter.

With respect to disarmament and the regulation of
armaments, the usual United Nations bodies, as well as
the Conference on Disarmament and many other
arrangements, provide forums to discuss and negotiate
these issues. Unfortunately, it has been difficult to
achieve meaningful results in recent years, mainly
because of the opposing interests of various countries.
To think that it is possible to revitalize a Military Staff
Committee whose functions it has never been possible
to activate and to enable it to address disarmament and
arms regulation of armaments does not seem to be a
realistic way to achieve the desired objective.

The responsibility of the Security Council for the
maintenance of international peace and security is
mainly executive in nature. Debates in the Council on
issues that are not on its agenda, even when they are
open meetings, should not make us lose sight of the
fact that this cannot replace the consideration of these
issues by the General Assembly, which is the main
deliberative organ of the United Nations. Even with the
division of labour between the Council and the General
Assembly set out in the Charter, the possibility of
including disarmament issues in the Council's agenda
cannot restrict possible action by the General Assembly
in this regard.

Argentina has traditionally adopted a
comprehensive approach towards the development of
actions and initiatives in the field of disarmament and
the regulation of armaments. We reiterate our long-
standing position in favour of the role of
multilateralism - and the United Nations in particular -
in addressing the challenges posed by disarmament and
non-proliferation.

With that in mind, Argentina would like to
reaffirm its commitment to the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, the Chemical
Weapons Convention, the Biological and Toxin
Weapons Convention and other fundamental
multilateral instruments. The Security Council should
continue to play an important role in support of
non-proliferation regimes for weapons of mass
destruction in the context of its mandate in the
maintenance of international peace and security.
International cooperation in the area of
non-proliferation of nuclear, chemical and biological
weapons, their means of delivery and related materials,
is extremely important for the achievement of the
Security Council's objectives, namely, the fight against
the threat to international peace and security posed by
the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and
by international terrorism.

Furthermore, we believe that specific actions in
the field of non-proliferation should be accompanied
with a clear and specific commitment, reflected in an
agenda for action in the field of disarmament by all the
members of the international community.

Lastly, allow me to recall the special priority and
attention that my country gives to progress in the area
of conventional weapons. We have provided our strong
and active support to the development of transparency
and confidence-building measures, both in our region
and internationally. In this context, we hope that,
following the success of initiatives like the
establishment of the United Nations Register of
Conventional Arms, we can now take the next step
towards the codification of the arms trade so as to
provide the United Nations with tools to prevent flows
of weapons that are excessive or destabilizing or that
ignore the standards set by the Security Council. We
therefore hope that we can make fruitful progress in
that direction.
