Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): First of all, we would like to confirm our
support for the resumption of the negotiations between
Israel and Palestine on 29 July. We trust that they
will be substantive and continuous and outline a clear
path towards a two-State solution, a cessation of the
conflict and the establishment of lasting peace based
on international legal documents known to all of us,
including Security Council resolutions.

We take note ofhow difficult it is to reach consensus

on the two-State solution. The parties are seeking fully
to solve all final status issues, where in many cases it will
not be as easy to find a compromise solution. Whatever
the situation, reaching final agreements is undoubtedly
the responsibility of the direct participants in the
negotiations, who must demonstrate full responsibility
for the future of their peoples. Of course, any eventual
agreement must be developed by the Palestinians and
the Israelis themselves, and not imposed externally.
Otherwise, it would not be viable and would not last.

We deem it very positive that a meeting of the
Middle East Quartet of international mediators was
held here at the ministerial level last month - the
first such meeting in a year and a half. The Quartet is
still the internationally recognized Security Council-
authorized mechanism to faciliate the Middle East
settlement.

We are convinced that fostering cooperation with
the League ofArab States, which is making a significant
contribution to the negotiation process, will help step
up efforts to find a fair resolution to chronic problems.
We support the efforts of the League to promote the
Arab Peace Initiative. Its role is very important, among
other things for restoring the intra-Palestinian unity on
the platform of the Palestine Liberation Organization.
Clearly, implementing any eventual agreement, which
the parties intend to achieve no later than April 2014,
would not be possible if there were to be a split.

The Quartet's adoption of a statement on the
resumed negotiation process (see SG/2202) is of
particular importance. However, we cannot dwell on
that. We need to move further by encouraging parties
and sending clear signals to show that the international
community does not wish to see the Palestinian
issue being pushed into the background, given all of
the upheavals in the Arab world over recent years.
Achieving a comprehensive, fair and lasting Arab-
Israeli settlement would be a key contribution to
normalizing the situation in the region.

It is a source of serious concern that illegal Israeli
settlement activities continue in the occupied territories.
Unilateral and provocative acts are unacceptable.
Measures by both sides to improve the atmosphere
surrounding the renewed negotiations should be a sine
qua non. The measures should be sustainable, gradual
and regular in nature.

The humanitarian situation in the Gaza Strip is
consistently deteriorating, despite the basic climate
of calm and certain concessions introduced by Israel
on the importation of fuel and building materials. It is
clear that giving the citizens of Gaza a normal life is
only possible by fully lifting the blockade of the Strip
and restoring the unity of the Palestinian territories.
Russia is fully assisting the current negotiation
efforts, both as part of the Quartet and through
ongoing dialogue that we have been carrying out with
the Palestinians, Israelis and Governments of the
region. Apart from the meetings that took place on
the sidelines of the sixty-eighth session of the General
Assembly, the Special Representative of the Minister of
Foreign Affairs of the Russian Federation for reaching
a settlement in the Middle East recently visited the
region. We will continue to assist Palestine with our
traditional assistance as well as by strengthening the
institutional basis for statehood and the economy.

Resolution 2118 (2013) opened a window of
opportunity for convening an international conference
on Syria. We must not drag our feet. The Syrian
conflict is increasingly taking on an obvious and very
dangerous interfaith aspect. Christians find themselves
under the threat of being chased off their lands and
are experiencing terrible suffering at the hands of the
Islamists. We are hearing ofnew cases ofthe desecration
and destruction of religious facilities and murders
and violence. Bandits, cloaked in Islam, are instilling
religious hatred in people and casting a shadow over
the community on behalf of whom they act. We need to
really urge all the Syrian parties to meet in Geneva and
make their choice, using political methods to resolve
the various problems.

The Syrian Government has frequently said that
it was ready to participate in the Geneva meeting. We
welcome the fully fledged accession by Syria to the
Chemical Weapons Convention. The authorities of the
country are demonstrating openness and preparedness
to work closely with the Organization for the Prohibition
of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) and the United Nations
and to ensure the international inspectors access to
their declared facilities. The destruction of equipment
linked with the chemical weapon programme is fully
underway. In that regard, there is a need for the
armed opposition also to comply unswervingly with
the requirements in resolution 2118 (2013) in terms
of providing full assistance to the OPCW and United
Nations support during the joint mission. It is clear that
at least part of the opposition is trying to undermine the
efforts to implement the resolution.

In conclusion, I would like once again to underscore
that in terms of finding a political and diplomatic
settlement and in working on chemical disarmament,
there is no option to pooling the collective mutually
complementary efforts of the international community.
Russia is prepared to workjointly on that.

