Ms. Anderson (Ireland): I welcome this
opportunity to address the Security Council. I align
myself with the statement just made on behalf of the
European Union.

Ireland enjoys a close relationship with Timor-
Leste and its people. We were very active supporters of
the quest for self-determination and have remained a
strong backer in the years since independence.

The report of the Secretary-General before us
today (S/2010/85) is convincing in its analysis and
clear in its recommendations. It gives full weight to
what has been achieved without underestimating or
understating the challenges yet to be met.

In speaking today, my main focus is on the
gender dimension, since cooperation in relation to
Security Council resolution 1325 (2000) is one of the
key areas of cooperation between Ireland and Timor-
Leste. I wish to say just a brief word, however, on the
issue of impunity.

Addressing the legacy of conflict is a highly
sensitive and complex process. We know from our own
experience on the island of Ireland just how fraught
that process can be. Timor-Leste has taken important
steps towards tackling its difficult legacy, but
considerable and urgent challenges remain. We note
that civil society organizations have expressed their
strong concerns in this regard. We commend the
Timorese leadership and members of its National
Parliament for their renewed attention to this area. It is
our hope that the current activity, led by Parliament,
will generate a robust and credible institution capable
of further contributing to stability and healing. Ireland
remains willing to provide appropriate assistance to
that process.

As I said, the principal aspect I wish to address is
the gender dimension. We particularly commend the
Secretary-General's report for the clarity of its gender
focus. As well as the overview of gender issues, there
are highly relevant comments and statistics in each of
the four areas addressed. In the security sector, for
example, the report notes that 19 per cent of the
National Police personnel is female - a higher
proportion than in most countries. The United Nations
police contingent, less than 4 per cent female, comes
nowhere near matching that proportion. As the report
notes, it remains highly desirable to increase the
proportion of women officers in the United Nations
Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT) police.
The section of the report on the rule of law,
justice and human rights catalogues the serious and
widespread violence against women and children and
the gender-specific obstacles that women face in
securing access to justice. In the section dealing with
socio-economic development, the statistical breakdown
by gender is enlightening. For example, access to
microfinance is 70 to 80 per cent female, although
women often receive little community support for their
entrepreneurial activities.

The gender issues identified by the report provide
the context for the cross-learning initiative on Security
Council resolution 1325 (2000) which Ireland has
launched together with Liberia and Timor-Leste. Our
initiative is designed to draw upon the experiences of
those directly affected by conflict in all three locations.
The first substantive meeting was held in Belfast in
2009 and the second in Dili in December 2009, and we
look forward to our final meeting in Liberia in April.
The overarching theme of the Dili meeting was
prevention of violence against women in conflict and
post-conflict settings. The focus was on sharing
experience and identifying specific challenges and
achievements.

The clear commitment of the Timorese people to
the principles of resolution 1325 (2000) is deeply
impressive. The variety of experience brought to the
conference by the Timorese delegation greatly
contributed to its success. Their stories were powerful
reminders of the need to operationalize Security
Council resolution 1325 (2000).

Ireland is committed to further engagement and
cooperation with Timor-Leste in relation to Security
Council resolution 1325 (2000), and we will continue
to sponsor a range of gender-specific initiatives. We
hope that today's debate will help to further underline
the Security Council's attention to gender issues in
post-conflict settings.

