Mr. Bermudez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like to start by welcoming the presence of
Mr. Leonard She Okitundu, Vice-Prime Minister and
Minister for Foreign Affairs and Regional Integration
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We also
thank Mr. Maman Sidikou, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, for his briefing, and reiterate
our appreciation for his entire team and the staff of the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO)
for the work they are doing in very difficult conditions.

I would like to once again reaffirm Uruguay's
commitment to establishing peace and stability in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. I speak not
just as a non-permanent member of the Security
Council but also as representative of a country that
has been contributing troops to MONUSCO for the
past 17 years without interruption. I would like to
outline Uruguay's assessment of three aspects of the
situation - the accumulating political delays, their
impact on the security, humanitarian and human rights
situations, and the role of MONUSCO in dealing with
the current situation.

First, we are concerned about the fact that the
broad consensus reached between the key political
actors through the signing on 31 December 2016 of
the Comprehensive and Inclusive Political Agreement
is rapidly eroding, thanks to significant divisions
among the signatories. The continuing delays in
the implementation of the Agreement, thanks to the
lack of genuine commitment among parties, have
seriously jeopardized the possibility of holding
elections before the end of the year, as stipulated in
the Agreement, and have done nothing but heighten
the political and institutional uncertainty. In order to
deal with this, Uruguay strongly urges all the political
stakeholders who signed the Agreement - including
the Government, which has a special role to play by
virtue of its sovereign responsibilities - to create the
conditions necessary to advance the political process.
There is no more time to lose.

Uruguay endorses the repeated requests by the
Secretary-General, the Council and the African Union
for the speedy publication of a credible calendar for the
holding of elections, in accordance with the provisions
of the agreement. It would not only significantly reduce
uncertainty among the Congolese people but would
also enable the various partners - including the United
Nations, whose technical and financial support remain
important for the conduct of elections - to better
determine the type of support they will have to provide.

Secondly, the stagnation of the political process
is clearly having a negative effect on the security,
humanitarian and human rights situation. It is always
the civilian population that suffers most in such crises.
As the Secretary-General's report (S/2017/824) points
out, the security situation has continued to worsen in
many areas of the Democratic Republic of the Congo in
the past few months. We also continue to be concerned
about the number of human rights abuses and violations
documented by MONUSCO, including the continuing
shrinking of the democratic space and violations of
civil and political rights, especially the right to peaceful
assembly and freedom of opinion and expression.

We urge the Government authorities to take
decisive action to end impunity. That will involve strong
Government measures aimed at bringing to justice any
individual responsible for human rights violations,
including members of the national police and armed
forces of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. With
regard to the militias operating in the country, a truly
horrifying video has been circulated recently ofa public
rape and execution that took place in April in the city of
Luebo in Kasai province. While many were responsible,
the main perpetrator was Kalamba Kambangoma, the
head of the Kamuina Nsapu rebel group. Acts such as
these make us reflect and urge that such evidence be
brought before the International Criminal Court so
that the murderer and his followers can be sentenced
as soon as possible. Those realities, exacerbated by
a fragile economic situation, have led to a worrying
humanitarian situation, with more than 8.5 million
people in need of humanitarian assistance and almost
4 million displaced from their homes. I reiterate
once again that those negative trends cannot improve
as long as the political actors do not make tangible
progress with the political process. Hence the crucial
importance of the immediate and full implementation
of the Agreement of31 December 2016.

Thirdly, Uruguay acknowledges the efforts that
MONUSCO has continued to make with the goal
of turning its force into a more agile, flexible and
receptive instrument. However, in that regard I should
reiterate my delegation's views as expressed during the
renewal of the mandate in March (see S/PV.7910) and
the previous briefing session in July (see S/PV.7998).
We are concerned about the reduction in MONUSCO
troop numbers at a time when there the violence in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo is increasing
significantly. We have taken note of the special report
(S/2017/826) of the Secretary-General on the recently
published strategic review of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. We acknowledge the
comprehensive and serious work done at the direction
of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, and it
is important to us. We should also emphasize that the
Secretariat has already clearly indicated the limits of
the tasks that MONUSCO can carry out in its present
configuration and given the current situation on the
ground. We encourage MONUSCO to continue focusing
on the Mission's two strategic priorities, the protection
of civilians and support for the implementation of the
Agreement of31 December 2016.

In conclusion, I would like to express our
condolences to the Government of the United Republic
of Tanzania for the death of two of its Blue Helmets
as a result of the deliberate attacks perpetrated by the
Allied Democratic Forces armed group. We firmly
condemn those attacks and call for those responsible to
be brought to justice.

