Archbishop Auza: The Holy See would like to
thank the Polish presidency for organizing today's
important and very welcome debate.

The Fourth Geneva Convention puts the protection
of civilians at the heart of international humanitarian
law. The 1977 Protocols Additional to the Geneva
Conventions significantly improve the legal protection
covering civilians and the wounded. Yet, despite those
safeguards, one can safely affirm that it has never been
as perilous to be a civilian in the middle of armed
conflict as it is today. Sadly, the Security Council
must listen regularly to testimonies of the most brutal,
barbarous and premeditated instances of the targeting
of civilians and civilian infrastructure as a tactic of war.

Taking into account the atrocities and all the attacks
deliberately targeting innocent civilians in many parts
of the world, the Secretary-General rightly speaks of a
global protection crisis. The current level ofpreventable
suffering is indeed horrifying and, as Pope Francis
has repeatedly stated, it is utterly unacceptable that so

many unarmed persons, including many children, have
to pay the price of conflict.
Essential health services, including hospitals and
the work of medical personnel, play a critical role as
providers of vital life support and sustainers of hope
and trust during conflicts. Any attack on hospitals,
schools and staff deprives entire generations of their
right to life, health and education, as Pope Francis has
noted. The spate of recent attacks on medical facilities
in conflict situations by both State and non-State actors
must be condemned in the strongest terms possible.
They are not only an egregious breach of international
law, but also a betrayal of humankind itself. The culture
of impunity for such crimes must end.

The Security Council's landmark resolution 2286
(2016) speaks to that imperative by unequivocally
condemning attacks or threats against medical and
humanitarian personnel who are exclusively engaged
in medical duties. The task we have now is to translate
that political resolve into tangible action.

The growing trend of attacks on humanitarian
workers is also a cause of very grave concern. The
politicization and militarization of humanitarian aid,
moreover, is unacceptable. Any party to a conflict
must be held accountable for any act of denying
civilians access to food, water or basic medical care
in order to gain military advantage. Similarly, the use
of humanitarian access as a bargaining chip in peace
negotiations must be rejected.

Above all, the goal of protecting civilians is best
served by preventing the outbreak of armed conflict in
the first place. That entails addressing the root causes
of conflict, finding inclusive political solutions to
disputes and seeking peaceful settlements. A culture of
prevention is, after all, the best assurance that we have
for sustainable and enduring peace and security.

