The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
the Secretary-General for his interesting and
extensive briefing.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
representative of the Plurinational State of Bolivia.

My delegation thanks the Secretary-General for his
briefing today, and we take this opportunity once again
to reiterate our support for his important work.

The twentieth century is characterized by the
strengthening of multilateralism as a fundamental
component of relations among States and respect for the
basic norms of international law, built on the basis of
treaties that establish rights and duties that we mutually
accept within the framework of the exercise of our
sovereignty, with the objective, among other things,
of protecting the most vulnerable from encroachment,
misappropriation and depredation by the most powerful.
The current conflicts arising in different parts of
the world show us that behind many international or
local geopolitical disputes is also almost always an
interest in access to and the control and exploitation
of economically attractive natural resources, which is
reflected in the fact that according to the Secretary-
General's report published by the United Nations
Environment Programme, over the past 60 years at
least 40 per cent of conflicts have been motivated by
this reason. In many cases, when control, exploitation
or access to oil, gas, water, minerals or other natural
resources becomes a strategic objective of the parties
to the conflict or of armed groups and criminal
organizations, it is because behind them there are often
also multinational corporations or foreign interests
willing to use them to gain access to these resources.

Some examples very close to the concerns of the
Security Council, just to mention a few from throughout
the history of the twentieth and twenty-first centuries,
are the coup d'etat against Iran in 1953, undertaken
against a democratically elected Government that, in
the exercise of its sovereignty, had nationalized oil
from the hands of an Anglo-American company; the
invasion of Kuwait in 1990 by Iraq, whose intention
was to control 20 per cent of world oil production; the
conflict in Libya, where parties are constantly clashing
over control of the country's hydrocarbon industry
and which is also affecting the entire Sahel region; the
illegal invasion of Iraq in 2003, whose objective was,
in the end, to control oil production and the oil market;
and the involvement of various armed groups in the
Democratic Republic of Congo as a result of the illegal
trade in tin, tantalum, tungsten and gold.

In other cases, when sovereign policies of the
States over their natural resources affect the interests of
corporations or of some other countries that form part
of the chain of industrialization or commercialization of
the resources, these corporations have no qualms about
financing separatist movements, arming opposition
groups or provoking policies of change of regime to
establish Governments in line with their interests. The
history of the twentieth century in many countries in
my own region is a clear example of this.

We believe that it is not enough to monitor and
punish armed groups, their heads as individuals, or
the parties to the conflict; it is also necessary to make
sanctions regime more dynamic and effective. To do
this, we must apply sanctions to the networks that make
up the entire chain of those involved in the conflict.
In the case of conflicts related to natural resources,
sanctions should also be applied to what we may term
commercial enablers, which in large part are composed
of large transnational companies that enable the
commercialization of natural resources that have been
obtained illegally or in conflict situations as well as for
their insertion into global markets. Sanctions should
also apply to what we may term financial facilitators,
composed of financial corporations and tax havens,
which allow for the insertion and legitimatization of
profits derived from the commercialization of these
resources into the global financial system. Accordingly,
the Security Council must reformulate the mandates of
the subsidiary bodies dealing with sanctions, so that
the panels of experts have a mandate to investigate and
identify these corporations, affecting or definitively
shutting down these criminal networks. With the results
of these investigations, the Council should be able to
impose sanctions on such networks.

It is important to fight not only the illegal exploitation
and misappropriation of natural resources, but also the
unequal distribution of the benefits resulting from their
commercialization, which can make them catalysts
that exacerbate conflicts. The Bolivian State has faced
these scenarios throughout its history. A clear example
of this goes back to the nineteenth century, when the
exploitation of natural resources by foreign corporate
interests drove an asymmetrical and expansionist war
in the region that deeply affected my country. These
foreign interests were replicated during much of the
twentieth century and translated into the privatization
and exploitation of our natural wealth - water, silver,
tin, oil and gas - for the benefit of transnational
corporations, leaving only tiny royalties for the
development and well-being of our people.

Iwould simply like to try to show what has been done
in Bolivia with respect to this issue. In 2006, the State
decided to nationalize the country's natural resources,
which were recognized through the Constitution
adopted in 2009 as the direct, indivisible and irrevocable
property and dominion of the Bolivian people, under
the administration of the State in accordance with the
collective interest. This mandate allowed the recovery
of the natural resources of strategic companies from the
hands of the companies that had exploited them to the
detriment of the interests of our people.

An example of how sovereign control of our
resources changed the course and development of
Bolivia can be seen in the social and economic changes
that my country has been experiencing for the past 12
years. It is no lie to say that before that time, my country's
presidents would go to the International Monetary Fund
or the Paris Club almost as beggars to ask for economic
assistance just to be able to pay the salaries of our
teachers or doctors. Twelve years ago, the dynamics of
the distribution of profits for hydrocarbon exploitation
sent 82 per cent of them to transnational companies and
only 18 per cent to the benefit of the country. Since our
resources were nationalized, 82 percent now remains in
the hands of the Bolivian people and 18 per cent goes
to the service contracts of the transnational companies
that remain in the country because they still make
healthy profits.

Hydrocarbon revenues in Bolivia increased from
$2.9 billion for the period between 1994 and 2005 to
$35.2 billion for the period between 2006 and 2017.
Bolivia's gross domestic product also grew steadily.
In 2017, it was 4.82 per cent, well above the regional
average of 1.87 per cent, and our gross domestic product
rose from $9 billion in 2005 to $36 billion in 2017. Our
international reserves increased from $1.7 billion to
$10 billion between 2005 and 2018.

In the past 12 years, this new flow of income and
its redistribution has enabled us to reduce extreme
poverty from 37 per cent in 2005 to 17 per cent today,
and to shrink inequality. In 2005, the richest 10 per
cent owned 128 times more than the poorest 10 per
cent, whereas in 2017, and today, that figure has been
reduced to only 47 times more. Public investment
increased from $620 million in 2005 to $5.5 billion in
2017. Some 3 million people in a country of 11 million
joined the middle class, which grew from 35 per
cent of the population in 2005 to 58 per cent in 2017.
The infant mortality rate dropped by more than half
between 2008 and 2017. The number of medical and
health facilities doubled. Life expectancy increased
from 63 years in 2005 to 72 years in 2018. The school
dropout rate fell from 4.5 per cent in 2005 to 2 per cent
in 2017. I understand that this subject is not one that is
inextricably linked to peace and security-related issues,
but the sovereign control of natural resources enables
fairer and more human societies to be built.

In conclusion, and using the words of President
Evo Morales when he spoke at the General Assembly
in 2015 (see A/70/PV.15), we believe that the Council
must reflect in the future on the following before
taking decisions based on various contexts. President
Morales said that we are living in times of peace, not
times of invasion or domination. We must therefore ask
ourselves, who benefits from wars? After interventions,
who retains control over natural resources? Who
governs - our citizens, or foreign interests that
promote wars for their own benefit? Those questions
can help to a certain extent as we begin today's debate.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I give the floor to members of the Council who
wish to make statements.

