Mr. Brites Pereira (Portugal): On behalf of
Portugal, I would like to start by saluting the
independence of the Republic of South Sudan and by
welcoming this new country to the community of
independent States. I am particularly pleased to greet
here today His Excellencies Vice-President Riek
Machar Teny-Dhurgon and Ambassador Daffa-Alla
Osman.

The Portuguese people have a special affinity
with Africa, forged by centuries of shared history.
Witnessing the arrival of the new South Sudan on the
world stage as an independent nation is undoubtedly a
special moment for us, marking the beginning of a new
phase in our relationship with both the Republic of
South Sudan and the Republic of the Sudan. Portugal
looks forward to continuing to work with both in
building a peaceful and prosperous future for the two
countries, and indeed for Africa in general.

Portugal was represented at the independence
ceremonies in Juba by Ambassador Antonio Monteiro,
former Portuguese Minister for Foreign Affairs and
member of the Secretary-General's panel for the
monitoring of the referendum held last January. In
Juba, Ambassador Monteiro conveyed a letter from the
President of Portuguese Republic to the President of
the Republic of South Sudan expressing wishes for
peace, stability and development to the new State.

I would also like to take this opportunity to recall
that Portugal has already recognized the Republic of
South Sudan as an independent and sovereign State, as
have the other European Union member States.
Portugal now looks forward to establishing diplomatic
relations with the Republic of South Sudan. We also
welcome the recognition of the new country by the
Republic of the Sudan and by the members of the
African Union.

Let me also commend the Sudanese people for
their peaceful determination and for the orderly way in
which they expressed their will. The referendum was a
milestone, not only in terms of implementing the 2005
Comprehensive Peace Agreement but also in terms of
underscoring the Sudanese people's desire for a
peaceful solution to their differences.

Allow me again to voice our sincere appreciation
for all the work and effort undertaken by the Secretary-
General and his Special Representative Haile
Menkerios, as well as by the African Union High-Level
Implementation Panel and its Chair, President Thabo
Mbeki, in order to help bring about the birth of the new
country. We are also deeply grateful to the leaders and
peacekeepers of the United Nations Mission in the
Sudan for their invaluable assistance throughout the
entire process, and for their dedication and
commitment.

The independence of the Republic of South
Sudan is but a step, albeit an important one. But in
order to fulfil the expectations it entails, the challenges
that still remain must be addressed in an urgent and
comprehensive way. That is why we encourage
President Al-Bashir and President Salva Kiir Mayardit
to grasp this opportunity and to spare no effort in
solving all the outstanding issues between their two
countries. As we have repeatedly stated, dialogue and
political commitment at the highest level are what is
needed in order to ensure that this historic moment
becomes a time of lasting progress. We are thus
encouraged by the meeting on 4 July between the two
Presidents at the extraordinary session of the
Inter-Governmental Authority on Development on the
Sudan in Addis Ababa, and by their commitment to
continuing negotiations after 9 July.

In that context, Portugal welcomes the recent
progress the parties have made on interim agreements
for Abyei and security arrangements for the border
zone between the North and South. Negotiations on
other issues have also continued. But we must
emphasize that finding an agreement on the final status
of Abyei and reaching a common understanding on key
issues such as citizenship, the management of oil
resources and border management are essential to
ensuring a peaceful future, a mutually beneficial
relationship between the two States and those States'
viability. We gave our support to the establishment of
the United Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei
and share the view that North and South would benefit
from the assistance of the United Nations on border
issues. We also urge the two leaders to make full use of
the good offices of the African Union High-Level
Implementation Panel, under the leadership of
President Mbeki.

Unfortunately, the encouraging progress in
several areas that I have just mentioned has yet to be
reflected in Southern Kordofan. Like all members of
the Council, Portugal has been deeply concerned about
the ongoing fighting in that state, which is resulting in
an alarming and increasing number of displaced
persons. We condemn the lack of access for
humanitarian agencies and urge all parties to grant
them full and unconditional access. We also call on the
two sides to follow through on the Political and
Security Framework Agreement negotiated by the
National Congress Party and the Sudan People's
Liberation Movement-North to find a quick solution to
the situation and put an immediate end to the
hostilities.

Peace and hope should be extended to all
Sudanese, including those in Darfur. I therefore
reiterate Portugal's commitment to working towards
improving the lives of all Darfuris.

In conclusion, let me underline again that a
continued commitment, engagement and spirit of close
cooperation on the part of both Governments will be
necessary to achieve a peaceful and prosperous future
for North and South alike. The international
community should also continue to provide the support
and encouragement that the two States will need in the
still difficult times ahead. For the immediate future, the
United Nations will remain in South Sudan, and the
mandate for the new United Nations Mission in the
Republic of South Sudan has been established by the
Security Council. In the same way that we have
supported and strongly encouraged the Organization's
presence in the South, we will continue to support all
efforts that the Republic of the Sudan believes may
contribute to making this new chapter equally
successful for its people.

Finally, let me express my best wishes to the
future one hundred and ninety-third member of the
General Assembly. I also hope that the new future will
bring peace, stability and prosperity to all the peoples
in the region. Indeed, that is the only outcome that will
justly honour their past suffering and struggle, while
meeting their expectations and aspirations for the
future.

