Mr. Valdivieso (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
First of all my delegation would like to express our
thanks for the report, which highlights the many
different activities that the United Nations Transitional
Administration in East Timor (UNTAET) has carried
out in so short a time. It is indisputable that the
situation in East Timor has been evolving at an
extraordinary pace after so many years of political
stagnation. Unfortunately, these so-rapid changes have
been accompanied by some deplorable acts of violence
that could perhaps have been avoided if the transition
had been more gradual. As many have said at various
times in this Chamber, the task assigned to UNTAET
carried with it great responsibilities, and my delegation
certainly joins all those that have paid tribute to Mr.
Sergio Vieira de Mello and his entire team for their
tremendous efforts.

We are also grateful for the very interesting
statements made by the representatives of the United
Nations Development Programme, the World Bank and
the International Monetary Fund - as well as the
special statement of the President of the General
Assembly. As you yourself said, Sir, we can call the
General Assembly President's appearance in this
Chamber "historic". We are also grateful for the
presence of and the statement made by Mr. Jose'
Ramos-Horta today. We were very moved by his
testimony and by his faith in the future of East Timor.

It is clear that the situation in East Timor now
requires coordinated and integrated action from the
different bodies in the system charged with economic
and social development, and - we can hope -
increasingly less attention from those of us in this
Chamber, who are primarily concerned with
international peace and security. In this regard we are
struck by the contrast between the sad reminders of
what East Timor endured and today's positive
atmosphere.

Bearing the aforementioned in mind, my
delegation believes that the Security Council should
take the necessary measures to enable UNTAET to
complete its work successfully, without hurrying in
ways that might jeopardize the future of the emerging
administration in East Timor. Along these lines, we
agree with the recommendations contained in the
Secretary-General's report published as document
S/2001/42.

We have noted the reports about the emergence of
an increasingly strong consensus among the population
in favour of achieving independence by the end of
2001, after elections are held. In this regard we must
take into consideration that the Secretary-General has
noted that the timetable is tight, and that a certain
degree of flexibility will be required.
We welcome the establishment of the National
Council, as well as the concerted efforts to speed up
the transfer of responsibilities to the Timorese.
UNTAET's efforts to build the capacity for self-
government among the Timorese so as to enable them
to assume all the responsibilities of government is
extremely important, and we must provide our full
support in this respect. Furthermore, we should also
welcome the efforts to bring about a consensus on the
holding of a national consultation regarding electoral
modalities and the composition of the Constituent
Assembly, which will draft the future constitution and
become the first legislature of the independent State.
We believe that it is important to emphasize that
UNTAET will be responsible for the conduct of the
elections.

The incidents of violence among supporters of
different political groupings are of great concern to us.
These developments must be followed very closely and
dealt with resolutely, because they do not augur well
for the democratic future of the new State. In this
context, we believe that UNTAET must, as soon as
possible, set up the civic education programmes to
which the report refers in order to help prevent such
outbreaks of violence.

The situation of the refugees still in West Timor
remains a cause for concern, and every effort should be
made to resolve the problem quickly, including by
controlling the militias. We welcome the fact that the
trial of the six people accused in the Atambua killings
opened on 11 January in a Jakarta court. As Mr.
Ramos-Horta pointed out, there cannot be lasting peace
without justice, which must be handed down regardless
of the power or wealth of those who committed the
crimes. Reconciliation cannot take place in an
atmosphere of impunity. We also believe that UNTAET
must intensify its efforts to bring about reconciliation
among the Timorese people, including those who
continue to favour the idea of autonomy.

No less important is the need for relations
between UNTAET and the Government of Indonesia,
in particular the authorities of West Timor, to continue
to improve. Furthermore, We welcome the new spirit of
cooperation between the leaders of East Timor and the
current Government of Indonesia.

My delegation fully shares the recommendations
of the Secretary-General to the effect that significant
economic assistance from the international community
must continue. We must ensure that the process will not
result in the creation of a State whose future is in
jeopardy from its inception. As the report makes clear,
continued assistance will be necessary until the defence
and police forces have been consolidated and, even
more importantly, the judicial system is fully
operational. The United Nations and the international
community must continue to provide support in the
period after independence.

