Mr. Manjeev Singh Puri (India): At the outset, I
would like to join others in thanking Judge Robinson,
President of the International Criminal Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia (ICTY), and Judge Khan, President
of the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda
(ICTR), for their presentations and assessment of the
Tribunals. We also appreciate the briefings given by
the two Prosecutors.

India welcomes the progress made by the two
Tribunals in expediting their work. We appreciate the
measures adopted to implement the completion
strategies. The Tribunals have set up new benchmarks
and adopted innovative procedures to expedite their
day-to-day work, including e-Court and e-Filing,
amendments to the Rules of Procedure and Evidence,
and case management techniques. The adoption and
implementation of e-Court and e-Filing procedures
could serve as a useful model in the national courts to
which some of the cases have been transferred.

We are happy to note that the ICTY has
transferred all low- and mid-level accused from its trial
docket to national courts, in accordance with resolution
1503 (2003), and that the Prosecutor is continuously
monitoring the progress of the referred proceedings in
national courts in the region. We also commend the
efforts of the Prosecutor to handle such cases through
effective partnerships with national prosecutors and
courts in the region, including training initiatives
aimed at strengthening the capacity of national
systems.

It is critical that the Tribunals finish their work
on time. We have listened very carefully to the
concerns raised by the Presidents of the two Tribunals
in relation to their ability to keep pace with their work,
while adhering to the expected timelines until the close
of business.

The judges have pointed out that the Tribunals'
trials and appeals continue to be affected by staffing
shortages and the loss of highly efficient staff
members. We share the concerns expressed by the
judges, especially on the need to retain adequate and
experienced staff. Careful consideration should be
given to the suggestions made by the Tribunals on how
to address that challenge. This is a practical issue and
requires the consideration of pragmatic and innovative
solutions, and we stand ready to work with the other
members of the Council to resolve it. Judge Robinson
also raised the issue of the enforcement of sentences,
which is an important matter that needs further
consideration.

We welcome the cooperation extended to the
Tribunals by all States concerned, which is vital to
ensuring the completion of the mandates of the
Tribunals and to the implementation of the completion
strategies. The arrest of Ratko Mladie is an important
example of effective cooperation, and we appreciate
Serbia's sustained efforts in that regard. We hope that
the remaining fugitives will be located soon and
surrendered to the Tribunals.

We also note with satisfaction the progress made
by the ICTY Residual Mechanism Steering Committee
in the implementation of the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals established pursuant
to resolution 1966 (2010). A multitude of factors is
involved in that process, and we hope that the Steering
Committee, in coordination with the ICTR, the Office
of Legal Affairs, the Archives and Records
Management Section and the Council's Informal
Working Group on International Tribunals, will
accomplish those tasks smoothly and successfully. Any
functional, operational or institutional issue in the
completion strategy may be addressed by the Council
as and when it arises.

In conclusion, we believe that the two Tribunals
have implemented their mandates admirably. We
consider that the support of the Security Council is
crucial at this critical juncture in the life of the
Tribunals. At the same time, we urge both Tribunals to
take all necessary steps to keep the trial and appeals
schedules on track. That will pave the way for the
successful trials of the remaining accused and a smooth
transition to an effective Residual Mechanism.

