Mr. Almunayekh (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I would like to welcome His Excellency
Mr. Carlos Trujillo Garcia, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Colombia, who is present with us today for
the first time. I also want to thank Mr. Jean Arnault,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Verification Mission in
Colombia, for his valuable briefing and comprehensive
presentation on the major achievements and challenges
facing the Colombian peace process. We also commend
the steps taken by the Government of President Ivan
Duque Marquez to continue with the implementation
of the Colombian peace process. We look forward to
the development plan, which will be submitted by the
President in November. In my statement, I will focus on
three key issues.

First, the socioeconomic reintegration of former
members of the Fuerza Armadas Revolucionarias de
Colombia-Ejercito del Pueblo (FARC-EP) has been
lagging, while there are negative repercussions from
the withdrawal of former leaders of the FARC-EP from
the reintegration process as a result of the risks that the
process may pose to their personal security and legal
status. However, we commend the relentless efforts of
the Colombian Government to assess and adopt a special
integrated approach to implement the reintegration
process. We value the role of the Mission in that regard
and its work with the Resident Coordinator, the High
Commissioner for Peace and the leadership of the
Fuerza Alternativa Revolucionaria del Comun (FARC)
to submit ajoint proposal to the Peacebuilding Fund on
socioeconomic reintegration and reconciliation.

Secondly, with regard to the security situation, we
are concerned about the ongoing killings, violence and
threats against social leaders, human rights defenders
and indigenous leaders. In that regard, we commend
the pact for life and the protection of social leaders
and human rights defenders, which was adopted by the
Colombian Government, in addition to the preparation
of guidelines on the policy to be established, which
would provide security guarantees to local communities,
human rights defenders and social leaders.

Thirdly, we welcome the ongoing efforts by
the Mission under Mr. Arnault, in cooperation with
national, regional and local authorities, as well as
civil society organizations, the private sector and the
international community. We also applaud the positive
role of the Mission in communicating with women's
groups and organizations and promoting dialogue with
them. We commend as well the adoption of a strategy
to implement resolutions 2250 (2015) and 2419 (2018),
on youth, peace and security, with a focus on the
role of young people pertaining to reintegration and
assurances. That would protect them both during and
post-conflict and ensure their participation in peace
processes and measures that will greatly contribute to
the promotion and maintenance of international peace
and security.

We appreciate the current cooperation between
the Colombian Government and the FARC. That was
demonstrated by the request submitted to the Security
Council to renew the mandate of the Mission and by
the adoption of Council's resolution 2435 (2018),
reflecting the belief of both parties in the Final Peace
Agreement and the Council's belief in the importance
of supporting it.

In conclusion, we reaffirm the support of the State
of Kuwait to the Colombian Government and the peace
agreement that ended a protracted conflict and paved
the way to a stable and lasting peace. We encourage
the Colombian Government and the FARC to resume
the implementation of the ceasefire agreement and to
reach an agreement that meets the aspirations of the
Colombian people and ends the current instability,
which has lasted for many years in Colombia.

