Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): I join my
colleagues in expressing my appreciation to Malaysia
for organizing this timely and important debate.

The prevention of the proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction (WMDs) and related materials and
technologies to violent, extremist armed groups and
non-State actors is of crucial importance to global
security. Such proliferation represents a threat that
requires strong national and international mechanisms
and calls for effective international cooperation. It is
therefore essential to maintain its prominent place on the
international agenda. The Kingdom of the Netherlands
is, and will remain, a dedicated international partner
in that regard, which we hope to demonstrate further if
elected as a member of the Council in 2018.

I align myself with the statement made earlier today
by the observer of the European Union.

Let me take this opportunity to highlight some
of the activities and priorities of the Netherlands. I
will focus on three issues, namely, nuclear security,
inclusiveness and resolution 1540 (2004).

On nuclear security, the prevention of nuclear and
radiological terrorism has been one of our top priorities
for the past several years. We took active part in the
Nuclear Security Summit process and hosted the
meeting in 2014 held in The Hague. The Summit process
led to significant progress in reducing the amount
of weapons-usable nuclear material in circulation.
It strengthened the international nuclear-security
architecture and enhanced international cooperation in
that field. In addition, the Summits themselves served
to raise awareness at the highest political levels of the
nuclear and radiological terrorism threat.

As the Summit host in 2014, we sought to contribute
actively to translating the Nuclear Security Summit
political commitments into concrete actions. In the
same vein, the Netherlands is currently the international
coordinator for the Global Initiative to Combat Nuclear
Terrorism. The Initiative has been instrumental in
enhancing national capabilities through practical and
effective international cooperation, which seeks to
prevent, detect and respond to nuclear terrorism.
My second point concerns inclusiveness. Through
the initiatives and activities I have just mentioned, a
robust network of political, judicial, intelligence and
technical contacts has been established. Collaboration
within and across Governments has been enhanced.
Other relevant groups have also become more engaged,
including industry and civil society. That engagement
is essential to our efforts to prevent the proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction - a point made so
clearly by our colleague from Italy earlier today.
Going forward, we believe it is necessary to take steps
to maintain such networks and to sustain close and
effective international cooperation.

My third point concerns resolution 1540 (2004).
The Kingdom of the Netherlands remains firmly
committed to the full and effective implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004), which we see as a central
instrument for preventing the spread of weapons of mass
destruction to non-State actors. The comprehensive
review of resolution 1540 (2004) offers a very welcome
opportunity to strengthen that implementation, and
we greatly appreciate the leadership of Spain in that
regard. We pay tribute to the open and inclusive
nature of the review process, as set up by Spain.
Especially commendable is the involvement of the
wider membership.

Enhancing the effective implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004) requires the sustainable
enforcement of national laws and regulations. That
concerns not just law enforcement, but also export
controls, physical protection and control ofthe financial
channels used by non-State actors to proliferate
weapons. Challenges clearly remain when it comes to
effective implementation.

From our perspective, we see three ways to
strengthen the implementation mechanism. The first
involves providing technical assistance, the point
raised by our South African colleague, who spoke just
before me. The further provision of technical assistance
is quite crucial. Secondly, we must promote regional
collaboration so as to prevent implementation gaps.
And, thirdly, we need to promote active engagement
with industry, the private sector and civil society.

In conclusion, although much has been
accomplished to prevent the spread of WMDs, related
materials and technologies, much more remains to
be done. We should maintain momentum in raising
awareness of the threats and challenges in that regard.
Together we should devise and implement the measures
needed to combat the chemical, biological, radiological
and nuclear terrorism threat. Only by working together,
all of us, can we be truly effective. The Kingdom of
the Netherlands looks forward to continuing to work
closely with partners on this issue as part of peace,
justice and development.

