Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri (India): At the outset, I
would like to thank you, Mr. President, for organizing
this meeting to discuss the activities of the United
Nations Regional Office for Central Africa (UNOCA),
particularly in the context of the threat posed by the
Lord's Resistance Army (LRA). Iwould also like to thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Abou Moussa, and Ambassador Madeira for their
briefings.

We have taken note of the Secretary-General's
report (S/2012/42l) on UNOCA and the LRA and on a
regional strategy for the LRA-affected areas.
The countries of Central Africa are making steady
progress in overcoming the negative effects of decades
of instability and conflict. The region has seen overall
political stability. Timely elections have been held in
several countries, which have further strengthened
democratic institutions. Countries are pursuing
economic reform, which has resulted in robust economic
growth in the region. They are also cooperating with
regional and foreign partners in addressing their
common challenges, such as the proliferation of
weapons, transnational organized crime and terrorism.
The African Union and the Economic Community of
Central African States have also continued to play a
crucial role in addressing these problems in partnership
with UNOCA and the United Nations Office to the
African Union.

Despite those positive trends, the countries
of the region continue to grapple with the effects
of conflicts of the past. Overall socio-economic
indicators still remain poor and the precarious security
and humanitarian situation in the Sahel is adversely
impacting on the region. Activities of terrorist groups
such as Boko Haram, armed groups and transnational
crime networks, illicit drug trafficking, and maritime
piracy and robbery at sea in the Gulf of Guinea continue
to threaten the security and stability of the region.

It is in this context that the activities of UNOCA
assume significance, particularly in the areas of
conflict prevention, early warning and addressing
socio-economic challenges. We commend UNOCA
and the Special Representative and Head of the United
Nations Regional Office for Central Africa, Mr. Abou
Moussa, for their active engagement with national
Governments and with regional and subregional
organizations. UNOCA should further strengthen that
collaboration and assist the efforts of Governments and
organizations in the region so that regional cooperative
frameworks developed to deal with those common
challenges are fully implemented.

The focus of the Council should lead to galvanizing
the international community to provide adequate
resources for the national and regional endeavours,
particularly in strengthening national capacities with
regard to civil administration, police and security
forces, security sector reform and disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration processes and
socio-economic development. Given the fragility of
political institutions in several countries, it is also
important for national and regional authorities to pay
attention to the need for inclusive political processes,
including electoral reforms.
Piracy in the Gulf of Guinea is a major threat to
maritime navigation, trade and economic activities in
several countries in Central and Western Africa. We
have noted the progress made towards a coordinated
approach to address the problem, including the
establishment of a multinational coordination centre for
maritime safety and security in Equatorial Guinea. We
hope that the proposed summit-level meeting will be
held soon to work out a regional strategy.

It is a matter of serious concern that the LRA
activities have increased this year, particularly in the
Central African Republic and the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. The LRA remains a potent threat and its
criminal activities have uprooted over 445,000 persons
from their communities in the Central African region,
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, South Sudan
and Uganda. While countries like Uganda, with support
from regional and foreign partners, have undertaken a
number of measures to address the challenge posed by
the LRA, a lot remains to be done. In that connection,
we have taken note of UNOCA's efforts and the launch
ofthe African Union-led regional cooperation initiative
against the LRA earlier this year. We hope that the
African Union will continue to work closely with the
affected countries so that the regional task force may be
expeditiously deployed in the three identified sectors.

We agree with the Secretary-General's View that
any effective strategy on the LRA should focus on
strengthening the capacity of national authorities,
including their security forces, to expand the authority
of the State, and focus on overall socio-economic
development in the affected areas. International
humanitarian, development and peacebuilding
assistance to the LRA-affected areas should address the
underlying causes for activities of armed groups. The
national programmes for disarmament, demobilization,
repatriation, resettlement and reintegration activities
should be supported with the provision of adequate
resources and be reinforced by a long-term plan
for employment generation among the affected
communities. It is also important that serious efforts
be made to eliminate the remaining active groups and
target the leadership ofthe LRA to bring them tojustice.
External assistance to the affected countries should be
apolitical in nature and respect national sovereignty in
policy as well as operational matters.

In that connection, it is important that United
Nations missions in the region should not be burdened
further without augmentation of their resources in
manpower and material. Without a commensurate
increase in resources, the expansion of mission
mandates will not result in operational effectiveness.

In conclusion, India stands ready to contribute
to efforts to address the challenges of the countries
of the Central African region, particularly in the
fields of capacity-building and human resource and
socio-economic development.

