Mr. Vassilakis (Greece): I would like to thank
you, Sir, for organizing today's thematic debate of the
Security Council on sustainable peace in the Middle
East, under the leadership of the First Deputy Prime
Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of the State
of Qatar.

I would also like to thank and commend the
Secretary-General for submitting to the Security
Council his insightful report on the Middle East and for
providing the Security Council with his highly
pertinent and significant observations on that matter. In
trying to evaluate and to assess what has transpired in
the Middle East during the two years that Greece has
served as a non-permanent member of the Security
Council, and to give our appraisal of where things
stand and where they may go from here, we find that
the report of the SecretaryzGeneral more than
adequately covers most of the observations we would
have made and coincides to a very large extent with
our evaluation of the situation.

In that regard, we share the Secretary-General's
assessment of the reasons behind the lack of significant
progress in the implementation of the road map. Both
sides have indeed failed to live up to their obligations
under the first phase of the road map, and we also note
with interest the Secretary-General's observations
regarding the role of the Quartet in the whole process.

There is much that is contained in the report that
the Security Council should reflect upon. For our part,
we would like to emphasize that the Arab-Israeli
conflict, of which the Palestinian issue is at the core,
and that all attempts to find a solution to it should not
overlook the wider regional picture and the dynamics
involved in that context.

When viewed from a wider regional perspective,
a number of issues emerge and come to the surface that
go a long way towards explaining the behaviour of all
respective parties. From that perspective, what
becomes evident is that the countries of the region all
have a key role to play and all share in the
responsibility for creating the necessary climate
conducive to promoting progress in the peace process.

The behaviour and rhetoric coming out of one
country of the region tends to have a direct impact on
the behaviour and rhetoric of another, and
developments in one country have a bearing on
developments in another. Given the situation's
inherently regional dimension, the United Nations is
the most suitably placed forum wherein a solution
ought to be sought and supported by all. The United
Nations does indeed have a permanent responsibility
towards the question of Palestine until it is resolved in
all its aspects in a satisfactory manner on the basis of
international legitimacy, and that responsibility applies
as equally Vis-a-vis the Palestinians and the Arab
populations as it does to the Israeli people and to the
State of Israel.

Greece wishes to reaffirm its attachment and
commitment to the realization of the vision of two
democratic States, Israel and Palestine, living side by
side in peace and within secure and internationally
recognized borders. The proposals contained in the
Secretary-General's report constitute a sober and
informed insight as to how progress in that direction
may be advanced. The parties to the conflict, the
countries of the region, as well as the Security Council
should explore all possibilities open to them.
It is our profound hope that we will not have to
receive a similar report in 10 years' time, and it is our
sincere conviction that the peoples of the region and
the international community as a whole can ill afford to
allow more time to elapse without making significant
and substantial progress towards peace.

