Mr. Konishi (Japan): At the outset, let me express on
behalf of the delegation of Japan my sincere appreciation to
all those involved in efforts to maintain stability in the
Central African Republic. I would like to pay particular
tribute to those who took part in the activities of the Inter-
African Mission to Monitor the Implementation of the
Bangui Agreements (MISAB), the International Monitoring
Committee, and the International Mediation Committee, as
well as France, which provided much-needed support for
those activities. My delegation believes that these efforts
have been key in maintaining order in the country, and
thereby in preventing the destabilization of the subregion.

Although significant progress has been achieved thus
far, including the adoption yesterday of the electoral code,
national reconciliation in the Central African Republic
remains a difficult and complex process. Among the tasks
awaiting the people of that country are the holding of
legislative elections, the restructuring and capacity-building
of the security forces, and the introduction of financial and
economic reforms.

These tasks are indeed challenging, and will require
concrete assistance from the international community to
ensure that the necessary conditions of peace and stability
prevail throughout the country. My delegation therefore
supports the establishment of the United Nations Mission in
the Central African Republic (MINURCA), and will vote in
favour of the draft resolution before us. The establishment
of MINURCA will demonstrate to the world the ongoing
commitment and unique capabilities of the United Nations,
and particularly of the Security Council, with regard to the
maintenance of world peace and security.

In this context, Japan has been and will continue to be
engaged in the effort to devise a comprehensive and
effective strategy for the prevention and early resolution of
conflicts, with a particular focus on Africa at this stage. In
January this year, for example, Japan hosted the Tokyo
International Conference on Preventive Strategy, where
representatives from more than 20 countries and
organizations met and discussed the subject in depth.
Among the main elements of this strategy are an enhanced
early-warning capability for the United Nations, and greater
coordination and cooperation between the United Nations
and regional organizations such as the Organization of
African Unity. In effect, Japan is exploring how the role
played by the Security Council and the United Nations in
conflict prevention can be strengthened and rendered
more effective.

I feel obliged to reiterate that MINURCA must by
no means be viewed as a panacea for the problems
confronting the Central African Republic. Its mission is
simply to support the efforts of the Government to
overcome those problems. It is the responsibility of the
Central African Republic itself to rebuild the country and
to strive to achieve prosperity. In this regard, I would like
to stress that it is incumbent upon President Patasse, as
the head of the Administration, to fulfil the commitments
he has made to the people of the Central African
Republic.

Finally, I would like to restate that Japan, for its
part, will continue to assist the Central African Republic
in its efforts to maintain stability and to enhance the well-
being of its people.

