I thank Special Representative Shearer, Under-Secretary-General Lowcock, and Ambassador Dang Dinh Quy for their briefings. With regard to the Secretary- General's report (S/2020/1180), I would like to discuss the following points. First, we must continue to advance the political process. South Sudan is actively engaging in political dialogue and seeking to consolidate the ceasefire, and has made positive progress on issues such as promoting the implementation of the Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan and reorganizing the Transitional Legislative Assembly. It is hoped that all parties will continue to proceed with a view to fostering the overall and long-term interests of the country and its people, strengthening mutual trust, properly handling differences, resolving issues such as the appointment of a Governor of Upper Nile as soon as possible and assuming the main responsibility for implementing the Revitalized Agreement. The international community should fully respect South Sudan's leadership in promoting the political process, support the African Union and the Intergovernmental Authority on Development in playing a greater role, and provide targeted assistance and support. Secondly, we must give major attention to humanitarian crises. South Sudan is facing multiple challenges, including the novel coronavirus disease, floods and fluctuations in international commodity prices. Economic difficulties have increased. More than 6 million people need humanitarian assistance and more than 3 million cannot return to their homes. International partners and financial institutions should increase emergency assistance to help South Sudan meet its urgent needs and the basic needs of its people. At the same time, they must find ways to help South Sudan rebuild its economy, achieve sustainable development and truly eliminate the root causes of conflict. China has been providing anti-pandemic supplies and emergency food aid to South Sudan since the start of the pandemic. The Chinese medical team has remained at its posts in South Sudan and is helping the people. China will continue to support South Sudan's fight against the epidemic and provide support to the degree that it is capable. Thirdly, the sanctions on South Sudan must be lifted as soon as possible. The coronavirus disease pandemic is having a fairly negative impact there, and sanctions have worsened the situation. The African Union Peace and Security Council recently met to once again call for the lifting of sanctions on South Sudan. China calls on the international community to respond to the African Union initiative and lift the sanctions as soon as possible. This will help encourage all the parties to continue to participate actively in the political process and maintain the current good momentum. We hope that the midterm review of the arms embargo will change its working methods and achieve substantial progress. Lastly, China appreciates the fact that the United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) has worked to mitigate the impact of the coronavirus disease, while actively protecting civilians and providing technical support to the Government of South Sudan. It is hoped that UNMISS will give priority to the implementation of the mandate of the Revitalized Agreement, strengthen communication with the Government and resolve the restrictions that it has had to deal with in performing its duties. We are willing to work with the international community to play a constructive role in ensuring peace, stability and economic development in South Sudan and in fighting the pandemic there.
