Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, allow me to welcome my dear
friend the Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Russian Federation and thank him for his presence
at this meeting and for the valuable clarifications he
just provided.

As the English saying goes,
(spoke in English)

"words may lie, but actions will always tell
the truth".

(spoke in Arabic)

The truth known to everyone is that the suffering of
the Syrian people is the result of the crimes of various
terrorist groups, going by different names and having
varying loyalties, and including foreign terrorist
fighters among their ranks. Their suffering is also the
result of the aggression and war crimes and crimes
against humanity perpetrated by the United States-led
coalition, its agents and its proxy militias, including its
barbaric actions involving economic terrorism.

The truth everyone knows is that, from the
beginning, the humanitarian issue has been exploited
by Governments of certain members and non-members
of the Security Council to target my country and
ruin Syrian State institutions, while distorting their
image and turning public opinion against them.
How can anyone believe that the claims made by the
Governments of those countries in their reprehensible
statements are born of their concern for the safety of
the Syrian people? How long will the Council be unable
to uphold the principles of the Charter of the United
Nations and international law, or be unable to compel
those aggressor States to end their aggressive practices
against my country, as well as hold them responsible?

Some colleagues mentioned the situation in Idlib.
In my statement before the Council on 17 May (see S/PV.8527) I clarified the reality on the ground given
that the terrorist group Hayat Tahrir al-Sham - which,
by the way, is the Al-Nusra Front, which itself is part
of Al-Qaida in the Levant, which in turn is part of
Al-Qaida in Iraq, which in turn is part of Al-Qaida
in Afghanistan. Therefore, we are all talking about
Al-Qaida, regardless of its different names; all are
designated by the Council as terrorist entities. Hayat
Tahrir al-Sham, along with its associates, control large
parts of Idlib and also carry out terrorist attacks on
neighbouring safe areas and on positions of Russian
and Syrian forces, as detailed by my Russian colleague.

I continue to await a response to the questions I
raised previously, including how members would
react when facing similar circumstances whereby
terrorist groups take control of one of their cities and
use it to target other cities and undermine their safety
and security.

The Ambassador of Belgium, speaking on behalf
ofthe co-penholders, asked five questions; we have just
one question, which I have just asked. When will it be
recognized that the right we are exercising is the same
right others have exercised in confronting terrorist
attacks against the Bataclan theatre and the offices
of Charlie Heba'o in Paris, as well as terrorist acts in
Niece, London, Boston and other cities? The terrorists
that members have confronted in their own countries
were not equipped with Turkish rocket launchers and
tanks, or modern United States military supplies and
communication technologies. They were not supported
by media mercenaries such as the American Bilal Abdul
Karim, who is the Al-Nusra Front terrorist group's
correspondent working with British Sky News and the
American CNN. They did not have Western experts on
chemical weapons at their disposal, as is the case with
the terrorists holding civilians hostage in Idlib.

The meeting held two days ago by the Turkish
intelligence service with members of the Al-Nusra
Front and other terrorist groups - including Jaysh
Al-Izza, Ahrar Al-Sham, Suqour Al-Sham and Jaysh
Al-Ahrar - serves to refute everything put forward in
previous years with regard to the so-called "moderate
Syrian opposition". It also proves undoubtedly that
Governments of States sponsoring terrorism are
providing support to those armed terrorist groups.
Allow me to show the Council photographic evidence.
This is a photograph ofthe leaders ofthe terrorist groups
that held a meeting in Idlib two days ago sponsored by
Turkish intelligence and some members represented in
the Security Council. Leading the meeting was the head
of the Al-Nusra Front, Al-Julani the terrorist. What is
important is that some people in the photograph sitting
down with the Al-Nusra Front, which controls 99 per
cent ofIdlib, were part ofthe Astana process - meaning
that they are obligated not to fight alongside these
terrorist groups against the Syrian Government. They
are bound to honour the agreements reached at Astana,
including the establishment of the de-escalation zone.
Therefore, this is a photograph of the "moderates" who
were meeting in Idlib.

How long will the Council ignore the suffering of
tens of thousands of Syrian civilians in areas where
militias of illegitimate foreign forces are present?
Ignoring the suffering ofthose civilians yet again proves
the scale of the lies and hypocrisy of some in dealing
with humanitarian issues. Allow me to highlight some
aspects of that suffering.

First, the United States and its agent the terrorist
group of Maghaweer Al-Thawra continue to detain
thousands of civilians in Rukban camp, in the occupied
Al-Tanf area. They are preventing civilians from
leaving the camp and returning home. They refuse to
dismantle the camp. We call on the Security Council
to compel the United States to cease its obstruction of
joint Russian and Syrian efforts to end the suffering
of the residents of that camp. Those efforts resulted in
making it possible for more than 12,000 people to leave
the camp.

Allow me to express my reservations about
remarks made by Ms. Mueller in her briefing. She
urged the Syrian authorities to allow the entry of
a third humanitarian convoy into Rukban camp, in
Al-Tanf. She gave the impression that it is the Syrian
Government that is obstructing the entry of the convoy
into the area, and I would like to correct that. The
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
(OCHA), Ms. Mueller, the Secretary-General, the
Security Council and, in fact, the entire world all know
that the Syrian Government approved the first convoy.
It was the occupying United States forces that refused
the entry of the convoy for 40 days. Ms. Mueller,
OCHA, the Council and the Secretary-General know
that the Syrian Government also approved the second
convoy. The United States of America - the occupying
Power - refused the entry of the convoy into Al-Tanf
for four months. Ms. Mueller, OCHA, the Council
and the Secretary-General know that, by virtue of the
1949 Geneva Conventions, the occupying Power is
responsible for the protection of civilians. The United
States occupying forces in Al-Tanf are, by virtue of the
Geneva Conventions, responsible for providing medical
and food assistance to those under its occupation.
Please correct me ifI am mistaken. Why is the United
States occupying such a wide expanse of my country?
What is the position of OCHA and the Council? What
is the United States doing in Syria?

Secondly, the situation in Al-Hol camp, in the
north-east of the country, is just as desperate as the
situation in Rukban camp. Al-Hol camp is under the
control of United States proxy militias known as the
Syrian Democratic Forces. They are militias that grew
with the support of the United States-led coalition,
supplemented by elements of the Da'esh terrorist
group. They have perpetrated many massacres, carried
out brutal practices and detained and tortured Syrians
who have called for their rights and the return of
Syrian State institutions so that they can carry out their
role. I would recall that the United States and gangs
of the Syrian Democratic Forces are plundering and
smuggling oil, historical artefacts and Syrian national
resources. They are undermining the Syrian economy
and fabricating crises that impact the day-to-day lives
of the Syrian people.

Thirdly, we must put an end to the suffering of
our people in the areas under the illegal control of the
invading forces of the Turkish regime. We call on the
Security Council to take decisive and immediate action
to put an end to the practices of the Turkish regime and
its attempts to change the identity and demographic
character of those Syrian areas, put an end to the
Erdogan regime's attempts to undermine the unity and
territorial integrity of the Syrian Arab Republic and
end his delusions of bringing back the Ottoman Empire.
Those days are gone for ever. I say that because I heard
my colleague the Ambassador of Britain thanking the
Turkish authorities for their humanitarian assistance
in Idlib.

The Syrian Arab Republic would like to stress
that the presence of any foreign military forces on its
territories without its approval is an act of aggression
and occupation and will be dealt with accordingly. Our
perspective is clear. We will spare no effort to rid our
citizens in Idlib of the control of the terrorist groups
that have taken them as human shields and to put an
end to the repeated acts of aggression of those terrorist
groups against innocent civilians in neighbouring
towns and cities. We call on all countries concerned
to withdraw their nationals who are foreign terrorist
fighters, whose number is estimated in the tens of
thousands. We call on them to withdraw those fighters
from my country immediately, hold them accountable
for their crimes, make sure that they do not commit
future crimes and not recycle those terrorists, thereby
allowing them to pursue their terrorism in countries in
Africa and elsewhere.

I would like to ask the representatives of Western
States in the Council: How can elements of terrorist
groups and foreign terrorist fighters move to Libya,
Afghanistan, Central Asia and the borders of the Niger
with Algeria, and others, without the support and
sponsorship of Governments with influence? We have
warned against this time and again. We have said that
those countries are investing in terrorism to undermine
the security and stability of other countries and serve
their own political agendas.

Our second question is the following: Why has the
Secretariat, with the partnership of 38 international
counter-terrorism institutions, been unable to identify
the Governments of States sponsoring terrorism that
has been targeting my country for the last eight years?
It is not that complicated, really. It is not as if we are
trying to identify the gender of angels.

We will liberate all of our national territory. We
will rid it of any illegal presence of foreign troops. That
is a sovereign right in accordance with the principles
of international law, the provisions of the Charter, the
Council's resolutions and the Astana agreements, which
have reaffirmed the sovereignty, unity and territorial
integrity ofthe Syrian Arab Republic. We call on OCHA
to shoulder its responsibilities and inform the United
Nations about the humanitarian suffering of the Syrian
people as a result of the unilateral economic measures
imposed by the United States, the European Union and
other States against my country, Syria. These measures
have had a negative impact on the day-to-day lives of the
Syrian people. The Ministry of Health in Syria cannot
even access material and equipment used in surgeries.
That is a form of economic terrorism that complements
terrorism by terrorist groups and their supporters. This
is unacceptable and should not go on. Again, we call
on OCHA to stop including in its reports claims that
are baseless and fabricated by hostile parties in the

United Nations Office in Gaziantep and in OCHA in
order to implement the agendas of the United States and
its allies.

In conclusion, some Council members - by which I
mean the United States, Britain and France * continue
to use deceit and misinformation to implement their
hegemonic policies so that the world goes back to
the era of colonialism, mandate and trusteeship.
Those countries continue to use the Security Council
to protect terrorists and undermine the advances of
the Syrian army when confronting terrorist groups
supported by those countries, including by instructing
the White Helmets terrorist group, which is a branch
of the Al-Nusra Front, to fabricate so-called use of
toxic chemical materials and to accuse the Syrian
Government of the act. It would not be the first time
that two of those countries have fabricated the lie of the
weapons of mass destruction in Iraq.

Similar to what happened when the Syrian army
made advances in eastern Ghouta, Aleppo and other
areas, we hear senior officials from those countries
and their Ambassadors in the Security Council making
threats in the event of the use of chemical materials.
Those senior officials and Ambassadors tell armed
terrorist groups in Idlib that they will be saved only if
chemical weapons are used. They ask them to use toxic
chemical weapons against civilians in Idlib, fabricate
evidence, bring forward false witnesses, as usual, and
manipulate the crime scene as they have done before,
and then those countries are ready with their political
and media capabilities to accuse the Syrian Government
and to come to their aid. That has happened before, and
we should prevent its recurrence.

