Mr. Ipo (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation welcomes the holding of this meeting on
the latest developments in the humanitarian situation
in Syria and commends Ms. Ursula Mueller, Assistant
Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Deputy Emergency Relief Coordinator, for her valuable
briefing. We also extend a warm welcome to the Deputy
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Kuwait.

My delegation remains deeply concerned by
the resurgence in hostilities, which is exacerbating
the already dire humanitarian situation in Syria.
According to Mr. Stephane Dujarric, Spokesman for
the Secretary-General, air strikes over recent days have
hit dozens of communities in the governorates of Idlib,
Hama, Aleppo and Latakia, displacing approximately
60,000 people. These bombings and clashes have
also left several people dead, destroyed or damaged
civilian infrastructure in the region, including schools
and hospitals, and hampered the response capacity of
humanitarian actors.

In this regard, my country commends the efforts
of the United Nations and humanitarian organizations
to meet the needs of populations in distress under
particularly difficult conditions. According to the
United Nations, an average of 5.6 million civilians have
access to humanitarian aid every month, mainly from
inside Syria. In that context, Cote d'Ivoire reiterates its
call on all parties to the conflict to cease hostilities,
guarantee the protection of civilians during military
operations and respect international humanitarian law,
including the principles of distinction, proportionality
and precaution. We also urge them to respect the
Russian-Turkish agreement on the establishment of a
demilitarized zone in Idlib, signed on 17 September
2018, as well as the agreements concluded on 17 October
2019, between the United States of America and
Turkey on the safe zone in north-eastern Syria, and on
22 October 2019, between Russia and Turkey on control
of the Syrian border.

My country welcomes the efforts aimed at
ensuring the continuation of cross-border humanitarian
deliveries for thousands of people affected by the
conflict, in particular the cross-border humanitarian
assistance mechanism established by resolution 2165
(2014). We further urge the international community
to support efforts to ensure safe, swift, unhindered
and sustainable humanitarian access to populations in
distress. My country also calls for the renewal of the
mandate of the cross-border humanitarian assistance
delivery mechanism.

In conclusion, Cote d'Ivoire urges all parties to the
conflict to cease hostilities throughout Syrian territory
and calls once again on the international community
to support the Special Envoy of the Secretary-
General in his tireless efforts aimed at reaching a
peaceful and lasting solution to the Syrian crisis and
thereby promoting peace, stability and development in
the region.

