Mr. Al-Khussaiby (Oman): Mr. President, allow me
at the outset to take this opportunity to extend to you my
sincere congratulations on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council during the current month of May,
and to express our confidence that your competence and
diplomatic skills will guide the deliberations of the Council
to a successful conclusion. I would also like to pay special
tribute to your predecessor, Ambassador Karel Kovanda,
the Permanent Representative of the Czech Republic, for
the exemplary manner in which he steered the work of the
Council during the month of April.

The Security Council is fully aware of the aspirations
of the Arab people towards achieving peace in the Middle
East, and of ending all the remains of walls and of hatred
towards Israel, which have prevailed for the past forty
years. The Arab States, led by the PLO, emphasized the
need for the convening of the Madrid Peace Conference,
which was chaired by the two super-Powers, the United
States and the Russian Federation. The Conference was
followed by serious and positive negotiations at all the
bilateral and multilateral levels. In spite of all the political
and social dangers which have encompassed the outcome of
these negotiations, the Arabs were quite responsible in their
dealing with these negotiations. The Arab leadership,
however, was steadfast in its observance of the international
legitimacy and the vital role of the international and
regional gatherings led by the United Nations and its
various organizations which have supported the peace process.

The political decision of the United States to engage
in negotiations with Israel was a strategic one, based on
resolution 242 (1967) and 338 (1973), as well as on the
principle of land for peace. The decision of the Government
of Israel to engage in negotiations with the PLO and the
signing of the Declaration of Principles by the two parties
have strengthened confidence-building in the peace process.
The Jordanian-Israeli Peace Treaty has further enhanced
confidence for the future of peace.

However, the expropriation of 53 hectares of Arab
land by Israel in east Jerusalem, with no legal backing,
constitutes a violation of the agreement by the parties, in
which it was decided that consideration of the question of
east Jerusalem be postponed until the end of the
negotiations in view of its extreme sensitivity to the
Arabs and Muslims as regards the question of Al-Quds.
This action has overshadowed the future of the
negotiations between the Arabs and the Israelis, and it has
also an adverse effect on the normalization of relations
between the two parties. Consequently, the future of
peace is at stake.

Acting upon their responsibilities towards the Arab-
Israeli negotiations and the future of peace, the Arab
States have decided to request the convening of this
Security Council meeting, on the basis of the fact that this
body is the world's sole international authority
responsible for peace-keeping. The request of the Arab
States for the convening of this meeting is based on their
urgent need to safeguard the peace process, and to
distance it from any political manoeuvres which would
jeopardize any peace process in the Middle East, and
might lead to the return of the cold war.

We do believe that the Security Council must
seriously consider the draft resolution before us - not in
order to complicate this matter, but rather to safeguard the
peace process itself. We would like to emphasize that the
first step the Council should take is to render Israel's
decision to expropriate Arab territories, including
Al-Quds, as null and void. Such a decision will renew the
Arabs' confidence in the peace process. And will enable
the two chairmen of the peace process in the Middle East,
the United States and the Russian Federation, to invite all
parties concerned to undertake more negotiations on this
matter.

We strongly believe that Israel does not possess any
legal instrument which would grant it the right to
expropriate Arab territories or allow it to make use of any
portion of occupied territory. It is not acceptable. In order
to maintain its future relations with Arab States, it is in
Israel's interest to cooperate with other parties, especially
with the patrons of the peace process, in overcoming this
dilemma, which we regard as a stumbling-block to the
peace process. We therefore call on Israel to expedite all
efforts to prevent further complications in the Middle
East.

 

