Ms. Mohammed: Allow me at the outset to
congratulate France on assuming the presidency of
the Security Council for this month and to thank you,
Madam, for presiding over this important open debate
on combatting the financing of terrorism.

I would like to also thank all briefers for their
insightful presentations.

Today's debate is indeed all the more relevant as it
takes place against the background of ever-increasing
challenges to international peace and security. And
obviously, terrorism and violent extremism remain
the most serious threat to our world's stability
and development.

I wish to reiterate the African Union's strong and
unequivocal rejection of terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations, as well as its strong condemnation of
all terrorist acts, which cannot be justified under any
circumstances. Iwould like to reaffirm our full solidarity
with the affected countries and victims, whose plight
should be fully acknowledged and addressed. It is also
our strong belief that terrorism cannot and should not
be associated with any religion, race or nationality.

In this regard, we note with major concern the
growing capacity of terrorist groups to finance their
activities by, among other things, running criminal/
illicit economies in areas under their control, engaging
in the illegal exploitation of and trade in natural
resources, kidnaping for ransom, arms, drugs and
human trafficking, and other types of transnational
organized crime. In this regard, permit me to elaborate
on the following four points.

First, financing remains the major vulnerability
of the different terrorist groups. Indeed, the success of
these groups in causing more atrocities largely depends
on their ability to adequately and sustainably finance the
preparation, planning and execution of terrorist attacks.
Therefore, there is an urgent need for more concerted
and coordinated efforts on the part of Member States to
effectively deny terrorist groups any source of funding,
including payment of ransom, as well as any form of
military, logistical or political support.
Secondly, if we are to effectively prevent and
suppress the financing of terrorist acts, we need
to take fully into account the terrorists' continued
ability to adapt their methods and innovate to meet
their financing needs. In this vein, there is increasing
evidence that terrorists are turning to transnational
organized crime networks to generate funding and
acquire logistical support to carry out their violent acts.
They are taking advantage of existing financial systems
and technologies, which they seek to float in order to
transfer large amounts of cash to intended recipients.

Similarly, there is evidence that terrorist groups
use legitimate private and non-profit sectors to channel
funding. However, the non-profit sector remains largely
ill-informed about its vulnerability to exploitation by
these extremist groups, and non-profit organizations
are often small, informal and not properly regulated.
Terrorist and extremist groups therefore take
advantage of these weaknesses to illicitly move large
amounts of money under the guise of implementing
non-profit activities.

Thirdly, continued efforts are required to ensure
full compliance with the international and regional
legal frameworks on combating the financing of
terrorism. The African Union (AU) is fully committed
to supporting its member States in implementing the
already agreed measures and meeting the international
standards in this regard. It will be recalled that the
African Union had played a critical role in raising
international awareness about the danger posed by the
payment of ransom to terrorist groups, as illustrated by
the decision adopted by the African Union Assembly on
the issue in July 2009 and subsequent efforts to enhance
the existing international frameworks.

Fourthly, financial intelligence, including from the
private sector, has been instrumental in tracking down
terrorists behind most attacks globally, and also in
Africa, and this has contributed to both the disruption
of terrorist financing and to preventing further
attacks. In this context, the strengthening of finance
intelligence units remains a major component of the
AU strategy to defeat terrorism and violent extremism.
The establishment of the Eastern and Southern Africa
Anti-Money Laundering Group is a reflection of the
importance that the countries of the region, and beyond,
attach to the need for cooperation and coordinated
efforts in ensuring compliance with the regional and
international standards against money-laundering and
terrorist financing.

In conclusion, I would like to emphasize once again
the critical importance of cooperation among the Member
States, both at the regional and international levels.
Let us not forget that we are dealing with a borderless
threat of global reach and that in our globalized society,
no country is immune to its devastating impact. The
international approach to reversing this scourge must
be as comprehensive and as integrated as possible,
while focusing on preventing and disrupting financial
flows to terrorist and extremist groups.

