Mr. Wang Yingfan (China) (spoke in Chinese):
Mr. President, I wish to welcome your presence in New
York today to preside over today's meeting.

For the East Timorese people, as well as for the
United Nations, today calls for joyful celebrations.
After more than two and a half years of preparation,
the East Timorese people have at long last gained their
national independence and become a new member of
the international community. President Jiang Zemin of
China has already extended his warm congratulations
and best wishes to the leaders and people of East
Timor. China eagerly looks forward to the newborn
Democratic Republic of East Timor becoming the
newest Member of the United Nations.
Credit for the independence of East Timor goes
first and foremost to the people of East Timor and to
their perseverance, courage and reconciliatory spirit. At
the same time, the role of the United Nations has also
been indispensable. All through the process of the
national referendum, the development of the
Constitution, the presidential elections and the
independence ceremony, the United Nations has played
a leading role. We can safely say that without the
United Nations full participation the independence
process in East Timor would not have gone so
smoothly.

The administrator of the United Nations
Transitional Administration in East Timor (UNTAET),
Mr. Vieira de Mello, has already handed over the key
to the Government building to President Xanana
Gusmao, but the outstanding contribution that
UNTAET and Mr. Vieira de Mello himself have made
for the smooth passage of the people of East Timor to
independence will go down in the annals of East
Timorese history.

The independence of East Timor marks a new
stage in its national development. East Timor still has a
long way to go in achieving social stability and
economic development and it cannot do without
assistance from the international community. The
Security Council has already unanimously adopted a
resolution establishing the United Nations Mission of
Support in East Timor (UNMISET), which is an
embodiment of the wider United Nations membership's
commitment to the East Timorese people. We hope and
believe that UNMISET will build on the achievements
of UNTAET and - under the leadership of
Ambassador Sharma, the newly appointed Special
Representative of the Secretary-General; in the light of
changes in the situation; and on the basis of its
mandate, established by a Security Council
resolution - make further contributions to helping the
East Timorese to consolidate their success and develop
their beautiful homeland. China will actively support
and contribute personnel to UNMISET.

As a close neighbour of East Timor, China has
always paid close attention to its independence process.
China actively participated in the work of UNTAET
and, through bilateral channels, has provided assistance
to East Timor within our capabilities. Upon East
Timor's independence, China established formal
diplomatic relations with it and provided it with new
economic and technical assistance. We believe that,
through joint efforts on both sides, a new chapter will
be written in the history of friendly cooperation
between the two countries.

