I would like to thank Mr. Pedersen and Ms. Ghazi for their presentations. More than 100,000 people in Syria today are imprisoned in the regime's jails. The latest amnesty announced by the regime cannot be taken seriously. The lack of progress on the issue of the disappeared persons also remains one of the main sources of suffering for the Syrian people. The Council must unite in response to the Special Envoy's call to release prisoners and facilitate access to detention centres. It is urgent to move beyond the current prisoner-exchange logic. The time has come to work on a broader political process that meets the expectations of Syrian civil society. The paralysis in the work of the Constitutional Committee eight months after its creation is appalling. After months of obstruction, for which the regime bears sole responsibility, it is urgent that discussions with the Special Envoy resume to prepare for a meeting in Geneva as soon as possible. The regime's repression of protests in the south of the country in recent weeks also clearly shows that it continues to propose repressive solutions to political problems. In the face of instability and the coronavirus disease, the priority must be to establish a comprehensive nationwide ceasefire under United Nations supervision, in response to the appeal made by the Secretary-General and his Special Envoy. In the north-west, the Russian-Turkish truce agreement remains fragile. The fight against terrorist groups cannot justify the resumption of an offensive by the regime and its allies or violations of international law. In both the north-west and north-east, humanitarian aid must reach people in need. In that context, the cross- border mechanism remains irreplaceable. France will continue, along with its partners, to combat the resurgence of Da'esh in the centre of the country. Finally, the instability and serious economic crisis in Syria underscores the urgency of finding a political solution. The economic crisis in Syria is the result of chronic corruption and of the regime's refusal to compromise. The European sanctions are focused on individuals and entities that participate in the repression and profit from the war economy. Sanctions also have mechanisms to safeguard humanitarian access. The European Union is among the main contributors of humanitarian assistance, including in the regime-controlled areas. Because it is the only way to bring back stability, I call on the Special Envoy to work on a political process that encompasses all elements of resolution 2254 (2015): the implementation of confidence-building measures to create a secure and neutral environment, and preparations for free and fair elections under United Nations supervision in which the Syrian diaspora participates. Elections that do not meet the criteria set out in resolution 2254 (2015) can in no way be recognized as legitimate by the Council. Finally, as long as a credible political process is not firmly under way, France and the European Union will not finance reconstruction in Syria.
