Mr. Haidara (Nigeria): Iwish to thank the Ethiopian
presidency and the membership of the Security
Council for organizing this briefing. It is illustrative
of the positive disposition of members of the Security
Council towards resolving the myriad challenges of the
Lake Chad Basin region. Our special appreciation goes
to the Secretary-General for his report (S/2017/764),
which contains far-reaching recommendations. We also
commend Under-Secretary-General Feltman for his
insight on the situation in the region and we note the
perspectives shared by Fatima Shehu Imam.

The Boko Haram insurgency has negatively
impacted virtually every facet of human endeavour,
including the economy, the polity, and the lives and
livelihoods of people not only in the north-east of
Nigeria, but across the region.

The insurgency has been met with resolve and
resilience of the Nigerian people and Government. The
Multinational Joint Task Force has had great success in
weakening Boko Haram. We have continued to witness
the emergence of rescued survivors and Victims,
hitherto under the brutal oppression of Boko Haram
in the north-east. Communities have pulled together to
provide succour.

For its part, the Nigerian Government has made
significant progress in the fight against Boko Haram.
The Nigerian military has successfully taken over the
Sambisa forest and its environs. In that success story, we
acknowledge the critical support of our neighbouring
countries, namely, Cameroon, Chad, the Niger and
Benin. That progress notwithstanding, the Nigerian
Government is aware of other development challenges
in the region, including the shrinking of Lake Chad.
Averting that consequence will require dedicated
international intervention to recharge the lake.

As we celebrate our gains in the war against Boko
Haram, we are not oblivious of the humanitarian
challenges resulting from the massive displacement of
persons, the abandoned farmlands and the disruption
of the educational system, among others. In that
regard, the Government of Nigeria has embarked on
programmes to support the reintegration of victims into
their communities.

I am glad to report that the Presidential Committee
on the North-East Initiative has been mandated to
coordinate and provide synergy, leadership and
direction for the various initiatives to help bring
normalcy to the region. That encompasses Government,
development partners, private foundations and civil
society. We are also accelerating the implementation of
existing legal and institutional frameworks to alleviate
the suffering of our people, in the spirit of the Istanbul
World Humanitarian Summit of May 2016.

We acknowledge and welcome the critical support
provided by the United Nations agencies to the girls
released by Boko Haram. For its part, the Nigerian
Government has continued to provide food, integrated
healthcare, shelter, psychosocial support and access to
water and sanitation amenities for those in need. We
are also engaging highly respected community and
religious leaders to discourage vulnerable youth from
being radicalized. We continue to accord the highest
premium to increasing the resilience of internally
displaced persons through vocational training and
skills acquisition programmes.

We hope that at this critical juncture, when there
is an improvement in the security situation as a result
of the recent military gains, the Security Council and
the international community will continue to engage
the Governments in the region in the search for lasting
peace, security, protection of civilians and resolution of
the humanitarian situation caused by the activities of
Boko Haram.

May I seize this opportunity to reiterate the
commitment of Nigeria to the protection of civilians
in armed conflict, in recognition of the primary
responsibility of States to protect civilians within their
national jurisdiction. This conviction underlines our
Government's resolve to take all measures necessary to
protect civilians in the battle against the terrorist group
Boko Haram and its ilk. All such measures are being
taken within a framework designed to simultaneously
address the short- and medium-term development
needs of the region.

In conclusion, I wish to reiterate that the future
of the people of the Lake Chad basin region rests on
durable security and the sustainability of resources
around the lake. We are confident that by enhancing
collaboration and consolidating strong partnerships
through the Lake Chad Basin Commission and the
African Union, we will swiftly overcome the Challenge.
The upcoming N'Djamena meeting is a consolidation
of such efforts.

We renew the call for rededicated international
action, increased global attention and active
engagement with countries of the Lake Chad basin
region to accelerate the recovery efforts and to address
the root causes of terrorism.

The meeting rose at 5.05 p.m.
