Ms. Rice (United States of America): Before I
begin my statement, let me congratulate you, Madame
President, on assuming the presidency of the Council
for the month of October. We know you will lead us
ably, and we very much look forward to cooperating
with you. Let me join others in paying tribute to
Lebanon and Ambassador Nawaf Salam for his stellar
leadership of the Council through a very difficult
month. We are grateful to him.

The United States is outraged that this Council
has utterly failed to address an urgent moral challenge
and a growing threat to regional peace and security.
Several members have sought for weeks to weaken and
strip bare any texts that would have defended the lives
of innocent civilians from Assad's brutality. Today, two
members have vetoed a vastly watered-down text that
does not even mention sanctions.

Let me be clear. The United States believes it is
past time for this Council to assume its responsibilities
and impose tough, targeted sanctions and an arms
embargo on the Assad regime, as we have done
domestically. Yet today, the courageous people of Syria
can now see clearly who on this Council supports their
yearning for liberty and universal human rights, and
who does not.

During this season of change, the people of the
Middle East can now see clearly which nations have
chosen to ignore their calls for democracy and instead
prop up desperate, cruel dictators. Those who oppose
this draft resolution and give cover to a brutal regime
will have to answer to the Syrian people and, indeed, to
people across the region who are pursuing the same
universal aspirations.

The record is clear. For more than six months, the
Al-Assad regime has deliberately unleashed violence,
torture and persecution against peaceful protesters,
human rights defenders and their families. The High
Commissioner for Human Rights has already warned
that the Syrian Government's appalling actions might
amount to crimes against humanity. The Al-Assad
regime's critics have joined the chorus of
condemnation from the region, including the Gulf
Cooperation Council, which demanded an immediate
end to what it called Assad's "killing machine". But the
Security Council has not yet passed even a hortatory
resolution to counter the Al-Assad regime's brutal
oppression.

The arguments against strong Council action
grow weaker and weaker by the day. Some on the
Council argue that the Al-Assad regime's abuses are
not that egregious or that the regime deserves more
time for its so-called reforms. But as reporting by the
United Nations itself makes clear, the Syrian
Government's efforts to mask its continued atrocities
are as transparent as its promises of reform are empty.

Others claim that strong Security Council action
on Syria would merely be a pretext for military
intervention. Let there be no doubt: this is not about
military intervention; this is not about Libya. That is a
cheap ruse by those who would rather sell arms to the
Syrian regime than stand with the Syrian people.

This is about whether the Council, during a time
of sweeping change in the Middle East, will stand with
peaceful protesters crying out for freedom or with a
regime of thugs with guns that tramples human dignity
and human rights. As matters now stand, the Council
will not even mandate the dispatch of human rights
monitors to Syria, a grave failure that may doom the
prospects for peaceful protest in the face of a regime
that knows no limits.
In August, we clearly condemned the violence
and made clear that the Syrian regime's repression is
utterly unacceptable. Several of us on the Council and
many throughout the international community have
voiced our condemnation and imposed sanctions on the
Al-Assad regime. Regional organizations such as the
League of Arab States, the Gulf Cooperation Council
and the Organization of Islamic Cooperation have
urged the Syrian Government to stop the bloodshed.
But the Syrian Government's reply has been an
increase in the violence and repression, while some
Council members have chosen to look the other way.

We urge the Governments that failed to support
Council action to change course and heed the voices of
the Syrian people. The Al-Assad regime flatly refuses
to meet its international obligations, including those
laid out in the Council's 3 August presidential
statement (S/PRST/2011/16). The international
community must bring real consequences to bear.

In failing to adopt the draft resolution before us,
the Council has squandered an opportunity to shoulder
its responsibilities to the Syrian people. We deeply
regret that some members of the Council have
prevented us from taking a principled stand against the
Syrian regime's brutal oppression of its people. But the
suffering citizens of Syria are watching today, and so is
the entire Middle East. The crisis in Syria will stay
before the Security Council, and we will not rest until
the Council rises to meet its responsibilities.

