Mr. Moustafa (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic):First of
all, I would like to thank the delegation of the United
States for its efforts to facilitate negotiations on the
very important resolution that we have just adopted,
resolution 2368 (2017). In our opinion, it is one of the
Security Council's most important resolutions with
regard to combating terrorism. It goes without saying
that the resolution contains very substantial provisions,
such as those, for example, that are linked to the
sanctions imposed upon Da'esh and Al-Qaida, as well
as on individuals, groups, entities and institutions that
are affiliated with those groups. Moreover, we also note
the significant paragraphs that commit all countries to
prevent the financing of terrorism and the provision of
arms and any other support intended for terrorist ends.

We would like to confirm very briefly two very
important points.

First, it is crucial that our efforts to combat terrorism
be successful. We must adopt a global approach based
on combating terrorism, wherever it is found, and tackle
its root causes without any exception.

Secondly, we reiterate that, since we joined the
Security Council, we have noted that its resolutions,
especially with respect to combating terrorism. It is
critical for the Security Council to hold countries
that do not respect its resolutions accountable. It is
inadmissible and irrational for the Council to discover
that, after adopting resolutions that establish a legal
and operational framework for combating terrorism,
regimes or groups in small countries undermine and
destroy that framework. Those regimes continuously
and flagrantly violate the Council's resolutions without
any fear of being held to account. They continue
to finance terrorism, provide arms and safe havens
to terrorists.

In that regard, I need only cite as evidence the
regime of Qatar, which has embraced a policy that
favours terrorism. That regime has financed terrorism,
provided arms to terrorists, given them refuge and
incited terrorism, whether in Libya, Syria, Iraq or in
other countries. That is the policy of the Qatar regime,
which has already violated the Council's resolutions and
believes that economic and political interests will shield
it from accountability vis-a-vis the Security Council. It
is actually a shameful situation that cannot be allowed
to continue. It is inconceivable to witness the silence

and absence of political will pn that account shown by
members of the Council, whose resolutions must be
effective, for which it must work to end all violations.

In conclusion, I reaffirm that Egypt will always
respect its commitments. We will always be at the
forefront ofthe fight against terrorism, while respecting
international law, human rights and the rule of law.

