Mr. Ladsous (spoke in French): Thank you,
Mr. President, for giving me this opportunity to present
the most recent report of the Secretary-General on the

African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID) (S/2013/607). I will be brief.

In general, the report before the Council outlines
the limited progress that has been made in the peace
process, a very worrying security situation and the
continuing need for substantial humanitarian aid in
Darfur. It also describes a very disturbing resolutionise
in violent attacks by armed assailants on UNAMID
personnel and humanitarian workers. I would like to
take this opportunity to express my condolences to the
Governments and the families of the peacekeepers who
were tragically killed in the most recent attacks. I would
like to add my voice to all those who are appealing to
the Government of the Sudan to speedily identify those
responsible for the attacks and take the necessary action.
Impunity for such reprehensible attacks must end. In that
regard, I would like to commend the Peace and Security
Council of the African Union's call, in a 17 October
communique, on the Government of the Sudan to
identify those responsible as quickly as possible and to
bring them to justice. The Peace and Security Council's
decision to follow up the investigation of the situation
in a month and to request an update on measures taken
is also encouraging.

(spoke in English)

At the same time, here at Headquarters we are
working with troop- and police-contributing countries
to ensure that uniformed personnel deployed to
Darfur are properly equipped, trained and prepared to
operate in a very challenging security environment.
That includes engaging bilaterally with contributing
countries to address equipment and serviceability
shortfalls. In addition, we are working with countries
preparing to deploy new units to Darfur to ensure that
their contingents meet the operational standards and
requirements. As Council members may be aware, that
involves appropriate preparations for deploying three
infantry battalions in order to replace units that have
been or are soon to be withdrawn, as well as a utility
helicopter unit.

In addition to presenting safety and security
challenges for UNAMID and aid personnel, the
intensification of conflict has increased the civilian
population's need for protection and humanitarian
assistance. Furthermore, support for the peace
process and efforts to strengthen the rule of law
and human rights in Darfur remain much needed.
With a View to ensuring that the mission has the
resources, configuration and procedures needed
to address those issues more effectively, we have
begun, in close consultation with the African Union,
a forward-looking and detailed review, as requested
in resolution 2113 (2013). The review will consist of a
conflict analysis and capability review phase, a senior
assessment mission to Darfur to validate the analysis,
the development of recommendations and options for
improving the mission's effectiveness and, eventually,
presentation of the findings to the Security Council.
The analysis, which involves an updated assessment of
the causes, actors and drivers of conflict in Darfur and
of projected trends, as well as an examination of the
mission's strategic and operation approach, is currently
under way. The senior assessment mission will take
place in late November and early December, and the
presentation of the findings and recommendations is
expected in February.

Despite very challenging circumstances, UNAMID
remains resolute in its commitment to providing much-
needed protection to civilians, facilitating the delivery
of aid and supporting the peace process. We here at
Headquarters will continue to work with the mission,
the African Union and other partners to ensure that
our peacekeepers in Darfur are able to carry out their
mandate in a robust, effective and efficient way. In
that connection, the Council's continued support for
UNAMID's operations and efforts to reach an inclusive
political settlement to the conflict remain very welcome.

