Mr. Sauer (Finland): Let me first thank Lithuania
for convening this important Security Council meeting.

Small arms and light weapons are the most
frequently used weapons in armed conflicts today.
They pose a continuous threat to international peace
and security. Their uncontrolled and illicit proliferation
cause significant loss oflife and contribute to instability
and insecurity. They also fuel conflicts and have various
negative impacts on human rights, humanitarian law
and development. The misuse of small arms and light
weapons can also have a disproportionate impact on
women and girls. These weapons also threaten stable
post-conflict peace and security.

We have to be mindful that parties to armed conflict
bear the primary responsibility to take all feasible steps
to ensure the protection of civilians. Equally, States also
bear the primary responsibility to respect and ensure
the protection of the human rights of all individuals.
Through its disarmament and arms control measures,
the Security Council can make a valuable contribution
to ensuring the protection of civilians.

Finland welcomes the report of the Secretary-
General entitled "Small arms and light weapons"
(S/2015/289). It outlines pressing issues that need to be
tackled if we are to combat the challenges of misuse of
small arms and light weapons. In addition, the findings
of the high-level review of sanctions will provide useful
guidance to the United Nations system and States for
strengthening the effectiveness of arms embargoes.

Effective physical security and the management of
stockpiles of small arms, light weapons and ammunition
are crucial in order to prevent their illicit transfer and
misuse. Finland is committed to continuing to support
the efforts to prevent diversion and illicit proliferation of
small arms and light weapons through such mechanisms
as the United Nations Programme of Action to Prevent,
Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms
and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects and the United
Nations Trust Facility Supporting Cooperation on
Arms Regulation.

Finland wishes to highlight the links between
different small arms processes and the Arms Trade
Treaty (ATT). The main objectives of the ATT are to
regulate the international legal arms trade and reduce
the illegal trade and diversion of small arms and light
weapons. The ATT is also expected to strengthen
the arms embargoes and sanctions regimes, enhance
the performance of peacebuilding and peacekeeping
operations and improve the protection of human rights
and living conditions of men, women and children. We
therefore need to work towards the universalization
of the Treaty and assist States in effective national
implementation, if needed.

The ATT includes the highest possible international
standards for arms transfers we can agree on today.
However, this does not exclude the possibility for
agreeing on even higher standards tomorrow. Finland
encourages all States that have not signed or acceded to
the ATT to do so at their earliest convenience, with the
aim of a more secure world for all of us and for future
generations.

We encourage the Council to adopt the new small
arms draft resolution under negotiation.

