The President (spoke in Arabic): At the outset of
this meeting, I should like, on behalf of the members
of the Security Council, to express profound grief and
sorrow at the passing of His Excellency Mr. Nector
Darlington Mhura, Permanent Representative of
Malawi to the United Nations. The members of the
Council convey their deepest sympathy to the family
of Ambassador Mhura and to the Government and the
people of Malawi.

Today also marks the one-year anniversary of
the passing of Ambassador Vitaly Churkin of the
Russian Federation.

I now invite the members of the Council to stand
and observe a minute of silence in tribute to the
memory of Ambassador Mhura and in memory of the
late Ambassador Churkin.

The members of the Security Council observed a
minute ofsilence.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

The situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question

The President (spoke in Arabic): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Israel to
participate in this meeting.

I propose that the Council invite the President of
the Observer State of Palestine to participate in this
meeting, in accordance with the provisional rules of
procedure and the previous practice in this regard.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

On behalf ofthe Council, I welcome His Excellency
Mr. Mahmoud Abbas, President of the Observer State
of Palestine, and I request the Protocol Officer to escort

him to a seat at the Council table.
Mr. Mahmoud Abbas, President of the Observer
State of Palestine, was escorted to a seat at the
Council table.


The President (spoke in Arabic): In accordance
with rule 39 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure, I invite Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process and
Personal Representative of the Secretary-General, to
participate in this meeting.

The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.

I wish to warmly welcome His Excellency
Secretary-General Antonio Guterres, to whom I now
give the floor.


