Mr. Imnadze (Georgia): At the outset, Iwould like
to thank the presidency of New Zealand and its Minister
for Foreign Affairs for his leadership in bringing this
issue to the Security Council. I would also like to
thank the high-level briefers - the Prime Ministers
of Samoa and Jamaica and the Minister of Finance of
the Seychelles - for their informative and insightful
interventions.

I would also like to align myself with the statement
delivered earlier on behalf of the European Union.

In today's world, the meaning of security can
no longer be linked merely to an absence of military
threats. Security risks manifest themselves in a range
of areas that know no boundaries and cannot be tackled
by a single country; they require a collective effort.
Transnational crime and piracy, the illicit exploitation
of natural resources, climate change and natural
disasters are among such threats. By putting them on its
agenda, the Council encourages us to take stock of the
United Nations programmes aimed at addressing such
challenges and to seek ways to reinvigorate our efforts
to mitigate them.

Climate change is a global security challenge.
In the near term it poses a direct, immediate threat
to small island developing States (SIDS), which are
in fact those least responsible for the problem. In
the long run, no country - whether it is an island,
mountainous, landlocked, developing or highly
developed - can be immune when nature strikes back.
Reducing vulnerability in today's changing global
landscape is therefore a cross-cutting and complex
development issue that requires an unprecedented effort
that encompasses scientific knowledge, innovation,
public understanding, careful development planning,
responsible enforcement of policies and legislation,
political and legal commitment, enhanced human and
institutional capacity and, of course, efficient disaster
management.

The outcome document of the third International
Conference on Small Island Developing States explicitly
states that there is an urgent need to strengthen
international cooperation and ensure genuine and
durable partnerships at the national, regional and
international levels in order to address issues related
to SIDS' sustainable development priorities and
needs. I would once again like to reiterate Georgia's
commitment to that outcome and to the need to establish
a platform under United Nations auspices that can
adequately address the issues of SIDS, which include 37
countries, one fifth of the United Nations membership.
Over the past decade, Georgia has developed steady
partnerships with important SIDS organizations, such
as the Caribbean Community and the Pacific Islands
Forum, as well as with individual SIDS countries, in
areas that include cooperation in education, the sharing
of experience and public-sector reform.

Georgia is not an island, but as a small developing
nation it faces many challenges similar to those
experienced by SIDS, whether earthquakes, floods,
soil erosion and degradation and severe climate
fluctuations. That is of course in addition to the illegal
exploitation and unsustainable use of our natural
resources, the militarization of our agricultural
and urban infrastructure and other security threats
stemming from the fact that 20 per cent of our territory
is under foreign military occupation. The adverse
impact of all such issues on our ecosystem and economy
has helped to motivate my country's commitment to
sustainable development. The Georgian Government is
currently undertaking efforts to limit greenhouse-gas
emission levels by boosting investments in low-carbon,
energy-efficient and renewable energy technologies. In
2013, we began to prepare a low-emission development
strategy and established a high-level inter-ministerial
committee under the leadership of our Ministry of
Environment and Natural Resources Protection. My
country has set itself the ambitious goal of becoming
entirely carbon neutral by 2050.

In conclusion, I would like to stress once again
Georgia's standing commitments and readiness to
continue our engagement with SIDS, both within
the framework of international organizations and
bilaterally and, by achieving sustainable development
and mitigating the adverse effects of climate change,
its willingness to make more tangible and resolute steps
towards preserving international peace and security.

