Ms. Tavares Pinto (spoke in French): It is a great
honour and pleasure for me to be here today with the
Security Council to represent the Women, Peace and
Security Network of the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) in Guinea-Bissau. I am
particularly honoured to speak at a meeting with my
compatriot and Prime Minister, Mr. Aristides Gomes,
as well as the representatives of Guinea-Bissau to the
United Nations.

Allow me to speak as a citizen and a woman leader
in Guinea-Bissau. I thank the speakers who preceded
me. I would like to focus my statement on aspects that
are specific to women and the role they play in civil
society in Guinea-Bissau.

The participation of women and girls is an integral
part of the development goals in the particular context
of Guinea-Bissau. The historic aspirations and the
progress achieved in recent years are especially
deserving of recognition in terms of the participation
of women. Throughout the history of the country,
women have shown their clear ability to be politically
involved, build peace and defend their rights, especially
in terms of economic and social development and
social cohesion. However, the recurring political and
governmental instability have posed an obstacle to the
adoption and implementation of necessary and urgent
public policies, which have kept women from fully
enjoying their rights, especially their civil, political,
economic and social rights.

The situation in Guinea-Bissau remains fragile.
The socioeconomic conditions are increasingly
challenging and are exacerbated by instability, which
in turn is having a significant cumulative impact
on young people, who are facing an increasing lack
of education and employment opportunities and are
subjected to the risks of clandestine migration and drug
trafficking. Above all, that has an impact on women and
girls, who are fighting on a daily basis to support their
households and families during such difficult times in
an environment that has deteriorated socially, culturally
and in terms ofintercommunal social cohesion.

My organization continues to play a very important
role through the activism of its women members to ease
the tensions of the conflict and promote peace in our
country. Our objective is to coordinate and optimize
women's role and initiatives in prevention, post-conflict
rebuilding and the promotion of human rights. We are
a regional network that also works to promote gender
equality, good governance and democracy. It is made
up of a variety of women's organizations fighting for a
definitive, lasting peace within our communities while
achieving the agenda set out in resolution 1325 (2000).

In 2014, in coordination with civil society and the
country's electoral institutions, along with the support
of the United Nations system, we actively contributed
to the national electoral process by establishing
elections monitoring cells to resolve any conflict
situations during elections. It was a platform made up
of women's organizations that worked towards avoiding
and resolving any problems on the ground during the
presidential elections with the use of an early-warning
system. The unit was made up of 200 women and youth
monitors throughout the country, as well 45 other young
people who monitored violence and sent real-time
text messages on the situation. The groups worked to
simultaneously harmonize mediation efforts in order to
avoid tensions before, during, and after elections once
the results were published. Awareness-raising and civic
education campaigns on electoral processes were also
carried out to complement those efforts. The results
achieved were satisfactory. There was equal access
for all candidates to State media, while effective and
qualitative involvement by civil society encouraging
all parties to work in a climate of trust, solidarity and
security led to elections that were deemed to be free,
fair and transparent. The role of women was thus shown
to be key in the elections. But those efforts did not come
to an end in 2014, nor are they limited to the domain of
elections.

In all of the political and institutional crises
of the country, our organization has encouraged
various dialogue initiatives. We participated in the
establishment of a group of women facilitators for
dialogue among parties in conflict, which made a major
contribution in overcoming the 2017 crisis. That group
led to the creation of the national women's council of
Guinea-Bissau - a broad and inclusive group that is
fully representative of the political, religious, ethnic
and territorial diversity throughout the different
communities of the country and the diaspora.

For the first time we can today say that civil
society - with the essential and decisive support of
women and the recognition of the United Nations
and ongoing support, especially from the Embassy of
Canada - has been able to come together with the
political parties in conflict, religious organizations,
universities, youth organizations and traditional leaders
to reflect on and discuss the quest for a solution to the
political crisis. The stakeholders decided to create an
alliance of civil society organizations in order to follow
up on the political dialogue to break out of the impasse
in which the Government is stuck. That platform made
it possible for us to make a series of recommendations,
which are the basis for a draft political and social
stability pact. The process is under way. We hope that
the pact will be signed by all stakeholders within a new
social and cultural development framework as the basis
of a new social contract.

At the same time, given the upcoming holding of
elections scheduled for 18 November, drawing on our
experience in 2014, and moving forward the electoral
process, a platform of women and young people was
chosen for moving forward the electoral process with
the financial support of the Peacebuilding Fund and the
technical support of the United Nations. The process
will facilitate registering voters, a civic education
campaign, media coverage, the electoral campaign and
monitoring possible outbreaks of Violence during the
electoral process, as well as on election day.

Lastly, I would like to cite as a positive example
concerning women, as we are all fully committed
together to dialogue with other actors and partners, the
recent adoption by the legislature of a gender parity
bill to ensure that 36 per cent quota of women on the
ballot. That was one of the outcomes achieved through
the struggle and the advocacy of the political platform
of women that will lead to considerably positive change
for Guinea-Bissau, once full and viable stability has
been achieved and sustainably ensured.

With a View towards ensuring a more effective
partnership between the United Nations and Guinea-
Bissau, the goal ofwhich is to build a reconciled, fair and
just society, we propose the following recommendations.
The United Nations system in Guinea-Bissau should
prioritize work geared towards achieving political
stabilization by encouraging inclusive national
dialogue that will allow for the adoption, monitoring
and implementation of a national stability pact. The
United Nations system should be more present on the
front line to further to give incentive to partnerships
so that international assistance can be more effective in
implementing national policies. Cooperation networks
linking women's and women's youth organizations,
with the goal of encouraging and bolstering the civic
and political participation of those organizations, must
continue to be supported, as well as establishing and
energizing a women's monitoring body to assess and
publish data on their progress so as to achieve gender
equality through partnerships with national research
institutions and the latter's international counterparts.

