Mr. Laro (Nigeria): I thank Deputy Secretary-
General Eliasson and Ambassador Patriota for their
briefings. I also thank the Secretary-General for his
report on progress in United Nations peacebuilding
efforts in the aftermath of conflict (S/20l4/694). The
report indicates that, while progress has been made in
United Nations peacebuilding efforts, challenges still
remain. I would like to briefly touch on three aspects of
the report: the participation of women in peacebuilding,
the need for an integrated approach to peacebuilding
among United Nations entities, and developing lessons
on good practices in peacebuilding.

With regard to the participation of women in
peacebuilding, Nigeria shares the view of the Secretary-
General that the promotion of inclusive politics requires
that attention be paid to the concerns of women in all
stages of peacemaking and peacebuilding. We welcome
the priority that the Secretary-General accords to the
advancement of women's participation in post-conflict
political and development processes. It is significant
that over the past five years more women have been
appointed as mediators and envoys by the Secretary-
General. Since women are disproportionately affected
by conflicts, it is appropriate that women mediators,
who can relate better to them, be involved in the
search for peace. Increased United Nations support to
women's civil society organizations involved in post-
conflict political participation and the progress made
in the funding of gender-responsive peacebuilding
programmes are key indicators of the United Nations
efforts in enhancing women's participation in
peacebuilding. We commend the use of a gender
marker to track the allocation of funds to women's
empowerment and gender-equality. We encourage the
Peacebuilding Fund to intensify its efforts at reaching
the lS-per cent target for the allocation of funds to
projects having as their main objective the promotion
of women's empowerment and gender equality.

Nigeria recognizes the difficulty of adopting an
integrated approach to peacebuilding among United
Nations entities having different mandates. We
therefore see merit in having one set of objectives
and a single vision to guide the actors on the ground
towards the consolidation ofpeace. That calls for closer
coordination and integration between the Secretary-
General's Special Representatives, Special Envoys
and Special Advisers on the one hand, and the United
Nations country teams on the other. Nigeria commends
the Peacebuilding Fund for its efforts in promoting this
integrated approach.

Concerning the development of lessons on good
practices in peacebuilding, we note that there are
challenges in obtaining comprehensive information
on the impact of programmes. That in turn has made
it difficult to quantify the impact of peacebuilding.
Nigeria believes that it is important, and indeed crucial,
for the United Nations to be able to assess the impact
of peacebuilding in order to identify gaps that need to
be filled. We therefore encourage the Organization to
take measures that would help it improve its capacity
to evaluate the impact of peacebuilding programmes.

Nigeria recognizes the importance of the ongoing
reforms by the Peacebuilding Commission. The 2015
review of the United Nations peacebuilding architecture
should help us to identify areas of progress and gaps
in international assistance to countries emerging from
conflict. Nigeria welcomes the emphasis placed by the
Commission on forging greater regional coherence as
a critical factor in helping countries sustain peace and
avoid a relapse into conflict. We share the Commission's
view on the importance of the regional dimension of
peacebuilding. That calls for closer engagement and
collaboration with regional actors. We believe that
this regional dimension deserves attention in the 2015
review process.

Finally, Nigeria would like to reaffirm its strong
support for the Peacebuilding Commission. The role
of the Commission in the peacebuilding architecture
remains crucial. Its efforts at attaining peace and
inclusive development in the aftermath of conflict are
yielding results. We call on Member States and other
stakeholders to strengthen their engagement with the
Commission with a view toward improving its capacity
to build peace and promote development in countries
coming out of conflict.

