We thank Geir Pedersen and Mark Lowcock for this year's final briefing on the situation in Syria. Two days from now, 18 December, will mark the fifth anniversary of the adoption of resolution 2254 (2015). What results do we see to mark that date? What has been done by our Western colleagues to foster a political settlement in Syria? Let us recall that in 2015 Western countries still pinned their hopes on the overthrow of the legitimate Syrian authorities by force, at the hands of bandits and terrorists. They were supplied with money, weapons, training and direct military support by external actors. They were taught how to wage media propaganda, film staged videos and do their own rebranding. Damascus endured the imposition of sanctions aimed at weakening the capacity of the Syrian military to repel the terrorist threat despite the fact that terrorism threatened the entire region with catastrophe. They literally sought to carve the country into pieces. At the request of the Syrian Government, Russia joined the counter-terrorist efforts. Ultimately, the carcass of international terrorism in Syrian was destroyed. Today the terrorists have only one final stronghold, in Idlib, and also remain active in the north-east. Our Western colleagues are actively engaged in rebranding them, often trying to present the terrorists as a real political alternative to the Syrian State authorities. The country has seen the ceasefire hold for the most part. Thanks to the Russian Centre for Reconciliation of Opposing Sides in the Syrian Arab Republic, it has been possible to stamp out intra-Syrian clashes. Therefore, with our support, the Syrian State and its entities have been preserved and continued to provide services to the population even in a situation of protracted conflict. With the decisive contribution of Russia, Turkey and Iran as guarantors of the Astana format and on the basis of the decision of the 2018 Syrian National Dialogue Congress in Sochi, the Constitutional Committee was established. That is the only format for dialogue in which Syrians themselves discuss the future of their own country. We welcome the holding of the fourth round of its drafting committee. As the Special Envoy said, the Syrians have adopted a constructive approach and agreed on a time frame and agenda for the fifth session. That political dialogue itself could have started a year earlier had it not been for direct interference by a number of Western countries, which clearly showed that a peaceful settlement in Syria is not something they are interested in. Members of the Security Council are well aware of all the details of that saga. What do we see today in terms of Western States? They still violate the very first provision of resolution 2254 (2015) - respect for the sovereignty, independence, unity and territorial integrity of Syria. After the failed attempt to overthrow by force yet another unwanted Government, our colleagues have moved on to tactics of financial and economic suffocation. However, since the adoption of resolution 2254 (2015), those sanctions have actually been expanded. One can hardly consider that to be assisting the political process. Another breach of resolution 2254 (2015) is the occupation by the United States of America of a part of Syrian territory and the attempt to conduct yet another ethnicity-based and religion-based separatist experiment in the Middle East. The United States also bears direct responsibility for the deterioration of the environment through the plundering of Syrian national oil resources and for other problems. There has been an increase in diseases, including cancer, among people residing in oil-producing areas. We are also seeing an upsurge in activity by terrorists emerging from sleeper cells of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant. Many Syrians have been suffering the most inhumane conditions for years on end in the Al-Hol and Rukban camps, in north- east and southern Syria, respectively. However, because of the position of the United States, those problems remain unsolved. Our colleagues the co-penholders on the humanitarian file, dueto Euro-Atlantic solidarity, seem to be paying no attention to that human suffering. Russia has done, and is doing, all it can to promote a peaceful settlement in Syria. However, at each step it encounters opposition from the West. Even the chemical weapons issue - on which unique success was achieved in the eradication of chemical stockpiles in Syria - has been turned in the hands of our colleagues into a tool for exerting pressure of the lawful authorities. That was confirmed by the recent Security Council meeting (see S/PV.8764) at which the former Director- General of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons was not allowed to answer specific questions. We are trying to reduce the politicization of humanitarian issues in Syria. Despite opposition from Western countries, we are striving to improve cooperation between the United Nations and Damascus so that all Syrians receive humanitarian assistance, once again in line with resolution 2254 (2015). Life in the liberated areas is returning to normal, which is prompting more Syrian refugees to return home. According to the Russian Centre for Reconciliation of Opposing Sides in the Syrian Arab Republic, more than 860,000 people have returned to Syria since September 2015. It is also clear that a further 1.2 million Syrians have stated their desire to return home. In November, with Russia's assistance, Damascus hosted an international conference on the return of refugees. Despite strong opposition and scare tactics by our Western colleagues, more than 20 countries and international organizations took part in the conference, confirming the importance of the international community concentrating efforts in that area. In that context, the issue of the provision of international assistance to rebuild Syria's destroyed infrastructure is extremely important. We have repeatedly heard the hard-line stance of our Western colleagues in the Security Council regarding conditions for providing such assistance. Specifically, that comprises the demand that the Syrian authorities remake the country's State structure to fit the mould of its donors. In other words, instead of easing the suffering of the most vulnerable among the population - namely, women and children - they are imposing a political bargain on Syria. In parallel, pressure cause by sanctions also continues to increase. I would like to address that specific topic in more detail. On 10 December, the United Nations Special Rapporteur on the negative impact of unilateral coercive measures on the enjoyment of human rights, Ms. Douhan, issued an anti-sanctions guidance note for the period of the coronavirus disease pandemic. That document was the result of a two-day brainstorming exercise that Special Rapporteur Douhan held in October with 24 major humanitarian organizations. Allow me to quote some of the concerns of humanitarian workers about sanctions: "Unilateral sanctions are the main obstacle to the delivery of aid, including medicine, medical equipment, personal protective equipment, food and other essential goods. Unilateral sanctions are multi-layered and complicated, they are not transparent and they are not coordinated. Humanitarian exemptions are ineffective, inefficient and inadequate". I wonder how my Western colleagues would respond to the fact that their sanctions efforts seem to be completely immoral. As for their attempts to write off all Syrian problems as the shortcomings of the Al-Assad regime? They are hardly convincing. We would like to stress that Russian military personnel are present in Syria at the request of the legitimate Government, provide food assistance on an almost daily basis and are involved in rebuilding civilian infrastructure. That work will continue. In conclusion, let me once again raise the issue of a cross-line humanitarian convoy to be dispatched to Idlib. We deem it totally unacceptable that there has been no solution to that issue. We are not satisfied with the passive stance of the United Nations, the hackneyed talk about coronavirus and the eight-month-long negotiations to agree on modalities for the convoy. The silence of the proponents of the cross-border mechanism and the lack of appropriate discussion with those forces responsible for obstructing the convoy are also baffling. Reports on the humanitarian situation in Syria clearly show that Damascus is upholding its responsibility to deliver humanitarian assistance on a non-discriminatory basis across contact lines to all parts of the country. What kind of assistance is the United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs referring to here? Some may not like it and continue to attempt to impose political conditions, but the facts speak for themselves: the situation in Syria has changed and will never revert to its conflict-ridden past. I would like to take this opportunity to state very seriously the following: the lack of progress in establishing not one-off but regular cross-line humanitarian deliveries to Idlib will cause unjustified harm to the cross-border mechanism, which has been extended until 2021. In response to the representative of Germany, before this meeting we had a little discussion as to how Ambassador Heusgen was most likely to behave during this meeting. We even placed bets on it. Some of my colleagues thought that Ambassador Heusgen would read out a statement on behalf of humanitarian co-penholders and that would be it. I thought otherwise, and so I won; I thank Mr. Heusgen. In general, I agree with much of what he said. He said that the Security Council had failed Syria and that human suffering there continued. We do not argue with that. The Council has indeed failed Syria, and the reason for that is he and Western countries - their hypocritical position and their attempts to say that black is white. All of that continues with regard to Syria, and that is why people are still suffering. We completely agree with his conclusions and diagnosis, but we do not agree with his vision of why that is happening. That is all. I would like to note that, as he continuously mentions the "Koblenz trial', it has almost become his calling card. I realize that people who are in his country's hands, from whom they may extract statements, can say much that is of interest because they want to save their own skins. That is why all those horrors and all that evidence that he refers to - and it is astounding - must be double-checked as to the sources of the information. At least, that is what we normally do. This is a good opportunity to show that in Germany, as he was saying, no one goes unpunished. There is a magazine - though I do not know if he reads anything besides The New York Times - called Der Spiegel. We read it occasionally. Recently, that magazine published very alarming information that one of the leaders of the notorious "White Helmets", Khaled Saleh, was transferred to Germany. That man is a well-known terrorist; his reputation leaves no doubt. There is evidence of his affiliation with extremist activity and the killing of foreigners. That is why the German Ministry of Home Affairs, as we know, for quite a long time has been objecting to that man being admitted to Germany. But the Foreign Ministry insisted, and he was not just admitted to Germany; he was brought there onboard a Government aircraft as a guest of Germany. Incidentally, that reminds us of another very curious individual who was similarly transported to Germany recently. They may wish for political reasons to turn a blind eye to that man's crimes, but that will not work. We hope that they will investigate all the atrocities committed by him and by other "White Helmets", without any double standards. Otherwise, the situation is simply impossible. I would like to thank Mr. Heusgen once again: he has made today's meeting his swansong, his legacy. We will remember him, and we will miss him personally. Everyone has come to know his manner of engaging in discussion and putting questions to briefers on every occasion, except in the case of Director-General Arias, when he asserted the contrary - that ostensibly it was not normal practice to put questions to a briefer. We will also remember him as a very cynical man who promoted double standards in the Security Council and someone who regularly reads The New York Times and tries to draw conclusions based on the contents of that newspaper, which I reiterate frequents our rubbish bin. In that sense, we will definitely miss him. In conclusion, I have to say that many of our colleagues at the United Nations received the news that Germany would be a non-permanent member of the Council with great anticipation. However, thanks to the Permanent Representative, they widely came to question whether the Council really needed so much dissent, division and negative emotion. Therefore, I understand from my contacts here that the number of those who welcomed Germany's tenure in the Council seems to have decreased dramatically. I think that draws a firm line under their presence here, thus I wish him all the best.
