Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
would like to thank the Permanent Representative of
Colombia for his briefing on the work of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1737
(2006) over the past 90 days. I commend his efforts in
advancing the work of the Committee. I hope that the
Committee will continue to carry out its mandate in a
prudent, pragmatic and balanced way. China has
always attached importance to and will continue to
actively participate in the work of the Committee.

The situation in the Middle East is now
undergoing profound changes. Safeguarding regional
peace and stability and avoiding greater turbulence in
the region is in the common interests of all parties. It is
also in line with the shared aspirations of the
international community. Against that backdrop, it is of
more pragmatic importance to be firmly committed to
dialogue and negotiation in order to promptly resolve
the Iranian nuclear issue.

Thanks to the joint efforts of all parties, the P5+1
group and Iran have expressed their willingness to
engage in sincere dialogue. The process of resolving
the Iranian nuclear issue through dialogue has shown
positive momentum. China hopes that parties will
narrow differences and take constructive measures so

as to launch sustainable dialogue at an early date and
actively explore a comprehensive, long-term and
appropriate settlement to the Iranian nuclear issue.

As a party to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons, Iran enjoys the right to the
peaceful use of nuclear power. It should also honour its
international obligations. China hopes that Iran and the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) will
further strengthen dialogue and cooperation on the
current basis and resolve the pending issues as soon as
possible. China also looks forward to a constructive
role being played by the IAEA in that regard.

China always believes that relevant resolutions of
the Security Council should be implemented in a
conscientious, comprehensive and accurate manner.
However, sanctions are by no means an end in
themselves. The Iranian nuclear issue can be
appropriately addressed only through dialogue and
cooperation. All members of the Committee and the
Panel of Experts, under the leadership of the
Committee, should further advance their work based on
the foregoing understanding and in strict accordance
with the mandate of the resolution.

