Mr. Djani (Indonesia): It would be remiss of me
if I did not express my delegation's appreciation to
you, Mr. President, and your team for your excellent
leadership of the presidency this month. I must say that
I am jealous that you had only 28 days in your position,
while I am going to have 31 days later in the year. I
would also like to extend a welcome to the French
delegation for the forthcoming presidency and to thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this meeting.

Allow me to thank Her Excellency Ms. Christine
Schraner Burgener, the Special Envoy of the Secretary-
General on Myanmar, for her briefing today. We know
that she has conducted a lot of shuttle diplomacy, as she
mentioned, and exerted untiring efforts to try to reach
an amicable solution to this very difficult situation. Her
briefing today is critical for members of the Security
Council to better understand the current situation on
the ground. It also serves to update us on the progress of
the good offices of the Secretary-General in addressing
the situation concerning Myanmar.

As Indonesia has always maintained, it is crucial
that the international community extend its full support
for a sustainable and comprehensive solution in the
country, as outlined in the recommendations of the
Advisory Commission on Rakhine State, formerly led
by Kofi Annan. Against that backdrop, allow me to
share three key points regarding our efforts to seek a
lasting solution to this critical issue.

First, and most important, we wish to highlight
the humanitarian crisis. I wish to take a moment to
commend Bangladesh for its efforts and generosity in
providing humanitarian assistance for the refugees.
Nonetheless, it is really of grave concern that we are
yet to see significant improvement on this matter. One
and a half years since the crisis escalated, hundreds of
thousands of refugees are still in the camp awaiting
our assistance.

We must therefore make sure that the pressing
humanitarian crisis faced by the refugees in Cox's Bazar
and in internally displaced persons camps remains our
guiding compass and top priority. We should prioritize
and step up our efforts to ensure the voluntary, safe and
dignified return of the refugees. That will require the
commitment and support of all to create a conducive
and enabling environment, including the provision
of security guarantees, freedom of movement and
access to basic services for the people so that there is
confidence to return. Those are all important factors.

It is also imperative to create inclusive and
sustainable economic development in Rakhine state
in order to ensure the sustainability of the solution.
Investment and other assistance would certainly
help as well. In that context, we urge the effective
implementation of the framework for cooperation as
agreed by Myanmar, the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees and the United
Nations Development Programme.

Secondly, we wish to highlight the importance
of constructive engagement. Indonesia is fully aware
that these undertakings require close engagement with
all stakeholders. For that reason, Indonesia's Foreign
Minister, Mrs. Retno Lestari Priansari Marsudi, has
conducted a series of meetings with key interlocutors in
the region. Just a few weeks ago, as part of that process,
the Foreign Minister travelled to Bangladesh to meet
with her counterpart, where they agreed that the focus
will be on repatriation. A meeting was also held with
senior officials from Myanmar, which focused on
the important role to be played by the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) in the repatriation
process. The Foreign Minister also communicated with
the Special Envoy following her series of meetings
with Bangladesh and Myanmar. In short, all those
endeavours are intended to build trust and confidence
between all parties and to find durable solution to the
problem. Trust is the missing link.

Thirdly, we wish to highlight the role of ASEAN.
Indonesia strongly believes that ASEAN's involvement
is important for achieving a sustainable solution in
Rakhine state. Pursuant to the decision of the ASEAN
leaders at their most recent summit, a number of visits
by the ASEAN secretariat was conducted to Myanmar,
in preparation for the involvement of ASEAN and its
Coordinating Centre for Humanitarian Assistance
on Disaster Management. We hope that ASEAN's
involvement will enable us to develop a clear picture of
the humanitarian needs in Rakhine state so as to assist
Myanmar in its efforts to solve the difficult situation on
the ground, and that it will also help nurture confidence
among all stakeholders. That certainly deserves the
support of the international community. I have heard
the call of many in the Council for ASEAN to play a
key role. We appreciate that.

We are hopeful that progress is being made. One
thing for sure, however, is that a durable solution to
this issue requires a gradual and continuing process.
We should prioritize the humanitarian aspect. No
one, including ASEAN, will be able to succeed on its
own in realizing that goal. It needs the support of all
stakeholders, including those in the Council, the relevant
United Nations agencies and the broader international
community. As we have always stated, what is at stake
is the well-being of the people concerned - and that
should be our top priority.

