Mrs. Dunlop (Brazil): I thank you, Madam
President, for having convened this meeting. I also
thank Under-Secretary-General Lynn Pascoe for his
briefing, and the Permanent Representative of Israel
and the Permanent Observer of Palestine for their
statements.

The past three months since the Council's most
recent open debate on the situation in the Middle East
(see S/PV.6706) have been profuse in developments in
the region. Unfortunately, a great deal of these recent
developments have not brought about the long-awaited
solutions to current crises or shown a way out of the
present stalemates.

The Israeli-Palestinian peace process has seen no
progress, despite the latest efforts of the Jordanian
authorities, which had cast a ray of hope. On the
contrary, we have been watching with dismay and
serious concern the steady and unabated continuation
of illegal settlement activity in the occupied territories,
which puts in grave jeopardy the prospects for a
two-State solution.

Brazil considers the continuation of the illegal
settlement policy to be the most important single
reason for the long-standing and dangerous paralysis of
the peace process. The international community must
not allow this policy to turn the idea of peace between
Palestinians and Israelis into an ever-elusive goal. We
reiterate our call on Israel to stop and reverse
settlement activity. In our view, the recognition of the
Palestinian people's legitimate right to sovereignty and
self-determination will contribute to Israel's security.

In the present circumstances, it is high time that
the efforts undertaken by the Quartet yield concrete
and significant results so as to bring the peace process
back to life. The Council also needs to fulfil its Charter
responsibilities with regard to the question of Palestine
and act in order to avoid the prospects for peace
unravelling. A greater involvement of the Security
Council is past due. Brazil reiterates its proposal that,
as a first step, the Quartet regularly report to the
Council on progress that might have been achieved on
the commitments undertaken by the parties.

I now turn to the situation in Syria. It is vital that
the legitimate aspirations of the Syrian people to
greater political participation, economic opportunities,
dignity and social justice be fully heard and realized.
Brazil continues to unequivocally condemn all violence
against civilians, in particular that committed by State
agents, and deplores all violations of human rights.

We welcome the display of unity that allowed the
Council to adopt resolutions 2042 (2012) and 2043
(2012). We have always said that the Council could
best help if it were able to send clear and unified
messages to all relevant actors in Syria.

Brazil underlines the crucial role of Joint Special
Envoy Kofi Annan, in bringing about a political solution
to the crisis. We support and commend his six-point
plan. We welcome the establishment of the United
Nations Supervision Mission in Syria (UNSMIS). We
fully concur with the Secretary-General's assessment
that the Supervision Mission can assist in the creation
of conditions for a comprehensive political dialogue in
Syria. Brazil fully supports the Supervision Mission
and expects the Government of Syria to ensure its
effective operation.

If UNSMIS is to be successful, violence must
stop immediately. The continuation of violence,
irrespective of its origin, is unacceptable. The Syrian
Government, which bears the greater responsibility for
easing tensions and stopping the violence, must fulfil
its commitments and fully implement all aspects of the
six-point plan. The opposition must understand that
dialogue, not armed struggle, is the means to advance
democracy, freedom and justice, and act accordingly.

In line with Brazil's commitment to stability in
Syria, we are ready to do our part and to support the
United Nations efforts, including by contributing to the
supervision of the cessation of all violence, in
accordance with resolution 2043 (2012).

Before concluding, let me say that Brazil
continues to carefully follow the situation in Lebanon.
We have recently renewed our interest in maintaining
our current contribution of personnel and equipment to
the maritime task force of the United Nations Interim
Force in Lebanon, which constitutes further indication
of the Brazilian commitment to the success of the
United Nations efforts in Lebanon, to peace and
stability in the Middle East, and to the work of the
United Nations peacekeeping missions.

