Mr. Dai Bing (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank Under-Secretary-General Lacroix and Special Envoy Onanga-Anyanga for their respective briefings. The political settlement of the Abyei issue, which has the consensus support of the Security Council, requires the Sudan and South Sudan to reach a solution through dialogue and negotiation. I would like to make the following three points. First, China welcomes the continued rapprochement between the two countries. The Sudan and South Sudan have demonstrated their willingness to resolve the final status of Abyei and appointed their respective chief administrators for the Area. China acknowledges those developments. The Security Council should fully respect the leadership of the Sudan and South Sudan on the Abyei issue and encourage both parties to engage in closer consultations and direct dialogue. The international community should support mediation efforts of the African Union, the Intergovernmental Authority on Development and other regional and subregional organizations and their good offices and facilitate cooperation between the Sudan and South Sudan in the establishment of administrative, judicial and security institutions in Abyei. Secondly, China is concerned about the ongoing intercommunal clashes in Abyei and hopes that all the parties concerned will put peace and stability first and refrain from taking any actions that may increase tensions. China urges all local communities to actively respond to the Secretary-General's appeal for a global ceasefire, commit to silencing the guns in Africa by 2020 and promote intercommunity consultations and dialogue among traditional leaders, with the support of the United Nations. The coronavirus disease pandemic has exacerbated the already grim humanitarian situation in Abyei. Tens of thousands of people have been displaced, and hundreds of thousands are in dire need of humanitarian assistance. The international community should provide targeted aid to help the Sudan and South Sudan alleviate the plight of the people in Abyei. Thirdly, the United Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA) is an important force for the maintenance of peace and stability in the Abyei Area and plays an indispensable role in the political settlement of the Abyei issue. China supports UNISFA's continued discharge of its mandate. Attacks against UNISFA personnel have occurred from time to time, seriously threatening the safety of peacekeepers. We hope that UNISFA will make every effort to minimize the security risks to peacekeepers. Medical evacuation remains a major challenge that hampers UNISFA's capabilities, and therefore requires timely remedial measures. We call on the Government of the Sudan and the Government South Sudan to facilitate the performance of UNISFA's mandated activities. The mission should also maintain close communication with the two Governments and enhance mutual trust. China supports the extension of UNISFA's mandate as recommended by the Secretary-General.
