Ms. Hoppe: It gives me great pleasure to
introduce to the Council the report of the Secretary-
General on small arms, document S/2006/109, which is
submitted pursuant to the request made by the
President of the Security Council in his statement of
17 February 2005 (S/PRST/2005/7). This is the third of
the follow-up reports on the implementation of the
recommendations contained in the Secretary-General's
report on small arms, contained in document
5/2002/1053 of 20 September 2002, on ways and
means in which the Security Council could contribute
to dealing with the question of the illicit trade in small
arms and light weapons in situations under its
consideration.

Those recommendations covered four main topics:
first, the implementation of the Programme of Action to
Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small
Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects; secondly,
Security Council-mandated sanctions and arms
embargoes; thirdly, conflict prevention, peacebuilding and
the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of
former combatants; and fourthly, confidence-building
measures.

As in previous years, the present report was
prepared by the Department for Disarmament Affairs in
close consultation with the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations, the Department of Political
Affairs, the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime, the United Nations Children's Fund and the
International Criminal Police Organization, which
contributed information on the initiatives undertaken in
their respective areas of competence.

The Security Council's annual open debate on
small arms is an important forum within the United
Nations for the consideration of the issue of small arms
and light weapons. It underscores the recognition by
the Council of the threat posed by the illicit trade in
and the proliferation of small arms and light weapons
to international peace and security. We have all
witnessed the concrete manifestations of that threat in
most of the recent conflicts where small arms and light
weapons have been used to cause widespread human
suffering, along with social, political and economic
instability in the regions directly involved in those
06-27602

conflicts, as well as the countries neighbouring such
areas.

The present report underscores continuing
progress made in important areas addressed in the
recommendations of the report of 2002.

An important step forward in the global struggle
against the proliferation of illicit small arms and light
weapons is the recent adoption by the General
Assembly of a politically binding international
instrument to enable States to identify and trace, in a
timely and reliable manner, illicit small arms and light
weapons. That instrument contains key provisions
aimed at facilitating the work of law enforcement
officials as they attempt to trace illicit weapons. The
challenge now is to take the necessary steps to ensure
the full implementation of that instrument. In that
context, serious consideration should be given to
international cooperation and assistance to States that
so request in developing the appropriate tools,
technical expertise and infrastructure necessary for the
implementation of the provisions of the instrument.

The report highlights, as an important
development, the entry into force of the Protocol
against the Illicit Manufacturing of and Trafficking in
Firearms, Their Parts and Components and
Ammunition, supplementing the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime.
The realization of that instrument's potential as an
effective tool in the efforts to prevent and combat
transnational organized crime depends on its wide
acceptance by States. The Council may thus wish to
encourage States that have not yet done so to ratify or
accede to the Protocol.

An encouraging sign of progress is the increased
focus on understanding the link between the illicit
trade in small arms and light weapons and the illicit
exploitation of natural resources and on measures to
help sever such links.

In terms of actions to prevent the diversion of
small arms and light weapons to the illicit market, the
decision of the General Assembly, at its sixtieth
session, to establish a group of governmental experts to
consider further steps to enhance international
cooperation to prevent, combat and eradicate illicit
brokering in small arms and light weapons is an
important step in the right direction. The Group will
commence its work in November of this year, with two
06-27602
more sessions to be held in the course of the first half
of 2007.

The report also underscores the fact that, despite
the progress made so far, more needs to be done in
order to fully implement some of the recommendations
being considered by the Council today. In that regard, I
would like to point out the need to support States in
their efforts to build the necessary capacity to adopt
measures aimed at further improving the effectiveness
of arms embargoes imposed by the Council. Such
support could include technical assistance for
improved monitoring of national air spaces and land
and maritime borders, as well as the development of
means to identify and prosecute those that violate arms
embargoes. I would also like to highlight the need to
intensify efforts to systematically integrate longer-term
small arms and light weapons control measures in the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration process
in post-conflict situations.

I also wish to emphasize the recent achievements
of the Coordinating Action on Small Arms mechanism,
particularly the development of a strategic framework
and an internet database, and the initiatives undertaken
to raise awareness of the mechanism among United
Nations offices in the field. Those initiatives are
intended to strengthen the mechanism's coordinating
role within the United Nations system, as well as its
capacity to better respond to requests for assistance
from Member States. The sustainability of those efforts
can be secured only with the support of Member States.

In June, the United Nations conference to review
progress made in the implementation of the Programme
of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit
Trade in Small arms and Light Weapons will be
convened. The intensity of the debates during the
session of the Preparatory Committee for the
conference, which was held in January of this year,
confirmed, on the one hand, that States remain as
committed as they were in 2001 to tackling the
challenges posed by the illicit trade in small arms and
light weapons. On the other hand, the wide diversity of
views expressed regarding a number of issues and
possible approaches to furthering the question of small
arms and light weapons on the international agenda is
symptomatic of the complexity of the challenges posed
by the problem of illicit small arms and light weapons
and its multifaceted nature.
3
The Secretary-General is encouraged by the
continued efforts of the Security Council to address the
challenges posed by illicit small arms and light
weapons in the context of matters under the Council's
consideration. I am confident that today's meeting will
enhance the determination of Member States in their
efforts to seek concrete measures to strengthen the
implementation of the Programme of Action on small
arms and light weapons, as well as to identify the best
approaches to addressing the areas of continued
concern.

