Mr. Ubalijoro (Rwanda): At the outset, I should like
to express to you, Mr. President, our profound gratitude and
appreciation for the exemplary and dynamic manner in
which you have conducted the business of the Security
Council this month. Allow me also to bid you farewell, as
you are about to retire from the diplomatic service. The
support and help you have given to my delegation as a
representative of a country that is a good friend of
Rwanda's will always be treasured and remembered.

I should also like to thank your predecessor, the
Ambassador of France, Jean-Bernard Merimee, for the able
manner in which he conducted the Council's affairs last
month.

My delegation attaches particular importance to the
draft resolution before the Council because we strongly
empathize with our Liberian brothers for the painful daily
ordeals they are currently being challenged with. After
carefully considering the Secretary-General's eleventh
progress report on the United Nations Observer Mission
in Liberia (UNOMIL) and the encouraging briefing of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr.
Anthony Nyakyi, my delegation is more than convinced
that it should vote in favour of the extension of
UNOMIL's mandate until 15 September 1995. My
delegation is also of the view that a two-and-a-half month
renewal of UNOMIL's mandate must not be considered
a huge request, even though certain difficulties continue
to prevail, such as the lack of respect for the cease-fire,
lack of respect for the arms embargo and other frustrating
delays that continue to hinder many of the efforts carried
out in the tireless search for a peaceful solution to the
Liberian conflict.

My delegation is also of the View that it is of
paramount importance for UNOMIL's mandate to be
extended at this critical juncture in order to reassure the
people of Liberia and simultaneously to send a strong
message to the key political players in the Liberian
conflict, telling them that at the present time not only is
the fate of their people in their hands, but also that an
entire nation's chances of survival depend on their good
sense, bona fides and responsibility. It is imperative that
the leaders of the Liberian factions learn from the lessons
of Rwanda last year, where a handful of evil-minded and
careless politicians of a former regime, inspired by
political opportunism and demagoguery, plunged our
country into one of the most frightening, horrendous and
barbaric bloodbaths in the history of mankind.

My delegation openly welcomes the presence of
UNOMIL in Liberia because of its good intentions, strong
commitment and determination to do well in Liberia. My
delegation would also like to congratulate the regional
and subregional efforts carried out by African countries in
their quest for a peaceful solution to the Liberian conflict.
There is no need to recall that the Economic Community
of West African States (ECOWAS) and the ECOWAS
Monitoring Group (ECOMOG) were deployed in Liberia
at a very critical moment, when the situation in Liberia
was at the peak of escalation and about to degenerate into
unprecedented disaster.

 

In this connection, considering the positive momentum
in the current peace negotiations, we should like to reiterate
that the time has come for the international community to
provide Liberia with adequate resources. Indeed, we
strongly believe that the regional and subregional
organizations have made significant efforts in trying to
promote peace in Liberia. In this regard, considering the
difficult economic situation and lack of means, my
delegation would like to call upon the moral authority of
the international community to give Liberia, regional
organizations and subregional organizations a hand so that
in the times to come Africans will gain more skills,
experience, and ability in solving their own problems
without necessarily having to call on third parties to solve
problems that they do not consider theirs.

