The President (interpretation from Spanish): I should
like to inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Croatia, in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the discussion of the item on the
Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, I
propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite that
representative to participate in the discussion without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of
the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr.
Nobilo (Croatia) took a place at the Council table.

The President (interpretation from Spanish): The
Security Council will now begin its consideration of the
item on its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance
with the understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them document
S/1995/28, which contains the text of a letter dated 12
January 1995 from the Permanent Representative of Croatia
to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council, which has begun its
consideration of the Secretary-General's report of 14
January 1995 submitted pursuant to resolution 947
(1994) (S/1995/38), has learned with concern of the
position adopted by the Republic of Croatia on the
extension of the mandate of the United Nations
Protection Force (UNPROFOR) in Croatia beyond 31
March 1995, as set out in the letter from the
Permanent Representative of the Republic of Croatia

to the Secretary-General of 12 January 1995
(S/1995/28). It is particularly concerned about the
wider implications of this development for the peace
process throughout the former Yugoslavia.

"The Security Council reiterates its
commitment to the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of the Republic of Croatia within its
internationally recognized borders. It understands the
concerns of the Croatian Government about the lack
of implementation of major provisions of the United
Nations Peace-keeping Plan for Croatia. It will not
accept the status quo becoming an indefinite
situation. It believes, however, that UNPROFOR'S
continued presence in the Republic of Croatia is of
vital importance for regional peace and security, and
that the United Nations in general and UNPROFOR
in particular have a positive role to play in achieving
the further implementation of the Peace-keeping Plan
and bringing about a settlement which ensures full
respect for the territorial integrity and sovereignty of
Croatia. It recalls the important role UNPROFOR
plays in helping to sustain the cease-fire in Croatia,
facilitating humanitarian activities and international
relief work, and supporting implementation of the
Economic Agreement of 2 December 1994
(S/1994/1375).

"It is in that perspective that the Security
Council hopes that discussions over the weeks ahead
will lead to a re-examination of the position now
taken in relation to the continuing role of
UNPROFOR in the Republic of Croatia.

"Meanwhile, the Security Council calls upon all
parties and others concerned to avoid any action or
statement which might lead to an increase in tension.
It welcomes the conclusion, under the auspices of
the Co-Chairmen of the International Conference on
the Former Yugoslavia, of the Economic Agreement
of 2 December 1994, and urges the parties to
continue, and accelerate, its implementation; it notes
the need for adequate international financial support,
and encourages the international community to
respond to this need. It calls for the intensification
in the coming weeks of all these efforts to
consolidate this achievement and to bring about a
political settlement in Croatia, and it also calls upon
the parties to cooperate with these efforts and to
negotiate in earnest to that end.
 

"The Security Council affirms its commitment to
the search for an overall negotiated settlement of the
conflicts in the fomter Yugoslavia ensuring the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of all the States
there within their internationally recognized borders,
and stresses the importance it attaches to the mutual
recognition thereof."

This statement will be issued as a document of the

Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/ 1995/2.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on the agenda.

The Security Council will remain seized of the
matter.

The meeting rose at 12.05 pm.

