Mr. Lambertini (Italy): I thank you, Madam
President, for taking the initiative to convene this open
debate on such an important topic. I also wish to thank
the Secretary-General for his briefing this morning.

Italy aligns itself with the statement delivered
earlier by the observer of the European Union (EU) and
would like to add a few remarks in its national capacity.

As pointed out by Nigeria in the concept note
circulated for this meeting (8/2015/599, annex), the
contemporary global security system increasingly
hinges on cooperation between the Security Council
and regional and subregional organizations. Regional
organizations can at times be better positioned to
respond to emergencies and crises. The United
Nations - and the Security Council - should use its
comparative advantage in ensuring coherence in the
response of the international community, and should
avoid duplication.

While the partnership in peace operations between
the United Nations and some organizations, such as the
European Union, is already well established, we think
that it could be further intensified. On the operational
level, for instance, cooperation in support and logistics,
in enhancing the exchange of information and analysis,
in the rule of law and in defence and security sector
reform may prove beneficial.

The same is true in regard to cooperation between
the EU and other regional organizations, such as the
African Union (AU). We welcome and support the
efforts of the African Union to strengthen its capacity
in the prevention and resolution of conflicts and in
peacekeeping, as well as its active role in defining and
implementing African solutions to African problems.
We are also ready to promote and support other regional
and subregional initiatives in this field.
We know that the scheme for cooperation on security
between the United Nations and regional organizations
is built on three pillars: peacekeeping, accountability
and peacebuilding. With regard to each pillar, Italy
is strongly committed to further strengthening those
relationships, in conformity with Chapter VIII of the
Charter of the United Nations. Today we would like to
focus on five related challenges.

The first challenge is achieving coherence. While
today we can say that coordination has improved, United
Nations mandates are still rather general. That can lead
to a decentralized decision-making process, which
sometimes overlaps, or is not properly coordinated
with, United Nations Headquarters. We should strive
to ensure clarity on respective mandates at the highest
political level.

The second challenge is to create a common culture
in the field through training and guidance. Training
is crucial to ensure the success and the reputation
of a mission. Italy has a strong record in training
national personnel for peace operations. Respect for
human rights, the protection of civilians and a gender
perspective are embedded in national military training
curriculums. Since 2005, the Center of Excellence
for Stability Police Units (CoESPU), in Vicenza, has
trained over 5,000 police personnel from different
countries to be deployed in peacekeeping operations.
That reality represents a common training platform with
other regional organizations, including in the Middle
East and Asia. Leadership training is key as well. To
that end, full use should be made of in-house training
opportunities and tools, considering the extensive
offerings by the United Nations System Staff College,
in Torino, the Global Service Centre, in Brindisi, and
the Regional Service Centre, in Entebbe, Uganda.

The third challenge involves protecting civilians
and ensuring justice. Italy has signed the Kigali
Declaration on the Protection of Civilians, a document
that is setting a standard that should be followed by
the international community. In order to ensure the
effective protection of civilians, strong unity of intent
among the United Nations membership is needed.
We must strengthen our support for the International
Criminal Court by ensuring appropriate follow-up to
Security Council referrals.

F ourthly, we must ensure a comprehensive approach
through coordinated support for the justice and security
sector. Rule of law and security sector reform (SSR)
activities have been at the core of both United Nations
and European Union missions over the past decade. The
cooperation in place in Mali might set a good precedent
for future endeavours. The EU's SSR mission - the
European Union Capacity Building Mission for the
Sahel and Mali, has been prepared in close collaboration
with the Department of Peacekeeping Operations. We
should also work for a standing working group on SSR
and the rule of law that serves regional organizations
and the United Nations.

Fifthly, we must invest financial and political
capital in the prevention of conflicts. Preventing
conflicts means affirming the primacy of politics,
dialogue and mediation as essential tools to address
global contemporary challenges of global security. In
that framework, the role of civil society is crucial. We
believe that engaging with civil society works best if
it is a two-way process. It is important that regional
organizations strengthen civil society's role, including
through the promotion of human rights, support for the
role of women and access to health care andjustice.

Lastly, let me also briefly mention the issue
of migration - a question that is transnational by
definition, and therefore simply cannot be adequately
addressed without consistent and close cooperation
among States and international and regional
organizations, such as the League of Arab States and
the African Union.

Italy is today at the forefront of efforts to deal with
migration flows in the Mediterranean Sea and will
spare no efforts to keep saving the lives of hundreds of
migrants every day - but solutions must be sustainable.
Therefore, humanitarian interventions to save lives must
be coupled with a comprehensive approach capable of
dealing with the root causes of migration, and they must
do so in partnership with all the stakeholders involved.
That is why Italy is actively supporting the efforts to
underpin new regional cooperation frameworks in that
sector - for example, with the establishment of the
Rabat and Khartoum processes. Italy is committed to
accelerating as much as possible the implementation of
concrete projects that will show the tangible benefits
of that cooperation both in African and European
countries.

