Mr. Rosselli Frieri (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
At the outset, I would like to thank Minister Kono for
presiding over our work today and Secretary-General
Guterres for his briefing. We share the concern of the
Security Council's Japanese presidency and believe
this debate is very timely. It is particularly important
at a time when the situation on the North Korean
peninsula represents a major threat to international
peace and security.

The proliferation of weapons of mass destruction,
whether nuclear, chemical or biological, is a serious,
real threat to international peace and security. Such
weapons should not be used by anyone under any
circumstances. Uruguay would like to emphasize
that it is the duty of all States to strictly respect their
disarmament and non-proliferation obligations under
international law as outlined in such documents as the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
and the Charter of the United Nations.

Uruguay has frequently expressed its categorical
condemnation of North Korea's nuclear tests and
ballistic-missile launches, and will continue to do so if
North Korea continues its threatening behaviour and its
violations of the relevant Security Council resolutions.
We once again urge it to abandon its nuclear programmes
in a complete, verifiable and irreversible way and
immediately cease all related activities, including
launching missiles with ballistic technology. We urge
it to return to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons and the safeguards regime of the
International Atomic Energy Agency.

The Security Council's sanctions represent an
attempt to bring the North Korean Government to the
negotiating table. However, and despite all the calls of
the international community to engage in dialogue, it has
so far not been impossible to get back to the negotiations
that are essential to unblock the situation. The sanctions
imposed on North Korea must be implemented
completely and effectively by all Member States. At
the same time, they must not have adverse effects on
the population. We are therefore concerned that the
sanctions could be having unintended negative effects
on the humanitarian situation in the country, and we
deem it appropriate to carry out a careful analysis of
the problem.

Throughout its participation as a non-permanent
member ofthe Security Council, Uruguay has supported
all the actions taken with regard to North Korea.
Likewise, we have consistently stated our position in
support of every initiative that aims to achieve dialogue.
There is no military solution to the North Korea issue.
The denuclearization of the Korean peninsula must be
carried out in a peaceful manner through diplomatic
negotiations that produce a political commitment
among the parties. We must aim to achieve that without
further delay, before it is too late and before we are left
to lament the consequences of a major disaster.

We very much appreciate the recent visit to North
Korea by Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs
Jeffrey Feltman, which was a concrete step in the right
direction following an extremely prolonged hiatus. It is
crucial to maintain an open channel of communication
between the United Nations and the Government of
North Korea. That will allow us to create the appropriate
conditions for the resumption of negotiations.

It will also be necessary to address the interests
and legitimate concerns of all the parties concerned in
the matter, and efforts to build trust between the parties
should therefore be intensified. As States Members of
the United Nations, we are convinced that there is no
other alternative to dialogue.

