The President: I thank Ms. Edwar for her briefing.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Poland.

I would like to begin by thanking Secretary-General
Antonio Guterres, Mr. Yves Daccord and Ms. Hanaa
Edwar for their comprehensive briefings. I would also
like to underline the importance of the messages they
conveyed to the Security Council today. They show
that violations of international humanitarian law and
international human rights law continue to have an
enormous, negative impact on civilians.
Poland welcomes the report of the Secretary-
General on the protection of civilians in armed conflict
(S/2018/462) covering the year 2017, in particular its
well-founded and accurate recommendations aimed
at solving the global protection crisis. It reveals a
particularly appalling image of suffering and pain
affecting millions of women, children and men who
have been the victims of deliberate and indiscriminate
attacks by parties to conflicts all over the world. The
report also underscores that as of 2017 more than
50 million people have been affected by conflict in
urban areas. Those who are particularly vulnerable in
conflict situations are women, children, persons with
disabilities and detainees.

Civilian objects, such as schools, hospitals, markets
and places of worship, are often the targets of attacks.
The number of persons missing in armed conflicts
is equally of concern, as it is constantly increasing.
While the responsibility to prevent disappearances
and provide answers to relatives lies with the State
authorities, together with the International Committee
of the Red Cross and other aid organizations, we should
all take part in explaining their circumstances.

I would like to focus now on three main areas
in which we should act together to ensure effective
protection in conflict situations: prevention, protection
and accountability.

We should spare no effort to make conflict
prevention an overarching priority of the United
Nations. As the Secretary-General quite rightly stated
in his report, dialogue and inclusive peace processes
combined with a holistic approach to address the
root causes of conflicts are essential elements of
preventive action.

If an armed conflict breaks out, our focus must be
directed at the highest standard of protection provided
to civilians. That responsibility lies primarily with
parties to the conflict, both State and non-State actors,
but also with the international community as a whole.
It is of the utmost importance to develop and promote
good practices by parties to the conflict that would
prevent and mitigate harm to civilians.

We should also pay special attention to humanitarian
challenges to the protection of civilians, such as the
inhumane impact of improvised explosive devices and
the illicit flows of small arms and weapons. Both have
the same degrading, socioeconomic impact on affected
communities. The United Nations has the proper reach
and effective means to deal with such issues. In that
context, the existing disarmament machinery within
the United Nations should be used effectively. In
particular, I would like to stress the importance of the
implementation of the Convention on the Prohibition
of the Use, Stockpiling, Production and Transfer of
Anti-Personnel Mines and on Their Destruction, as
well as the Chemical Weapons Convention. Another
important instrument is the Convention on Prohibitions
or Restrictions on the Use of Certain Conventional
Weapons Which May Be Deemed to Be Excessively
Injurious or to Have Indiscriminate Effects and its
Protocols, which addresses the various inhumane
effects of existing and emerging weapons systems.

In recent years numerous countries around the
world have been severely affected by armed conflicts,
including Afghanistan, the Central African Republic,
Chad, the Democratic Republic of Congo, Iraq, Libya,
Mali, Myanmar, the Niger, Nigeria, South Sudan,
Somalia, Syria and Yemen. With regard to European
countries, Ukraine has been witnessing continuous
military aggression and the unlawful occupation of
its territories. Despite many efforts undertaken by the
international community, a ceasefire in Ukraine is
far from being achieved. The number of casualties is
particularly alarming. According to recent reports by
the United Nations, 2,830 civilians died and 25, 000
were wounded as a result of that protracted armed
conflict. There are also 1.5 million internally displaced
persons in Ukraine.

Every month more than 1 million people are forced
to cross the front lines to receive humanitarian aid and
basic services. Such cases clearly show that civilians
are the ones who often pay the highest price in conflict
situations. Poland believes that respect for international
humanitarian law and international human rights
law must be enhanced. It is important that all State
and non-State parties to conflicts comply with their
legal obligations.

Moreover, it is crucial to implement good
practices in this field. An example of which is
Poland's interministerial commission on international
humanitarian law, which several other countries
have also done, in order to ensure that international
humanitarian law is implemented throughout the whole
judicial system. Tasked with the dissemination of the
normsofinternationalhumanitarianlaw,thecommission
meets twice per year and is made up of representatives
from the relevant ministries. It conducts reviews
and analyses of international agreements related to
international humanitarian law and formulates opinions
on the legislative, organizational and educational
measures that should be undertaken to ensure the full
incorporation of international humanitarian law into
the Polish legal system. It also drafts national reports
on the application and dissemination of international
humanitarian law in Poland.

Impunity for any violation of international
humanitarian law should be brought to an end, or at
least substantially reduced. It is necessary to ensure
accountability no matter who the perpetrator of a
given crime or abuse is. The International Criminal
Court should play a leading role in holding parties to
conflict accountable and in restoring a sense ofjustice
on the international stage. The Security Council should
refer flagrant violations of fundamental international
law standards to the International Criminal Court
with greater frequency. We also support initiatives
aimed at limiting the use of the veto by the Council in
cases related to war crimes, crimes against humanity
and genocide, which is one of the most horrific war
atrocities that can be committed against civilians. .

This year marks the seventieth anniversary of the
adoption by the United Nations of the Convention on the
Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide.
Sadly, despite the adoption of the Convention, human
beings have not stopped committing the crime of
genocide. One of the most dramatic cases we have seen
of this crime is the genocide that took place against the
Tutsis in Rwanda, where close to 1 million people were
killed in 1994.

Poland has supported and welcomes with
satisfaction the code of conduct regarding Security
Council action against genocide. We encourage States
that have not yet expressed their support for the code
of conduct, especially those that are members of the
Security Council, to consider doing so. I also encourage
the 116 States that supported the code of conduct to
enhance their commitment to the Security Council's
actions against genocide, crimes against humanity and
war crimes.

Since the adoption of the landmark resolution
2286 (2016), in 2016, which is dedicated entirely to the
protection of medical-care providers in armed conflict,
at least once a week some medical-assistance personnel
have experienced some sort of hostility in the field.
It is the duty and responsibility of the international
community to take practical measures to prevent that
from happening. At the forefront of medical-assistance
efforts is the International Committee of the Red
Cross, which delivers aid to victims of conflict. In that
context, I would refer to the valuable Health Care in
Danger initiative, which aims to address the issue of
medical personnel being targeted and to protect those
who provide aid.

We have endorsed the Kigali Principles enunciated
in 2015, which set out critical benchmarks for Member
States and address the most relevant aspects of
peacekeeping, including pre- and post-deployment
training on the protection of civilians. We strongly
encourage strict implementation of the zero-tolerance
policy with regard to sexual exploitation and abuse
by peacekeeping personnel. The Blue Helmets should
make us proud of their activities instead of making us
feel ashamed.

Next year marks the twentieth anniversary of the
issue of the protection of civilians first being placed on
the Security Council's agenda. It is worthwhile noticing
that some progress on the protection of civilians has
been made. In that context, it is important to commend
the initiatives of the World Health Organization to
develop a surveillance system for attacks on health care,
as well as the efforts of the International Committee
of the Red Cross aimed at adopting laws on protecting
health care.

Despite many achievements in the field, much more
needs to be done globally. The Secretary-General's
words pronounced a year ago in this Chamber on the
occasion of the annual debate on the protection of
civilians remain valid today: "What is needed now is
action that will turn words into reality" (S/PV7951, p. 3). It is hard not to agree. I look forward to the
discussion to come.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.

