Sheikh Al Sabah (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): To
begin with, I would like to commend the initiative of
your country's delegation, Mr. President, to convene
this formal public meeting under the agenda item
"Non-proliferation". This meeting is being held before
the convening of the next Review Conference of the
Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons (NPT), to be held in May 2020. I would like
to extend my thanks to Mr. Yukiya Amano, Director
General of the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA), and Mrs. Izumi Nakamitsu, Under-Secretary-
General and High Representative for Disarmament
Affairs for their informative briefings.

Over the past months, the issue of nuclear
non-proliferation has seen a momentum that is not
witnessed since the high-level meeting of the Security
Council in 2009 at which resolution 1887 (2009) was
adopted (see S/PV.6191). The resolution reaffirms
that the NPT remains the cornerstone of the nuclear
non-proliferation regime and the main pillar in efforts
aimed at denuclearization and the peaceful use of
nuclear energy. That momentum continued through the
2010 NPT Review Conference, where an agreement
was reached that led to the Action Plan that gave the
peoples of the world a glimpse of hope that concrete
measures would be achieved in terms of ridding
the world of nuclear weapons and other weapons of
mass destruction.

We are meeting again at a high-level after few
months of participating in the Security Council's high-
level meeting in September 2018 (see S/PV.8362),
to reaffirm the threat of nuclear proliferation, stress
the high priority given by the Council to the NPT
and address this menace to humankind, based on
the Council's responsibility to prevent conflict and
maintain international peace and security. In that
regard, I would like to reiterate the principled and firm
position of the State of Kuwait regarding NPT issues.
We condemn the use of nuclear weapons and other
weapons of mass destruction at any time, any place and
by whomsoever. We consider such use to be a serious
violation of international law. We also reiterate our
steadfast commitment to the NPT and the achievement
of its universality, in order to preserve and promote the
international NPT regime. We recall the outcomes of
previous Review Conferences, including the outcome
documents of those held in 1995 and 2000, as well as
the 2010 Action Plan.

Notwithstanding our commitment and the commitment
of all States parties in supporting the Treaty, its regime
continues to face great challenges in achieving the
Treaty's objectives. Forty-nine years after the Treaty's
entry into force, the world continues to face the threat
of nuclear weapons and their proliferation. The peoples
of our region are still awaiting the implementation
of resolution NPT/CONF.1995/32 (Part I), annex,
on establishing a Middle East zone free of nuclear
weapons and all other weapons of mass destruction,
adopted at the 1995 Review Conference, which led to
the indefinite extension of the NPT.

The State of Kuwait and all other Arab countries
reaffirm that the 1995 resolution shall remain valid and
in force until its objectives have been achieved. The
responsibility for its implementation rests with all States
parties to the NPT, in particular the nuclear-weapon
States, including the three co-sponsoring ones. At the
same time, we emphasize that Israel must join the NPT
and subject all its nuclear facilities to the monitoring
and inspection of the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA) given that Israel is the only country in
the Middle East that has not yet joined the NPT.

Today's discussion on the NPT is not limited to the
threat posed by nuclear weapons. It also includes one of
the key pillars of the Treaty, namely, the peaceful use
of nuclear energy. The State of Kuwait underlines that
all States parties have the right to carry out research
and studies as well as to possess and use nuclear
technology for peaceful purposes. That inherent right
is completely in line with the legal obligations of States
and agreements concluded with the IAEA.

The State of Kuwait firmly believes in
multilateralism under the United Nations umbrella, as
well as the principles and obligations agreed upon in the
Charter. Preserving the NPT is the responsibility of all
States. In May 2020 the international community will
meet in New York to take part in the upcoming Review
Conference. That requires stepping up our efforts and
working together as of today, showing the sincere
political will to ensure the success of the Conference by
demonstrating maximum flexibility in our positions to
reach an agreement on measures that will contribute to
achieving our goals of a world free of nuclear weapons.

