Mr. Daeie (spoke in Serbian," interpretation provided by the delegation): I would like to thank all
Security Council member States for the support they
have expressed to our chairmanship ofthe Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE).

I would also like to reiterate our wish to cooperate
as closely as possible with the United Nations, and
therefore value this very beneficial and important
meeting. I express my full willingness and readiness,
along with those of our Secretary General, Mr. Zannier,
and my Special Representatives in various areas, in
particular my Special Representative in Ukraine, to
participate in the work of the United Nations and to
brief the Council on the situation on the ground. The
OSCE is the only organization present in Ukraine. That
is why the support of the United Nations is of crucial
importance to OSCE activities and why I welcome the
holding of this meeting.

Without mentioning all of the areas of OSCE
engagement, I would like to draw the Council's attention
to several topics on our agenda, including the campaigns
against anti-Semitism and human trafficking, and water
management. I will not mention the various frozen
or protracted conflicts except to say that we will use
existing means to resolve such situations as those in
Nagorno Karabakh, Moldova and Georgia.

Iwould also like to reiterate that I, as Chairperson-in-
Office, together with my team, intend to visit all areas
that have an OSCE presence. I have already visited the
OSCE missions in the the Former Yugoslav Republic
of Macedonia, Montenegro and, strange as it may
seem, Serbia as well. Against that backdrop, I wish to
familiarize myself with all existing issues. I intend to
visit the OSCE missions in Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Albania, Kosovo, Moldova, Armenia, Azerbaijan,
Georgia, of course Ukraine, and the five central Asian
countries of Kazakhstan, Uzbekistan, Turkmenistan,
Tajikistan and Kyrgyzstan.

I recall that Switzerland assumed the chairmanship
of the OSCE in 2014; before Switzerland, Ukraine
held the chairmanship. The 2013 Ministerial Council
was held in Kyiv only two or three months before the
eruption of the crisis in Ukraine, and there was no
notion or early warning that the crisis would happen.
That is a demonstration of how complex the situation
is and how difficult it is to plan any activity in an
organization such as the OSCE.

We have adopted an budget enabling us to carry out
all our activities on the ground. I am grateful for the
work of the OSCE troika - Germany, Switzerland and
ourselves - and the Normandy group, which includes
Russia, Ukraine, Germany and France. The Normandy
format meeting took place this morning in Paris, and
any participation, whether via video-teleconference,
conference call or personal presence involving either
Ms. Tagliavini or Mr. Apakan, is crucial to enabling us
to implement the Minsk agreements. I welcome these
agreements and hope that some progress will be made
on the ground.

I discussed the topic yesterday with my counterparts
from Russia and Ukraine, Mr. Lavrov and Mr. Klimkin.
The mandate of the Special Monitoring Mission to
Ukraine will come to an end in late March. We have
already started to reflect on a new mission, and two
ministers have agreed that the current Mission could
be extended. The mandate is currently 6 months; we
propose that it be extended to 12 months. We also
discussed whether there are a sufficient number of
observers, and touched on the topic of equipment, of
which there was some mention in accordance with the
agreement, but which we do not possess. Those include
satellite images, drones and armed vehicles. We also
broached topics such as the budget, and touched on
the issue mentioned by the Lithuanian representative,
namely, the mandate of the mission. It remains to be
seen whether the scope of the mandate will be changed
or remain the same. We will do that in accordance with
the agreements under the Normandy format.

I would just like to remind the Council of the scope
ofresponsibility ofthe Special Monitoring Mission. It is
not only to verify the ceasefire, the withdrawal ofheavy
weapons or the exchange of hostages and prisoners;
it will also have to address the law on amnesty and
pardons, the reconstruction of social and economic
ties, and issues related to gas and electricity, pensions,
salaries and trafficking, as well as political issues that
were preconditions to achieving full normalization.
The agreement envisaged that the Ukrainian authorities
would take control of the border the first day after local
elections were held in Donetsk and Luhansk, based
on agreements that remain to be concluded through
mediation under the auspices of the Trilateral Contact
Group. The completion of the dialogue, the agreements
reached therein, the drafting of the constitution and
the role of the OSCE are all highly significant on
the ground. That is why various task forces must be
established to take charge of the different issues.

I believe that the mission requires full support.
There are two missions on the ground. The first is the
Special Monitoring Mission, headed by Mr. Apakan;
the second is the Observer Mission at the Russian
Checkpoints Gukovo and Donetsk, headed by the
French diplomat, Mr. Picard. The Swiss Ambassador,
Ms. Heidi Tagliavini, is my Personal Representative
to the Trilateral Contact Group. It is very important
for us to enjoy the support of the United Nations and
the Security Council to provide the authority to those
missions and thereby enable them to conduct their work
in an impartial and fair manner.

We have not made significant progress regarding
the ceasefire and the withdrawal of heavy weapons, but
our missions need to verify that. We have been told that
the parties have started to implement the ceasefire in
Donetsk and Luhansk and to withdraw weapons. That
is why I called on the parties to provide access to our
monitors so they can verify the actions on the ground to
determine the truth of the matter. I raise this issue only
to illustrate the difficulty of carrying out a mission that
is neither military nor combat in nature, but civilian.

At the same time, not all members of the Security
Council or other United Nations States Members
are aware of the enormous size of the territory of
Ukraine. It is the second largest country in Europe.
The contact line is 480 kilometers long. The part of the
border between Ukraine and Russia that is not under
the control of the Ukrainian forces is more than 400
kilometers long. Our mission of 350 personnel needs
to be functional and able to conduct its activities. If the
political will exists to sign the agreement and adopt the
implementation plan, we will make every effort to fully
implement the agreement.

I would like to again thank the Council for its
assistance in that regard. The OSCE considers the
support of the United Nations on the ground to be of the
highest importance to ensuring its ability to perform
its functions and to de-escalate the crisis in Ukraine,
although I do not wish to downplay other ongoing
problems. I, my Secretary General and my Special
Representatives are ready to respond to the Council's
call to participate in debates such as this or on any of
topic of great importance to our organization.

