Mr. Tang Jiaxuan (China) (spoke in Chinese):
First of all, on behalf of the Chinese delegation, I
would like to express my deepest sympathies to the
relatives and families of those who died as the result of
the crash that occurred this morning.

Since 11 September, counter-terrorism has
become the focus of concern of the international
community. It is of great importance for the Security
Council to hold the ministerial meeting on counter-
terrorism at such a time, which will help strengthen and
promote the fight against terrorism by the international
community. I would also like to welcome the
Secretary-General and thank him for his participation
and important remarks.

The events of 11 September have shown that
terrorism has not only posed a major threat to
international peace and security but has also inflicted
severe damage on the world economy. Terrorism is a
brazen challenge to all of human civilization and a
common enemy to humanity. All countries should
adopt political, economic and judicial measures to
intensify the punishment of terrorism, seriously
implement the relevant Security Council resolutions,
actively promote international cooperation in counter-
terrorism and accede to all international counter-
terrorism conventions at an early date.

China holds that the strike against terrorism
should be clearly targeted and try to avoid injuring
innocent people, and should be in compliance with the
purposes and principles of the United Nations Charter
and other commonly acknowledged norms of
international law. It should benefit the long-term peace
and stability of different regions and the world as a
whole.

China believes that the fight against terrorism is a
contest between peace and violence. We oppose linking
terrorism to any specific religion or ethnicity. China
also believes that there should be no double standards
with regard to counter-terrorism. The international
community should take a common stand against all
forms of terrorist acts, condemn them in unison and
carry out a resolute fight against them.

The fight against terrorism is a protracted,
complicated and arduous task. Measures should be
taken to address both the symptoms and root causes of
terrorism. The proper solutions to global issues such as
poverty, regional conflicts and sustainable development
will not only be conducive to the promotion of peace
and development in the world but will also contribute
to strengthening international cooperation against
terrorism and to eradicating it.

The United Nations is the most representative
intergovernmental organization. Its Security Council
shoulders the primary responsibility for safeguarding
international peace and security. The relevant
resolutions adopted and the meetings held by the
United Nations, including the Security Council, have
played an important and irreplaceable role in fighting
terrorism and promoting international cooperation.
Like many other countries, China supports the United
Nations and the Security Council as they continue to
play a leading role in the fight against terrorism.

The next priority for the Security Council should
be to give full play to the role of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee, with a view to monitoring and assisting
Member States in implementing fully resolution 1373
(2001). Meanwhile, the Council should pay close
attention to developments in the fight against terrorism
and adopt timely measures to coordinate and promote
the international counter-terrorism endeavour.

It should be pointed out that it is not only the
United States which is threatened by terrorism. Many
other members of the Security Council present here
have also suffered deeply from the scourge of
terrorism. China, too, has been threatened by terrorism.

The "East Turkestan" terrorist forces have long
received training, financial aid and support from
international terrorist groups. On numerous occasions,
they have launched various kinds of terrorist activities
in the Xinjiang region of China and in other countries,
and brutally slaughtered innocent people. Clearly the
"East Turkestan" terrorist forces are, purely and
simply, a part of international terrorism, and should be
resolutely fought against.

China has always stood against terrorism in all its
forms and manifestations, and has adopted a series of
administrative, judicial, economic and security
measures in this regard. Soon after the Security
Council adopted resolution 1373 (2001), the Chinese
Government issued a circular calling for strict
implementation of all the provisions of the resolution.
China has already acceded to nine of the existing 12
international counter-terrorism conventions. Recently,
China also completed its domestic legal procedures for
joining the International Convention for the
Suppression of Terrorist Bombings. China will soon
become a signatory to the International Convention for
the Suppression of the Financing of Terrorism. We
have also stepped up counter-terrorism consultation
and cooperation with relevant countries and established
various counter-terrorism cooperation mechanisms.
China will continue its unremitting efforts to combat
terrorism and promote international cooperation in
counter-terrorism.

We support the document on counter-terrorism to
be adopted at this meeting of the Council.

