Mrs. Purschel (Germany): Let me thank
Mr. Yamamoto, the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General; Ms. Sarabi, Deputy Chairperson
of the High Peace Council; and Ms. Safi, Executive
Director of the Organization for Policy Research and
Development Studies, for their comprehensive briefings.

Germany aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the observer of the European Union.

To start, I would like to commend the National
Unity Government for holding the second Kabul
Process conference on 28 February, despite the series of
atrocious attacks only weeks earlier. This is a testament
to the courage of the Afghan people. There is no purely
military solution to this conflict. After so many years,
the Taliban have achieved none of their objectives and
they never will. All they can do is prolong the misery
of their own people.

The only sustainable solution is a negotiated
peace without losers. President Ghani's offer to enter
into talks with the Taliban without preconditions is an
important step towards such an intra-Afghan peace
process. The participants in the Kabul conference
lent their full support to this offer; now it is up to the
Taliban to respond.

Furthermore, we are encouraged by the steps taken
to prepare for the parliamentary and district council
elections. The presentation of the voter registration
concept and the appointment of a new member to
the Afghan Independent Election Commission gave
new impetus to the process. The postponement of the
election from July to a later date in 2018 seems realistic.
However, the electoral preparations must be accelerated
to hold the elections within this year.

As the Secretary-General notes in his report
(S/2018/165), the number of security related incidents in
2017 was the highest everrecorded. We deeply deplore the
high number of civilian lives lost - especially the lives
of so many children - and we condemn the particularly
brutal series of attacks by anti-Government elements at
the beginning of this year. The Afghan Security Forces
continue to stand on the front line in this fight against
terrorism. We applaud the envisaged security sector
reforms that aim to improve the professionalism of the
Afghan National Army, especially by retiring several
hundred generals and bringing on a new generation of
military leaders.

To train, advise and assist the Afghan National
Security Forces, Germany intends to increase the
number of its troops committed to the Resolute Support
Mission by approximately 300, to a total of up to 1,300
soldiers. We will then be the second-largest troop
contributor to the Mission after the United States.

We also welcome the fact that further efforts have
been made to strengthen the legal and the anti-corruption
framework. The recently adopted amendments to the
penal code may help to reduce war crimes, and the
adoption of the Law on Declaration and Registration
of Assets of State Officials and Employees will yield
visible progress in fighting corruption and foster the
rule of law if implemented correctly.
We thank the Kingdom of the Netherlands for
putting a women, peace and security focus on today's
debate. This emphasis is much welcome and important,
and not just because it is International Women's Day.

I would like to commend the intention of the
Afghan Government to increase the representation of
women in the civil service to 24 per cent by the end
of this year, in line with Afghanistan's national action
plan on resolution 1325 (2000). At the same time, I
would like to put particular emphasis on the importance
of enforcing the Law on the Elimination of Violence
against Women. Too many reported cases remain
unheard by the competent courts. In that context, let
me also thank the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA) for its excellent work in
tracking the human rights situation across the country,
most recently through its annual report on the protection
of civilians.

Germany continues to support UNAMA and
United Nations agencies working in Afghanistan. We
welcome the renewal of the UNAMA mandate today.
It is particularly important that the Security Council
endorse the outcome of the strategic review to give
the Mission a reliable basis for planning the necessary
adjustments. As on previous occasions, I would like to
stress that the important tasks ofthe now abolished Rule
of Law Unit should be fully integrated into UNAMA's
core activities.

Let me conclude by inviting all participants in
this meeting to a movie screening in German House
today. As a concrete measure to highlight the role of
women on this important day, we are proud to present
the first international screening of the documentary We
the Women ofAfghanistan: a silent revolution. We are
pleased that Afghanistan, Canada and the Netherlands
will be there to support the event as hosts.

