Mr. Zinsou (Benin) (spoke in French): We would
like to express our gratitude to you, Mr. President, for
having organized this open debate on the African
dimension in the work of the Security Council.
Although it comes as no surprise, the fact that you have
taken this initiative does you credit.

The objectives of the Organization as set out in
the Charter can be summarized as peace, freedom and
development. It was therefore only logical that, once
the United Nations was established, Africa should
become a focus of its activities. But, in particular,
Africa has also steadily been on the Council's agenda
for several decades because of the many conflicts that
have afflicted the countries of the continent since their
independence, and it is those conflicts that are the main
cause of the backwardness that characterizes the
continent in various domains. A partnership for peace
and security has thus developed between the African
continent and the Council.

The Council has committed itself to seeking
solutions to a number of African crises at various
stages of development by mobilizing the instruments
for intervention available to it, with varying degrees of
success. The Council's activities have increased over
time. The attention the Council devotes to African
issues has increased tenfold. The search for solutions
to African crises is carried out in a more systematic
and prompt manner than in the past. Unfortunately,
Africa provides tragic proof of how costly conflicts can
be if they are resolved. That is why my delegation
believes that the Council should do more to prevent
conflict in Africa. The Security Council should
therefore be proactive, rather than reactive.

The United Nations should look more closely at
the underlying causes of conflict. In order to prevent
conflict in Africa, greater attention should be paid to
the best way in which to encourage democracy and
good governance to take root in the countries of the
continent. The United Nations, particularly the United
Nations Development Programme, has an important
role to play in that area. Responsibility for post-
conflict reconstruction is, first and foremost, the
responsibility of the World Bank and the African
Development Bank - with, of course, the support of
the African Union - as evidenced today in several
African countries. Greater synergy with those
institutions should be developed. A peacebuilding
commission, as proposed by the High-level Panel on
Threats, Challenges and Change, would thus be
entirely justified.

In addition to its devastating and wide-ranging
impact directly on the African people, conflict also has
indirect effects: the deterioration or destruction of
health and education systems; the relentless spread of
diseases, such as HIV; the abandonment of agriculture;
the slowdown in economic growth and investment;
massive violations of human rights.

The Council should be more active and more
open to greater coordination and closer cooperation
with other United Nations bodies, as necessary, and
regardless of the stage at which United Nations
intervention is decided upon. In that connection, we
welcome the favourable developments that have
transformed peacekeeping missions into
multidimensional operations that respond more
effectively to the increasingly complex character of the
crises that they are addressing.

As a complement to its diplomatic efforts and the
deployment of peacekeepers, the Council should refine
the way in which it uses sanctions. It is true that the
usefulness of that instrument has been demonstrated
against UNITA in Angola and the Revolutionary
United Front in Liberia; in those cases, the sanctions
were targeted and the political goals clear-cut.
Sanctions must continue to be assessed and monitored
on a regular basis by the panel of independent experts.
However, we should think more deeply about how to
ensure greater respect for arms embargoes, in particular
those on light weapons, as well as for individual
sanctions aimed at drying up the sources of conflict.
Wherever a United Nations operation is in place, it
should contribute to ensuring that sanctions are
enforced in an effective manner. Its mandate and rules
of engagement should be formulated accordingly.
Greater support should be provided for initiatives such
as the moratorium of the Economic Community of
West African States, which is being transformed into a
convention; this could also contribute to the attainment
of that goal. Experience with Council missions and
international missions of inquiry shows how useful
they can be, and we welcome the Council's intention to
continue to use such tools.

With regard to interaction between the Council
and regional African organizations, we must ensure
coordination with regional conflict management
machinery in Africa. Such coordination could be
carried out through by means of regular reports on
activities and networks for exchange of information,
which would provide the Council with reliable and
timely information to facilitate rapid decision-making.

When prevention efforts fail, we have a duty to
protect civilians; nowhere is this more pressing than in
Africa. People who are already suffering as a result of
conflict and crisis should receive adequate
international assistance to protect their right to life and
to protect them from the violent actions of combatants.
The Council should strive to speak with one voice
when it comes to promoting international criminal
justice as an effective tool to combat impunity. The
Council must also give more sustained attention to
forgotten crises. There should be closer coordination
between the Council and non-governmental
organizations that provide humanitarian assistance,
even if it is necessary to maintain a clear separation of
humanitarian assistance and military operations.

The Council must overcome a certain hesitation
in taking courageous action to deter perpetrators of
abuses against civilians. We should renounce a linear
approach to managing post-conflict situations. Instead,
we should promote a comprehensive approach linking
conflict prevention and resolution to peacebuilding
through a complete sequence of steps, because
experience has shown that a linear approach leads to
bottlenecks that entail real risks, as they reduce our
ability to manage and take advantage of synergies to
accelerate the normalization process. We should
encourage the harmonious linking of the various steps
of the international community's intervention in order
to multiply the effectiveness of the resources
employed. Disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programmes should be viewed as a lever
to set in motion socio-economic changes that promote
the development of a productive formal economy, thus
assisting economic recovery and sustainable
development.

