Mr. Mugabe: Madam President, we are pleased to see
you chairing this special series of meetings of the Security
Council on Africa devoted to the situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. We recall with
satisfaction the special meeting of the Security Council also
dealing with Africa, held in 1997 under the presidency of
your country, which you also chaired. We welcome the
interest your country has thus continued to demonstrate
with regard to the problems facing the African continent.

We also wish to thank all the members of the Security
Council who have actively supported the holding of this
particular session, devoted exclusively to the pursuit of
peace in the Democratic Republic of Congo. The Secretary-
General, Mr. Kofi Annan, deserves our gratitude for the
several reports and recommendations he has made to the
Security Council on the need for peace in the Democratic
Republic of Congo. Finally we all acknowledge that it is
the drive and energy of Ambassador Richard Holbrooke
which have brought us to this session on Africa. We thank
you, Mr. Ambassador, for all the efforts you have exerted
to bring this session about.

Madam President, as part of your "month of Africa"
platform, the Security Council has deliberated on the
scourge of HIV/AIDS in Africa, which you quite rightly
identified as constituting a threat to the security of African
States. You have also discussed the pathetic plight of
refugees and displaced persons. I am advised that the
Security Council, together with other international agencies,
such as the United Nations Development Programme
(UNDP), the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), the World Bank
and the Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS
(UNAIDS), agreed that an effective strategy must be
worked out to fight these scourges that are devastating the
African continent. We join you, Madam President, in this
crusade. We appeal to one and all to accept this challenge
in the interest of humanity. Our mutual interests must
make all of us acknowledge human interdependence and
force us to embark on the task to mobilize international
support against HIV/AIDS and in alleviation of the
condition of African refugees, including internally
displaced persons.

Furthermore, we note that the Council has already
addressed the pressing problems of Angola and Burundi.
However, today the Council is holding a special meeting
devoted to the preservation of the territorial integrity of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, as enshrined in
Chapter 1, Article 2, of the United Nations Charter. We,
the African leaders from the region, key actors in a
conflict that has affected not only the Great Lakes region,
but also the countries of southern Africa - a conflict that
arises from the violation of sacred tenets of the United
Nations Charter and has pitted brother against brother,
resulting in the death and untold suffering of hundreds of
thousands of innocent people, especially women and
children - are here today to demonstrate our
commitment to a peaceful resolution of the crisis in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and to urge the
Security Council to help us bring peace to that country.

Madam President, let me at the outset emphatically
and categorically state that the Southern African
Development Community (SADC) allied forces have no
territorial or other hidden ambitions or agendas in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. We are in the Congo
at the invitation of the sovereign Government of that
country and in accordance with SADC decisions on
collective security. Indeed, our defense objective - that
is, the defense objective of the allies - is code-named
"Sovereign Legitimacy". We are there to uphold one of
the most fundamental principles of the Charter of the
United Nations, namely, respect for the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of States and non-interference in the
domestic affairs of a sovereign country.

The Council need not be reminded that it was in
pursuit of those same fundamental principles that the
international community readily went to war in the Gulf
only a few years ago. It is common knowledge that it was

 

my country that held the presidency of this body when that
momentous decision was taken. It is these same
fundamental principles of the Charter that, in its resolution
1234 (1999), the Council acknowledged and committed
itself to uphold and protect in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. But alas, little has been done since then to
implement them.

As we have said on many occasions, the SADC allied
States are committed to peace in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and in the subregion as a whole. The war in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo is a terrible tragedy
for all of us in the region. It is a war that should never
have taken place. We acknowledge that if there had been
sufficient consultations in our region we could have avoided
it. Lessons have been learned from this tragedy. That is
why from the very onset of the conflict the SADC allied
States advocated dialogue as a means of settling the
conflict. To advance that peace objective, several summits
were held, beginning with that held at Victoria Falls on 7
and 8 August 1998, and followed by several others held
respectively at Pretoria on 23 August 1998, at Durban in
September 1998, and again at Victoria Falls on 7 and 8
September 1998, culminating in the ceremony for the
signing of the Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement on 10 July
1999.

Even as we fought each other in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, we never believed that the conflict
could be settled by force of arms alone. It was always clear
to us that negotiations, in the end, were the logical and
sensible way of resolving the conflict. The Lusaka Peace
Agreement is a vindication of the collective wisdom of the
parties to the conflict in choosing dialogue over arms as the
best way to end the conflict. Some members of the region
indeed made a serious mistake by initiating the conflict in
the first place. But today, all members have shown courage,
vision and wisdom in negotiating an end to the conflict. We
are here, therefore, to call upon the Council, as the
custodian of peace and security in the world, to assume its
role and responsibility by immediately sending both
observers and peacekeepers to the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. To date, the Security Council has, to our
disappointment, been slow and hesitant in welcoming and
strengthening our regional peace agreement.

The months that have elapsed since the signing of the
Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement have been most frustrating, as
they have exposed the dangers inherent in delayed action by
the Council in supporting the peace process in the Congo.
In a situation without observers and monitors, for months
on end, troops and their commanders on the ground were
expected to rely on the good faith of their erstwhile
opponents, whom they suspect of being cunning and
skilful, as all practitioners of the art of war are trained to
be. In such a situation, it is inevitable that the
commanders will always try their utmost to ensure that
their men are not exposed to sudden attack, or somehow
encircled or outmanoeuvred by the other side. Any troop
movements by one side are read and interpreted as threats
by the other and have, on occasion, led to violations of
the Ceasefire Agreement. While this is regrettable, we, as
parties to the Agreement, have exercised maximal
restraint despite the number of violations that have
occurred in the context of the unsupervised and
unmonitored Ceasefire Agreement. Indeed, full-scale war
has not resumed, and the Agreement has continued to
remain broadly in place, as important elements of the
Agreement have, in spite of the problem of resources,
continued to be implemented by the parties.

The Joint Military Commission established as
envisaged by the Agreement has been functioning despite
resource constraints. The Commission is present in four
regions, as President Chiluba has said, with headquarters
in three of them: Kabinda, Boende and Lisala. It has
developed programmes on such key tasks as the
withdrawal of foreign troops, the disarming of armed
groups, disengagement of forces, release of prisoners, and
the provision of humanitarian corridors. The Political
Committee of ministers, another institution envisaged in
the Lusaka Agreement, has been established and has been
meeting often to carry out its important responsibilities of
guiding the peace process.

At its last sitting, held in Harare last week, on 17
and 18 January, the Committee took some quite important
decisions with a view to promoting the peace process.
First it, inter alia, reaffirmed the fundamental nature of
the Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement as a basis for solving the
conflict in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Secondly, it solemnly recommitted all the parties to the
Lusaka Agreement and to the faithful observance of the
provisions of that Agreement. Thirdly, it designated 18
January 2000 as the date on which parties to the
Agreement restated - that is, renewed - their
commitment to the Agreement. The effect of that decision
is to make "R-Day" - Restatement Day - replace the
"D-Day" of earlier arrangements for all the remaining
tasks under the agreement. This was an important
decision in view of the difficulties that had arisen to
establish a "D-Day" in the Lusaka peace process, since
the various parties had signed the Ceasefire Agreement on
different dates.

 

Besides those institutions, we have the recent
appointment of our brother, His Excellency Sir Ketumile
Masire, former President of Botswana, as the Facilitator to
promote the Congolese national dialogue, a crucial aspect
of the Lusaka Peace Agreement. These and many other key
elements have now been accomplished. Much that has been
achieved has been done largely using the resources of the
belligerents and of donors. Some donors have pledged
support for these efforts, and we say "thank you" to them.
We now wish to urge those that have made pledges and
have not yet honoured them to do so, and those that have
not yet pledged to consider doing so.

As partners involved in the search for peace in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, we, the countries of the
region, are disappointed and frustrated by what we perceive
as the lethargic manner in which the Security Council has
responded to our call for assistance and urgent action. To
date, after months of procrastination and foot-dragging, we
do not seem to be any closer to any action by the Council
on the deployment of the much-needed and long-awaited
peacekeeping force in the Congo. The closest thing we have
to the much-desired action programme is the recent
Security Council decision authorizing the Secretary-General
"to take the administrative steps necessary for the equipping
of up to 500 United Nations military observers with a view
to facilitating future United Nations deployments".
(resolution 1279 (1999), para. 9) We say, "Good intention,
yes, but no good action to follow the good intention". A
review of the Security Council's decisions and actions so
far yields the depressing impression that there has been too
much time spent on the diagnosis of the situation when the
prescription that ought to be administered is already known.
In these circumstances, considering the alacrity with which
the questions of Kosovo and Bosnia were handled, Africa
feels marginalized, neglected and, dare I say it, segregated.

Madam President, when Ambassador Holbrooke
visited Zimbabwe, we raised the question of what we
perceived as double standards in the Security Council's
handling of Africa's problems. With respect to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, we pointed out that
because of the magnitude of the human tragedy in that
country, none of us could afford to appear on the stage
wearing only the mask of commitment; we said that a
credible performance was essential. We told him that some
members of the Security Council appeared to be aligned
against the sovereign independence and territorial integrity
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, or at least to be
in favour of those who would deny it. However, we were
assured that your great country, the United States, would
never countenance acts that violated international
agreements. We were told that your concern was that the
United Nations had got it wrong twice in Africa, namely
in Somalia and in Rwanda, and, hence that it had to
exercise caution.

We noted these points, but we now say the time has
come for prompt action if the Security Council genuinely
desires to buttress the peace process in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. Any further delays can only be
detrimental to the achievement of the objectives of peace
in that country. While we are well advised to heed the
lessons of history, we should not allow ourselves to be
paralysed by them. The Security Council still has a
unique opportunity to redeem itself and restore faith in
the United Nations, among the people of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo in particular and of Africa in
general. Let us remind ourselves of the betrayal of the
Congo in the 1960s, when the Congolese nationalist
leader, Patrice Lumumba, met his tragic death, and the
opportunity for peace and nationhood was dashed because
the Security Council, then, as now, had abdicated its
responsibilities.

I call upon this body to heed the heartbeats of the
people of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Let us
help them emerge from the great suffering that has
afflicted them. Our presence here as African leaders has
indeed raised their hopes, and dashing those hopes will do
them irreparable damage.

The people of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
await our bold decision eagerly so that they can drive
from their midst the spectre of national disintegration.
They yearn for the unity of their country so they can
banish the hatred that is the handmaiden of civil strife.
They look forward to using their independence and
freedom in pursuit of the socio-economic goals and ideals
of democracy essential for the development of their nation.

What the people of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo now require from this meeting of the Security
Council, and what we of the region also require, is not
more talk of sending observers to their country, but the
invoking of Chapter VII of the Charter and the urgent
dispatch of peacekeepers to keep the peace. This Council
has been observing the situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo from afar for too long; it should
now go into the country and try to keep the peace. The
message is, peacekeepers now.

Let us agree to send this message of hope to the
Congolese people. I want to assure the Council of my

 

nation's commitment to playing its part in affording them
the opportunity to work for their destiny free from
aggression and interference in their domestic affairs.

