The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank the
Special Representative for his clear comments and for
his kind words addressed to me.

Following consultations among the members of
the Security Council, I have been authorized to make
the following statement on behalf of the Council.

"The Security Council reaffirms the
comprehensive mandate of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) as
set forth in resolutions 1542 (2004) and 1576
(2004), and expresses its support for the United
Nations presence in Haiti as long as necessary.

"The Security Council underlines that
national reconciliation, security and economic
development remain key to stability in Haiti, and,
in that regard, stresses that all Member States and
international organizations, especially those in
the region, should support the Transitional
Government of Haiti in those efforts.

"The Security Council underlines the
important role of MINUSTAH in ensuring a
secure environment and commends the recent
joint operations by MINUSTAH and the Haitian
National Police (HNP), in particular against all
illegal armed groups. It notes however that
further urgent action is needed to continue to
improve the security situation. The Council again
calls on all parties in Haiti to respect human
rights and to renounce the use of violence to
advance their goals.

"The Security Council encourages the
Transitional Government to create without delay
the National Commission on Disarmament,
Demobilization and Reintegration (DDR), to
address all armed groups, particularly former
members of the military, in a comprehensive
manner. It notes that any compensation should be
part of a comprehensive and durable solution.

"The Security Council renews its appeal for
the prompt disbursement of the funds pledged by
international financial institutions and donor
countries at the International Donors Conference
on Haiti held in July 2004. It recognizes the need
for MINUSTAH, other organs of the United
Nations system, international financial
institutions and Member States to assist the
Transitional Government in the preparation and
implementation of development projects in Haiti,
as well as quick-impact projects. The Council
reiterates the need to assist the Transitional
Government in establishing a long-term
development strategy for Haiti, in accordance
with the priorities set forth in the Interim
Cooperation Framework.

"The Security Council welcomes recent
steps taken by the Transitional Government of
Haiti to release some individuals being held
without formal charge or trial, and calls on the
Transitional Government to review all such cases
in order to ensure full respect for due process and
the rule of law. In this regard, the Council calls
on MINUSTAH to continue its support for the
provision of human rights training to Haitian
judicial, police and correctional authorities to
ensure adherence to international norms and
standards.

"The Security Council encourages the
Transitional Government to continue to take steps
towards a comprehensive and inclusive national
dialogue and reconciliation process and calls
upon all political actors in Haiti to renounce
violence and join this dialogue without delay. The
Council fully supports MINUSTAH's continuing
facilitation of this process.

"The Security Council calls upon the
Transitional Government, with the assistance of
MINUSTAH and the Organization of American
States (OAS), to take urgently the necessary
measures to ensure the holding of free and fair
elections in 2005 and the subsequent transfer of
power to elected authorities, and welcomes the
recent decisions of the Provisional Electoral
Council (CEP) in its preparations. It encourages
all political parties that have rejected violence to
participate in the electoral process.

"The Security Council expresses its
intention to organize a mission to Haiti before 1
June 2005, possibly in conjunction with a mission
of the Economic and Social Council Ad Hoc
Advisory Group on Haiti.

"The Security Council expresses its
gratitude to the countries that have contributed
personnel to the Mission. It urges troop - and
police-contributing countries to complete the
authorized strength of MINUSTAH as soon as
possible, stressing that prompt completion of this
step is an essential requirement for the continuing
success of the operation.

"The Security Council expresses its full
support for the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Haiti, Juan Gabriel Valdes,
and commends the work done by MINUSTAH
and all of its personnel."

This statement will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2005/ 1.

The Minister for Foreign Affairs of Haiti has
asked to speak. If no member of the Council objects, I
propose to give him the floor.

I call on the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Haiti.

