The President: I thank Ms. Toure' for her briefing.

I will now make a statement in my capacity as
Prime Minister of the Netherlands.

First of all, I would like to thank Secretary-General
Guterres, Moussa Faki Mahamat and Fatimata Toure
for their inspiring contributions.

United Nations peacekeeping operations save
lives. For many men, women and children in conflict
areas, the United Nations is their last hope. And sadly,
more and more people around the world have only that
last hope to cling to. Since 2010, the number of major
violent conflicts has tripled. They have also become
more complex.

The history of peacekeeping operations has
seen notable achievements, but it also has its dark
pages. We in the Netherlands know that all too well.
But that does not make us want to look away. On the
contrary, modernizing and improving United Nations
peacekeeping operations is one of the priorities of the
Kingdom of the Netherlands. We fully support the
Secretary-General's efforts in that regard.

That brings me to my main message today: we need
to shoulder our responsibilities. That applies to us all,
first and foremost to the Security Council. We must
establish clear and focused mandates and put pressure
on parties to conflicts to find a political solution. It also
applies to host countries, which must cooperate fully
with missions. It applies to the Secretariat, which must
support missions efficiently and effectively. And last
but not least, it applies to all Member States because
we are the United Nations, and we must make sure
that sufficient funding, political support and well-
trained, disciplined and well-equipped troops are
always available.

The Kingdom of the Netherlands is shouldering
its responsibility. We are a big financial donor, we
make an innovative contribution to the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali (MINUSMA), and we contribute to missions
in South Sudan and the Middle East. We want more
effective and flexible missions. But how do we achieve
that? Let me highlight a few specific points.

First, good intelligence is one of the keys to a
successful mission. Together with other countries,
the Netherlands has developed a new intelligence
capability in Mali. The United Nations mandate can
thus be carried out more effectively, and civilians and
peacekeepers can be better protected.

Secondly, capabilities like helicopters and medical
facilities are vital, but scarce. Norway was the first
country to set up a rotation scheme for this. After the
Netherlands and then Germany supplied helicopters in
Gao, Canada recently announced that it would take up
the baton. That is great news. Rotation schemes lower
the threshold for participation in missions, increase
their sustainability and improve their quality.

Thirdly, I would like to stress the importance of
an integrated approach within United Nations missions.
Each mission must have an overall strategy, with
benchmarks, and I am delighted that such a strategy
will be put in place for MINUSMA.

Finally, the United Nations is working more with
regional partners, such as the African Union and the
European Union. It is good news that organizations
like the African Union and the G5 Sahel are assuming
their responsibility.

Those are only a few of the many improvements,
big and small, being made. We will continue to press for
modernization ofUnited Nations peace missions during
our membership in the Security Council and beyond.
I hope that today will spark greater commitment to
making peace operations more effective so that the
United Nations can go on making a difference to the
lives of millions of men, women and children around
the world.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I now give the floor to the Minister of State and
Minister of Defence of Cote d'Ivoire.

