Mr. Tafrov (Bulgaria) (spoke in French): I
should like to thank the Secretary-General for his
presence at the beginning of our discussion this
morning. My thanks go also to Under-Secretary-
General Jean-Marie Guehenno, and to Ms. Carolyn
McAskie, Deputy to the Under-Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs, for their very complete and
useful briefings. It is also a pleasure to see around the
table the Foreign Ministers of Sierra Leone and of
Guinea. I welcome in particular the presence of
Francois Fall in his new capacity as Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Guinea.

The very choice of the format for this discussion
on the part of the British presidency of the Council, I
think, attests to an approach that is becoming more and
more necessary. Bulgaria welcomes this approach to
various conflicts, particularly in Africa but also
elsewhere: the regional approach. We are discussing
today not only the crises in Sierra Leone and Liberia,
but also the situation in the Mano river region as a
whole. This approach is extremely sound, and we
commend it. I must state that the situations in those
countries are very intimately interconnected, almost
like communicating vessels. The Council is right to
address them simultaneously.

Before I make some further brief remarks, I
would like to say that Bulgaria fully associates itself
with the statement that will be made this afternoon by
Denmark on behalf of the European Union. Bulgaria,
as members know, is an associated country of the
European Union.

One of the most important lessons of the success
of the United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone
(UNAMSIL) is undoubtedly the fact that it was made
possible by the resolute action of a country having
historical links with the region. I am speaking of your
country, Madam President, the United Kingdom.
Bulgaria pays tribute to the role played by the United
Kingdom in the resolution of the Sierra Leone tragedy,
a resolution which would not have been possible
without the resolve and engagement of the United
Kingdom.

Of course, the other Members of the United
Nations, and of the Security Council in particular,
made possible a remarkable harmony of approach to
this crisis, which was so difficult in humanitarian
terms. That harmony and unity of approach was
reflected in the mandate that was given UNAMSIL
once the shortcomings of the mandate and the
weakness of the United Nations presence in Sierra
Leone had been identified. J ean-Marie Guehenno spoke
of this eloquently. I fully concur with his appraisal.
One thing is certain: while we cannot make the
integrated mission of the United Nations a rigid
principle in conflicts all over the world, it is important
to understand that that integrated approach can very
often ensure greater effectiveness, particularly in the
humanitarian sphere. I was glad to hear this impression
confirmed by Ms. McAskie. This has been the case for
Sierra Leone. It is the case for Afghanistan. It is
increasingly the case elsewhere. The fear of
humanitarian workers of seeing their room for
manoeuvre and independence somewhat limited by
politicians and the military is, I believe, offset by their
ability to have a genuine impact on the political and
military decision-making process. I think that this is
extremely valuable.

Much has already been said about the clarity of
the mandate and the fact that the investment was
thoughtfully made commensurate with the risks of the
Mission.

With respect to other conflicts in Africa, we must
also bear in mind another dimension: the scale of
Sierra Leone and of Liberia, which are relatively small
countries, which makes it possible perhaps to take the
same approach in these situations. But the resources
required in other situations are clearly greater. I am
especially thinking, of course, of the Great Lakes
region, which, I believe, should particularly benefit
from this debate, given that we are far from stabilizing
the situation in that region of Africa.

The role of sanctions is an aspect that we will
never be able to discuss enough. Ambassador Aguilar
Zinser has spoken about this, and I agree with him.
Sanctions will work in the case of Sierra Leone. That is
true because, while in other situations the lifeblood of
war is money, in this case the lifeblood of war is
diamonds. When we speak of diamonds we are
speaking of interests that go well beyond the
subregion.

On that note, I would like to conclude by saying
that the lessons of Sierra Leone may not be of universal
application, but they are relevant to a large number of
crises, in particular in Africa, where natural resources
are among the causes of the misfortune of the people
afflicted by the situation.

