Mr. Prodi: I am very grateful to be here and
grateful that I have been asked to say a few words even
if that had not been planned; I take this as a great sign
of respect and gratitude for the work that the African
Union-United Nations panel on modalities for support
to African Union operations has done. At the outset, I
should like to thank all the members of the panel for
their efforts and the results that they achieved. I am
deeply grateful for the quality of the individual

contributions that all members of the panel made and
for the intense work of the United Nations staff.

Mr. Le Roy has already presented the main
results to the Council, and I do not want to repeat
them. I should like simply to speak of one simple
concept. Peacekeeping is only one of the great African
issues, which include development, health and
infrastructure.

Our panel found, and it is also my deep
conviction, that we cannot continue dealing with Africa
in a bilateral way. Looking at the economic aspects, at
the peacekeeping aspects and at all the problems of
education and health, we simply cannot go on with this
country-by-country approach based on individual
relationships between wealthy countries and African
countries. If we examine the economic aspects, we
cannot find any prospects for development unless we
approach African countries in their wider context, as a
regional and continental union. Inter-African trade is
negligible. Inter-African infrastructure is absolutely
insufficient. There is an absolute necessity to improve
inter-African cooperation for peacekeeping in the
continent.

I invite all the members of the Security Council,
which bears such great responsibility for the future of
the world, to consider African peacekeeping in this
wider context of relations between other continents and
Africa. Clearly, this process related strictly to
peacekeeping will require long-term capacity-building,
on the basis of ownership and full responsibility by the
African Union. In this process, a multilateral approach
must be at the top of our priorities in dealing with
Africa. That is the point of departure, and it is the
conclusion of our panel.

I ask, in particular, the countries that have the
highest level of responsibility in the world economy, in
development and in peacekeeping to analyse the
necessity of helping with any major engagement of the
African Union and other regional structures, in order to
make African development feasible. That is the
direction we need to go in. The proposals presented by
the panel move towards developing the capacities of
the African Union and allowing it to have
responsibility for future peace in Africa.
To be sure, the objections I hear are logical and
understandable. Some say that the existing
organization, the African Union, is not strong enough
to tackle the problems addressed in the report. I
completely agree, but the task before us is to give the
African Union the ability to build its strength in the
medium and long term. No one thought while writing
the report that everything was ready today for full and
efficient deployment of peacekeeping efforts. However,
if we do not start now, we will never reach our goal.

(spoke in French)

That is the conclusion reached by our panel. I
repeat that the Council will consider all the technical
aspects and technical proposals, but the report must be
seen in the context of a comprehensive African
development plan aiming to provide Africa with all the
means it needs for all countries to act collectively and
in solidarity to promote development on the continent.

(spoke in English)

Those are our conclusions. That is our
contribution to the discussion today. I repeat: let us
now start this long-term effort and work closely with
the entire United Nations system in order to coordinate
the efforts of all countries in Africa so that Africa can
act as a united continent within which cooperation
among all countries is indispensable to a better future.

