Mr. Perovic' (Montenegro): We thank you,
Mr. President, for holding this important debate on the
protection of civilians and commend Uruguay's strong
commitment to the issue. We also thank today's briefers
for their valuable presentations, which reminded us that
this agenda item continues to be of relevance to the
Security Council.
Montenegro aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the observer European Union. I would
like, however, to make some remarks in my national
capacity.

Every day we are reminded that the rules and
principles of international humanitarian law to protect
civilians from the effects of military operations
are challenged and, unfortunately, often ignored.
Deliberate targeting, indiscriminate or disproportionate
attacks, and sexual and gender-based violence are just
a few examples of this troubling and worsening trend,
which we have witnessed in Syria, South Sudan, the
Central African Republic and Iraq. The sad reality is
that civilians still account for a high proportion of the
victims in most armed conflicts.

When something such as the death and suffering
of civilians, especially women and children, happens,
people across the world look to the United Nations and
its peacekeepers for reassurance and protection. And
we ask ourselves what more could be done to prevent
it and how to practically improve civilian protection
in conflict. We have seen a number of important and
positive developments relating to the protection of
civilians. However, the Security Council must do more
than address the issue of the protection of civilians at
the thematic level. Our close attention, decisive action
and full engagement in the implementation of this
agenda item in practice is needed to protect civilians
and ensure that the perpetrators of grave violations
against civilians are brought to account.

More importance needs to be given to the
protection of civilians in conflict zones, and to the
refugees who have fled them. We must do all we can
to reduce suffering, allow humanitarian access, build
trust and protect civilians. Civilians trapped in today's
conflict areas cannot wait for the conclusion ofpolitical
processes before they receive assistance. There can be
no justification for any country that stands in the way
of a resolution designed to allow civilians access to
food and medical assistance. Preventing humanitarian
access by indiscriminate attacks is a great crime, and an
important role ofthe Council is to ensure accountability
for such violations.

Montenegro is of the view that early action to
prevent conflict and mass human rights abuses is
essential. We recognize the valuable progress made in
the area of enhancing the implementation of protection
mandates by United Nations peacekeeping and other
missions.

Priority should be given to the protection ofcivilians
in mission-planning assessments, the allocation of
resources, and in activities on the ground. The challenges
of protecting civilians appear to be increasing.
Logistics, mobility and rapid response challenges in
difficult environments, in the midst of armed conflicts,
some in the presence of violent extremist groups, are
very significant. However, protecting civilians is not
just the responsibility of uniformed peacekeepers, but
also the primary responsibility of States. It is therefore
essential that we take up our responsibilities and use the
Council's authority to ensure that States shoulder their
primary responsibility to prevent conflict and minimize
suffering. Civilians, as well as non-governmental
organizations and communities themselves, play an
important role in that regard.

The emergence of new challenges to international
peace and security implies a greater role for new
technology. The predeployment training of troops that
are ready and willing to meet evolving threats is crucial
in order to be effective.

The protection of civilians from the ravages of
conflict is vital to the mission of the Security Council;
it is what the United Nations is ultimately judged upon.
This is a challenging time for taking action. Montenegro
remains committed to contributing to the common
objective of protecting the lives of women, men, girls
and boys from the consequences of conflicts.

