Mr. Thorns (Germany): At the outset, I would like
to thank Foreign Minister Frans Timmermans and
Under-Secretary-General Jeffrey Feltman for their
insightful briefings.

More than two months have passed since the
downing of Flight MH-17. A total of298 lives, including
four German citizens, were tragically lost. We grief
with those who have lost loved ones and extend our
deepest condolences to our friends in the Netherlands,
Malaysia, Australia and all the other countries that are
mourning the loss of their citizens.

Although two months have passed, the downing
of Flight MH-17 will not be forgotten. By adopting
resolution 2166 (2014), the Council has reacted and sent
out a clear signal, namely, that we must establish the
facts. We want to know who is responsible. We must
bring them to justice.

We commend the Netherlands for taking the lead
in a thorough and inclusive international investigation
into the downing of Flight MH-17. The preliminary
report clearly affirms that the plane did not crash as a
result of technical or human failure. However, too many
questions remain unanswered. It is outrageous that
the investigations on the ground and the repatriation
of human remains are still being hampered by armed
separatist groups. That is a clear violation of resolution
2166 (2014) and an insult to the victims and the
Council. All parties with influence on the ground must
do everything possible to allow for a quick return of the
experts to the crash site.

We hope that the provisions ofthe Minsk protocol of
5 September, especially the mutually agreed ceasefire,
will also improve the situation at the crash site. That
agreement offers the best opportunity we have to end
the bloodshed, to embark on a political process and
to bring about a political solution to the conflict. Its
crucial elements are the following.

First, the Russian-Ukrainian border must be secured.
We call on Russia to end fully and unconditionally its
military activities on or directed against Ukrainian
territory, to halt the continuing flow of weapons and
fighters across the border and to take a constructive role
in stabilizing Ukraine. Secondly, we call for the full
reintegration of eastern Ukraine into Ukraine's State
structures, while empowering local self-government
under Ukrainian law. Thirdly, we urge full respect
for Ukraine's sovereignty and territorial integrity. In
that regard, I reiterate our condemnation of the illegal
annexation of Crimea, which we will not recognize.

Germany has committed itself to supporting
Ukraine in such difficult times. We will continue to
work closely with our partners in the European Union,
the Group of Seven (G-7) and the United Nations, as
well as the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe, which has played a key role in helping to
de-escalate the crisis. It is our deep conviction that
the crisis can be solved only politically, in accordance
with international law and in full respect for Ukraine's
sovereignty, territorial integrity and independence. It
is the responsibility of all members of the Council to
uphold those principles.

