Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
thanks the delegation of the United Kingdom for its
initiative to convene today's open debate. I also welcome
Ms. Greening, Secretary of State for International
Development of the United Kingdom, presiding over
the meeting. I also wish to thank Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon, Ambassador Skoog and Ms. Bouchamaoui
for their briefings.

China extends its sympathy and condolences to
France and other countries over the recent terrorist
attacks. China condemns these attacks, including the
downing of the Russian aircraft in the Sinai, in the
strongest terms. I offer my condolences and sympathy
to the Government and the people of France, Russia and
other countrires and to the bereaved families and the
wounded.

Peace and development are the theme of our times
and the common aspiration of all the peoples. The
United Nations, as the most universal, representative
and authoritative international Organization, is an
important platform for member States to seek peace,
development and cooperation.

The present world is far from peaceful. Regional
conflicts are spreading and the root causes have yet
to be eliminated. Violations of the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations take
place from time to time. The imbalance in international
development is striking. Developing countries, African
countries in particular, are deeply affected by poverty
and underdevelopment. The path to achieving lasting
peace and common prosperity is long. Establishing a
new type of international relationship centred around
win-win cooperation and building a community of
common destiny for humankind is a fundamental
guarantee for promoting peace and development and
eliminating the root causes of conflicts around the
world. The international community should make joint
efforts in that regard.

First, in order to firmly uphold the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations, all
countries must be treated equally and their sovereignty
and territorial integrity must be respected. There
should be no intervention in the internal affairs of
other countries and the rights of other countries
to independently choose their social systems and
development paths should be respected. It is important
to peacefully settle disputes through dialogue and
negotiation. Support must be given to the countries
concerned and regional organizations in their efforts to
seek peaceful settlements to disputes through dialogue,
negotiations, mediation and good offices.

Secondly, to work towards establishing a more just
and rational new international political and economic
order and to establish a mutual, comprehensive,
cooperative and sustainable concept of security in
international relations, a win-win for all philosophy
must be promoted. In the pursuit of national interests,
the reasonable concerns of other countries must be
addressed. International cooperation must be advocated
for properly addressing global challenges. International
affairs must be dealt with through negotiations among
all countries.

Thirdly, to fully implement the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development (resolution 70/1) and eradicate
poverty and achieve equitable, open, comprehensive
and innovative development, the principle of common
but differentiated responsibilities in international
development cooperation must be upheld. The
developed countries should honour their commitments
and undertake their obligations in a timely manner and
support the developing countries, in particular African
countries, in their efforts to achieve development and
implement the sustainable development agenda.

Fourthly, to respect the diversity of civilizations
and promote dialogue and exchanges, we must recall
that there is no such thing as inferiority and superiority
when it comes to different civilizations, cultures and
religions. They must all be respected and treated
equally. The principle of harmony in diversity and
the coexistence of differences must be upheld, and
efforts must be made to promote dialogue, exchanges
and learning from each other among different
civilizations, cultures and religions so that dialogue
among civilizations can become a bridge for enhancing
friendship among countries and maintaining world
peace.

The Security Council has the primary responsibility
for maintaining international peace and security and it
is duty-bound to remove the root causes of conflicts.
The Security Council should closely cooperate and
coordinate with other United Nations agencies to
conduct preventive diplomacy and maintain and build
peace. Peaceful means and coercive actions must be
used comprehensively in order to settle disputes. The
Council should strongly support regional organizations
in their efforts to properly address regional conflicts.
In assuming their responsibilities under the Charter of
the United Nations, Council members should proceed
from an assessment of the overall situation and ensure
that the Council's actions are unified and effective,
thereby maintaining the unity and authority of the
Security Council.

Terrorism is the most serious challenge facing the
international community. The Security Council should
greatly coordinate international counter-terrorism
efforts and promote the parties concerned to strengthen
counter-terrorism cooperation and form a unified front
in accordance with the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations and other recognized
fundamental principles of international relations. The
Council should ensure the effective implementation of
resolutions on counter-terrorism and the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant, including by taking action to
combat terrorist activities that use the Internet to
incite and plan terrorist activities and by cutting off
their channels of external support, recruitment and
ideological propaganda. In that regard, international
counter-terrorism efforts should address both the
symptoms and the root causes without double standards.

