Mrs. Rugwabiza (Rwanda): Rwanda congratulates
you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of
the Council for the month of July and for convening
this debate on a subject of paramount importance to
our continent, Africa. We also thank the briefers, the
Secretary-General and the African Union Commissioner
for Peace and Security for their earlier briefings.

Today's threats to peace and security, worldwide
and on our continent, have become much more complex,
as has been underlined by many speakers, which calls
for multifaceted interventions and stronger partnerships
with regional organizations.

The African Union is better positioned in terms
of knowledge and proximity to mobilize and respond
quickly to existing and new threats to peace and
security. We believe that the Joint United Nations-
African Union Framework for an Enhanced Partnership
in Peace and Security, which was signed in April by the
United Nations Secretary-General and the Chairperson
of the African Union Commission, Moussa Faki
Mahamat, provides the necessary framework for a
much-needed closer and more focused cooperation
between the two organizations. What we now need to
do is institutionalize that cooperation.

Allow me to make specific recommendations on
the issues being considered in our debate today, which
you, Mr. President, very ably presented in your concept
note (S/2017/574, annex).

First, Rwanda believes in the value of holding
regular dialogue and consultations between the African
Union and the Security Council on all conflicts on the
continent. The information shared by both institutions
during this dialogue will, in our opinion, increase the
understanding of the context and root causes of such
conflicts and therefore help design adequate responses.

Secondly, Rwanda strongly recommends increased
investment in the African Union capacities to intervene
and respond effectively to warning signals with rapid
interventions to protect civilians and prevent conflicts
from spreading and escalating.

Often in conflict situations, the only credible
prevention is rapid action. Enhancing African
capacities in the areas of peace and security and, more
specifically, enabling the African Union to address
the deficit in the training, equipment and capacities
of security institutions will augment their ability to
respond effectively to current and emerging threats.

Thirdly, in post-conflict situations, Rwanda
recommends that investment in institutions' capacities
and inclusive governance systems be given priority in
development cooperation.

Fourthly, the lack of predictable and sustainable
funding remains a major challenge to the ability of the
African Union to engage more effectively and use its
comparative advantage to address conflicts and sustain
peace on the continent. In order to address that challenge,
the African Union Summit decided, at its twenty-
fourth Ordinary Session, held in Kigali in July 2016,
to finance 25 per cent of the African Union-led peace
support operations. The African Union Peace Fund,
established by the African Union, and Mr. Kaberuka's
report serve that purpose. Supporting the African
Union Peace Fund, including through United Nations
assessed contributions, will go a long way in ensuring
predictable financing and contributing to the goal of
ending conflicts in Africa. The management structure,
accountability and transparency mechanisms built into
the administration of the African Union Peace Fund
will ensure value for money. However, Rwanda knows
through experience that the highest value for money
lies in the millions of lives that could be saved by
enhancing African capacities to respond to peace and
security issues.

None of the 17 ambitious Sustainable Development
Goals of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
can be realized without peace and security. Therefore,
increased investment in Africa's capacities in the area
of peace and security is an investment in ensuring that
the 2030 Agenda leaves no one behind, including, above
all, those affected by conflicts today.

