Ms. Power (United States of America): I thank
Under-Secretary-General Feltman for his briefing.
The United States is deeply concerned about
the rocket attacks by Hamas and by the dangerous
escalation of hostilities in the region. In particular, we
are concerned about the devastating impact of the crisis
on both Israeli and Palestinian civilians.

President Obama spoke with Prime Minister
Netanyahu this morning to reaffirm the United States
strong support for Israel's right to defend itself. As
President Obama said today, no nation should accept
rockets being fired into its borders or terrorists
tunnelling into its territory. In just the last two weeks,
Hamas and other armed groups in Gaza have launched
more than 1,500 rockets towards population centres
in Israel. Hamas attacks are unacceptable, and would
be unacceptable to any State Member of the United
Nations. Israel has the right to defend its citizens and
prevent those attacks.

President Obama also said today that we are deeply
concerned about the potential loss of more innocent
lives. It is important that everything possible be done
to prevent civilian casualties, as well as to mitigate the
suffering of innocent men, women and children.

The consequences of the increasing violence are
plain for all of us to see, and they are heart-wrenching.
We feel profound anguish upon seeing the images of
suffering from Gaza, including the deaths and injuries
of innocent Palestinian civilians, including young
children, and the displacement of thousands of people.
Israeli civilians, including the elderly and children
alike, are fleeing to shelters with little warnings to
escape the barrage of rockets from Gaza. That is no
way for anyone to live - not Palestinians, not Israelis.

The four Palestinian boys playing on the beach
in Gaza City were like boys everywhere, restless for
play. Their deaths are heartbreaking, and the loss their
family members and neighbours must feel today must
be searing. The Israeli authorities have opened an
investigation into their deaths.

The devastating consequences of the conflict make
it all the more disturbing that Hamas has squandered
the serious efforts by Egypt to broker a ceasefire. A
cessation of violence would have offered civilians on
both sides a chance for peace, but Hamas continued its
rocket attacks.

As we have repeatedly stated, the United States
is committed to finding a diplomatic solution to stop
the ongoing violence. As President Obama made clear
earlier today, we believe there should be a return to the
ceasefire that was reached in November 2012. To that
end, we are committed to supporting Egypt's ceasefire
proposal. That is why Secretary of State Kerry is
working with our regional partners to try to bring about
a cessation of hostilities, and is prepared to travel to the
region following additional consultations.

Until that ceasefire is reached, we need to do
everything within our power to assist the civilians
caught in the middle ofthe violence. We are grateful for
the five-hour humanitarian pause negotiated by Special
Coordinator Serry yesterday. It provided a critically
important window for the United Nations, humanitarian
and medical workers and others to reach the wounded,
displaced and most vulnerable. It allowed time for some
crucial infrastructure repairs to improve access to basic
services. And it offered a brief reprieve for some of the
people most affected by the conflict.

But let us be clear: a humanitarian pause is just
that, a pause. It is a brief stop in an otherwise persistent
and often overwhelming stream of violence, which has
inflicted suffering and terror on civilians. A pause is
no substitute for a ceasefire, which is what is needed.

Indeed, what was already a very troubling
humanitarian situation in Gaza is rapidly deteriorating.
There are widespread shortages of water, food,
electricity and medicine. The United Nations,
humanitarian organizations and regular Palestinian
citizens are all doing tremendous work to assist those
in need - from opening their homes to the displaced
to delivering emergency rations to those in the hardest-
to-reach places. But the situation is grave and getting
worse. Until a ceasefire is reached, we call on all parties
to ensure the protection of civilians and to respect and
protect humanitarian and medical facilities, including
those of the United Nations.

This week, the United Nations in Gaza discovered
20 rockets that had been put in one of its schools. The
United Nations quickly removed the rockets and roundly
condemned the action. Such tactics are indefensible. We
condemn in the strongest terms this immoral, unlawful
and dangerous use of schools and hospitals for military
purposes, which endangers some of society's most
vulnerable members: children and the sick.

No family, Palestinian or Israelim should have
to live in perpetual fear of being unsafe in their own
homes. No children, Israeli or Palestinian, should be
kept awake at night by the sounds of rockets and gunfire,
or to be prevented from going to school because it's too
dangerous to venture outside. No people want to live
like that. It is outrageous that they are being forced to
do so.

The only way to end the situation is an immediate
cessation of rocket fire from Gaza and a de-escalation
in hostilities. That is what we are calling for today.

The recent surge in violence escalated with the
kidnapping and senseless murder of three Israeli
boys, which was followed by the kidnapping and
senseless murder of a Palestinian boy. When news of
the Palestinian boy's killing reached the mother of one
of the Israeli victims, she said: "No mother or father
should go through what we are going through now." She
is right. Too much innocent blood has been shed. The
suffering ofinnocent civilians must come to an end.

