Mr. Duarte Lopes (Portugal): I thank you,
Mr. President, for organizing this timely open debate.

Portugal fully aligns itself with the statement just
delivered by the observer of the European Union.

We heard the Secretary-General's warning that

"nothing less than our future and the fate of
humankind depends on how we rise to the
climate challenge".

Climate change constitutes a direct existential threat
to international peace and security, one that can
be addressed only through the involvement of, and
cooperation between, all Member States. That is the
reality that pushes us to seek action and encourages us
to have climate change more strongly reflected in the
work of the Security Council.

We know all too well the concerning trends
we face - the unprecedented economic costs of
climate-related disasters, energy-related carbon dioxide
emissions at historic highs and warmer and more acidic
oceans than ever before. Those challenges require
urgent and ambitious action. We therefore commend
the convening of the Secretary-General's 2019 climate
summit in September, as well as the President of
the General Assembly's high-level meeting slated
for March.

What brings us together today is the recognition
that, among its many effects, climate change also has
a concrete impact on international peace and security.
Climate change is a major threat multiplier, particularly
in already fragile regions. The added tension of
competition over diminishing natural resources adds
fuel to existing conflicts. Existing vulnerabilities
are amplified by rising waters, excessive rainfall and
prolonged drought, thereby increasing social and
economic instability, which often leads people to move
in search of better living conditions. Those concerns
are reflected in the 2017 Hague Declaration on
Planetary Security, with a special focus on combating
desertification in the Sahel region and optimizing
international coordination efforts.

Portugal's strategic concept of national defence,
adopted in 2013, also addresses that reality by taking
into consideration environmental threats and risks
and paving the way for strengthening our capacity to
prevent, adapt and respond to environment-related
security challenges.

During the Portuguese presidency of the Security
Council in November 2011, the Council held a high-
level briefing (see S/PV.6668) on the new challenges
to international peace and security, where the issue of
the impact of climate change on refugees and displaced
persons was considered. That debate has since evolved,
thanks to the efforts ofmany Member States that sought
to bring this issue to the fore, including, most recently,
Sweden in 2018. We believe that the time is ripe for
further including relevant climate and environmental
risks in risk assessments that form the basis of the
Security Council's discussions, thereby bolstering the
Council's conflict prevention role.

In conclusion, it is essential that the international
community implement the Paris Agreement on Climate
Change, work together to address the impacts of climate
change and ensure support for those States that are most

vulnerable to its effects. The Security Council cannot
ignore the many interlinkages between climate change
and security. It should stand ready to take the necessary
measures required to prevent, reduce and address the
existing risks. Portugal supports an integrated approach
to those challenges, one that is based on inter-pillar
and interregional cooperation and aimed at promoting
resilience and preparedness. And we see that approach
as a necessary step towards the full implementation of
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and the
Sustainable Development Goals.

