Mr. Omoregie: The report before the Council,
contained in document S/2008/395, is the latest report
of the Secretary-General on developments in Guinea-
Bissau and the activities of the United Nations
Peacebuilding Support Office in Guinea-Bissau
(UNOGBIS).

The report focuses in particular on constraints at
the socio-political level and, among other things,
highlights progress in the implementation of security
sector reform, the engagement of the Peacebuilding
Commission, preparations for legislative elections
08-39896
scheduled for November this year, and economic
recovery efforts.

I should like to say just a few words to update the
Council on developments since the report was
published. Although the political and economic
situation in Guinea-Bissau remains fragile, some recent
developments bring much promise. The country has
seen a slight improvement in its economic performance
indicators, evidenced by an increase in agricultural
production, including cashew nut exports, and the
setting-up of mechanisms for improved revenue
collection and the maintenance of fiscal stability.

In that connection, if economic performance
indicators continue to improve, Guinea-Bissau could,
by the end of the year, become eligible for the
International Monetary Fund's Heavily Indebted Poor
Countries Debt Initiative and for debt relief under the
Multilateral Debt Relief Initiative. Those facilities, in
combination with similar debt-relief initiatives of the
World Bank and the African Development Bank, will
reduce the volume of the country's regular debt-service
payments, allowing improved investment in the social
sectors and in economic revitalization.

However, the aforementioned positive prognosis
is threatened by structural limitations in internal
revenue generation and fiscal management. An
accounts audit of the General Directorate of Customs,
Taxes and the Treasury, sponsored by the United
Nations Development Programme (UNDP) and
covering the period 2004 to 2007, concluded that a
substantial amount of duties and taxes had not been
collected and that very few companies had declared
their commercial activities.

The report makes a number of recommendations,
such as the deferment of payment of 2007 arrears; the
routing of State expenditure payments exclusively
through the treasury; the centralization of State revenue
collection through the Central Bank of West African
States; further restrictions on extra-budgetary
spending; and finally, computerized treasury
operations, including payroll management, by the end
of 2008. If implemented, those recommendations could
improve the State's revenue collection system and
reduce its financial deficits. UNDP plans to initiate a
second-phase audit of State expenditure by the end of
June.

In addition, the limited progress on the economic
front could be jeopardized by deepening institutional
08-39896

tension between Government institutions and the main
political parties. The holding of the legislative
elections is vital to consolidating the democratic
process. However, jockeying for power threatens to
exacerbate latent political tensions among the three
political parties signatories to the Political and
Government Stability Pact of March 2007.

The Pact, which underpins the current
Government, is itself undermined by splits within the
three major signatory parties. While disagreements
between party leaders and the Prime Minister have
abated, tensions between the political factions are
likely to increase in the run-up to the African Party for
the Independence of Guinea and Cape Verde (PAIGC)
congress and leadership contest to be held on 26 and
28 June. The leader of the PAIGC and former Prime
Minister, Mr. Carlos Gomes Jr., has already indicated
his intention to seek a review of the Political Stability
Pact. He has also expressed some mistrust and
questioned the fairness and transparency of the
electoral process, particularly with regard to the role of
the Party for Social Renewal (PRS).

Opposition political parties have also stepped up
their criticism of the Government's performance, with
accusations ranging from corruption to apathy towards
the general deterioration of the living conditions of the
citizens. Those condemnations were intensified by a
wave of strikes in the public sector in the past four
weeks due to the inability of the Government to pay
salary arrears and spikes in the prices of food and other
consumer items. Although the Government was able to
pay two out of four months of salary arrears on
18 June, social discontent is likely to continue and be
exploited in the electoral process.

Preparations for the legislative elections
scheduled for 16 November 2008 have been
undermined by, among other things, bureaucratic
lapses and limited human and financial resources. On
SJune, Prime-Minister N'Dafa Cabi announced the
Government's intention to conduct manual voter
registration for the elections. Subsequently, the
Secretary of State for Territorial Administration
announced that voter registration would take place
between 3 and 24 July 2008. Although the manual
voter registration exercise is scheduled to start on
3Ju1y 2008, it was only on 23 June that UNDP
concluded a memorandum of understanding with the
National Institute of Statistics and Census to start the
recruitment and training of electoral officials and the
3
procurement of material and equipment. It is therefore
uncertain whether voter registration will take place as
scheduled or whether all logistical and civic education
activities will be conducted in a timely manner and as
efficiently as desirable for elections to be held as
scheduled and without compromising the credibility of
the whole process. I continue to encourage all
concerned to accelerate their efforts in order to avoid
delays in the electoral calendar.

At the request of the Government, UNOGBIS
will coordinate international observation, while UNDP
will continue to provide technical assistance. In that
connection, UNDP has held working-level meetings
with representatives of the National Electoral
Commission, the National Institute of Statistics, the
Technical Support Office for Elections and regional
electoral commissions. The European Union is
expected to deploy some electoral observers, as
recommended by its mission that visited Guinea-Bissau
in the first week of June.

The engagement of the Peacebuilding
Commission - covering short-term, medium-term and
long-term activities - provides an important context
for deepening international assistance to the
Government. Through the short-term peace
consolidation process under the Peacebuilding Fund,
the Guinea-Bissau Peacebuilding Fund National
Steering Committee recently approved four quick-win
projects covering electoral support, youth employment,
the rehabilitation of military barracks and the
rehabilitation of prisons. With the approval of the four
projects, steps are currently being taken to finalize the
Guinea-Bissau Peacebuilding Fund priority plan.

Consultations are also ongoing to finalize the
strategic framework for peacebuilding in Guinea-
Bissau, which will synthesize the medium- to long-
term engagement of the Peacebuilding Commission.
The strategic framework will integrate the experiences
and analyses derived from the four missions conducted
in the country by Commission's country-specific
configuration on Guinea-Bissau and the Peacebuilding
Support Office, as well as consultations between the
United Nations and various stakeholders. The
consultations have been intense, and have included
weekly and fortnightly thematic discussions by video
link between New York Headquarters and stakeholders
in Guinea-Bissau. The consultations have focused on
priority areas identified by the Government as
peacebuilding challenges, namely, the reform of the
public administration, the consolidation of the rule of
law and security sector reform, technical professional
training and youth employment, and support for
vulnerable social groups. The strategic framework,
which is expected to be completed in July, will set the
context for the announcement by the Secretary-General
of a larger envelope of financial assistance for Guinea-
Bissau. That will formalize the envisaged continuous
engagement of the Peacebuilding Commission as an
advocacy platform for resource mobilization and a
coordinating mechanism for multi-partner efforts at
peace consolidation and post-conflict reconstruction.

To strengthen national stakeholder involvement,
in particular by women's groups, in the engagement of
the Peacebuilding Commission in Guinea-Bissau,
UNOGBIS and its partners held a round of regional
consultations throughout May, which were capped with
a three-day national workshop held from 17 to 19 June.
The activities were aimed at mainstreaming gender
issues and enhancing the participation of women in
peace consolidation, as provided for in resolution 1325
(2000). Recommendations from the national workshop
will be integrated into the strategic framework for
peacebuilding in Guinea-Bissau.

The initiation of implementation of the security
sector reform programme, with support from the
European Union, marked an important milestone. The
ongoing deployment in Guinea-Bissau of a team of 15
civilian and military personnel from the European
Union, under the framework of the European Security
and Defence Policy, in support of security sector
reform is a major step towards the operationalization of
the national programme for security sector reform.

Another important benchmark was the armed
forces census, which was conducted in March and
revealed a total of 4,493 military personnel - almost
half earlier estimates of 9,000. That number is
expected to be reduced to 3,440 under the armed forces
rationalization and modernization plan within the
security sector reform programme. The rationalization
will be facilitated by information revealed by the
census that more than 1,000 current military personnel
would prefer voluntary demobilization. In the context
of the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
component within the larger security sector reform
programme, UNOGBIS and its partners are finalizing
arrangements for a pilot vocational training project in
Brazil for 30 selected senior military officers. The
08-39896
training of those senior officers will enable the start of
security sector reform.

When I last briefed members in March, I referred
to arrangements between UNOGBIS, the Department
of Political Affairs and the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO) to organize a
security sector reform resource-mapping exercise with
partners in order to identify gaps in donor support for
security sector reform and make recommendations to
address such gaps. I am pleased to report that the
resource-mapping exercise took place in New York on
22 and 23 May. The exercise recommended focused
support for the adoption of a legal framework for the
Ministries of the Interior and Justice, including training
in criminal investigation for the various law-
enforcement bodies, the provision of operational
equipment to the police, the establishment of a
financial intelligence unit, the creation and training of
a specialized police force to combat terrorism and
transnational organized crime, the ratification and
domestication of relevant international conventions,
and addressing relationship issues within the security
sector reform process.

In the follow-up to the security sector reform
resource-mapping exercise, an assessment mission led
by the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
(DPKO) is expected to visit Guinea-Bissau in the
coming weeks.

Following consultations held since last year with
national authorities, UNOGBIS, the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) and UNDP will
be organizing a workshop for law enforcement
institutions in August this year aimed at explaining
jurisdictions, responsibilities and competencies and
enhancing interdepartmental cooperation.

The campaign against drug trafficking and
organized crime received a boost with the signature on
16 June of the financial agreement between the
European Community and the UNODC for a
€2-million justice and security programme. The
programme will, inter alia, support the creation of a
special anti-narcotics unit within the judiciary police
and the strengthening of its operational capacities in
intelligence-gathering and information-sharing for the
detection and prosecution of offenders.

Drug trafficking cannot be combated without
subregional and international cooperation. Efforts to
address this scourge in Guinea-Bissau should be

complemented by initiatives in neighbouring States.
Otherwise, successful regulation in one State would
lead to relocation of the criminals into another, less
regulated, national territory in the region. Criminals are
able to operate with impunity where States have little
capacity, where judicial systems are flawed and where
international cooperation mechanisms are weak, so that
they cannot, for example, be extradited. If the anti-
narcotics capacity of local law enforcement agencies is
strengthened to detect and apprehend drug traffickers,
they will still need improved international cooperation
in order to speedily extradite those wanted in other
countries and/or to prosecute them locally.

Realizing the importance of regional cooperation,
the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) will hold a regional conference on drug
trafficking in October 2008 in Cape Verde in order to
share experiences and develop a common strategic
approach. UNOGBIS, in close cooperation with the
United Nations Office for West Africa (UNOWA) and
UNODC will facilitate this event.

The human rights situation in Guinea-Bissau
remains an issue of concern, especially in relation to
the absence of and weak institutional mechanisms for
the protection and promotion of human rights.
Activities in the social, economic and political fields,
including security sector reform, should be
complemented by a strong commitment to the
development of a human rights culture, which is
imperative for the sustainability of the current
international effort. I have requested the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
to strengthen the human rights component of
UNOGBIS so that it can more effectively play its role
in the areas of monitoring, capacity-building and
technical cooperation.

To conclude, I would like to highlight some key
points. The second quarter of 2008 witnessed a surge in
economic activities, accompanied by growing
confidence by the Bretton Woods institutions in
Guinea-Bissau's economic performance indicators. In
order to support and consolidate this positive trend, the
United Nations system should continue to support
reforms in both administrative and economic
governance.

Although the implementation of the security
sector reform programme has commenced, only about a
third of the proposed total budget has been pledged.
5
Additionally, there is a perception that security sector
reform is a defence-related reform, evidenced by
lopsided donor support for the defence sector. That
misperception should be addressed. A holistic approach
to security sector reform that integrates judiciary, law
enforcement and oversight mechanisms is advised,
especially given the threats posed by international
organized crime. The current security sector reform
strategy should also integrate an anti-narcotics
component linking diverse law enforcement agencies
and inter-ministerial departments.

Limited resources remain a challenge in the
efforts to combat drug trafficking in Guinea-Bissau.
During the International Conference on Drug
Trafficking in Guinea-Bissau, held in Lisbon in
December 2007, the Government presented an anti-
narcotics operational plan for 2007-2010. Out of a total
projected budget of $19.1 million, only $6.7 million
was pledged. There is an urgent need to cover the
shortfall of $12.4 million to ensure the complete
implementation of the programme. Additionally, the
anti-narcotics efforts could benefit from more stringent
and practical preventive measures, such as the naming
and shaming of individuals involved in drug trafficking
and organized crime in Guinea-Bissau, as well as their
collaborators in foreign countries. The Prime Minister
of Guinea-Bissau today submitted evidence relating to
persons who are involved in drug trafficking to the
Prosecutor General of Guinea-Bissau for action. I think
that the Council can help the Government by taking
action to support its efforts in this direction.

Failure to hold elections as scheduled on
16 November 2008 would create a legal and
constitutional vacuum and unleash consequences that
could unravel ongoing efforts at socio-economic
recovery and political stabilization. However, this
important milestone for consolidation of democracy is
threatened by limited resources. According to the latest
figures provided by the UNDP, there is a funding gap
of $1.9 million out of the total election costs, which are
estimated at $8.56 million. This includes pledged
contributions; if the pledged contributions are
removed, the gap will be about $4.5 million. The
international community is strongly encouraged to
assist in covering this dreadful funding gap.

There is a need for improved international
assistance to the Government in establishing an
effective national human rights protection system as a
bulwark against the existing culture of abuses and
violations. It is hoped that the High Commissioner for
Human Rights will seize the opportunity provided
under the current initiatives to strengthen the human
rights role of UNOGBIS.

Finally, Guinea-Bissau faces key challenges and
difficulties in the following areas: reduction of social
and political tensions and overcoming difficulties in
political cohabitation among not only the organs of
State - the executive, the legislature, the judiciary and
the presidency - but also within the ranks of some of
the main political parties. Failure to sustain ongoing
efforts to address these difficulties and challenges
would undermine national programmes for political
stabilization, socio-economic development and
sustainable peace.

