Mr. Cancela (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): 1
shall be brief in order to expedite this debate. Allow
me to commend you, Sir, for having convened this
debate and to underscore the importance of the ideas
set forth in the briefings we heard at the start of this
meeting.

Within the United Nations, the concept of the
protection of civilians in armed conflict applies to
various situations, such as humanitarian activities,
including access for and the protection of humanitarian
personnel as they go about their work; peacekeeping;
peacebuilding; and situations arising out of
international criminal responsibility, among others.

In recent years, an in-depth and wide-ranging
conceptual and operational debate has taken place at
Headquarters on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict in the context of peacekeeping operations.
That has been the case not just in the Security
Council - an organ that has discussed this issue since
the days of the United Nations Mission in Sierra
Leone, in 1999- but also among the entire
membership through the specialized and representative
bodies of the General Assembly.

Although mandates to protect civilians are
considered on a case-by-case basis, and while there is
genuine room for improvement, we cannot fail to
underscore that there has been much progress in
achieving greater consistency in implementing such
mandates and evaluating existing problems and
limitations and seeking solutions to them. In our view,
this is bringing about positive results in New York and
the field, some of which can be clearly discerned while
others are intangible.

How do we measure what we have avoided? How
do we quantify costs in human lives and the different
types of damages averted by the presence of the United
Nations with clear mandates to protect civilians? How
valuable and how influential are the political
agreements on this issue that various stakeholders,
including troop-contributing countries, have reached at
Headquarters in recent years? That is impossible to
calculate; however, there is no doubt that it entails very
valuable capital that we do not have the luxury of
squandering or imperiling. It is much easier to destroy
than to build anything, including trust.

We must therefore be very careful when it comes
time to carry out efforts in the context of a legally
binding instrument that carries the legitimacy of the
United Nations vis-a-vis the protection of civilians.
Similarly, while we favour moving ahead with the
debate on implementing the responsibility to protect,
without failing to acknowledge the intrinsic overlap
with the protection of civilians, we believe that it is
important that we be clear in our references to these
concepts and that we take into account the singular
nature of each one - which have distinct legal
characters and have followed clearly differentiated
discussion processes.
We do not for an instant forget that the ultimate
goal must always be to protect the physical, mental and
emotional integrity of the human beings under threat
today, but also those who will tomorrow depend upon
the presence or mandate of the United Nations to
ensure that their lives, integrity and dignity are
safeguarded. In that regard, my delegation would like
to take this opportunity to reiterate the urgent need for
all parties involved - at all times and in all
situations - to consistently and impartially preserve,
strengthen and respect the exact terms of the mandates
of the Security Council and the norms of international
humanitarian law, which are the foundation upon
which rests the protection of civilians in armed
conflict.

Having reached a propitious point when it comes
to the protection of civilians, what must we now do to
maintain that state in the current circumstances? This is
a question that all of us should ask ourselves. We
believe that it is crucial that we focus on addressing the
major practical challenges that have concrete impacts
on the ground.

From our perspective as troop contributors, there
is no more pressing and clear challenge than that of
bridging the enormous gap between protection-of-
civilian mandates and the necessary resources to
effectively carry them out. There is also much room for
improvement in the area of training, both during
pre-departure and post-deployment.

We are optimistic when it comes to improving
coordination among the various stakeholders on the
ground charged with implementing mandates, in the
context of the overarching protection strategies that
missions must develop. However, we believe that more
work must be done with local authorities and
communities in the area of managing expectations and
that of public communication and information
strategies. Those are aspects of the recommendations
that were formally adopted yesterday by the Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations.

Moreover, it is always imperative to facilitate
access for humanitarian personnel and to ensure that
international humanitarian law is respected by all
parties concerned in every situation, so as to ensure
adequate security conditions for staff to carry out their
tasks.

At the same time, we reiterate that every human
response must be sustainable and take into account the
development perspective. In that regard, it is essential
to ensure the building of adequate capacities at the
national level.

Finally, I would like to reiterate that Uruguay
believes the agenda on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict to be a multidimensional one. It is
informed and sustained by more specific, although
closely linked, issues, such as, among others, those of
children in armed conflict and women and peace and
security. It is therefore essential to make progress in as
coordinated a manner as possible in order to achieve
synergies, avoid duplication of effort and, as
effectively as possible, take advantage of the tools at
the disposal of the Organization in the field. That will
make possible greater coordination among all
stakeholders involved, which will lead to more
coherent responses in the protection of civilians -
especially for groups in vulnerable situations, who are
the most exposed and require greater efforts to secure
their effective protection. That will also make it
possible for us to focus more closely on post-conflict
tasks, such as the reintegration of victims whose rights
have been gravely violated and children who have been
affected by armed conflict.

