Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I
welcome the adoption of resolution 1984 (2011), which
France, Germany and the United States co-sponsored.

The measures adopted by the Security Council
are aimed at convincing Iran to negotiate and slow the
development of its nuclear and ballistic programme. In
order to be effective, they must therefore be fully
implemented by all States.

The independent Panel of Experts established last
year by resolution 1929 (2010) plays a crucial role in
ensuring that the measures adopted by the Council are
implemented, but also that they continue to be effective
and are not violated. The Panel has done outstanding
work in just a few months. It has carried out essential
awareness-raising work with many Member States to
explain the measures adopted by the Council. It has
provided valuable analyses and recommendations
geared towards understanding and improving the
implementation of sanctions. I would like to express
our gratitude to all the experts for their
professionalism.

However, their task is not yet complete - far
from it. Iran continues to violate its international
obligations, as illustrated by instances of violations
3
reported to the Sanctions Committee and by the latest
report of the Director General of the International
Atomic Energy Agency. Much therefore remains to be
done. The international community must continue to
mobilize in order to strengthen the implementation of
the sanctions adopted by the Council.

We therefore welcome the renewal of the
mandate of the Panel of Experts for another year. This
is yet another signal to Iran from the international
community about its determination to secure full
respect for the Council's resolutions. Moreover, we
await the speedy publication of the Panel's final report
as an official document of the Security Council, in line
with the usual practice of sanctions committees.
Transparency is crucial in order for all members to be
informed and for improving the implementation of
sanctions. Lastly, we hope that the Committee will
carry out an in-depth discussion of the Panel's final
report, with a view to determining how to follow up the
Panel's recommendations.

