Mr. Pleuger (Germany): I would like to thank
Ambassador Negroponte and Ambassador Jones Parry
for the update on the implementation of Security
Council resolution 1483 (2003).

As regards the political development, we
welcome the most thorough evaluation and findings of
the United Nations fact-finding mission led by the
Secretary-General's Special Adviser, Mr. Lakhdar
Brahimi.

Mr. Brahimi's report, endorsed by the Secretary-
General, is indeed an impressive political analysis, one
characterized by a completely independent and neutral
approach and with the sole objective of helping the
Iraqi people. We believe that report reflects very well
the current political realities in Iraq.

Let me simply say that Germany fully concurs
with both the findings of the fact-finding mission and
its recommendations. We also share the team's view
that only consensus-building among all relevant Iraqi
groups, inside and outside the Governing Council,
offers a real chance to overcome the present impasse in
the political process in Iraq. We continue to believe
that only the United Nations can credibly facilitate a
lasting consensus among the Iraqis.

Germany also subscribes to the "ceterum censeo"
of the Secretary-General, that "a precondition for the
United Nations to succeed in Iraq is the clear and
unambiguous support of a united Security Council and
the establishment of a secure environment"
(5/2004/140, p. I). For her part, Germany is prepared
at any time, upon request of the Secretary-General, to
give to the United Nations in the Security Council all
the support the Secretary-General needs for his
difficult task ahead.

With regard to establishing a secure environment,
however, that will remain the responsibility of the
Coalition Provisional Authority (CPA), in cooperation
with the evolving Iraqi security structures, until
sovereignty has been transferred to the Iraqis.

Consensus has been achieved regarding a possible
time frame for elections until the end of 2004 or early
2005, for the transfer of sovereignty on 30 June and
with regard to a transitional mechanism for the interim
period, and the analysis of the fact-finding team has
very convincingly shown that those are only the first
steps, to be followed by necessary consensus on other
very important substantive issues still pending. All of
those pending issues, in particular the elaboration of a
fundamental law - or, as it is called now, a
transitional administrative law - and the conclusion of
agreements on the status of Coalition forces after the
transfer of sovereignty, are part of the 15 November
Agreement concluded by the CPA and the Governing
Council. They are all subject to specific deadlines prior
to the transfer of sovereignty and to the establishment
of a provisional Government.

In the light of the Brahimi report, I would like ask
the two Ambassadors whether the CPA still pursues the
conclusion of bilateral security agreements in

accordance with the November Agreement between the
CPA and the Governing Council.

Secondly, as we heard from Ambassador
Negroponte, the CPA and the Governing Council still
pursue the elaboration of the transitional administration
law, or at least parts of it. I would like to know which
parts have been dropped from the original idea
regarding drafting a fundamental law. Also, with regard
to the procedural aspects, I would like to know which
deadlines, if any, are to be applied in this context. Are
Iraqi groups outside the Governing Council included in
the negotiation process on the transitional
administrative law? And will the CPA and the
Governing Council seek the assistance of the United
Nations as a facilitator for those issues as well?

As we see it, the key question right now is how to
get from here to 30 June and find a way to establish a
transitional mechanism. In his report (S/2004/ 140),
Mr. Brahimi has said that the United Nations is willing
to help build a consensus in that regard. But he has also
said that options can come only from the Iraqis
themselves, through dialogue and consensus-building.
Consequently, the Brahimi report, in recommendation
8, calls on all Iraqis, inside and outside the Governing
Council, and on the CPA to engage in a more focused
dialogue on the mechanism to which authority and
sovereignty will be transferred on 30 June 2004.

As Mr. Brahimi has clearly stated that he is not
going to make proposals on how this is going to be
done and that this has to come from the Iraqi
themselves, my question is, does the CPA already have
clear ideas on the possible options for the transitional
mechanism? And as the electoral process and the
caucusing system seem to be excluded at this stage by
the Brahimi report, are there ideas on the format and on
the time frame for such a dialogue? The next question
is, which groups outside the Governing Council does
the CPA intend to address to make this negotiation and
this consultation as inclusive as possible, and how does
the CPA intend to reach out to those other groups
outside the Governing Council?

In conclusion, I would like to say once again that,
in our view, the political situation in Iraq is at a critical
juncture. Many challenges still lie ahead, and the
available time is short, especially with a view to
preparing democratic elections as envisaged in the
Brahimi report. However, we feel that if all parties
involved, including the Security Council, get it right
now, there is still hope that, with the crucial help of the
United Nations in forging consensus among all Iraqis,
we can contribute to the development of a stabilized
and democratic Iraq at peace with itself and with its
neighbours - definitely a result from which the region
as a whole would benefit largely.

