Mr. Baali (Algeria) (spoke in French): As the
Council holds its final public meeting of the month, I
wish, Mr. President, to extend to you and to the other
members of your delegation the appreciation of my
delegation for the manner in which you have guided
our work, which has been praiseworthy in every
respect. I wish also to thank you for your choice of
subject for today's debate; its relevance to the work of
the Council has been acknowledged by all members.
Here, the contributions by Ms. Rasi and Mr. Egeland
were most illuminating and provided a new dimension
that will broaden our View and will help us hone our
response to the challenges before us.

The subject of today's debate is of great interest
because it links the United Nations - which is itself an
inherently complex system - with complex crisis
situations. As observed in the Millennium Declaration,
the multidimensional nature of the challenges facing
the Organization demands a multidisciplinary approach
involving multiple actors in both assessing and
addressing crises.

Let me make a key observation with regard
specifically to complex crises: most of the situations of
which the Council is seized in the context of its
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security fall into that category. Moreover,
the other principal organs and the agencies of the
United Nations system are facing the same situation.

Although it is not appropriate to propose a single
definition of these situations, observing them enables
us to identify a number of recurrent characteristic
elements. Among the causes of complex conflicts and
crises are, almost invariably: poverty; corruption;
ethnic or religious tensions fuelled by extremism;
denial of citizenship; seizure of wealth by social
groups, either alone or in association with foreign
actors; and the exclusion and social inequality that
those practices engender.

The factors causing the outbreak of these crises
can vary, but the consequences are constant. They
include massive flows of displaced persons and
refugees fleeing the fighting and the lack of security,
along with a concomitant deterioration of the
productive sector. The breakdown of the economy then
accelerates that of the State, whose powers and
prerogatives are challenged by criminal systems that
rise out of its ruins to grasp control of natural
resources, whose illegal exploitation enables them to
prolong the crisis, because a settlement would run
counter to their interests.

But the complexity of a crisis does not stop there.
Border-area flows of refugee populations and ethnic
situations that cross borders in most conflict zones
impose an additional, most often unbearable, burden on
the economies of neighbouring countries; the result is
to involve States in the crisis. At this point, the crisis
reaches a higher level of complexity with interference
by neighbouring States. These States are sometimes
motivated by a legitimate desire to spare themselves
the negative consequences of instability. But more
frequently they are motivated by the interplay of tribal
or ethnic solidarity, behind which is quickly seen the
notion of compensation for harm suffered, which in
turn barely conceals covetous designs on the resources
of the neighbouring State which has collapsed or is in
the process of doing so. The convergence of interests
among the criminal armed groups, neighbours and
foreign mercenaries and adventurers who never fail to
appear in these situations gives rise to a conflict
economy which is designed - and which functions -
to prolong the crisis and to prevent the regrowth of the
State.

We are all aware of those facts, but they are
indispensable to understanding the nature of the United
Nations response. I think it is only fair to acknowledge
that the Organization has for several years fully
understood this complexity and that it has begun a
process of conceptual and structural adaptation.
Concrete progress towards a comprehensive, integrated
approach is reflected both in decisions taken by the
Secretary-General in areas within his purview in the
sphere of inter-agency coordination, and in the
progressive, ongoing implementation of the
recommendations of the Working Group on
Peacekeeping Operations. Indeed, it cannot be denied
that peacekeeping and peace-building operations are
increasingly multidisciplinary in nature.

Moreover, in the context of conflict prevention
and settlement, recourse to the resources of Chapter
VIII of the Charter is becoming more systematic, with
a View to integrating the contributions of regional and
subregional organizations into this approach. Here, I
should highlight the important role played by Special
Representatives of the Secretary-General.

However, we believe it premature to talk about
genuine comprehensive and integrated strategies for
dealing with complex crises at all stages of conflict
prevention, conflict settlement and peace-building. In
fact, the current situation of a rapidly growing number
of crises is generating huge needs. Current operations
now employ more than 50,000 individuals and might
soon employ 60,000, with an unprecedented annual
budget of $3.5 billion. That amount, approaching the
amount pledged for development at the Monterrey
International Conference on Financing for
Development, underlines the gap in the comprehensive,
integrated response sought by the international
community for conflict prevention and ensuring human
security.

We believe that, without question, this gap should
be overcome by means of a bolder, more precise
approach to detecting and preventing conflicts and by
making development a dimension of complex United
Nations operations, at the same integral level as the
humanitarian and human rights dimensions, whose
inclusion in missions is now widely accepted and is
made necessary by the massive violations of human
rights and other atrocities committed during armed
conflicts.

We are aware that this assertion touches upon the
Charter, which entrusts other organs with the
responsibility for development issues. Yet, we have
been inspired to make this assertion by the lucid
analysis of the Economic and Social Council's Ad Hoc
Advisory Group on African countries emerging from
conflict, which spells out the objective limits of the
post-conflict involvement of the United Nations
Development Group. The debate now under way on
United Nations reform provides an opportunity to
consider adjusting the Charter with a view to creating
the desired integrated response.

We believe that a regional approach to complex
crises requires the creation of regional pillars to
optimize the use of the resources made available by the
pre-existing international security framework. On the
African continent in particular, that means that the
regional security framework that the African countries
are seeking to establish, a process that culminated this
week in the launch of the Peace and Security Council,
should receive the same level of attention in terms of
resource allocation as international operations. In that
connection, my delegation welcomes the establishment
by the European Union of a financing mechanism to
support this process and, in particular, its support of the
principle of an African standing force.

Finally, my delegation believes that thorough
reform of how the interventions of the international
community are carried out is necessary. That
necessarily entails reforming the financing of those
operations and enlarging the Security Council.

