Mr. Le Luong Minh (Viet Nam): At the outset, I
would like to join previous speakers in thanking
Mr. Staffan de Mistura, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Iraq, for his introduction of the
report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) (S/2008/19). I
thank the Secretary-General for his report. I also thank
Ambassador Khalilzad, Permanent Representative of
the United States, for his briefing.

The report of the Secretary-General presents us
with a mixed overall picture of the situation in Iraq
during the reporting period. On the bright side, my
delegation is pleased to note that, despite extremely
difficult circumstances, the people of Iraq have
persevered in the political transition process set out in
resolution 1546 (2004) and have entered a new phase
of striving for unity, stability and development. The
marked reduction in the number of violent incidents,
the gradual assumption by the Iraqi authorities of the
control of competencies in the area of security, the
process of implementing article 140 of the constitution
and the reinforcement of the Jaysh al-Mahdi ceasefire
are positive developments.

On the dark side, my delegation shares the
concerns of the Secretary-General about the daunting
challenges that the people of Iraq still face in the quest
for peace, security and development. Attacks against
civilians, outbreaks of sectarian strife, the lack of
consensus in promulgating key legislative documents,
the escalation of border tension and the worsening
humanitarian and human rights situation, with the
plight of nearly 4 million refugees and internally
displaced persons unresolved, continue to pose serious
challenges to the Government and the people of Iraq.

In the present situation, the role of the United
Nations in Iraq with regard to the political process,
constitutional support, electoral assistance and, in
particular, humanitarian assistance and national
reconciliation is even more important. We commend
the World Food Programme, the World Health
Organization, UNICEF, the United Nations
Development Programme, the United Nations Human
Settlements Programme, the United Nations Population
Fund, the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights and other United
Nations agencies for the activities that they are
undertaking in Iraq under what the Secretary-General
describes as extremely difficult conditions.

Viet Nam highly appreciates and supports the
efforts undertaken by UNAMI in the implementation of
its expanded mandate under resolution 1770 (2007). At
the political level, we support the efforts by the parties
concerned to advance the political process and to
promote national dialogue and reconciliation. We
remain convinced that reinforcing the constitutional
review process, disbanding militias and armed groups,
curbing the illicit use of weapons and improving the
livelihoods of civilians and the conditions of refugees
and displaced persons, as well as strengthening the rule
of law, are among the most important measures that
can help Iraq to tackle existing problems.

On the economic front, we encourage the
Government of Iraq to undertake specific measures
with a view to achieving tangible results in the areas of
poverty reduction, the provision of public services, job
creation and institutional strengthening. In our View,
those are essential to creating a sound basis for the
reconstruction work to be effective and sustainable.

We reaffirm our support for the activities
undertaken within the framework of the International
Compact with Iraq. In the implementation of its
expanded mandate, UNAMI should continue to assist
Iraq to undertake those measures effectively.

My delegation is encouraged by the efforts of
Iraq to strengthen constructive cooperation and
dialogue with regional countries on economic, security,
energy and humanitarian issues. We share the
assessment that the reduction in the number of violent

incidents in September, October and November last
year was partially due to the increase in such
cooperation. We hope that this type of cooperation and
dialogue will take place not only with Iran and Syria,
but also with other neighbouring countries concerned
with a View to easing border tensions, preventing
further hostilities and resolving humanitarian issues.

In the context of continued difficulties in almost
every field, the role of the international community in
general and of the regional countries in particular
remains instrumental in helping Iraq respond to various
security, humanitarian, national reconciliation and
socio-economic development challenges. Viet Nam
will continue to support the political process in Iraq
and the efforts of the parties concerned aimed at
restoring the peace, stability, unity and prosperity of
Iraq. We support the efforts of the Iraqi people in
rebuilding their country and look forward to
developing political, economic and commercial
relations with Iraq when conditions permit.

