Mr. Takht Ravanchi (Islamic Republic of Iran):
Along with other guarantors of the Astana format, the
Islamic Republic of Iran continues to support keeping
Idlib as a de-escalation area. That approach is based on
a reality and a fundamental principle. There are a large
number of civilians there whose lives must be saved.

At the same time, certain questions are in order.
Can and should this situation continue indefinitely?
Should the Government allow internationally
designated terrorist groups to maintain their control
over its territory. Should the international community
allow such terrorist groups to take a large number of
civilians as their hostages?

The answer is clear. The establishment of the Idlib
de-escalation area was only a temporary measure,
with the exclusive objective of protecting civilians, not
providing terrorist groups with such a safe haven. It does
not limit the right of the Syrian Government to fight
Security Council-designated terrorists, which of course
has to be carried out in accordance with international
humanitarian law. Therefore, both defeating terrorists
and releasing civilians is necessary.

The current situation in Idlib - in which the most
dangerous terrorist groups are allowed to use more than
2 million civilians as human shields, continue their
control over a large part of a sovereign State's territory
and conduct their operations therefrom, attacking both
military and civilian targets beyond that area - cannot
and must not continue indefinitely. The persistence of
that situation would enable the terrorists to kill more
civilians. That is in contradiction with the objective of
the Idlib de-escalation area's creation. We should be
vigilant enough not to confuse the protection of civilians
with the protection of terrorists. The continuation of the
current state of affairs in Idlib would further interrupt
the restoration of the Government's control over all its
territory and securing the safety and security of all its
citizens, prevent the return of refugees and internally
displaced persons, delay the country's reconstruction
and hamper the political solution, all of which are
inherently interlinked.
In conclusion, I would like to stress once again the
need for full respect by all for the sovereignty, political
independence, unity and territorial integrity of Syria.
As underlined in the joint statement by the guarantors
on the international meeting on Syria in the Astana
format held in Nur-Sultan on 25 and 26 April, no action,
no matter by whom, should undermine those principles.
In that context, the guarantors of the Astana format
also rejected all attempts to create new realities on the
ground under the pretext of combating terrorism. In that
regard, the United States must therefore immediately
end its illegal presence in parts of Syria.

With that in mind, the Syrian Government must be
assisted in the formation of the constitutional committee,
facilitated by the Special Envoy of the Secretary-
General for Syria, Mr. Pedersen, whose efforts we
support. We encourage him to further strengthen his
consultations with the Government of Syria.

As stated in the aforementioned joint statement,
there is no military solution to the Syrian conflict, and
the only option is to advance the Syrian-led, Syrian-
owned and United Nations-facilitated political process.
Ultimately, the right to determine the future of Syria
belongs exclusively to the Syrians themselves. We must
genuinely support the realization of that objective.

