Sir Jeremy Greenstock (United Kingdom): Later
in this debate France will make a statement in the name
of the European Union, and that statement will make
the fundamental points of substance which the United
Kingdom subscribes to, and we wholly associate
ourselves with that. I want to make just a few extra
points.

First of all, I want to pay very warm tribute to Mr.
Kouchner and to his whole team for what they have
achieved over the last year and a quarter in Kosovo.
This is the most difficult of the international jobs that
we are monitoring from the Security Council. Against
the background we all know he has had to face, it has
been an extraordinary achievement. The United
Kingdom thanks him for that, as well as the whole of
the European Union.

Let me say a word on the elections. We, too, were
particularly pleased at the success of the municipal
elections held at the end of October, which should pave
the way for Kosovo-wide elections in due course to
restore the autonomy which was taken away from
Kosovo in 1990. We are interested in the Special
Representative's support for an election at a fairly early
date. The United Kingdom has no specific date in
mind, because the conditions have to be right for those
elections first. The point is to work from now on to
ensure that the right conditions are put in place and the
right general atmosphere established. Of course, the
changes in Belgrade are relevant to that, and elections
will have to be preceded by a new registration exercise
to ensure that Serbs and other ethnic minorities are
fully included.

My second point, not entirely irrelevant to that,
concerns future status. Deciding future status should
not be a top priority for the moment in the short term.
There are more pressing issues for both Belgrade and
Pristina on which attention should be focused - for
instance, economic regeneration and the rebuilding of
society.

It will, in the end, be up to Belgrade and elected
representatives of Kosovo's communities to reach final
agreement between themselves on status, with the help
and support of the international community. That is the
import of resolution 1244 (1999), which, of course,
makes no final prescriptions on this point.

Thirdly, we welcome Mr. Kouchner's intention to
nominate representatives of the Kosovo Serbs to
certain municipal councils, as well as his intention to
widen involvement in the advisory structures, because
this will make the current Kosovo structures more
representative of public opinion and thus bring the
current structures nearer to the people over whom they
have influence. For this reason, we support him in that
move.

Lastly, on the issue of Serbian elections in
December and how they affect Kosovo, we support in
principle the ability of voters in Kosovo to participate
in the planned Serbian parliamentary elections. We
hear what Mr. Kouchner has said about the practical
and technical impossibility for the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
to organize those, but we do not at this point regard
this as being the end of the story as far as participation
is concerned.

If there are arrangements for people to vote from
Kosovo in the Serb elections, then all parties,
particularly Kosovar Albanians, must understand that
this would be without prejudice to the future status of
Kosovo.

