Mr. Van Schalkwyk (South Africa): Let me begin
by thanking Special Envoy Pedersen for his briefing
on the political situation in Syria. We welcome his
dedicated efforts and those of his Office in carrying
out his mandate. We also thank Ms. Rajaa Altalli for
her briefing and statement.

At the Council's previous briefing on the
political situation in Syria (see S/PV.8664), South
Africa welcomed the launch and first meeting of
the Constitutional Committee, held in Geneva, and
expressed our hope that it would lead to tangible progress
towards a sincere constitution-building process. We
welcome the convening of the second round of talks
by the small body of the Constitutional Committee and
note the need for building blocks to be put in place to
achieve progress on substantive matters. We encourage
all parties to recommit to the Constitutional Committee
as an effective and essential part of the Syrian political
process. In addition, my delegation urges the various
parties to make every effort to work together, with the
support of the Special Envoy, to find agreement on a
realistic agenda, before the start of the next round of
talks, to guide the work of the Committee. While the
Constitutional Committee is part of a larger political
process designed to bring peace and stability to Syria,
it is a vital one that must be supported.

With regard to the other components of the political
process, and as a way to buttress the Constitutional
Committee's process, there is a need to build trust
and confidence among the various parties and
communities. Actions in that regard, at all levels of
society and Government, including through the release
of civilian detainees, would contribute to healing and
reconciliation. We, as South Africans, know that trust
and confidence among parties is an essential component
of any negotiation and hope that actions that build on
those principles will be of benefit to all. The only long-
term solution to the current crisis in Syria is through
an inclusive, Syrian-led dialogue that is reflective of
the voice of the Syrian people and will safeguard the
universal rights and fundamental interests of all Syrian
society. In that regard, we call on all parties to fully
implement resolution 2254 (2015) as the blueprint for a
long-term political solution in Syria.

South Africa believes that the political and
humanitarian situation in Syria cannot be addressed
independently of each other. The continuation of
violence and the deterioration of the humanitarian
situation negatively affect the political process. In the
same vein, progress in the political sphere will support
efforts towards ensuring that all Syrians are able to
live in a safe, secure and prosperous environment, free
of violence and terrorism. The Council met yesterday
(see S/PV.8694) to discuss the humanitarian situation
in Syria and try to find consensus on the renewal of
the cross-border assistance programme. We remind all
Council members of their duty to uphold the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations
and their moral imperative to alleviate the suffering
of the Syrian people. South Africa calls on all Council
members to make every effort to find a compromise
and reach consensus to ensure that the mandate of that
vital, life-saving humanitarian assistance programme
is renewed.
