The President (spoke in Russian): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as representative of
the Russian Federation.

At the outset, allow me to convey my gratitude to
the Chairmen of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
(CTC), the 1267 Committee and the 1540 Committee
for their comprehensive reports and their work carried
out to bolster international counter-terrorism
cooperation. The Russian Federation backs
development, coordination and cooperation between
the three counter-terrorism Committees of the Security
Council, whose main areas of work are reflected in the
joint statement made today by Mr. Mayr-Harting.

The Russian delegation views future cooperation
between the Committees and their expert groups as
important conditions in bolstering the effectiveness of
efforts taken by the Security Council in countering the
global threat of terrorism.
Turning now to the activity of the Counter-
Terrorism Committee, I wish to state the following.

In recent months, the Committee has made
substantial progress in dialogue with States on the
basis of the Preliminary Implementation Assessments
of resolution 1373 (2001). At the centre of attention
today is the first round of stocktaking, including States'
responses to and comments on the recommendations of
the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate (CTED). We welcome that progress, which
is closely related to the CTC's preparation of an
updated comprehensive review of the implementation
of resolution 1373 (2001).

In that respect, we note the increased role played
by subcommittees of the CTC, which, under the
chairmanship of the representatives of France, Russia
and Viet Nam, are actively discussing country
assessments and are ready to promote that work. It is
important to insure that the CTC's bilateral
communication mechanisms with States operates as
effectively as possible.

We note that steps to improve the organizational
structure of the CTED and its methods of work, as
provided for in resolution 1805 (2008) are yielding
tangible results.

The CTC's move to use a variety of formats for
country visits - regional, repeat, focused, full-
assessment and comprehensive Visits - has proved
itself. The geographical scope of such visits has
expanded, and the number of States involved has
grown. While previously the main focus of visits was
to study States' technical assistance needs, it has now
become possible to assess in depth the capacity of
relevant potential donor States. We expect that this,
alongside other measures to expand the CTC's capacity
to coordinate international technical counter-terrorism
cooperation, will make the Committee's work more
focused and more effective.

We support the CTC's participation, within the
framework of its current mandate, in the activities of
the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force and
the use of CTED's unique expert capacities to that end.
We welcome the good cooperation between the CTC
and international, regional and subregional
organizations, which has of late yielded mutual
benefits. Here, let me once again draw attention to the
current task of convening a sixth meeting of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee with international,
regional and subregional organizations; we propose
that CTED step up its work on making practical
preparations for that event.

In our view, it is necessary to continue efforts to
expand dialogue with States on the implementation of
resolution 1624 (2005), which is aimed at countering
the ideology of terrorism, inter alia by prohibiting
incitement. That resolution remains an important
element of the Committee's mandate. It is important to
continue to include issues relating to the
implementation of resolution 1624 (2005) in CTED's
country visits; endeavours towards the broad adoption
of relevant best practices in this field should continue
as well.

We expect the interim review of the activities of
CTED, carried out pursuant to resolution 1805 (2008),
to enable the Security Council to assess the
Directorate's progress and to clarify the tasks before it.
The regular review mechanism should remain as an
important tool for the Security Council to provide
political leadership for the activities of the CTC.

We continue to view the 1267 Committee and its
Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team as
an effective and viable Security Council counter-
terrorism mechanism. We express our grave concern
about the continued spread of Taliban influence and
extremist ideas in Afghanistan and beyond. This
reflects the continuing drive by radical forces to seize
power and gain control throughout the region. In those
circumstances, we consider it to be inappropriate and
dangerous to move away from a policy of isolating
extremist leaders to forge political contacts with
leading members of the Taliban, especially in breach of
the existing sanctions regime. We urge all States to
unswervingly impose restrictive measures against
individuals listed pursuant to relevant Security Council
resolutions and the guiding principles of the work of
the 1267 Committee.
We welcome the efforts of the 1267 Committee
and the Monitoring Team to keep the sanctions list up
to date, reflecting the true nature of today's terrorist
threat. Substantial progress was achieved in this area
with the adoption of Security Council resolution 1822
(2008). We note that the Committee, pursuant to
paragraph 25 of that resolution, has begun a
comprehensive review of all names on the sanctions
list, which has yielded its first practical results. We call
upon States to continue to submit request for the listing
of individuals or groups associated with Al-Qaida and
the Taliban, including those financing their terrorist
activities with proceeds from the illicit cultivation,
production and trafficking of drugs in Afghanistan. We
call upon them also to provide additional information
regarding individuals already on the list.

The success of our common efforts to counter the
real and changing threat to international peace and
security posed by the Taliban and Al-Qaida depends on
all States fully and in good faith meeting their
obligations.

As an initiator and sponsor of resolutions 1540
(2004), 1673 (2006) and 1810 (2008), the Russian
Federation is interested in the comprehensive
development of international cooperation in the full
implementation of the provisions of those Security
Council decisions. We note that over the past six
months the 1540 Committee has engaged in
painstaking work and agreed upon and adopted two
important documents: one on modalities for the
comprehensive review of the implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004), and the Committee's
programme of work for the current year. A priority for
the Committee in the near future is to successfully
carry out that comprehensive review. We hope that the
review process will contribute in the future to
enhancing the international community's efforts to
counter the risks and threats posed by proliferation. We
hope too that the activities of the four working groups
that were recently established will enhance the
effectiveness of the Committee's efforts in key areas of
its work.

It is important that the Committee continue to
increase assistance to States in implementing
resolution 1540 (2004) and to coordinate wide
international cooperation in that sphere, including
through participation within the framework of its broad
programme of outreach activities.
We are prepared to continue our active support
for these measures, including in the context of our
ongoing cooperation with members of the
Commonwealth of Independent States on issues related
to the mandate of the 1540 Committee. Russia will
continue its focused efforts to carry out the tasks set
out in resolutions 1540 (2004), 1673 (2006) and 1810
(2008), with a view to establishing a reliable system,
under United Nations auspices, to combat black-market
weapons of mass destruction.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

The next speaker on my list is the representative
of New Zealand, Ms. Rosemary Banks, who is
participating in a Security Council meeting for the last
time as Permanent Representative of her country. I
wish on behalf of the Council to thank Ambassador
Banks, who, over the past four years, has participated
in many Council meetings and who has made a
substantial contribution to our work. I now give her the
floor.

