Mr. Musayev (Azerbaijan): I would like to thank
the German presidency for convening today's open
debate on children and armed conflict and for its active
role and leadership in advancing that significant theme
in the work of the Security Council.

We welcome Ms. Leila Zerrougui, the new Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict, to the Council and wish her every
success in fulfilling her important and responsible
mandate. I would also like to thank Mr. Ladsous,
Mr. Lake and Mr. Tolbert for their statements.

Azerbaijan's firm views with regard to the issue
under consideration are well known and stem from
our keen interest in contributing to the achievement
of sustainable peace and development and from our
practical experience in addressing the impact of
armed conflict on civilians, including children. The
war unleashed against my country and the military
occupation of our territories has had a considerable
impact on, inter alia, humanitarian issues in our
country, primarily affecting the most vulnerable
groups. Azerbaijan continues to suffer from having
one of the highest numbers of refugees and displaced
persons in the world, many of whom are children. The
most serious crimes of concern to the international
community have been committed during the conflict,
and not even children have been spared.

Azerbaijan remains deeply concerned by the
negative impact of armed conflicts on children and
strongly condemns all violations of international
humanitarian and human rights law committed against
them. We have always been consistent in demanding
the strict observance by the parties to armed conflict of
their obligations under international humanitarian and
human rights law in all circumstances.

Azerbaijan reiterates its commitment to continuing
to support the activities of existing United Nations
mechanisms aimed at ensuring more effective
protection for the rights of children and improving the
situation of children affected by armed conflict.

We welcome the growing attention of the Security
Council to the topic and support the activity of its
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict.
The heightened vulnerability of children in wartime
brings an element of urgency, dedication and strong
commitment to our protection efforts, which must be
free of selectivity and politically motivated approaches
and preferences. Azerbaijan knows the role that the
mandate of the Special Representative for Children and
Armed Conflict must play in that regard. We encourage
the Special Representative to fulfil her mandate to
attend to the suffering of children in all situations of
armed conflict, including, in particular, those of a
protracted nature and of prolonged impact on children.

Important steps have been taken in a number of
situations of armed conflict to achieve accountability
for grave violations of children's rights, including the
development of international jurisprudence. However,
serious challenges remain. Unfortunately, the violation
of international humanitarian and human rights law
in some situations of armed conflict has not received
attention and response at the international and regional
levels. It is obvious that more resolute and targeted
measures are required to protect children in situations of
armed conflict and to end impunity for the most serious
crimes of concern to the international community that
have been perpetrated against children.

It is incontrovertible today that no official or
political status can cloak the person responsible with
immunity for such crimes. Combating impunity is
important not only for the purposes of prosecuting
such crimes and bringing those responsible to justice,
but also for ensuring sustainable peace, truth and
reconciliation.

Particular consideration should be given to
internally displaced children in terms of ensuring their
inalienable right of return and to the implications of
illegal policies and practices in situations of foreign
occupation for the protection of children's rights. In
addition, among the pressing issues requiring urgent
attention and action is that of children taken hostage
and reported missing in situations of armed conflict. In
that context, it is essential to ensure that all appropriate
measures are taken to determine the fate of such
children, including searching for them and reunifying
them with their families, in particular by strengthening
international cooperation.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate that there is
a need for more resolute and consistent efforts aimed
at addressing existing challenges and finding long-
term and sustained solutions to the problems involving
the protection of civilians, including, in particular,
violations and abuses committed against children in
situations of armed conflict.

