Mr. Li Baodong (China) (spoke in Chinese): I would
like to thank Mr. Robert Serry, Special Coordinator
for the Middle East Peace Process and Personal
Representative of the Secretary-General to the Palestine
Liberation Organization and the Palestinian Authority,
for his briefing. I also welcome Mr. Malki, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Palestine, to today's meeting.

I have listened carefully to the statements
made by Foreign Minister Malki and the Permanent
Representative of Israel.

The question of Palestine has always been at
the centre of the Middle East issue. Dialogue and
negotiation remain the ultimate solution to the
settlement of the Palestinian-Israeli conflict. However,
Israeli-Palestinian talks have been stalled since 2010.
China is gravely concerned about that situation. The
continued deadlock in the Israeli-Palestinian peace
talks is in the interest of neither side and will not lead
to lasting peace in the Middle East. It also contravenes
the common aspiration of the international community.
The status quo is untenable.

The Middle East peace process must be restarted
as soon as possible, in order to achieve the vision of
the two-State solution. China welcomes any and all
initiatives aimed at restarting the Israeli-Palestinian
talks. We hope that the two sides will advance in parallel
by adopting practical measures to foster a favourable
environment aimed at resuming the talks and making
progress at an early date.

China has consistently rejected Israel's settlement
activities in the occupied Palestinian territories,
including East Jerusalem and the West Bank. We are
also seriously concerned about Israel's suspension of
tax revenue transfers to Palestine. Nevertheless, the
problem of settlement activities remains the main
obstacle to the resumption of the peace talks. Israel,
as the more powerful party to the conflict, should
take the initiative to cease its settlement activities in
occupied Palestinian territories, release detainees
and ease the humanitarian situation in the occupied
Palestinian territories, including the Gaza Strip, in
order to eliminate the obstacles and create conditions
favourable to the restart of the peace talks.

The international community should base its
actions on the ultimate goal of achieving peace and
stability in the Middle East, address the question of
Israel and Palestine with greater urgency and promote
the peace talks more vigorously. China appeals to
the Quartet to take substantive action with a view to
restarting the peace talks. China also urges all of the
parties concerned to demonstrate the necessary political
will. In that context, China supports the efforts of the
League of Arab States and favours a greater role for
the Security Council in settling the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict.

It is China's continued view that all of the parties
concerned should settle their disputes through
political dialogue based on the relevant United Nations
resolutions, the principle of land for peace, the Arab
Peace Initiative and the road map for peace in the
Middle East, so that Israel and Palestine can eventually
live side by side in peace as two States.

China supports the establishment of a sovereign,
independent State of Palestine with East Jerusalem as
its capital, based on the pre-1967 borders. Achieving
independent statehood is the legitimate right of the
Palestinian people and constitutes the foundation and
principles of the peaceful coexistence of Palestine
and Israel as two States. The granting of observer
State status to Palestine by the General Assembly
represented one more step towards the establishment of
an independent Palestinian State.

China has always promoted the peace talks in its
own way, and has made efforts to advance the Middle
East peace process. China would like to work with
the parties concerned, together with the international
community, and to continue to play a constructive role
in achieving comprehensive, just and lasting peace in
the Middle East region.

China is gravely concerned about the continuing
tension in Syria. A political settlement is the only
feasible solution to the Syrian issue and reflects the
common understanding of the international community
as a whole. The current urgent task requires intensifying
political mediation efforts and urging all Syrian
parties to cease fire and halt the violence with a view
to launching a Syrian-led political process as soon as
possible. China applauds all efforts aimed at promoting
a political solution.

China supports the just and fair mediation efforts
of the Joint Special Envoy of the United Nations
and the League of Arab States on the Syrian crisis,
Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi. We sincerely hope that all of the
parties concerned will strive to find a just, peaceful
and appropriate solution to the question of Syria based
on the final communique of the Geneva meeting of the
Action Group on Syria (S/2012/522, annex) and the
relevant Security Council resolutions.

