Mr. McKell (United Kingdom): I too thank the
Prosecutor for her report and briefing on the situation
in Libya.

The United Kingdom is concerned about the
continued deterioration in security and political
stability, which continues to hamper overall progress
towards a secure, stable and prosperous Libya. Libya
is now at a critical stage in its transition. It is essential
that Libyans work towards agreement on a single and
inclusive national dialogue process and refrain from
destabilizing action that would further set back the
political transition.

While the substance of any settlement must be
worked out by the Libyans themselves, the United
Kingdom is committed to working with Libya and its
international partners to encourage and support a stable
political agreement which can deliver the transition to a
more permanent democratic State. Helping the Libyan
Government to address its security challenges remains
our immediate priority, but supporting progress towards
a stable political settlement in Libya will require broad
and sustained engagement beyond security, including
in the areas of justice and the rule of law.

The United Kingdom welcomes the continuing
efforts to ensure that all those who have committed war
crimes and crimes against humanity since 15 February
2011 are held to account for their actions. There must
be no impunity for the perpetrators of those atrocities.
We welcome the ongoing dialogue between Libya
and the International Criminal Court (ICC), and in
particular the agreement by Libya to support the
Prosecutor's continuing investigations. We encourage
the Government of Libya to conclude its negotiations
with the Registry on recognizing the privileges and
immunities of Court staff.

The United Kingdom is grateful for the update
from the Prosecutor on the cases of Saif Al-Islam
AI-Qadhafi and Abdullah Al-Senassi. We continue
to support the right of Libya to hold national trials
for crimes committed within its jurisdiction. It is
important that any action taken be in line with the
decisions of the International Criminal Court. It is
imperative that all detainees be held in accordance with
Libyan and international law, by a legitimate authority
and that they have access to legal representation and
medical care. The treatment and management of high
profile detainees from the Al-Qadhafi regime provides
Libya with an important opportunity to demonstrate
to the international community that it is committed to
ensuring fair trials, to meeting international standards
and the protection of human rights, and to cooperating
fully with the International Criminal Court.

The United Kingdom continues to urge Libya's
full cooperation with the International Criminal Court.
We recall Libya's obligation to cooperate fully with
and provide any necessary assistance to the Court
and the Prosecutor pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011).
The United Kingdom notes that in July 2013 the ICC
Appeals Chamber rejected Libya's request to suspend
the surrender of Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi while its
appeal was pending. Libya is under an obligation to
surrender him to the Court.

The United Kingdom stands with Libya as it works
to return to and strengthen the rule of law throughout
the country. We look forward to future cooperation
between Libya and the International Criminal Court.
The United Kingdom remains ready and willing to
assist the Court with its investigations as it plays its part
in ensuring that individual perpetrators of atrocities are
held to account for the crimes they have committed.

