Sir. Jeremy Greenstock (United Kingdom): The
position of the European Union (EU) will be fully set
out by the Spanish presidency later in this debate, and
the United Kingdom strongly supports the statement
that will be made.

First, we are very disturbed by reports from
southern Lebanon and the Blue Line. The rise in
tension there has to be reversed. We strongly endorse
the European Union's condemnation of the recent
attacks from Lebanese territory, and the United
Kingdom shares the positions of our French and Irish
partners on that issue.

Secondly, on the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, I
have to add to the EU's statement that the United
Kingdom finds the continuing - indeed, escalating -
Israeli military action following the adoption of
resolutions 1402 (2002) and 1403 (2002) intolerable. It
amounts to a defiance of the Security Council, and we
condemn it. We demand the immediate withdrawal of
Israeli forces from areas that are the responsibility of
the Palestinian Authority. In addition, we expect Israel
rigorously to respect humanitarian norms and to
prevent human rights abuses. Their carelessness as
regards the effects of the fighting on civilians is, prima
facie, a breach of Security Council resolutions on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict.

On the Palestinian side, whatever the motivation,
there has been an equivocation about resorting to
violence and about the scope allowed for the
committing of acts of terrorism. The Palestinian
leadership must be unequivocal in opposing suicide
bombing and then in taking action to see that these
instructions are respected. Israel must, of course, allow
President Arafat to do his job in this, as in other
respects.

There has begun to be talk of a further draft
resolution. I would advise the Council against any
debasing of the currency of its resolutions. Israel's
actions, while they continue, are amounting to self-
condemnation. We hope they stop now, but if they do
not, the effect of that disastrously counterproductive
approach will be far more compelling than another
version of resolutions 1397 (2002) or 1402 (2002). Let
those resolutions speak for themselves and let the
activity in the region of Secretary Powell and other
senior representatives of the "quartet" take the
operational lead in bringing this horrific episode to a
close. Third-party involvement has now become
absolutely essential and this could extend - as the
Ambassador of France has said - to monitoring.

When the Security Council next puts effort into a
new draft resolution, it should be to spell out, with
clarity and unanimity, the political route out of this
quagmire, without which no progress away from
violence is going to be a realistic prospect.

