Mr. Khalid (Pakistan): At the outset, I wish to
congratulate Ambassador Arias on his successful
completion of the first six months of his term as
Chairman of the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC).
I also wish to thank him for his statement and for
presenting the ninth 90-day work programme of the
Committee (S/2003/995, annex).

We have noted the progress made by the
Committee in the past three months. We hope that the
Committee will be able to maintain its momentum and
achieve the targets set for the next 90-day work
programme. We appreciate the opportunity offered by
our meeting today to reflect on the course of action that
we have taken so far in countering terrorism and to
plan for the future. We need to craft a strategic vision
of the direction which our common efforts against
terrorism have to take.

The CTC represents an important organized
international response to global terrorism. We hope that
the CTC will continue to perform its mandated tasks in
an effective manner. It is important that the Committee
consolidate its activities within its existing mandate. It
should avoid assuming a policing role, which is beyond
its mandate.

The effects of terrorism can be felt in almost
every country today. Pakistan in particular has been
exposed to terrorism for decades. However, Pakistan is
resolved to combat that menace with full vigour. That
is made abundantly clear by the successes Pakistan has
registered in capturing more than 500 terrorists,
including key operatives of Al Qaeda and the Taliban.
Approximately 70,000 troops have been deployed in
the harsh and inhospitable western region along the
Pakistan-Afghanistan border to carry out interdiction
operations against suspected terrorists.

We appreciate the CTC's continued commitment
to maintaining transparency, as reflected in its work
programme. That is crucial for winning the confidence
and cooperation of all States in fighting terrorism. We
have noted that a number of States have moved from
stage A to stage B, namely, to the implementation of
the counter-terrorism legal framework. Naturally, the
Committee should expect a greater time commitment in
reviewing a State's performance at this stage.

However, there is a need to balance reporting
requirements with actual action on the ground. We
hope that the issue of reporting fatigue will be
adequately covered in the Chairman's report to the
Council, to be presented by 15 November, on the
problems encountered by States and the CTC in
implementing the provisions of resolution 1373 (2001).

We support the CTC's contacts with regional and
subregional organizations to coordinate efforts for
counter-terrorism. We have noted the usefulness of the
CTC's joint meeting with the Inter-American
Committee Against Terrorism of the Organization of
American States, held on 7 October in Washington. We
look forward to the joint meeting of the CTC with the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe in
Vienna next March. However, we share the view
expressed at the meeting in Washington that future
meetings of the CTC with such organizations should
also be held in different geographic regions.

I would like to take this opportunity to make a
few comments on the general drift of our counter-
terrorism efforts. First, we should arrive at a
consensual legal definition of terrorism, including State
terrorism, not only to lend clarity to our fight against
terrorism but also to pre-empt its abuse.

Secondly, we need to examine the causes which
lie at the roots of terrorism. The issues of political and
socio-economic justice are not just fancy and exotic
terms. The existence and quality of those factors are
closely linked to the growth of, and support for,
terrorism in a particular region.

Thirdly, human rights should be at the core of
counter-terrorism efforts. Counter-terrorism should not
be used as a cloak to violate the very freedoms and
rights we are seeking to protect.

Fourthly, States have continued to make an
opportunistic use of counter-terrorism measures. That
applies in full measure to situations of foreign
occupation and alien domination, particularly in
Kashmir and in Palestine. It would be a travesty of
justice to allow the perpetrators of terrorism to join the
fight against terrorism. We should fully resist attempts
to delegitimize just causes and the just struggles of
peoples for their right to self-determination.

Terrorism has no faith. We should therefore avoid
linking terrorism with any religion. Rather, we should
direct our energies towards promoting interreligious
and intercultural understanding and harmony.

Lastly, technical assistance constitutes an
important element of the counter-terrorism work of the
Committee. We need to enhance the capacity of
Member States by providing them with sustainable
technical assistance.

