Mr. Jovanovie: The Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
sent a timely warning to the Security Council of the
unforeseeable consequences of the illegal and brutal
aggression of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization
(NATO) and requested on a number of occasions that the
aggression be stopped immediately. If this legitimate
request had been heeded, vast human suffering and material
destruction would have been avoided.

My country has been a Victim of NATO aggression
for 45 days now. NATO attacks have been concentrated
primarily on civilian targets, threatening lives, the
environment and the basic human rights of the entire
population of the country. The principle for selecting
allegedly legitimate military targets looks like: hit anything,
anytime, anywhere. Using over 1,000 planes, NATO has
made over 12,000 sorties thus far, has launched over 3,000
cruise missiles and has dropped more than 10,000 tons of
explosives. The tragic toll is 1,200 civilian lives lost and
the over 5,000 people wounded, many of whom will remain
disabled for life.
Can the lost or ruined life of any human being be
cynically called collateral damage? Is this term fitting to
describe the deaths of over 100 children brought on by
NATO bombs? No mention of collateral damage or
incidental killings of people and destruction of property is
made in the Geneva Convention of 1949 or in the statutes
of the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia. Human life has no price tag and cannot be
compared to anything else. However, the NATO bombs
threaten the lives of the entire population of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia.

Who can live in a country in which houses, bridges,
roads, railroads, schools, hospitals, water-supply systems,
heating or house appliance plants or public transport are
being systematically destroyed? Graphite bombs have short-
circuited the power grid of the country, leaving more than
5 million people without power or water and by extension
without the most essential provisions. NATO has used
weapons banned by international conventions, causing an
ecological catastrophe. Over 20,000 cluster bombs have
been dropped thus far, while depleted uranium
ammunition has also been used. No exception has been
made for cultural monuments, cemeteries or memorials to
victims of Nazi atrocities in the last war. No army so far
has vandalized Serbian medieval monasteries and
churches. They survived centuries, eliciting the respect of
all except NATO strategists.

The NATO countries, which in their conceit like to
think of themselves as standard bearers of democracy and
of the right to hold a different opinion, dispatched their
planes to drop bombs on television centres in my country,
thus committing a crime against freedom of speech and
of the media. The buildings of TV Belgrade and TV Novi
Sad have been totally destroyed, as well as the Ustje
business centre in Belgrade which housed three private
television and four radio stations. Scores of television
transmitters have been hit too, including the television
transmitter on Mount Avala, the largest facility of its kind
in Yugoslavia and the beacon above Belgrade which
greeted passengers and beckoned to many generations of
Yugoslavs from afar that they were coming home at last.

The Federal Republic of Yugoslavia has been
committed to a peaceful solution of the crisis in Kosovo
and Metohija. I would like to remind members of the
Security Council that all activities of the armed forces of
the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia in Kosovo and
Metohija were unilaterally stopped on 6 April, that the
Government of Serbia and Yugoslavia has called on all
refugees and displaced persons to return home,
guaranteeing them safety and security, and that
constructive talks were conducted on a number of
occasions between the highest representative of Serbia
and Yugoslavia and Dr. Ibrahim Rugova. However, the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia has the right and the duty
to protect itself from aggression. The right and the duty
are enshrined in the constitution as well as in the Charter
of the United Nations and international law.

Yesterday, the aggressors' warplanes targeted and
destroyed the Embassy of the People's Republic of China
in Belgrade. The Embassy was hit by at least two
missiles. According to preliminary information, 26
Embassy staff members were wounded, two very
seriously, and two persons were killed. The Embassy
building is in the exclusive residential area of New
Belgrade. There is no military target around there. The
attack is in gross violation of the Geneva Convention of
1949 and of international law. It is, without any doubt, a
war crime.

 

It is more and more evident that NATO is waging a
total war against a sovereign country and its people. It is
not only Yugoslavia that is targeted, but peace and security
in the region as well. The neighbouring countries are
already involved in the aggression. The economy of the
region is seriously disrupted by the aggression. The main
waterway in Europe, the Danube, is out of use. The
consequences of the bombing on the region's environment
are devastating.

This criminal aggression against Yugoslavia should
cease immediately. The Security Council has failed until
now to condemn the aggression and to halt the bombing.
The entire international legal system is at stake. This
morning the Security Council has perhaps the last chance
to exercise its duty and reaffirm the authority invested in it
by the Charter of the United Nations.

