Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank Special Envoy Martin Griffiths,
Under-Secretary-General Mark Lowcock and the
Executive Director of the World Food Programme,
David Beasley, for their comprehensive overview of the
military, political and humanitarian situations in the
Republic of Yemen.

We support the mediation efforts of Mr. Griffiths
and Lieutenant General Michael Lollesgaard, who are
striving to steer the parties to the Yemeni conflict to
acknowledge the futility of a military solution. We are
convinced that the implementation of the Stockholm
Agreements remains possible. In that connection,
we welcome the progress reached by the parties at
the joint meeting of the Redeployment Coordination
Committee, under the leadership of Lieutenant General
Lollesgaard, particularly with regard to the development
of confidence-building measures.

The completion of the redeployment of armed
forces from the ports of Al-Hudaydah, Saleef and Ras
Isa will undoubtedly help to unblock other aspects of
the Stockholm Agreement, including the exchange of
prisoners and the de-escalation of tensions in Taiz, and
will help spark discussions of the framework parameters
for a settlement.

We all voted to extend the mandate of the United
Nations Mission to Support the Hodeidah Agreement.
We are confident that the further deployment of an
international presence will facilitate the separation of
the conflicting parties in the city and promote the overall
stabilization of the situation in Yemen. However, we
should not expect instant results as the bulk ofthe work
lies ahead. Russia will continue to provide assistance to
United Nations mediation in Yemen, both in its national
capacity and as one of five permanent members of the
Security Council.

Mr. Lowcock and Mr. Beasley today painted a
discouraging picture of the situation in the Republic
of Yemen, which is experiencing one of the worst
humanitarian crises in the world. The crisis is structural
in nature. It has inflicted irreparable damage on the
population, economy and civilian infrastructure of
Yemen. Millions onemenis are starving, cannot access
needed medical services and supplies and are in dire
need ofvarious types of assistance. The country is once
again in the grip of a cholera epidemic. The situation is
deteriorating with each passing day and approaching a
point of no return. Providing humanitarian assistance
to Yemen should be a priority of our work and must
carried out on a non-discriminatory basis, regardless of
who controls any given area.

We once again call for a universal ceasefire,
ensuring unfettered humanitarian access to all regions
of the country and unconditional compliance with
the provisions of international humanitarian law.
All parties to the Yemeni conflict must immediately
stop launching indiscriminate strikes against civilian
facilities, abandon aggressive, provocative rhetoric and
show restraint.

In conclusion, we recall resolution 598 (1987), as
we so often do. The resolution tasked the Secretary-
General to develop an architecture of security and
confidence in the region in collaboration with the States
of the region. This architecture, bringing together all
key States of the region - the Persian Gulf countries
and Iran - would now only strengthen comprehensive
and indivisible security in this part ofthe globe but also
help resolve long-standing and new crises, including
the conflict in Yemen.

In that connection, our proposal to begin developing
a package of security- and confidence-building
measures for the Persian Gulf, and ultimately for the
entire Middle East, remains on the table and relevant.
We have said this repeatedly. This comprehensive
formula would help replace threats and confrontation
with dialogue and cooperation and improve the general
environment, which would, incidentally, contribute
significantly to the success of the Yemeni efforts under
the auspices of the United Nations.

