Mr. Ramirez Carrefio (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): I would like to thank
Mr. Nicholas Haysom and Mr. Yury Fedotov for their
briefings. I would also like to thank Ambassador
Zahir Tanin for his statement, as well as to take this
opportunity to acknowledge, and commend him on, his
work as the Permanent Representative of Afghanistan.
I wish him every success in his new responsibilities.

The holding of elections in Afghanistan a year ago
and the assumption of office by President Ashraf Ghani
launched a new phase in a political process aimed at
overcoming the instability caused by the armed violence
that rocked this brotherly country for decades and
claimed the lives of countless innocent civilians. The
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela has welcomed those
achievements of the Afghan people in consolidating
peace. Afghanistan needs peace and stability in order
to rebuild the country.

However, we are concerned that the political
momentum has recently been affected by the violence
unleashed by the new Taliban leadership, as well as
by the uncertainty that has been generated by the new
direction taken by that group.

My country appreciates the efforts of the Afghan
Government to pursue national reconciliation as a
central theme of its political agenda, as well as the
support of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) for the efforts made by the
country's authorities. The four initiatives aimed to
promote inter-Afghan dialogue represent an important
starting point for achieving peace and the consolidation
ofa political process that is Afghan-owned and includes
diverse representation from all sectors of society.

In that regard, the participation of women remains
a fundamental aspect in the building of an inclusive
society. We are convinced that women's empowerment
contributes to the promotion of human rights. We
welcome the efforts of the Afghan authorities to
implement the national plan of action on resolution 1325
(2000), on women and peace and security. Through that
initiative, the Afghan Government, with the support
of the UNAMA, committed itself to ensuring that
women could play a more important role in the areas
of participation, protection, prevention, relief and
recovery. We believe that to be the correct path.

My country welcomes the existing collaboration
between President Ashraf Ghani and Chief Executive
Abdullah Abdullah in carrying out the necessary
electoral reforms agreed a year ago following the
formation of the Government of National Unity. That
step is essential to boost the confidence of the Afghan
people in their institutions.

The security situation in Afghanistan remains
fragile as the result of the actions of terrorist groups
operating in that country and the region ofCentral Asia,
which have persisted in their plans for destabilization.
The continued presence of groups affiliated with the
Islamic State in Iraq and Syria (ISIS) demonstrates
once again the growing threat posed to the stability
of the country by the fostering of terrorist activities.
ISIS intends to expand its terrorist methods throughout
Afghan territory, as part of its strategy to expand and
bolster its presence in the Middle East and North Africa
by controlling drug-trafficking routes in the region.

ISIS efforts in the country have received a boost
thanks to the incorporation of Taliban elements who
disagree with the fighting methods of the new Taliban
leadership. Reports indicate that about 10 per cent
of Taliban insurgents are active supporters of ISIS,
whose presence is a destabilizing factor for the region.
The presence of ISIS is a worrying development that
requires that the international community, in particular
the Security Council, adopt robust measures to curb the
flow of foreign terrorist fighters, who destabilize the
country and fuel the armed conflicts in Iraq and Syria.
The fight against terrorism requires the strengthening
of the Afghan armed forces as a legitimate institution
in guaranteeing the security of the State.

In addition to the danger of violent extremism,
drug trafficking remains a serious obstacle to the
country's stability and development. This illicit activity
is the main source of financing for the Taliban and
other criminal groups in carrying out their activities.
The impact of drug trafficking on the region requires
international cooperation, including neighbouring
countries, to prevent, combat and eliminate this scourge.
We recognize the efforts of the Afghan Government
in this regard, which have been assisted by the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime. Proof of this is
the launch of the Afghanistan Drug Reporting System,
which implements stricter controls while establishing
the indicators needed to craft effective policies for the
control and eradication of poppy crops.

The insecurity that persists in some parts of
Afghanistan has a negative impact on the civilian
population, which is the victim ofindiscriminate attacks
by terrorist groups. The number of people affected by
armed violence has not decreased, as pointed out in
the report (S/2015/684) of the Secretary-General. The
fighting on the ground and targeted attacks make up
the bulk of the violence with the greatest impact on
civilians.

In that context, we regret the increase in the number
of internally displaced persons this year, which at more
than 100,000 is an increase of 77 per cent as compared
with the previous year. The civilian population,
including children, continue to pay a high price for the
continuing fighting. We call on the parties to respect
international humanitarian law and international

human rights law and to protect children.

In another vein, we would like to highlight the
enhancement of Afghanistan's relations with its
neighbouring countries. That is a positive factor for
the region. Dialogue and the various agreements
established between Afghanistan and India, Pakistan,
China and Russia, among others, reaffirm the need to
strengthen those bilateral relations in order to promote
cooperation in areas of common interest for the benefit
of their peoples.

Finally, we encourage the Government of
Afghanistan to continue its efforts to promote a
comprehensive and inclusive political process leading
to the establishment of a firm and lasting peace.
That requires the participation of all sectors of
Afghan society, with the support of the international
community and the United Nations. In that regard,
and pursuant to resolution 2210 (2015), we support the
recommendations to the effect that UNAMA should
continue its presence in Afghanistan in order to work
in full coordination with the Afghan Government and
its people with a view to bolstering its institutions.

