Mr. Kasanda (Zambia): I would like to join my
colleagues who have spoken before me in congratulating
you, Mr. President, on the magnificent leadership you are
providing the Council for the month of December. Permit
me also to acknowledge the able manner in which your
predecessor, the Ambassador and Permanent
Representative of Indonesia, presided over the work of
the Security Council last month.

My delegation further thanks the Secretary-General,
Mr. Boutros Boutros-Ghali, for his detailed report on the
situation in Angola contained in document S/ 1996/ 1000
of 2 December 1996.

We are pleased to note the positive assessment by
the Secretary-General of the situation in Angola since the
signing of the Lusaka Protocol on 20 November 1994 -
positive, of course, in the sense that relative peace has
since characterized the situation in that country. The
Government of Angola must, in large measure, be
credited for its considerable patience in the face of
intransigence on the part of UNITA in the peace process.
We also recognize and applaud the work of all the men
and women involved in the United Nations Angola
Verification Mission (UNAVEM. III), without whose

 

presence Angola would have sunk deeper and deeper into
its fratricidal conflict.

When the Lusaka Protocol was signed on 20
November 1994, it was the fervent hope of the international
community that a framework for an effective peace process
had been put in place which, through the implementation of
the Protocol's provisions, would at last end the war in
Angola and usher in an era of peaceful reconstruction of
the country, thereby opening the way to the consolidation
of peace and stability.

Regrettably, the obligations contained in the Lusaka
Protocol have not been fulfilled on time and in accordance
with the timetable originally envisioned. A lot of the
remaining business should have been finished by now. In
the meantime, the time for the phasing out of UNAVEM. III
in February 1997 is fast approaching. The international
community cannot continue to breathe life into the peace
process to sustain an unending situation of conflict in
Angola. The people of Angola urgently require a complete
break with the prevailing situation of "no war, no peace".
The people of Angola have suffered enough and they want
an opportunity to rebuild their lives in conditions of peace
and stability. While the onus is on both sides, it must be
pointed out that UNITA and its leader, Mr. Jonas Savimbi,
bear a special responsibility in carrying out their obligations
under the Lusaka Protocol in a timely fashion and without
having to wait for international pressure before fulfilling
these obligations.

There is a lot of unfinished business that has yet to be
addressed. There must be concerted efforts to resolve the
problem of deserters from quartering areas; the tide of
deserting troops must be stemmed immediately. The
incorporation of UNITA forces into the Angolan national
army must be accelerated and other vexing problems
referred to by the Secretary-General in his report also need
urgent attention. These include, of course, the need for
UNITA deputies to return to the National Assembly in
Luanda and the need to resolve the status of the UNITA
leader in the national Government.

However, my delegation is pleased to have learned
this afternoon that UNITA has finally issued the long-
awaited declaration on completion of the quarterng of its
troops and the handing over of their weapons. We are also
pleased to learn of the incorporation of the UNITA generals
into the Angolan national army. What is required now, or
part of what is required now, is for the Government of
Angola and UNITA to seize the opportunity that is
presented to address seriously and resolve their many
political problems in the peace process.

The people of the southern African region put a high
premium on the success of the peace process in Angola,
for we believe that such a peace will bring benefits to the
entire region. Angola will be able to concentrate on
rebuilding its economy so that it can make a better
contribution to the Southern African Development
Community (SADC) as coordinator for the energy sector
in the region. If Angola is to make a meaningful
contribution to the SADC region, it will have to
strengthen its own economy first and foremost. It is in the
light of that that my delegation wishes to applaud the
Government of Angola for initiating last June the "New
Life Programme", aimed at resuscitating the economy.

We are pleased also that the International Monetary
Fund (IMF) is taking a keen interest in assisting Angola
to revive its economy. The visit to Angola this year by
the IMF Managing Director, Mr. Michel Camdessus, is a
concrete expression of that interest. This is a timely
intervention by the IMF, which we believe the rest of the
donor community should support.

Finally, my delegation wishes to appeal to the
international community not to lose patience with the
peace process in Angola. Angola is the only country in
southern Africa which is still grappling with an internal
conflict situation. It should be helped to rejoin the rest of
the countries of the region, which are enjoying peace and
stability through good governance.

