Mr. Oh Joon (Republic of Korea): I shall read out
my statement as fast as I can, as this is Valentine's Day
and I am the last speaker.

First, I would like to welcome you, Mr. President,
to the Security Council and thank you for convening
today's briefing on this important issue. Our deep
appreciation also goes to Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon for his statement earlier. We would also like to
welcome High Representative Catherine Ashton back
to the Council and to thank her for her statement.

The security challenges that confront us today
clearly illustrate that effective cooperation between
the United Nations and regional bodies is of crucial
significance in managing crises around the globe. In that
regard, the Republic of Korea highly appreciates that
the European Union (EU), as a reliable and responsible
partner, is making substantial contributions to the work
of the Security Council. The long experience of the
European Union in the field of mediation and conflict
management enables it to play an essential part in
maintaining international peace and security.

The EU's role in bringing peace and security to
the Balkans is especially noteworthy. The historic
Agreement reached by Belgrade and Pristina in April
2013 was a strong testimony to the EU's contribution to
the peace process in the region. We would like to thank
High Representative Ashton for her tireless efforts in
facilitating that process. Serbia and Kosovo are now at
a critical juncture on their path towards normalizing
relations. We look to both sides to step up their efforts
at consolidating their hard-won progress and we
encourage the EU to continue its active engagement on
that front.

Nuclear negotiations with Iran represent another
area where the European Union has played a pivotal
role. We commend the EU's efforts in reaching and
implementing the interim agreement between the E3+3
Governments and Iran. We look forward to Iran seizing
that momentum and fully undertaking the measures set
out in thejoint plan of action to comply with the relevant
Council resolutions. We also hope that the ongoing
progress will lead to the final resolution of the Iranian
nuclear issue and that it will have a positive influence
on other outstanding non-proliferation issues.

The constructive role of the EU is also notable in that
its contribution reaches beyond regional boundaries. In
the Central African Republic, the EU has once again
demonstrated its partnership with the United Nations
in addressing the serious crisis there. We welcome that
fact that last month the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs and the European Commission
co-organized a conference where donors pledged
nearly $500 million towards humanitarian assistance
in the Central African Republic. We believe that the
deployment of EU troops under resolution 2134 (2014)
will further consolidate the joint efforts towards the
prompt stabilization of the Central African Republic.

We also value the EU's role in the promotion of
peace and economic development in the Sahel region,
including Mali. In order to ensure progress towards
the effective implementation of the United Nations
integrated strategy for the Sahel, close cooperation
between the EU and the United Nations will be
instrumental.

Likewise, with regard to Syria, we appreciate
the EU's continued efforts to provide humanitarian
assistance to the Syrian people and to promote a
political solution to that crisis.

I would like to conclude by expressing Korea's
support for the active role played by the European
Union in maintaining peace and security, and our hope
that the close partnership between the Council and the
European Union will continue.

