Mr. Bermudez Alvarez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I wish to thank the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Afghanistan, Mr. Tadamichi
Yamamoto; the Executive Director of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, Mr. Yury Fedotov;
Ambassador Kairat Umarov; and Ms. Wazhma Frogh
for their briefings. I also thank Ambassador Mahmoud
Saikal for his comprehensive statement.

As stated in the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2017/1056), Afghanistan continues to face multiple
political, electoral, economic and security challenges,
which require a unified vision and greater efforts
to achieve a political solution to the conflict. For
that reason, the support of the United Nations and
the international community to the National Unity
Government of Afghanistan continues to be crucial for
the long-desired consolidation of peace in the country.

Uruguay reaffirms its support for the Government
of Afghanistan, as well as for a peaceful, Afghan-led
resolution to the conflict. In that respect, we continue
to encourage that Government to persist in its efforts
to achieve lasting peace based on the principles of
sovereignty, territorial integrity and national unity.
The lack of dialogue and progress towards a peace
agreement between the Afghan Government and the
Taliban continues to wreak havoc on Afghan society.
The conflict in Afghanistan has no military solution.
The parties should come together to find political
alternatives. It is necessary to continue to make every
effort to put an end to the cycle of violence and to take
the path to establish dialogue between the Government
and the Taliban. Without the firm will of all the parties,
there can be no end to this long and cruel conflict.
The Kabul process, which is intended to bring about
genuine reconciliation among the Afghan people,
requires the support of the international community.
We therefore recognize this process of cooperation for
peace and safety, as well as the interest demonstrated
by Afghanistan's partners in its execution.

We encourage the Afghan Government to continue
with programme of reform, with a focus on ensuring
strong and independent institutions and a solid
democratic process. The consolidation of democratic
institutions with a View to achieving the stability of
the country is fundamental. In that context, we must
highlight the role of Afghan women and their direct
participation in the peace process and security and
development reform efforts. To ensure that discussions
in the realm of decision-making reflect the concerns
and needs of the whole population, the voices of women
should be heard.

It is worrying that the humanitarian and security
situation, as well as the violence, that are affecting
the Afghan civilian population continue to cause
instability and serious consequences. The protection
of civilians, especially of women and children, is a
priority and demands respect for their ability to enjoy
their fundamental rights. All parties to the conflict
should respect humanitarian principles, human rights
and international humanitarian law. In that respect,
Uruguay reaffirms its call for full compliance with the
provisions of resolution 2286 (2016) concerning the
protection of the wounded and the sick, and medical
facilities and personnel. Those responsible for such
crimes should not continue to enjoy impunity. Anyone
who commits such crimes should be held accountable
for their actions.

It is crucial that the Government of Afghanistan
and the international community continue to work
together to counter the challenges facing the country
and to build a peaceful, stable and prosperous future.
Afghanistan needs the ongoing support of the United
Nations, of Member States and of all concerned parties
in the interest of improving the security situation of
the country. It is also crucial that efforts to counter the
threat of the terrorism currently afflicting the country
be stepped up. To promote the stability, security,
development and prosperity of Afghanistan, and the
entire region of Central Asia, greater cooperation and
regional integration are also necessary.

Uruguay wishes to express gratitude for the work
carried out by the United Nations in Afghanistan in
particular. Furthermore, we acknowledge the dedication
and work of the Special Envoy and all UNAMA staff
to promote inclusive peace initiatives and to support
the Afghan people, under very difficult circumstances.
Lastly, Uruguay wishes the upcoming Security
Council mission to Afghanistan, led by Kazakhstan,
every success.

