Mr. Nazarian (Armenia): I thank you,
Mr. President, for organizing this debate. We also
thank the Secretary-General, the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights and the Director for
International Law and Cooperation of the International
Committee of the Red Cross for their active involvement
in addressing this important subject. This open debate
offers an opportunity to reflect on our experience in
dealing with the issue of the protection of civilians and
to highlight priority aspects for united and practical
actions. Armenia strongly condemns deliberate attacks
on and killing of civilians through the disproportionate
use of war, which is a gross violation of international
humanitarian law in any conflict in any part of the
world.

We remain alarmed by the worsening humanitarian
situation in Syria. We condemn all attacks and terrorist
acts that indiscriminately target civilians, including
minority groups and are deeply concerned over the fate
of Armenians living there. Today they are struggling
for their lives, together with many Syrian citizens. We
continue to receive refugees from Syria who are gravely
worried about the escalation of violence in that country.
We are convinced that, in order to address that situation,
we must abandon the selective approach to violations
of international humanitarian law. There must also be
strict adherence to human rights standards.

The peaceful resolution of any conflict is not an
easy enterprise and requires strong political will and
painful compromise on both sides. We believe that the
time has come to replace the unchanged propaganda
rhetoric and hollow allegations with constructive steps
aimed at an environment more conducive to peaceful
settlement.

The statement made by the Azerbaijani Foreign
Minister this morning, replete with a long-established
distortion of facts, came as no surprise to us. References
were made to a 1992 military event where, according to
the then-Azerbaijani President Mutalibov, responsibility
for the slaughter of the civilians of the city of Khojalu,
near Stepanakert, the capital of Nagorno Karabakh, falls
fully on the Azeri opposition group. It is completely the
responsibility of Azerbaijan to thoroughly prosecute
the persons responsible for the killings of Azerbaijanis
in Khojalu, as well as for the atrocities and violence
against Armenians in Azerbaijani cities and towns.

Exactly 25 years ago, in response to the peaceful
and constitutional demand of the people of Nagorno
Karabakh to exercise their right to self-determination,
the Azerbaijani authorities organized an armed mob
that launched pogroms against defenseless Armenians
living in the city of Sumgait. A savage attack was
launched upon the minority Armenian community
living quietly at home, attacked for no reason other
than their ethnic origin. Massacres in Gianja, Baku,
Kirovabad and other cities between 1988 and 1991 were
far more barbaric and massive and led to the deportation
and ethnic cleansing of over half a million Armenians.

Those atrocities were followed by an unprecedented
Azerbaijani military offensive and operations against
the civilian population, which were designed to
implement a military solution to the question of Nagorno
Karabakh. Once again, it was Azerbaijan that started
an armed aggression against Nagorno Karabakh. As a
result of that aggression, in the early 1990s Armenia's
entire border was transformed into a battlefield.
Innocent civilians were subject to barrages of heavy
artillery, missile shelling and bombing. Today, 20 years
later, Azerbaijani snipers continue indiscriminate
attacks and weapons-fire against homes, schools,
kindergartens, hospitals and even ambulances in the
inhabited areas of Armenia and Nagorno Karabakh.

In his recent report (S/2012/376), the Secretary-
General refers to attacks against civilian objects and
facilities, which, according to a study ofthe International
Committee ofthe Red Cross, is one ofthe most complex
and least recognized humanitarian issues. We join the
Secretary-General in calling on the Council to assume a
more proactive approach in preventing and responding
to such incidents. We also call upon Azerbaijan to
immediately cease its subversive activities and attacks
against civilians, health-care facilities, vehicles and
other types of providers, as well as threats against
civilian aircraft.

In that context, let me remind the Council that on
various occasions, the co-chairs of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe's Minsk
Group called for the parties to the Nagorno Karabakh
conflict to undertake confidence-building measures,
particularly those that would remove threats to the
civilian population. To that end, the co-chairs' proposal
to refrain from provocative actions, remove snipers
from the line of contact and establish a mechanism for
investigating ceasefire violations could save the lives
of many civilians and military personnel on both sides.

In concluding, let me mention that Armenia
remains committed to the peaceful resolution process
and strongly believes that the fundamental solution of
the problem will be achieved only by peaceful means
based on the principles of international law.

