Mr. Pamir (Turkey): It is with a profound sense
of sadness that the Turkish people receive the news of
the ongoing war in Iraq. We pray for an early end and
we continue to hope that the loss of life will be
minimal. Now, on the carcass of aborted diplomacy,
every passing hour describes one truth: that the
international community has reason to deeply regret the
division which reigned over this Council at that critical
moment in history. We are left with a call to parties to
uphold the principles of international humanitarian law.
We appeal to them to act in accordance with the
established practices thereof.

The European Union statement delivered by the
distinguished representative of Greece embodies the
principles and outlook that would serve us well at this
time of profound change and uncertainty. It is with this
understanding that Turkey has aligned itself with the
position of the European Union.

Turkey sincerely values its intense and
multifaceted historical and cultural ties with Iraq and
its people. At times like these, time-honoured friends
are called upon, first and foremost, to be candid,
straightforward and truthful. It is with such feelings
that Turkey addresses the Council. Had Iraq cooperated
in 1991, this vicious downward spiral would have been
avoided and none of its abysmal results would have
been set in motion.

Today, the true friends of the Iraqi people say that
there is much to regret and much to ponder upon while
feeling a sense of loss and dismay.

While this outright conflict is under way, the
delivery of humanitarian assistance to the Iraqi people
is of paramount importance. The oil for food
programme, the backbone of United Nations
humanitarian assistance to Iraq, should continue
uninterrupted. The United Nations and its specialized
agencies should be able to fulfil their responsibilities in
this regard. Turkey supports the suggestions of the
Secretariat for ensuring the smooth functioning of the
said programme during and in the aftermath of the
present conflict. We think there is every reason, at this
time, to follow a pragmatic and flexible approach.

In view of the vast amount of sheer
disinformation with regard to Turkey in the context of
northern Iraq, I take this opportunity to clarify once
more Turkey's concerns and priorities in this matter.

Turkey upholds the territorial integrity, political
sovereignty and national unity of Iraq. We will support
the decisions reached by the Iraqi people through
democratic processes. We wish to see a fully
representative system in place in Iraq. Turkey actively
supports efforts towards that end, as attested by the
recent agreements reached in Ankara.

We believe that the natural resources of Iraq
belong to all Iraqis. No desire, not even a sliver of
scheming outside these basic parameters, can be
ascribed to Turkey. Amateur strategists are having a
field day and many do not always speak with good
sense and objectivity. Nowhere are they more
irresponsible than when they describe the relationship
between Turks and Kurds.

Notwithstanding the transparency of our policies
and our many declarations on the subject, the people of
Turkey are profoundly hurt by the cynical, self-
righteous, and at times insulting rhetoric emanating
from certain quarters. We are at a loss to understand
why such attitudes persist in spite of our repeated
attempts at clarification.

We cannot allow another influx of refugees into
Turkey to take place, as it did in 1991. We are not
convinced by the reasoning offered to explain why
such an influx would not happen this time. If it comes
to that, any refugee movement should be contained
inside Iraq and the people in distress provided with
shelter, food and security.

We cannot allow the Kurdish armed terrorists
marauding in parts of northern Iraq to abuse conditions
of stability and to instigate terrorism and provocation
that would set in motion a vicious circle hampering our
efforts.

Briefly, we wish to see lasting conditions of
stability conducive to widespread and general human
and economic development established in Iraq. We do
not wish to see instability emerge, sabotaging the
efforts to ensure an enlightened way of life, as we and
our allies have been working so hard to bring about.

It is common knowledge that elements of the
Turkish armed forces are stationed in northern Iraq.
They were not sent there yesterday but years before in
the context of "Operation Northern Watch", which
Turkey allowed to be conducted from its territory in the
aftermath of the Gulf war in 1991, and, thanks to
which, the Kurds living in northern Iraq received
protection and humanitarian relief. We will continue to
handle such delicate issues in a manner aimed at
dispelling any misunderstandings that might arise
under the prevailing conditions in the region.

We have no intention of entering into Iraq.
Should that need occur, we will not enter Iraq to fight
but to monitor a refugee crisis that might unfold, and to
respond to our immediate concerns of security in the
vicinity of our borders.

We do not have a concealed agenda. We are
enemies of no one and we will not be an enemy for
anyone. Turkey is a bastion of stability for those who
seek enlightened ends. Those who can resist the
detractors of Turkey and can be guided by wisdom will
see that they can always find in Turkey a true friend.

