Ms. Ioannou (Cyprus): While peace agreements
may treat the symptoms of conflicts, their causes
cannot be fully addressed without the restoration, at
the grass-roots level, of the fractured relationship that
starts or fuels the conflict cycle. As the human pillar
of conflict resolution, complementing its political
and justice pillars, reconciliation is perhaps the only
process that can help a post-conflict society come to
terms with brutal and irreversible historical facts. We
would propose the following three elements as key for
reconciliation to be credible as a project in the service
of a peaceful future, through an organic process of
overcoming a violent past.
First, reconciliation cannot be a substitute for
justice or a disguise for impunity, both as a matter of
principle and because the resentment created by the
lack of accountability defeats the objective of achieving
viable peace. Rather, reconciliation should act as a
complementary accountability mechanism that compels
perpetrators to take responsibility for their actions.
Historically, individual and collective amnesties have
been included in political agreements in order to end
the conflict. However, no amnesties granted by peace
agreements or as part of reconciliation processes can
extend to the commission of supreme international
crimes, such as war crimes and crimes against
humanity. In that regard, the United Nations has both
a moral and material responsibility, in particular with
respect to peace agreements concluded under its watch.

Secondly, however difficult it is for a society
to tackle uncomfortable historical truths, identity
questions, prejudices and inequalities, a reconciliation
process, if it is to be credible, must never be a vehicle
for sanitizing or revising history.

Thirdly, with regard to timing, it is hard to envisage
a reconciliation process before reaching a political
settlement, given the difficulty of the desired outcome,
which is nothing less than social transformation by
enabling the peaceful coexistence of rivals, leaving
no room for different historical narratives or for
questioning the truth and creating unified social and
political structures.

Lastly, our biggest challenge when it comes to
reconciliation is broadening its scope, from a national
process to one that can address grievances resulting
from inter-State conflict, without prejudice, of course,
to the administration of international criminal justice.

