Mr. Kuzmin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): Russia supported today's resolution 2475
(2019), as we share the document's humanitarian
principles and its aims to improve support and protection
for persons with disabilities in areas of conflict.
However, we feel compelled to point out that a number
of its provisions nonetheless go beyond the mandate of
the Security Council. In our view, the call in operative
paragraph ll to comply with the provisions of the
Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities
pertains only to article ll of the Convention, which
relates to situations within the Council's purview.

We believe that activities for the protection of
vulnerable groups, including persons with disabilities,
must be carried out strictly in line with the tried-and-
tested principle ofthe so-called division of labour in the
United Nations system, and that genuinely constructive
efforts to protect persons with disabilities are possible
only when each body deals with the issue in a way that
is fully consistent with the mandate entrusted to it.

The Russian Federation assumes that operative
paragraph 10 will be applied without detriment to the
Security Council's working methods and in accordance
with its provisional rules of procedure. We strongly
support the position that all groups in society should
receive equal protection during armed conflicts, as laid
down in international law, and that the consideration of
one category of people should not be at the expense of
any other group.

There is no point in inventing new international
legal concepts that supposedly plug so-called gaps in
the protection regime under the Geneva Conventions.
We do not need to be distracted by endlessly creating
new categories of persons who need special protection
under international humanitarian law. In practice,
such ideas can only weaken the protection provided
to civilians. The Council's job is concentrating on
practical work to ensure the protection of civilians
within the framework of existing international legal
norms and its existing mandate.

