Mr. Manzi (Rwanda): I thank you for organizing
this important debate on the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), Mr. President. I
would also like to thank the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Jan Kubis, for his in-depth
briefing on the Secretary- General's report (S/2013/350),
and the Permanent Representative of Afghanistan for
his statement.

Despite a number of changes that have occurred
in the transitional process in Afghanistan, Rwanda
recognizes the tremendous progress achieved so
far. While the transition there is beset by multiple
challenges, including insecurity, economic hurdles,
illicit drug cultivation and a difficult humanitarian
situation, it is important to reflect on the progress that
has been made towards a stable political and economic
transition. Rwanda welcomes the formal transfer of
responsibility from the United States-led NATO troops
to the Afghan authorities. The official launch of the
fifth and final stage of the security transition is a
demonstration of faith in the Afghan security forces.
That is indeed a milestone in the process of withdrawal
from the country; however, we urge NATO and other
partners in peace to continue to support the Afghan
forces through enhancing their capacity in terms of
training and equipment, in order to safeguard the gains
made in the past 12 years.

The upcoming presidential and provincial council
elections in 2014 will be a major opportunity for the
Afghan authorities to translate their commitments into
concrete achievements. If Afghanistan is to pursue
stability and infuse the prospects of the post-2014
scenario with new optimism, there must be a credible,
transparent and inclusive electoral process. We
encourage the Afghan Government, with the support
of its partners, including UNAMA, to lay a solid
foundation for free and fair elections, and to spare no
effort to achieve the broadest possible consensus on the
rules of the game. We believe that engaging opposition
groups, civil society and all relevant stakeholders in
general will prove fruitful. The only way to foster
participation is to make the process more inclusive
and ensure that its outcome is legitimate. Successful
and credible elections in Afghanistan are essential to
stability and lasting peace.

My delegation is deeply concerned about the rate at
which civilian deaths have been increasing, by 25 per
cent compared to the same period last year. We strongly
condemn all acts of terror and those that target innocent
civilians. We therefore urge the Afghan Government to
put in place both political and military measures aimed
at protecting civilians.

Combating the narcotics trade is a cross-cutting
issue that should be tackled in a holistic way. Opium
production in Afghanistan has posed a threat to the
stability of the region and the overall security situation.
We welcome the Afghan Government's commitment
to combating this scourge; but while it cannot succeed
alone, it is possible with regional cooperation and
international engagement. We therefore support the
comprehensive approach led by the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime aimed not only at eradicating
poppy production but also at dealing with related areas,
such as development and law enforcement.

The international community has given its
assurance that it will stand by Afghanistan through the
transition process and beyond in the transition decade.
The 2012 Tokyo Conference donors made pledges
of around $16 billion, and we call on them to raise
their commitments. We urge the Afghan Government
to ensure good governance and to strengthen its
anti-corruption measures, as indicated in the Tokyo
Mutual Accountability Framework. We would like
to express our ongoing support for UNAMA in the
expectation that it will continue to play an essential role
in supporting the stabilization of Afghanistan, and to
that end, the Security Council should ensure that the
Mission's mandate remains up to the tasks ahead.

I would like to conclude by voicing our strong
belief that the United Nations will continue to play
a crucial role in the transition process. The gradual
downsizing of the international military coalition
will test the Afghanistan's governing capacity at the
national and subregional levels. At this critical time, we
believe strongly that UNAMA has a vital role to play in
leading and coordinating the efforts of the international
community.

