Ms. DiCarlo (United States of America): I would
like to join others in welcoming Special Representative
Eide to the Council today and to thank him for his
briefing. My Government would like to express its
deep gratitude to him for his efforts to help stabilize
Afghanistan. His leadership and commitment remain
critical to the implementation of the expanded mandate
of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA). We congratulate him and the
staff of UNAMA and offer them our full support.

I would also like to welcome Ambassador Tanin
today. I would like to assure him of the commitment of
the United States to a stable and secure Afghanistan
and of our continued cooperation.
The United Nations, NATO and other
contributors all have important roles to play in making
Afghanistan more secure, helping to build the
capacities of its Government, strengthening its justice
system and expanding the reach of economic
opportunity. My Government strongly supports
UNAMA's leadership in coordinating international aid
efforts and improving cooperation between civilian and
military operations.

We also welcome the decision of the General
Assembly to provide the crucial resources UNAMA
needs to fulfil its mandate. Approving UNAMA's 2009
budget of $168 million and giving it the authority to
hire 437 new staff members and expand to four new
offices this year were important steps. But we have to
do more together.

My Government urges the United Nations to
speed up the process of funding to UNAMA and we
encourage Member States to provide highly qualified
staff to help fill these new staff positions. UNAMA's
role is critical, and, of course, we strongly support the
renewal of its mandate.

I would like to touch on several of the issues
raised in the Secretary-General's report (S/2009/l35).
The United States agrees with the conclusion that the
problem of the Taliban's resurgence and the spread of
extremism in the region cannot be solved by military
means alone. Civilian assistance is critical to success in
Afghanistan. We are therefore encouraged by the
formation of the integrated approach working group,
and we look forward to hearing about its progress in
delivering aid and completing needs assessments.

The United States sees the upcoming elections as
the key strategic event in Afghanistan this year. We
support an open, fair election in which the Afghan
people can choose their own leaders, free from
intimidation. We appreciate the efforts made by the
Independent Election Commission of Afghanistan, the
United Nations, international donors and security
forces and Afghan security services to confront the
difficult challenges in preparing for the upcoming
voting. The United States supports the Commission's
decision to hold the elections on 20 August in order to
maximize the fairness, transparency and universality of
the voting. We call upon Afghanistan's leaders to find a
solution within their constitutional framework that will
ensure the continuity, legitimacy and stability of their
Government throughout the election process.
We must also move urgently to ensure that the
elections are properly funded. The Commission has
presented a budget of $224 million to give the voting
process the resources it will require. We urge donors to
follow through on their pledges as soon as possible.

There will be no sustained progress in
Afghanistan no matter how many troops are deployed
or how much money is spent if we do not make
substantial progress on increasing the country's
capacity for good governance. First and foremost, such
actions must come from the Government and the
people of Afghanistan. But we will continue to work
together with them to provide ongoing support here.

Corruption remains one of the primary concerns
of the Afghan people. It undermines efforts to help
build an impartial, fair Government that delivers
services to all citizens equally, without regard for their
wealth or connections. We need to see progress from
the Afghan Government in fighting corruption,
expanding the reach of the central Government,
strengthening local governments and creating
economic opportunity.

We also share the concerns raised in the report
about the deteriorating human rights situation in
Afghanistan. We are particularly concerned by the harm
that discriminatory laws and practices are causing to
women and children. While we are encouraged by the
steps that the Afghan Government has taken to
implement the National Action Plan for the Women of
Afghanistan, we are in full agreement that much more
needs to be done. The United States has trained more
than 3,000 Afghan women as teachers over the past
year, and we continue to support higher education for
women through our programmes at the University of
Kabul. We are also helping to train more than 22,000
women to help carry out the upcoming elections. We
welcome the views of the Special Representative about
how UNAMA and the international community might
cooperate better with the Afghan Government to meet
the needs of women and girls for education, health care,
economic opportunity, justice and a chance to lead.

We are encouraged by the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime forecast of a possible further
decrease in opium cultivation in 2009, as steep a drop
as 30 per cent, according to these United Nations
estimates. But the drug threat in Afghanistan remains
unacceptably high. It will require a long-term
commitment by both the Government of Afghanistan
and the international community for us to meet this
challenge. We are particularly concerned by the
deteriorating security conditions in the south, where
the insurgency now dominates and where 98 per cent
of Afghanistan's poppies are now grown.

I must address the issue of civilian casualties.
The United States, our NATO allies and our coalition
partners deeply regret any loss of civilian life.
International forces in Afghanistan take extraordinary
measures to avoid civilian casualties, in sharp contrast
to the Taliban, who deliberately attack and endanger
civilians. The International Security Assistance Force
issued a directive last December specifically aimed at
reducing the number of civilian casualties resulting
from its operations. I want to stress that our goal is to
avoid casualties. When events that may involve
civilians occur, joint Afghan and international teams
move quickly to investigate and, where appropriate,
compensate victims.

Finally, we appreciate the role of the United
Nations in co-chairing the forthcoming 31 March
International Conference on Afghanistan, along with
the Governments of Afghanistan and the Netherlands.
We look forward to reaffirming the broad international
consensus on supporting Afghanistan, as embodied in
the Afghanistan Compact of 2006, and we particularly
look forward to a productive dialogue on ways to
provide aid more effectively, to help meet the Afghan
Government's priorities. These are improved security,
better governance and more robust economic growth.

