The President: Members will recall that in the third
ballot, more than five candidates obtained the absolute
majority. The Council will therefore now proceed to a
new vote on all the candidates, as noted in paragraph
13 of the Secretary-General's memorandum contained
in document S/2017/6l9.

I should like to remind members of the Council that
each elector may vote for not more than five candidates
and that only the candidates whose names appear on the
ballot papers are eligible. Any ballot paper containing
votes for more than five candidates will be invalid.

May I take it that the Council is now ready to
proceed with the election of five members of the
International Court of Justice?

It is so decided.

I request the Conference Officer to distribute the
ballot papers.

Members of the Council should place an "X" in the
boxes next to the names of the five candidates for whom
they wish to vote.

>l<>l<>l<

The President: I take it that all the members of
the Council have now voted and I ask the Conference
Officer to collect the ballot papers.

>l<>l<>l<


The President: All the ballot papers have been
collected. I should like to remind Council members that
in accordance with the established practice, the ballots
will not be counted until it has been verified that the
ballot papers in the General Assembly have also been
collected. The Council will remain in session pending
the receipt of that information.

***


The President: I wish to inform members that
the voting in the Security Council was conclusive, but
that the voting in the General Assembly was not. The
Council will therefore wait for the balloting process in
the General Assembly to be completed. As soon as I
receive from the President of the General Assembly the
names of the five candidates who received the required
majority, I shall announce the full results of the voting in
the Council and the Assembly. The Council will remain
in session pending the receipt of that information.
***


The President: The result ofthe voting is as follows:

Number of ballot papers: 15
Number of invalid ballots: 0
Number of valid ballots: 15
Number of abstentions: 0
Required majority: 8
Number of votes obtained:
Mr. Ronny Abraham 15
Mr. Dalveer Bhandari 7
Mr. Antonio Augusto Cancado Trindade 10
Mr. Christopher Greenwood 12
Mr. Nawaf Salam 12
Mr. Abdulqawi Ahmed Yusuf 10

Five candidates obtained the required majority in the
Security Council. Accordingly, the following candidates
received the required majority of votes in the Security
Council: Mr. Ronny Abraham, Mr. Antonio Augusto
Cancado Trindade, Mr. Christopher Greenwood,
Mr. Nawaf Salam and Mr. Abdulqawi Ahmed Yusuf.
I have communicated the result of the voting to the
President of the General Assembly in writing.

I should like to inform the members of the Council
that I have just received from the President of the
General Assembly the following letter:

"I have the honour to inform you that, at the
44th plenary meeting of the General Assembly,
held today for the purpose of electing five
members of the International Court of Justice, the
following candidates obtained an absolute majority
of votes in the General Assembly: Mr. Ronny
Abraham, Mr. Dalveer Bhandari, Mr. Antonio
Augusto Cancado Trindade, Mr. Nawaf Salam and
Mr. Abdulqawi Ahmed Yusuf."

As both the Security Council and the General
Assembly have agreed on the following candidates,
Mr. Ronny Abraham, Mr. Antonio Augusto Cancado
Trindade, Mr. Nawaf Salam and Mr. Abdulqawi Ahmed
Yusuf, they have been elected as members of the
International Court of Justice for a term of office of
nine years, beginning on 6 February 2018. I should like
to congratulate them and wish them every success in
the high office to which they have been elected.

As a result of the voting that has taken place in
the Security Council and the General Assembly, four
members of the Court have been duly elected. In
accordance with Article 11 of the Statute of the Court,
the Council will proceed to hold a second meeting to Accordingly, I shall adjourn the current meeting

of the Security Council and I shall immediately call to
elect one candidate by further ballots for the one seat order the second meeting.

remaining to be filled. The meeting ruse at 6,05p,m.

