Mr. Matulay (Slovakia): I, too, would like to
thank Mr. Koenigs and Mr. Costa for their briefings
today and for having painted a fresh and updated
picture of the current situation in Afghanistan. Allow
me also to join previous speakers in welcoming the
Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Italy, Mr. D'Alema.

Slovakia fully associates itself with the statement
to be delivered later by the Permanent Representative
of Germany on behalf of the European Union. I will
therefore limit my statement to some specific
comments.
The implementation of the Afghanistan Compact,
as a result of the London Conference, is firmly under
way, despite very difficult circumstances and insurgent
activities, mainly in the southern provinces. There are
many positive signs of social renewal such as the
ongoing reconstruction and the building of
infrastructure. New projects are under way involving
small businesses for women; electric plants; health-
care services; and programmes to combat illiteracy.

There is also abundant evidence that Afghans are
living in conditions of greater insecurity than they were
two years ago and that the insurgency and counter-
insurgency campaigns are spawning ever-greater
Violence.

Security sector reform, justice reform and efforts
in the areas of counter-narcotics, impunity and gender
rights are significantly lagging behind the expectations
of the international community, and more has to be
done to improve the overall situation.

Substantial challenges remain to be addressed, in
particular comprehensive security sector reform. The
Afghan National Army operates under very difficult
conditions and is at only half of its planned strength.
The Afghan National Police still lacks qualified and
motivated manpower in its lower ranks. Given the
current levels of internal conflicts, insecurity and
criminality, the Afghan National Police also lacks the
structures necessary to provide basic public security.
The international community, led by Germany, should
intensify its support to make it possible for Afghanistan
to reach the target of a professional, trained police
force by 2010. The question remains whether that will
be enough to respond to the growing Taliban attacks,
fuelled by the drug trade.

Significant problems are being caused by the
widespread corruption, particularly within the police
and the judiciary. That undermines development by
distorting the rule of law and weakening the country's
institutional foundation, and it undermines the trust of
the Afghan people in Government institutions. The
present culture of impunity for certain commanders
and warlords is also contributing to instability. The
Afghan Government should make strong efforts in
these fields, as the country's successful transition to
democracy is not guaranteed.

Public expectations are not being met or even
addressed. The Afghan people expect effective,
accountable and transparent governance, and they will
not support a Government that does not create the
conditions necessary to establish security, promote the
rule of law, protect human rights and encourage
economic development.

Little progress is being made towards the
realization of gender equality. There is a clear decrease
in the ability of Afghan women and girls fully to enjoy
their rights. Continued attacks against educational
institutions are having a negative impact on the
enrolment of girls, and women's participation in State
institutions remains low. Parliamentary deliberations
on the abolition of several ministries pose a continual
threat to the future existence of the Ministry of
Women's Affairs.

The Afghan Government continues to face
enormous challenges in the delivery of economic and
social services. The picture that has been painted
shows chronic food insecurity, an inability to access
sufficient water and a lack of health-care services,
educational facilities and economic opportunities for
Afghans. In contrast, the flourishing drug industry
accounts for probably one half of the total gross
domestic product.

The overall approach taken by the Afghan
Administration, together with the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) and the
international donor community, should stress the close
interrelationship among security, recovery and local
economic development. Provinces should be made
directly responsible for their progress towards
fulfilling the Afghan National Development Strategy,
and rewards by the Good Performance Fund are steps
in the right direction.

Afghanistan's neighbours have an important role
to play. High-level regional engagement and cooperation
are crucial to addressing terrorism, the narcotics trade
and pressing refugee issues. Afghanistan's regional
partners must step up their up efforts and take
responsibility for the prevention of cross-border
movement on the part of insurgents in order to fight the
flourishing narcotics trade and to find solutions for
Afghan refugees living within their borders.

In that context, I should like to note that new
cooperation initiatives between Afghanistan and
Pakistan have been announced, for which I would like
to express our support, as they are promising steps
towards closer regional partnership and in the combat
against terrorism. The Afghanistan-Pakistan Tripartite
Commission is a welcome example of regional
cooperation.

However, the report underlines the fact that the

Taliban continues to enjoy privileged sanctuary on the

Pakistani side of the frontier, posing an imminent and

ongoing threat to the State-building efforts of the
Afghan administration and its citizens.

Despite the difficult situation in the country,
Slovakia strongly supports Afghanistan's political and
economic transition. We will continue to contribute to the
transformation and stabilization processes by maintaining
our peacekeepers in the country and providing in-kind
assistance to the Afghan police and to its army.

