Mr. Drobnjak (Croatia): At the outset, allow me to
congratulate Uruguay, a new member of the Security
Council, and to wish every success success during its
important mandate.

Croatia aligns itself with the statement delivered by
observer of the European Union. I would like to make
additional remarks in my national capacity.

We thank the Uruguayan presidency for holding this
timely debate on the protection of civilians. This is a
topic that requires our constant and undivided attention,
especially when we are witnessing unprecedented levels
of human suffering throughout the world. I would also
like to thank and commend the Secretary-General for
his report on this topic (S/2015/453).

Day after day we see media reports and images
of civilians in Syria, Yemen, Iraq, South Sudan and
many other conflict areas bearing the brunt of conflict,
fleeing war zones, struggling to survive in unbearable
circumstances. The number of people in need of
humanitarian assistance is staggering. In that context,
we are hopeful that the World Humanitarian Summit
will be a significant step towards finding sustainable
solutions to the global humanitarian crisis.

The conflicts are many and often protracted,
and it may seem that too often we address them with
a business-as-usual approach. But no conflict and
no human suffering should be treated in such a way.
The situation in the Syrian city of Madaya, with the
images of people there starving to death, is just one
among many tragedies about which we cannot stay
silent. Let me therefore add Croatia's strong voice to
the calls of the international community on all Syrian
parties, especially the regime, to end all sieges, allow
immediate and unfettered humanitarian access, and
adhere to international humanitarian law. Protecting
civilians and ending the widespread atrocities and
suffering in Syria must be the focus of the efforts of the
international community all the time.

Unfortunately, the pictures coming out of Madaya
and other Syrian cities remind us of what many people in
our part of the world went through a quarter of a century
ago. February will mark the twentieth anniversary of
the official end of the siege of Sarajevo, in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, which lasted for almost four years - the
longest city siege of the twentieth century. This year,
Croatia will mark the twenty-fifth anniversary of the
siege of Vukovar, a town that was besieged and shelled
constantly for almost three months by Serbian forces.
It is important to underline that at least some of those
responsible for the atrocities committed in Vukovar
and Sarajevo are facing justice before the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia.

Accountability and bringing those responsible to
face justice should be regarded as part of the equation
of protecting civilians. The parties to a conflict have to
ensure full compliance with international humanitarian
law. Clearly, sieges, starvation and the denial of
aid are unlawful; they are crimes punishable under
international law. We therefore reiterate the importance
of the International Criminal Court in the context of
protecting civilians in armed conflicts. Those violating
human rights in armed conflicts should know that they
will face justice for the crimes committed. That is
why Croatia supports the request for the referral of the
situation in Syria to the International Criminal Court.

We acknowledge that the primary responsibility to
protect civilians lies with the State, but the international
community has to assume its share of the responsibility
to protect, and take collective action through the
Security Council if and when national authorities
manifestly fail to protect their populations.

We are also very concerned by reports of the
alleged use of cluster munitions in Yemen, Syria and
other conflict areas. In September last year, Croatia
hosted the first Review Conference of the Convention
on Cluster Munitions. We strongly support the overall
goal of the Convention, which in our view has been
largely successful in stigmatizing cluster munitions,
which should never be used by anyone at any time.
We also welcome the humanitarian aspects of the
Convention, which has established high standards
for assistance to cluster munitions victims, their
socioeconomic reintegration, and the enhancement of
local and regional capacities. Croatia was one of the
sponsors of General Assembly resolution 63/71, the
first-ever on this subject.

Croatia is also deeply concerned about the
implications of armed conflict on women and children,
especially the fact that sexual violence against women
continues to be used as a tactic of conflict. Sexual
violence is not only one of the most heinous crimes
committed against women in conflict, but is also one
that is often the least visible. Therefore, Croatia believes
that we have to continue to raise our voice against sexual
violence and that the international community can and
must do more to prevent and respond to sexual violence
in conflict. For us, it is also of utmost importance that
rape and other forms of sexual violence in conflicts be
recognized as war crimes and crimes against humanity,
for which the International Criminal Court is also
competent.

In conclusion, let me reiterate that the prevention of
conflicts must lie at the core of all our efforts to ensure
the protection of civilians. We therefore welcome the
fact that the peacekeeping and peacebuilding reviews
put prevention at the centre of international peace and
security. We would also like to reiterate our strong
support for the Human Rights Up Front initiative and
the concept of the responsibility to protect.

Sinisa Glavasevie, a radio reporter who perished
with so many of his fellow citizens in Vukovar in
1991, and whose stories and reports from that besieged
Croatian town bear witness to the tragedies of life
under siege, in one of his stories, said that war was
truly the most terrible and destructive thing to happen
to humankind. I believe that that sentence perfectly
summarizes the reasons that we should all strive to
be better at preventing conflicts, and if conflicts do
happen, at protecting civilians because, in the end, it is
they who pay the highest price.

