Ms. Mueller: All Security Council members know
the statistics of this conflict. Members know that more
than half of the Syrian population has either fled the
country or faced repeated internal displacement. They
know that hundreds of thousands of Syrians have been
killed and millions injured. And members know that,
currently, an estimated 3 million people in Idlib are
caught up in the crossfire, with some living under trees
or plastic sheeting on bare patches of land. There are no
safe schools or clinics, no way to earn a living - eight
years of air strikes and shelling, of deadly terrorist
attacks and the constant fear of sending one's child to a
school that may be bombed later that day.

Fighting in Idlib has continued over recent days,
despite the announcement of a temporary ceasefire on
17 May. So far this month, heavy shelling and aerial
bombardment have resulted in the confirmed deaths
of more than 160 civilians and the displacement of
approximately 270,000 people. As recently stated by
the Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights
(OHCHR),

"both pro-Government forces and non-State
armed groups fighting in northern Syria appear
to have failed to respect the principles of
distinction and proportionality under international
humanitarian law".

Since 28 April, in the past four weeks, a total of
25 attacks on health care have been reported by the
World Health Organization, including on 22 health
facilities, with some having been hit more than once. All
of those attacks occurred in north-western Syria. About
25 schools are reported to have also been impacted by
the violence, as have markets and at least three sites for
displaced people.

The humanitarian community is responding in
accordance with its contingency and readiness plans. For
example, so far in May, more than 170,000 ready-to-eat
meals have been handed out to those who fled the latest
round of violence. Shelter support has been provided
to 25,000 newly displaced people, while an additional
60,000 civilians are to be assisted in the coming days
and weeks. That is in addition to the 1.2 million people
whom we already reach on a monthly basis.

However, despite our best efforts, the response is
stretched. Further military operations will overwhelm
all ability to respond. Many of our humanitarian
partners are part of the affected population and have
themselves been displaced. As a result, in many areas
of active hostilities, humanitarian operations have been
suspended. That includes the suspension of health,
nutrition and protection services previously supporting
some 600,000 people, including 21 immunization
centres that have ceased operations, and at least 49
health facilities that have partially or totally suspended
activities, out of fear of being attacked.

As all members know, this year marks the seventieth
anniversary of the Geneva Conventions as well as
the twentieth anniversary of the Security Council's
adoption of the protection of civilians as an item on its
agenda. And yet, as stated by the Secretary-General last
week during the Council's open debate on the protection
of civilians (see S/PV.8534), respect for international
humanitarian law today is, at best, questionable. In
Syria, for example, the World Health Organization
has confirmed 33 attacks on health care since the
beginning of the year, and some health care facilities
have been impacted repeatedly. As Member States, all
Council members are aware that all parties to armed
conflict are legally bound to comply with international
humanitarian law. Sparing hospitals and schools is not
optional; it is a fundamental legal obligation.

While the fighting in Idlib is perhaps the most
distressing front in the conflict at present, it is not
the only place where humanitarian needs continue to
increase. We remain gravely concerned, for example,
about reports of deteriorating conditions inside Rukban.
As members might know, over 13,100 people left Rukban
during the past two months. Typically, those who leave
Rukban spend around 24 hours at five shelters around
Homs city, where children are vaccinated and families
receive humanitarian and medical assistance, before
most of them continue on to their areas of choice. The
United Nations now has access to people who left
Rukban, having visited the shelters on 22 April and
13 May, and humanitarian assistance is being provided
to all of them. That is a welcome development.

Sustained assistance for the 29,000 people who
remain in Rukban, however, is just as necessary. They
are perhaps the most vulnerable of all. The food, basic
medicines and other life-saving supplies delivered in
February have run out inside the camp. Fuel is scarce,
and prices are skyrocketing. People are exhausted. The
deployment of a third humanitarian convoy to Rukban
therefore remains critical in order to avoid further
suffering. We strongly urge the Syrian authorities to
reverse their refusal and facilitate access for a third
humanitarian convoy, as first requested in March, and
again on 9 May. Access at all stages - in the camp,
as they pass through the shelters and in their areas
of origin * is important to provide support to this
vulnerable population.

We have frequently reported to the Council about
the plight of some 74,000 civilians at the Al Hol
camp - 92 per cent of whom are women and children.
Most have been exposed to extreme violence and
trauma under the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant.
They are now living in extremely difficult conditions,
under which they face a range of protection challenges
and an uncertain and disconcerting fate. Many of
them are foreigners, and face the risk of being denied
repatriation, rehabilitation, re-integration, a fair trial,
or even of becoming stateless. They also face the risk
of family separation and not knowing the whereabouts
of family members, given the notable absence of
adult males and adolescent boys over the age of 12 in
the camp.

All children, including those suspected of being
associated with armed groups and/or designated
terrorist organizations, are entitled to special care
and protection under international humanitarian law
and international human rights law, including the
Convention on the Rights of the Child. Those children
must be treated, first and foremost, as victims. The focus
must be on their prompt rehabilitation, reintegration
and repatriation, where applicable, while remaining
with their families, and, in the meantime, ensuring
their access to specialised support, including protection
services, translation where necessary, and mental health
and education services. Solutions for foreign nationals
need to be urgently found to avoid their protracted
encampment. We call, yet again, on all Member States
to take all the measures necessary to ensure that
their nationals are repatriated for rehabilitation and
reintegration, or prosecution, as appropriate, in line
with international law and standards.

We understand that more people may yet arrive to
Al H01 in the coming period. Conditions are already
difficult with the current population. The summer
months and the risk of new arrivals might complicate
the situation even further. Solutions for residents of
the camp, including voluntary returns to their areas of
origin or choice and/or repatriation, as relevant, must
be found urgently.

Our concerns extend to the situation in the south
of the country, which has been under the control of the
Government since the summer of 2018. As described
by the Office of the High Commissioner for Human
Rights, active hostilities have ceased yet the levels of
violence continue to be unacceptably high. Moreover,
OHCHR has received reports of at least 380 people
having been arrested or detained in recent months,
230 of whom have been forcibly disappeared. At least
two have died in detention Many families continue to
have limited or no information about their missing or
detained relatives.

The Council has been briefed in great detail -month
after month - on the scale of the suffering of the
Syrian people. Sixty-one reports have been submitted
by the Secretary-General. Hundreds of Council
meetings have taken place. There is no question today
about whether the members of the Council are aware of
the tragic humanitarian situation in Syria; they clearly
are. The question today is what they will do to protect
civilians in Idlib - the latest example of an entirely
known, predictable and preventable humanitarian
disaster unfolding before our eyes. Can the Council
take no concrete action when attacks on schools and
hospitals have become a war tactic that no longer
sparks outrage? Is there nothing to be said or done when
barrel bombs are dropped indiscriminately in civilian
areas, in clear breach of international humanitarian law
and of resolution 2139 (2014)? Millions of battered and
beleaguered children, women and men cannot wait for
another Geneva round to succeed. They need protection
and Council action now.

