Mr. van Walsum (Netherlands): We thank you, Mr.
President, for calling this open meeting and Mr. Annabi
for his briefing.

Circumstances have changed considerably and very
much for the better since the last time the Council had an
open debate on the subject of East Timor, which was on
11 September 1999. The new situation is also reflected in
the fact that the General Assembly has decided to drop
the item on the question of Timor from its agenda and
include a new item on the agenda of the fifty-fifth
session, entitled "The situation in East Timor during its
transition to independence".

The Netherlands wishes to pay tribute to the
countries participating in the multinational Force - the
International Force, East Timor (INTERFET) - which
has been essential in establishing a safe and secure
environment, without which the current process of
reconstruction could not have begun. I would like to
mention in particular the lead nation, Australia, and the
participation of Association of Southeast Asian Nations
(ASEAN) countries. They have demonstrated their will to
take on responsibilities for security in their region. This,
of course, is the region to which East Timor belongs.

The Netherlands is encouraged by the positive
developments in the relationship between East Timor and
Indonesia. We understand that President Wahid intends to
visit East Timor on 17 January, and we consider this step
of great importance.

Of course, despite the improvements of the past few
months, it should be realized that the people of East
Timor are only at the beginning of a long process of
rehabilitating their economy and society and building the
institutions of a modern democratic State in which the
rule of law prevails. As members of the Security Council
have repeatedly stressed, the international community has
a duty to help the East Timorese on this difficult road.

 
The Netherlands notes with satisfaction that,
through a variety of channels, both multilateral and
bilateral, aid is being offered. Mr. Annabi reminded us that,
at the donor conference in Tokyo last week, $522 million
was pledged. The Government of the Netherlands will
donate approximately $7.3 million to the United Nations
consolidated inter-agency appeal for East Timor. An initial
contribution has already been made to the trust fund for the
United Nations Transitional Administration in East Timor.
During the new fiscal year, a further $2.3 million will be
made available to that fund. Money left over from our
contribution of $220,000 to the United Nations Mission in
East Timor (UNAMET) trust fund can also be used for
similar purposes under the United Nations Transitional
Administration in East Timor (UNTAET). Finally, $1.8
million has been donated to the International Committee of
the Red Cross (ICRC).

The diversity and intensity of international aid is, of
course, very satisfying. However, in a sense, there can also
be too much aid. The local absorption capacity of East
Timor has to be taken into account. We have to make sure
that East Timor does not become permanently dependent on
outside aid instead of independent.

Furthermore, as with every complex operation
involving several aid organizations, there is also the risk of
a lack of synergy of aid efforts. We would be interested in
hearing the views of the Secretariat on these considerations,
including its thoughts concerning division of labour and of
competences among the organizations involved.

We welcome the emphasis in the Secretary-General's
report to the General Assembly on the need for the
international community to work in close consultation and
liaison with the East Timorese themselves. The
Netherlands, as well as other Council members, has made
the same point on previous occasions, and we are therefore
pleased to see that agreement has been reached on the
establishment of a National Consultative Commission. The
Secretary-General states in his report that, through this
consultative mechanism, UNTAET will ensure that the
needs and wishes of the East Timorese people are fully
represented in the implementation of the transitional
administration.

There is another issue to which the Secretary-
General's report rightfully draws our attention: that those
responsible for grave violations of human rights must be
held accountable for their actions. Both international and
Indonesian investigative activities are taking place. We
would like to hear the Secretariat's views on the
interrelationship between these activities. We have
received the report on the joint mission to East Timor
undertaken by the three Special Rapporteurs of the
Commission on Human Rights, and we hope that the
report of the United Nations Commission of Inquiry will
also be presented as soon as possible.

These reports can constitute important steps in the
process of East Timorese reconciliation. From the
perspective of my own country, I must mention one
particular instance of human rights violations, namely the
murder in East Timor in September of the Dutch
journalist Sander Thoenes. We understand that
INTERFET has concluded its investigation into the matter
and now expect its report to be made available to the
Secretary-General without delay.

Finally, while we speak in positive terms about
developments in East Timor, there are still tens of
thousands of refugees stuck in camps in West Timor and
elsewhere in Indonesia. Mr. Annabi mentioned that close
to 120,000 refugees had returned. INTERFET, FRETILIN
and the Indonesian armed forces (TNI) have agreed on
arrangements for the safety of border crossings. Can we
conclude that the message that it is safe to return to East
Timor has come through to the refugees and that the
efforts to intimidate them into staying are now subsiding?

Mr. Annabi mentioned the following reasons why
refugees might not return: misinformation, a lack of
infrastructure in areas to which refugees wish to return,
and the absence of a wish to return in the immediate
future for a variety of reasons. My delegation would
appreciate receiving more detailed information on this
matter. We cannot simply conclude that the matter is
complex because we are dealing with such a mixed bag
of motives. Some of these reasons fall under the heading
of logistics, but intentional disinformation comes close to
intimidation, and intimidation comes close to force. To
that extent, we are dealing with an unresolved political
problem.

Precisely because the Indonesian Government has
adopted such a positive attitude in so many respects, we
feel the Council should remind it today that under
resolution 1272 (1999) it continues to be responsible for
the safe return of refugees.

