The President (spoke in Chinese): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as representative of
China.
The Chinese delegation wishes to thank
Ambassadors Mayoral, Loj and Motoc for their
briefings on the work of the three Committees. We
appreciate their efforts to advance the work of their
Committees. On this occasion, I wish to make the
following comments.

First, over the past few months, the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1267 (1999) concerning Al-Qaida and the Taliban and
associated individuals and entities, the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1373 (2001) concerning counter-terrorism and the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004) have made positive progress in
their respective fields and have played irreplaceable
roles in ensuring the implementation of the relevant
Security Council resolutions. We express to them our
appreciation for that. At present, the international fight
against terrorism still faces an enormous task. As the
Security Council's main mechanisms in the fight
against terrorism, the 1267 Committee and the
Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC) are entrusted
with important mandates. We support the strengthening
of the Security Council as the main forum for
international cooperation against terrorism.

Secondly, with regard to the next phase of our
work, we believe that, since the mandates of the three
Committees, though different, converge in some areas,
they should enhance their coordination and cooperation
in areas such as collecting, exchanging and sharing
information. We encourage the Committees to continue
their dialogue with the relevant international and
regional organizations and to improve their interaction
and communications with the working group
established pursuant to resolution 1566 (2004) in a
joint effort to enhance international counter-terrorism
cooperation.

Here, I wish to thank Ambassador Denisov for
his contributions as CTC Chairman and to congratulate
Ambassador Loj on her assumption of the
chairmanship. I am confident that, under her
leadership, the CTC will achieve even greater
accomplishments.

We welcome the adoption of the CTC's fifteenth
90-day work programme (S/2005/266). We expect the
CTC to finish as soon as possible its consideration of
the reports submitted by Member States, to assist
Member States - particularly developing countries -
in carrying out capacity-building measures, to
formulate specific practical measures and to undertake
targeted actions to meet the needs of Member States.

It must be pointed out that, although more than a
year has passed since the adoption of resolution 1535
(2004), the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate (CTED) has yet to complete all its
preparations and to become fully operational. That
situation should change as soon as possible. We urge
the Secretariat to accelerate the relevant processes.

Thirdly, resolution 1540 (2004) is of great
significance in the promotion of international non-
proliferation efforts. To date, more than 110 countries
have submitted their initial reports. That fully reflects
the importance that countries attach to the resolution as
well as their resolve to implement it. We expect the
1540 Committee to step up its consideration of the
reports submitted by Member States and to study ways
and means to provide assistance to those Member
States that need it to implement the resolution. China
will continue to take an active part in the work of the
three Committees, and we are prepared to join other
members in a constant effort to enhance the
comprehensive and effective implementation of the
relevant Security Council resolutions.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

As a measure to optimize the use of our time, I
will not individually invite speakers to take seats at the
Council table or invite them to resume their seats on
the side of the Chamber. When a speaker is taking the
floor, the Conference Officer will seat the next speaker
on the list at the table. I thank members for their
understanding and cooperation.

The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of Luxembourg, to whom I give the
floor.

