Mr. Llorentty Soliz (Plurinational State ofBolivia) (spoke in Spanish): I would like to join others in
welcoming you and your delegation, Mr. President, and
I thank you for convening this very important debate.
I would also like to thank the Secretary-General,
Mr. Antonio Guterres; the Chairperson of the African
Union Commission, Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat; and
the President of the Commission of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS),
Mr. Jean-Claude Kassi Brou, for their briefings.

Bolivia recognizes the centrality and leadership of
regional and subregional organizations in addressing
the problems and conflicts faced by their respective
regions. We acknowledge the fundamental role they
play to encourage and strengthen political stability,
economic growth and social and cultural development
within the framework of respect for the sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity of all the States
that form their respective regions.

Therefore, the development of synergies between
the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations - as well as the promotion of consultations
for coordination and cooperation, in accordance with
Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations - are
useful and beneficial, as they can make a substantial
contribution to the maintenance of international
peace and security. Similarly, exhaustive analysis
of, and debate on, conflicts and their unique features
are indispensable for the effective implementation of
mediation, prevention and reconciliation efforts for
the peaceful settlement of disputes, in line with the
application of the provisions enshrined in Chapters
VI and VIII of the Charter. The role of regional and
subregional organizations is therefore essential to
bolster those endeavours.
It is also necessary to underscore the responsibility
of the international community in general to ensure
that this relationship is effective. That would facilitate a
common understanding of the root causes of conflicts,
which can be resolved only through multilateralism and
its mechanisms. It is for that reason that we reiterate
the need to deepen the integration of peacebuilding
and peacekeeping activities, as well as strengthen and
improve dialogue and mechanisms for cooperation and
coordination.

With regard to Africa, we believe such objectives
can be achieved within the Joint United Nations-
African Union Framework for an Enhanced Partnership
in Peace and Security, through joint strategies linked to
demobilization, disarmament and reintegration, as well
as by prioritizing the leadership and active participation
of women and youth in order to promote the nexus
between peace, security and development. Furthermore,
we welcome the signing of the African Union-United
Nations joint framework for the implementation of the
African Union's Agenda 2063: The Africa We Want and
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. That
will promote a systematic and predictable strategic
partnership based on the principles of mutual respect
and comparative advantages.

In terms of cooperation and coordination
mechanisms, a notable example is the deployment
of joint operations. Such efforts constitute a key
instrument in the constant search for the consolidation
of peace and security, in addition to being a useful tool
in the face of obstacles and threats such as terrorism and
humanitarian crises. Bolivia supports those initiatives,
including the deployment and full operationalization
of the Group of Five for the Sahel Joint Force, which,
together with the African Union Mission in Somalia and
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur, are the most fruitful examples of the United
Nations and the African Union's commitment to their
partnership.

We also commend the initiatives spearheaded
by subregional organizations, such as the Economic
Community of West African States, which, within the
framework of preventive diplomacy, made it possible to
prevent conflict in the Republic of the Gambia, as well
as the processes under way as part of the Nouakchott
process. Bolivia once again expresses its full support
for the regional and subregional architecture for conflict
resolution in Africa. It is vital that we take on board the
African vision and its recommendations.

We also underscore the growing strategic
partnership between the Security Council and the
Peace and Security Council of the African Union and
their commitment to developing a structured and equal
relationship by strengthening their partnership through
mutual support and ongoing technical support, both in
terms of political issues and peacekeeping operations,
as continues to be demonstrated by thejoint visits. That
is why we must continue to seek various modalities of
assistance and support for African Union peace-support
operations, in accordance with resolution 2320 (2016).
In that regard, Bolivia supports the requests made by the
African Union for a predictable and flexible budget and
economic support for peace and security operations.

To conclude, we underscore the importance for
strategic entities and partners to uphold all their
commitments, with a View to continuing to forge ahead
along the path of stabilization, peace, security and
development, leaving no one behind.

