Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): The Chinese delegation wishes to thank Secretary-General Guterres and Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo for their briefings. China has been following the developments in Idlib very closely. The Idlib problem is rooted in the control of Idlib by terrorist forces. The parties concerned should continue to seek a comprehensive, long-term solution to the Idlib problem through dialogue and negotiations. In that process, Syria's sovereignty, independence, unity and territory integrity must be upheld. We have noted that the leaders of Russia and Turkey maintain close communication. That Syrian issue has its complicated background. The Council must act in an impartial, objective and comprehensive manner to create enabling conditions for a political settlement of the Syrian crisis. Terrorism is the common enemy of the international community. According to the Secretary-General's report, terrorist forces systematically harm civilians, journalists and medical workers in Idlib. Eradicating the forces of terror is a necessary requirement for the restoration of peace and stability in Syria and the region. Listed terrorist groups should be resolutely crushed in accordance with the relevant Council resolutions and international law. The safe haven established by terrorist forces in Syria should be liquidated. At the same time, counter-terrorism operations should be cautious not to harm civilians. The origin of weapons seized in the course of counter-terror operations should be investigated and the channels for supplying weapons to terrorists should be cut off. Measures should be taken to prevent foreign terrorist fighters from fleeing to other countries and regions to continue to wreak havoc. China is deeply concerned about the overall humanitarian situation in Syria. China supports the efforts of the United Nations to assist Syrian refugees and displaced civilians. The living conditions of the Syrian people are very difficult as a result of years of war, dilapidated infrastructure and economic sanctions. The international community should provide the United Nations with adequate funding and resources to ensure the provision of humanitarian supplies to populations in need throughout Syria. We note that the Syrian Government has taken a number of decisions to assist international humanitarian relief operations. The United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs should actively communicate with the Syrian Government and prioritize the channels it has provided to carry out humanitarian relief operations and address the needs for medical supplies in north-eastern Syria. China supports the Syrian Government in its reconstruction efforts in areas where the security situation is relatively stable as well as its work to clear explosive remnants of war, which is conducive to improving the humanitarian situation on the ground. The United Nations should continue to make progress on a Syrian political process that is Syrian-led and Syrian-owned in accordance with resolution 2254 (2015). With regard to the Syrian political process, it should be up to the Syrian people themselves to find a solution, free from external interference. China supports the Secretary-General's Special Envoy for Syria, Mr. Pedersen, strengthening his communication with the Syrian Government and making full use of the platform of the Constitutional Committee in an effort to make new progress.
