Mr. Al-Qahtani (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): Allow
me first to thank Ambassadors Mayoral, Loj and
Burian for their briefings on the work of the Security
Council committees established pursuant to resolutions
1267 (1999), 1373 (2001) and 1540 (2004). We hope
that the Committees' work will be successful, as it is an
important component of our global campaign against
terrorism.
Sanctions remain a major tool of the Security
Council. We fully grasp the importance of moving
from general sanctions to sanctions against individuals.
They must be carefully targeted, however, if they are to
achieve precise, balanced and effective goals.

Some believe that sanctions are a political tool of
the Security Council, but we must make it clear that the
imposition of sanctions is also a legal process in which
the Council must take into account legal procedures
and criteria, human rights and principles that must
never be violated. It should guarantee the legality and
effectiveness of the sanctions.

Many Member States, regional and international
organizations, and non-governmental organizations
have reaffirmed the importance for the Security
Council sanctions Committees, in particular the
Al-Qaida and Taliban Committee, to comply with legal
procedures and to be transparent when listing, or de-
listing individuals. As the Council knows, legal
proceedings have been instituted in many countries by
people on the list and have been taken to regional
courts. Some Member States as well as the Security
Council and the Al-Qaida and Taliban Committee, have
been shown not to respect principles of human rights
and legal principles when certain names have been
placed on the list. When assets were frozen, they said
that the recourse procedures were not effective and
described them as unfair.

Not only does that give rise to certain doubts
about the sanctions regime but it could also lead to its
collapse. Accordingly, my delegation believes that it is
important to establish effective regimes and
periodically to review their effectiveness and monitor
their implementation, and, once their objective has
been achieved, to lift such sanctions.

In addition, clear and objective procedures need
to be established when it comes to listing and de-listing
individuals and entities. Exemptions should be
provided for religious and humanitarian reasons. Also,
mechanisms are needed to guarantee accountability. We
call upon the Monitoring Team to act professionally
and to be transparent, objective and specific when
preparing reports and recommendations for submission
to the Committee.

In the area of counter-terrorism, one of the
cardinal points is the need to respect human rights.
When adopting measures to combat terrorism, States
must comply with their commitments to human rights,
which should not be violated at any time or under any
circumstance. The United Nations must adopt an
overall strategy to guarantee the observance of human
rights in counter-terrorism efforts, and the underlying
reasons for terrorism should be studied, in addition to
the relationship between terrorism and colonialism and
foreign occupation.

We must combat radicalism by respecting a
number of points, in particular the establishment of an
international committee free from hatred and hostility
for religions or their symbols under the pretext of
exercising freedom. Here it should be recalled that
resolution 1624 (2005) stipulates the need to make
international efforts to strengthen dialogue and mutual
understanding among civilizations. In order to prevent
certain religions or cultures from being targeted, the
media have an important role to play in encouraging
tolerance and coexistence and in creating an
environment that does not incite terrorism. We call
upon the CTC to deal with this question in a
determined fashion, to encourage States to criminalize
attacks on religion.

We support the work done by the 1540
Committee. We think that the main function of that
Committee is to consider specifically national reports.
We appreciate the fact that many States have submitted
their national reports and note that since the extension
of the mandate of the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1673 (2006), the number of States that
have not submitted reports has not dropped
significantly.

We call on the Committee to provide technical
assistance to help States to deal with the inherent threat
posed by the possession of weapons of mass
destruction. Whether through States or non-State
actors, measures concerning non-proliferation of such
weapons should not be selective.

Qatar maintains that the quest for security should
not be at the expense of freedoms or human rights.
Human rights are the very basis of the policy of
combating terrorism. Combating terrorism locally,
internationally or through the United Nations and its
institutions should be in keeping with the purposes and
principles of the Charter and with the provisions of
international and humanitarian law. There can be no
double standards here at the political or moral levels.

