Mr. Burleigh (United States of America): Today the
United States will express its commitment to the peace
process in Angola by voting to approve an extension of
the mandate of the United Nations Observer Mission in
Angola (MONUA). The leadership of the Secretary-
General's Special Representative and the commitment of
MONUA personnel and troop-contributing countries have
been essential at each difficult step in the peace process.
As MONUA completes its important tasks, the United
States will support the withdrawal of its formed military
umts.

The United States was deeply disturbed by the
ambush of MONUA personnel and several other people
on 23 October. We express our condolences to the
families of those who lost their lives serving the goal of

 

peace, and demand that those responsible for the attack be
brought to justice. The Angolan parties must ensure that
such incidents do not recur.

A month ago the Council cautiously welcomed signs
that UNITA was fulfilling its obligations in the peace
process. To encourage the apparent momentum, the Council
postponed the imposition of sanctions for 30 days. We all
hoped that UNITA would use the time to take the steps
necessary to complete the peace process.

Throughout October the United States actively pressed
Mr. Savimbi to meet UNITA's obligations under the
Lusaka Protocol. Last Saturday Ambassador Richardson
went to Bailundo to advise Mr. Savimbi that sanctions
would go into effect if UNITA did not comply with
resolution 1127 (1997). But UNITA did not comply.
UNITA has even taken some backward steps, such as
impeding the work of the administrators in areas recently
transferred to Government control.

As Secretary of State Albright said during the
ministerial session of the Security Council on 25
September, the United States believes this Council should
penalize any party that fails to meet its obligations under
the Lusaka Protocol. We therefore support the automatic
entry into force of the sanctions specified in resolution 1127
(1997). We will vigorously enforce these new measures as
well as those measures imposed by resolution 864 (1993).
We call on all Member States to do the same.

We hope that UN ITA will see the imposition of these
measures as a sign of the international community's
determination that UNITA move rapidly to complete the
remaining tasks in the peace process. If it does so, the
United States stands ready to reconsider the need for
sanctions. The burden is on UNITA.

However, there is a message in this draft resolution for
the Government of Angola as well. This draft resolution
calls on the Government to demonstrate restraint as it
implements the final steps in the peace process. We believe
that the peace process could be served by a meeting
between President dos Santos and Mr. Savimbi within the
territory of Angola.

The United States and other members of the Council
are gravely concerned by the Government of Angola's
military intervention in the Republic of the Congo, which
resulted in the overthrow of a democratically-elected
President. This intervention is a violation of the Charters of
the United Nations and the Organization of African Unity.

We understand Angola's legitimate security concerns
in Cabinda and its frustration over assistance provided by
the Republic of the Congo to UNITA in contravention of
existing United Nations sanctions. But military
intervention is not an acceptable response. We condemn
this intervention and demand that the Government of
Angola immediately withdraw its forces. The Foreign
Minister of Angola has made a public commitment to do
so by 15 November. We expect this commitment to be
honoured. We also demand that mercenaries and other
armed groups, including UNITA, also withdraw
immediately.

The United States urges both the Government of
Angola and UNITA to refocus their efforts on peaceful,
rather than military, solutions to internal and regional
problems. The international community has supported the
peace process patiently and generously over the past
several years, but the Government, and especially
UNITA, must now recommit themselves to this effort.

