Mr. Rosa Chupany (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, on behalf of the Government
of the Dominican Republic, I thank the United Nations
for permitting us to take part in this open debate. I
congratulate Lithuania on its outstanding work in
presiding over the Security Council for the month of
May and commend the excellent subject chosen for this
high-level meeting. We would also like to salute the
representatives ofthose countries present for this timely
opportunity to reiterate our full support for the work,
results and actions achieved thanks to this agenda.

In order not to exceed my allotted time, I shall
abridge my statement and focus on a number of aspects
that are important to the Dominican Republic. An
extensive and detailed version of this statement will be
circulated to each Permanent Mission in the course of
the day.

The stockpiling and illicit trade in small arms
and light weapons are a scourge that affects and has
repercussions around the world. It is indisputable that
the excessive, brutal and uncontrolled proliferation of
small arms and light weapons poses a serious threat
to international peace and security, human rights and
the social development of our countries. It affects the
most vulnerable and sensitive groups in our civilian
populations and has a devastating impact on human,
economic and social development. The spread of
these destabilizing weapons endangers the most
highly vulnerable groups in our societies, affecting
tranquillity, harmony, peace and peaceful coexistence.
It also interferes in the initiatives of the Dominican
Government to promote poverty eradication and
sustainable development.

In order to provide a picture of the scale of
the problem of small arms and light weapons in
the Dominican Republic, I should like to offer
the following statistics, whose numbers speak for
themselves. In 2012, our country had a population of
9,680,000 inhabitants and a crime rate of 23.4 per cent
per 100,000 inhabitants. In 2013, with a population
increase of 103,717 inhabitants, the crime rate dropped
to 20.3 per cent, or a decrease of 12 per cent, with
some 1,257 deaths by firearms. However, in 2014, with
a population increase of 98,806 inhabitants the crime
rate dropped to 18.3 per cent, or a decrease of 9 per
cent, with the number of deaths by firearms dropping
to 1,132, which is 125 fewer deaths compared to 2013
for a decrease of 10 per cent. These figures give an idea
of the efforts made by our authorities to fight crime and
control the use of firearms by civilians; these efforts
have paid off.

In the Dominican Republic, we are working
strenuously to control the acquisition ofillegal weapons,
and we are implementing actions to effectively regulate
their trade and combat their illicit trafficking. In the
framework of these efforts, we underscore the most
important aspects. As background, I note that the
Dominican Republic does not manufacture firearms,
components or ammunition, and a ban on their
importation has been in place since 2006. We are
currently modernizing the law on the bearing and
ownership of firearms to meet international standards.
In 2012, at the initiative of our President, we established
a national weapons system, which is an advanced
technological platform that includes a ballistic and
biometrics laboratory. Since it was put it place, we have
captured 77,774 traces of ballistic and biometric data,
and we continue to make progress in that direction.

We have also undertaken the marking of weapons
and ammunition as another effective method of control.
Since the end of 2013, some 9,968 weapons have been
marked within the framework of a programme called
Promoting Firearms Marking in Latin America and the
Caribbean, in cooperation with the secretariat of the
Organization of American States. Joint operations have
been fruitful. In 2013, the authorities confiscated some
5,732 weapons. We are also constantly decommissioning
and destroying weapons. With the support of the United
Nations Regional Centre for Peace, Disarmament and
Development in Latin America and the Caribbean, we
have destroyed some 8,000 firearms since 2012.

My country signed the Arms Trade Treaty on
3 June 2013 and ratified it on 5 June 2014, completing
the process within approximately a year and eight
months, which is proof of our commitment to fulfilling
the goals of the Treaty.

In conclusion, on behalf of the Dominican
Government, I would like to thank the Council for the
opportunity to participate in today's important debate
and, as I said earlier in this statement, I reiterate the
Dominican Republic's commitment to supporting all
initiatives that are launched in this area.

