Mr. Monteiro (Portugal): Portugal deeply regrets
this serious crisis, which was provoked by the Iraqi
challenge to the authority of the Security Council. The
obstacles repeatedly raised by the Iraqi authorities in the

 

last months to the work of the United Nations Special
Commission (UNSCOM) are unacceptable. The Special
Commission is an arm of the Security Council, with the
duty to conduct inspections on its behalf. Challenging
UNSCOM. is challenging the Council is challenging the
United Nations. That is intolerable.

Also intolerable is the decision announced by Iraq on
29 October and the Iraqi behaviour since then: the
conditions Iraq has sought to impose on UNSCOM
operations; its refusal to accept members of the Special
Commission on grounds of their nationality; the removal of
equipment; the threats against aircraft in the service of the
United Nations.

The present draft resolution, which we have joined in
sponsoring, is the logical outcome of previous decisions
taken by the Council since June. Then, the Council sent a
clear message of warning to the Government of Iraq by
adopting unanimously resolution 1115 (1997). By that
resolution the Council called upon Iraq to cooperate fully
with the Special Commission or face additional sanctions.

On 29 October, the Council, once again unanimously,
through the voice of its President, made a strong statement
of condemnation of the decision of the Government of Iraq
in attempting to dictate the terms of its cooperation with the
Special Commission. The Council also warned of the
serious consequences of Iraq's failure to comply
immediately and fully with its obligations.

Portugal has supported all diplomatic efforts developed
to make the Iraqi authorities understand the need to rescind
their unacceptable decision and comply unconditionally
with their obligations. We welcomed in particular the
initiative taken by the Secretary-General in sending personal
representatives all the way to Baghdad to try to convey this
message directly to the Iraqi Government. Unfortunately,
we have not seen any positive results.

This draft resolution is therefore the necessary next
step. The additional sanctions foreseen are sharply targeted
in order not to impose further suffering on the Iraqi
population, which has made many sacrifices, or on
neighbouring countries. They are designed to affect those
Iraqi officials and members of the Iraqi armed forces who
are responsible for Iraq's non-compliance with its
obligations.

Nobody should forget why ultimately we are here,
confronted with another crisis with Iraq - one more such
crisis since 1990. Iraq faces sanctions imposed by the
Security Council because Iraq violated international law
by invading another country. The United Nations has no
quarrel with the Iraqi people. Nor is it the aim of the
United Nations to question Iraq's sovereignty and
territorial integrity.

It is in the hands of the Government of Iraq to bring
an end to these sanctions. The only way they can be lifted
is through Iraq's full compliance with the resolutions of
the Security Council. They can be lifted soon, provided
Iraq cooperates fully, honestly and unconditionally with
UNSCOM.

We hope this clear message from the Council will
finally be understood in Baghdad, so that a new path of
true cooperation with the Security Council will be opened.
We want the Iraqi nation to regain its full role within the
international community and the Iraqi people to see an
end to their suffering.

