Mrs. Hassan (Djibouti) (spoke in French): Allow
me to thank the Swedish Prime Minister, His Excellency
Mr. Stefan Lofven, for having convened this important
debate on the fate of children in armed conflict under
the theme "Protecting children today prevents conflicts
tomorrow". I should also like to thank Ms. Gamba,
Ms. Fore and Ms. Londofio for their contributions to
today's debate. We would also like to thank the Swedish
delegation for its concept note prepared for this meeting
(S/2018/625, annex), which once again reflects Sweden's
commitment to this noble cause.

Djibouti believes that resolution 2427 (2018),
adopted this morning and in which we were involved,
is a concrete response to the call to action launched by
the President.

The changing and complicated nature of conflict
today means that we must constantly review and
adapt the mechanisms and strategies we use to
protect children in areas of conflict. According to the
report of the Secretary-General under consideration
today (S/2018/465), children continue to be
disproportionately affected by armed conflict in many
countries. Unfortunately,

"[i]n 2017, there was a large increase in the number

of violations compared with the number reported
for 2016" (S/2018/465, para. 5).

We View that statement as an urgent call to find
solutions to this issue. Allow me to underscore
Djibouti's commitment to the protection of civilians in
armed conflict, and especially to preotecting children,
who are particularly affected. I should like to undercore
four points relative to protecting children caught up in
armed conflict.

Djibouti has always supported and implemented
international instruments on protecting children. We
are proud to have ratified the Optional Protocol to the
Convention on the Rights of the Child on involvement
of children in armed conflict. In that regard, although
most countries have set 18 as the minimum age for
recruitment into the armed forces, 43 other States
have yet to do so. It is inconceivable that we can today
consider continuing to exploit the vulnerable situation
of children and target them for conscription and
recruitment into armed conflict.

Secondly, Djibouti is proud to have joined and
signed the Safe Schools Declaration and is committed
to taking advantage of the Guidelines for Protecting
Schools and Universities from Military Use during
Armed Conflict. Respecting and protecting the right to
education in times of armed conflict is a crucial factor
in the reconstruction of a post-conflict country.

Thirdly, we must also strengthen our dialogue
with regional and subregional actors, in particular
the African Union. My delegation would also like to
recall Africa's contribution to the fight against this
phenomenon, including the adoption, in 1996, of the
Cape Town Principles on the Prevention of Recruitment
of Children into the Armed Forces and Demobilization
and Social Reintegration of Child Soldiers in Africa.
The Cape Town Principles have been a source of
inspiration for the international community in its action
for the protection of children, in particular through the
adoption of the Paris Principles, which today constitute
a key instrument in the field of protecting children
in conflicts.

Fourthly, my country, a haven of peace that is
enjoying great political stability in a troubled region,
has always sought to provide, despite its meagre
resources and reception capacities, an adequate level of
protection for refugees and migrants, and particularly
for children. The Government of Djibouti has always
taken the necessary steps to ensure that they receive the
assistance and protection required by their situation.
In the field of education, in 2016, we committed to
providing basic education programmes that meet their
needs. In the health field, medical and hospital care
services are provided to everyone in our territory.

We are currently working with UNICEF to open
a logistics platform in Djibouti. With our support,
UNICEF will expand its operations in Djibouti
to support the various humanitarian programmes
implemented by the United Nations in more than 20
countries in Africa and Asia.

We remain concerned about the ongoing
destabilization activities in the Republic of Djibouti,
in particular through the recruitment, training and
provision of arms and equipment to approximately 100
young Djiboutians, some of them minors, in violation
of international humanitarian law. Successive reports
by the Monitoring Group on Somalia and Eritrea have
extensively documented this situation. Eritrea must
definitively cease its destabilization activities and
liberate the territory it has illegally occupied for 10
years now. To demonstrate its desire for a definitive
resolution of the border dispute between Eritrea and
Djibouti, Eritrea must agree to submit to international
arbitration. Djibouti is fully prepared to do so. The
Horn of Africa region needs and deserves peace.

In conclusion, I would like to stress the importance
of a comprehensive approach that takes due account
of the political, economic, social and legal dimensions
of child protection and emphasizes a preventive and
proactive approach.

