Mr. Prosor (Israel): At the outset, I would like to
extend my condolences to the people of Turkey
following yesterday's tragic earthquake.

Let me begin by reminding the Council that the
name of today's debate is the situation in the Middle
East, including the Palestinian question, and not vice
versa. This morning, I would like to take the unusual
step of actually focusing on the situation in the Middle
East. Let me assure the Council that I will give proper
attention to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict later.
However, let us first look at the facts.

The Middle East is in turmoil. Thousands of
innocents have been gunned down in the street. People
are calling for their freedom and demanding their
rights. Yet, month after month, the Council deals
disproportionately with one - and only one - conflict
in the region. I do not claim that the Council is not
dealing with the situation of specific countries in the
Middle East. It does. However, I think that it is time to
start connecting the dots so that we can face the bigger
picture.

For generations, the Arab world has failed
miserably to address the needs of its own people. The
United Nations Development Programme has
sponsored five - five- Arab Human Development
Reports since 2002. Year after year, the Arab
researchers who write the reports often offer a glimpse
into the real world of the Middle East. Young people
struggle without access to jobs and education. Women
are denied basic rights. Free expression is repressed.
Minorities are persecuted. Elections are a sham.

With their world in flames, Arab leaders continue
to blame Israel and the West for all their problems. For
years, it has been the only explanation that they have
been able to offer to their own people. From time to
time, they spice up the story. When a shark attacked a
tourist in the Red Sea resort of Sharm el-Sheikh
recently, the local Egyptian Governor suggested that
Mossad was using sharks to harm Egyptian tourism.
Everything wrong in the Middle East, according to
many Arab leaders, is simply Israel's fault. If it is not
Mossad, it is the Central Intelligence Agency, MI6 or
some other foreign force.

Today, the people of the Middle East demand real
answers for their plight. We have seen their brave
stands in public squares. We have heard their cries. We
have witnessed the deadly response to such calls for
freedom. In Hama, Dara and Latakia, the Syrian regime
slaughters its citizens in a desperate bid to hold onto
power. Some members of the Council remain blind to
Al-Assad's brutality. In Libya, the reign of Muammar
Al-Qadhafi is over after more than 40 years of
repression and many months of bloodshed. The Libyan
despot's violent end illustrated what Churchill once
described as the signal disadvantage of a dictator. What
he does to others may often be done back to him. That
truth haunts the minds of many leaders in our region.
Al-Qadhafi's fate rings an alarm bell for them.

In Iran, an Ayatollah regime represses its own
people, as it helps other tyrants to butcher theirs. Last
week, United Nations Special Rapporteur Shaheed
briefed the General Assembly, offering a chilling
picture of what daily life in Iran looks like. His report
highlighted

"a pattern of systemic violations of ..
fundamental human rights includ[ing]
multifarious deficits in relation to the
administration of justice practices that amount
to torture the imposition of the death penalty
in the absence of proper judicial safeguards
the persecution of religious and ethnic minorities,
and the erosion of civil and political rights". (see A/66/374, para. 18)

Iran remains the world's central banker, chief
trainer and primary sponsor of terror. Recent events
have shown that its State-directed terrorist activities
extend from the Persian Gulf to the Washington
Beltway, with targets that range from innocent
protesters to foreign soldiers to official diplomatic
representatives. That is the way the regime behaves
today. One can only imagine what it would do with
nuclear capabilities - with the dangerous combination
of extremist ideology, advanced missile technology and
nuclear weapons.

The reports of the International Atomic Energy
Agency make clear that Iran continues to march
towards the goal of a nuclear bomb in defiance of the
international community. We all cannot allow it to
place the entire world under the spectre of nuclear
terrorism. The world must stop Iran before it is too
late.

The Middle East is trembling. Its future is
uncertain. Two roads stand before us. There is a future
offered by Iranian and Syrian leaders of more
extremism, greater violence and continued hate. Their
vision will not liberate human beings. It will enslave
them. It does not build. It destroys. There is another
road - a path of progress, reform and moderation.

The choice before us is clear. It has never been
more critical to make the right choice for the future of
the Middle East and all its inhabitants. It is time for the
Council to stop ignoring the destructive forces that
seek to keep the Middle East in the past, so that we can
seize the promise of a brighter future.

Make no mistake. It is important for Israel and
the Palestinians to resolve our long-standing conflict. It
is important on its own merits, so that Israelis and
Palestinians alike can lead peaceful, secure and
prosperous lives. But it will not produce a sudden
outbreak of stability, harmony and democratization
from the Persian Gulf to the Mediterranean Sea.
Seriously addressing the underlying problems of the
Middle East will be essential to advancing Israeli-
Palestinian peace.

The road to peace can only be built on a
foundation of mutual recognition and a dialogue. A
month ago, President Abbas stood in this building and
said,

"I come before the General Assembly today from
the Holy Land, the land of Palestine, the land of
divine messages, ascension of the Prophet
Muhammad and the birthplace of Jesus Christ".
(A/66/PV.]9, p. 29)

He denied 4,000 years of Jewish history. It was
not a small omission. It was not an oversight. The
Palestinian leadership's attempts to erase the
connection between the Jewish people and the land of
Israel is not new. Others in the Arab world have offered
a different message. In 1995, for example, King
Hussein went to the United States and said,

"For our part, we shall continue to work for the
new dawn when all the children of Abraham and
their descendants are living together in the
birthplace of their three great monotheistic
religions".

Let me repeat that King Hussein said three
monotheistic religions, not one or two. Those who seek
peace do not negate the narrative of the other side. On
the contrary, they recognize its existence and choose to
sit down and negotiate peace in good faith. That is
what President Sadat did; it is what King Hussein did.
The ancient Jewish bond with the land of Israel is
unbreakable. This is our homeland. The United Nations
recognized Israel as a Jewish State 64 years ago. It is
time for the Palestinians and more than 20 Muslim
countries around the globe to do the same.

Let there be no doubt, and I repeat, Israel wants
peace with a future Palestinian State. In word and in
deed, my Government has demonstrated time and again

that we seek two States for two peoples living side by
side in peace. I repeat: two States for two peoples. We
do not hear that from the Palestinians or any Arab
leaders. If anyone should hear the phrase "two States
for two peoples", they should call me, on a 911 number
if necessary, day or night.

It is no coincidence that Prime Minister
Netanyahu stood here last month and issued a clear call
to President Abbas (see A/66/PV.19). Today let me
reiterate that call to the Palestinians. Sit down with
Israel. Leave your preconditions behind. Start
negotiations now. The international community has
called on the Palestinians to go back to negotiations.
Israel has accepted the principles outlined by the
Quartet to restart negotiations immediately without
preconditions. We are waiting for the Palestinians to do
the same thing.

The Palestinians suggest that settlements are the
core cause of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. It is an
interesting assertion, considering the fact that the
conflict raged for nearly half a century before a single
settlement sprang up in the West Bank. From 1948
until 1967, the West Bank was part of Jordan. Gaza
was part of Egypt. The Arab world did not lift a finger
to create a Palestinian State, and it sought Israel's
alienation when not a single settlement stood anywhere
in the West Bank or Gaza. The issue of settlements will
be worked out over the course of negotiations. But the
primary obstacle to peace is not settlements. That is
just a pretext for the Palestinians to avoid negotiations.
The primary obstacle to peace is the Arab world's
refusal to acknowledge the Jewish people's ancient
connection to the land of Israel, and the Palestinians'
insistence on the so-called right of return.

Today the Palestinian leadership is calling for an
independent Palestinian State, but insists that its own
people return to the Jewish State. That is a proposition
that no one who believes in the right of Israel to exist
could accept, because the only equation in political
science with mathematical certainty is that the so-
called right of return equals the destruction of the State
of Israel. The idea that Israel will be flooded with
millions of Palestinians is a non-starter. The
international community and the Palestinian leadership
know it, but the Palestinian people do not hear it. This
gap between perception and reality is a major obstacle
to peace. The so-called right of return is the major
hurdle to achieving peace. Since the Palestinian
leadership refuses to tell the Palestinian people the

truth, the international community and the people
around this table have a responsibility to tell the
Palestinian people about the basic compromises that
they will have to make.

The many issues that remain outstanding can and
will be resolved only through direct negotiations
between the parties. Israel's peace with Egypt was
negotiated, not imposed. Peace with Jordan was
negotiated, not imposed. An Israeli-Palestinian peace
must be negotiated; it cannot be imposed. Palestinian
unilateral action at the United Nations is no path to real
statehood; it is a march of folly. Today the Palestinians
are far from meeting the basic criteria for statehood,
including the test of effective control. The President of
the Palestinian Authority has zero authority in the Gaza
Strip. Before flying 9,000 kilometres to New York to
seek United Nations membership, President Abbas
should have driven 50 kilometres to Gaza, which he
has been unable to visit since 2007. In the same breath
that they claim that the State will be peace-loving,
Palestinian leaders speak of unity with Hamas, an
internationally recognized terrorist organization.
Hamas and a love of peace? There is no greater
contradiction in terms.

This month, on a fund-raising excursion of
terrorism with his Iranian patrons, Hamas leader Ismail
Haniyeh stood in front of an audience in Tehran and
said that "the correct strategy to liberate our country
and Jerusalem is violent resistance". Under Hamas
rule, Gaza remains a launching ground for constant
rocket attacks targeting Israeli civilians that are fuelled
by a continuous flow of weapons from Iran and
elsewhere. Israel has a right to defend itself. As the
Palmer report made clear, the naval blockade is a
legitimate security measure for preventing weapons
from entering the Gaza sea.

When it is not attacking Israelis, Hamas is
oppressing its own people. In Gaza, civil society is
non-existent. Political opponents are tortured, women
are subjugated and children are used as suicide
bombers and human shields. Textbooks and television
glorify martyrdom and demonize the Jews. Incitement
against Israelis also continues in the West Bank, among
the official institutions of the Palestinian Authority,
which names its public squares after suicide bombers.

The unresolved questions about the future of a
Palestinian State cannot be simply swept under the
carpet. They go to the core of resolving our conflict.
They have to be addressed. Let me be clear: for Israel,
the question is not whether we can accept a Palestinian
State; we can. The question is what the character of the
Palestinian State that emerges alongside us will be -
whether it will live in peace.

Palestinian unilateral action in the United Nations
breaches the Oslo Accords, the Interim Arrangements,
the Paris Protocol and other bilateral agreements that
form the basis of 40 spheres of Israeli-Palestinian
cooperation, all of which could be jeopardized by
unilateral action at the United Nations. This unilateral
initiative will raise expectations that cannot be met. It
is a recipe for instability and, potentially, violence.
Members of the international community should be
clear about the responsibility: you vote for it, you own
it. All those who vote for unilateral action and
recognition will be responsible for its consequences. At
this critical juncture, the Palestinians' true friends will
encourage them to put aside the false idol of
unilateralism and get back to the hard work of direct
negotiations.

Speaking of friends, the many so-called Arab
champions of the Palestinians' cause have a
responsibility to play a constructive role. Constructive
support from the Arab world is vital for building the
civic and economic structures necessary for real
Palestinian statehood and peace. Instead of simply
adding to the cause of State-bashing, the Palestinians'
true supporters will help advance State-building. Arab
donors provided just 20 per cent of international funds
for the Palestinian Authority's regular budget last year.
Let me put this in perspective: last year Arab donations
to the regular Authority budget accounted for a little
more than half of what Saudi Prince Al-Waleed bin
Talal spent on his newest personal luxury jet. People in
Washington, London and Paris are struggling with an
economic downturn, but still providing the bulk of
support for Palestinian institutions, while Arab States,
saturated in petrodollars, do not even give the
Palestinians crumbs from the table.

In the Jewish tradition we are taught that
whosoever saves a single life saves an entire universe.
This sacred principle forms the backbone of Israel's
democracy. It drives our Government's policy. We
witnessed a clear reflection of those values last week.
All of Israel welcomed home our kidnapped soldier,
Gilad Shalit, after he had spent more than five years in
Hamas captivity. It was a moment of great joy, but it
came with tremendous costs. I would like to take this

opportunity to thank the Secretary-General personally,
and the people around him. Some of the countries
represented here today played an important role in
Gilad Shalit's release. For us, the supreme value of a
single human life justified releasing more than 1,000
terrorists and criminals covered in the blood of
innocents. The values inherent in such an act shine
bright in our region. Many took note. On Twitter, one
Syrian blogger, Soori Madsoos, wrote:

"Their Government is prepared to pay the
ultimate price for one citizen, while our
Government kills us like we were animals, and
our Arab neighbours say that it is an internal
matter".

Time and again, Israel has shown that it is ready and
able to make bold and courageous decisions to preserve
life, to uphold human dignity and to pursue peace.

Sustainable peace must be negotiated, must be
nurtured and must be anchored in security. It must take
root in homes, schools and media in order to teach
tolerance and understanding and thus grow within
hearts and minds. It must be built on the foundation of
a younger generation that understands the compromises
necessary for peace. A brighter future for the Middle
East must be forged from within, when we are open
and honest about the challenges before us, and resolute
in our determination to meet them together.

