Mr. Legwaila (Botswana): On 31 January this year,
the Group of Arab States brought to the attention of the
Council a decision by Israel to pursue its controversial
settlements policy in the occupied territories. In February,
the Council held a formal meeting which deliberated on this
vexing issue. On that occasion, my delegation expressed its
full support for the concerted efforts of the Israeli and
Palestinian people in the search for durable peace. Our
position remains unchanged.

It is a matter of profound regret that the Security
Council should be meeting again on the same subject within
a space of two months. In his statement before the Council
on 28 February, the representative of Israel said, among
other things, that the PLO's decision to initiate a debate on
this matter in the Security Council was "in contradiction of
the agreements it signed with Israel" (S/PV.3505, p.8),
especially article XV of the Declaration of Principles and
article XVII of the Gaza-Jericho Agreement. He further
stated:
"The Government stopped allocating public resources
to support the extension of existing settlements. No
land has been or will be confiscated to establish new
settlements" (ibid., p. 8).

Unfortunately, the truth is now self-evident.

My delegation has, since its adoption by the two
parties to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, considered the
Declaration of Principles as a major breakthrough and an
important milestone on the road to peace. However, the
Declaration of Principles cannot by any stretch of the
imagination render irrelevant Security Council resolutions
concerning the illegality of the settlements and the
applicability of the Fourth Geneva Convention of 1949 to
the territory occupied by Israel.

The decision of the Government of Israel to
expropriate 53 hectares of land in East Jerusalem is
therefore highly regrettable. It gravely undermines the peace
process and significantly weakens the position of its
partner, the Palestinian Authority, in the peace process. The
Israeli settlements policy will only serve to embolden the
enemies of the peace process, the men of violence whose
instruments of negotiation are the gun, the hand-grenade
and worse. In an article entitled "The Privatization of
Peace" published in the Advertising Supplement to The
New York Times of Saturday, 6 May 1995, the Foreign
Minister of Israel, Mr. Shimon Peres, stated that
fundamentalism

"is the greatest danger to world peace and economic
welfare - the greatest menace since the fall of
communism. Were fundamentalism to take control
of the Middle East, it would suffocate it in the name
of God and maintain poverty and stagnation".

My delegation agrees fully with this position and
cannot but reach the same conclusion vis-a-vis the
continuing proliferation of settlements in areas which are
on the agenda of the very difficult and delicate
negotiations between Israel and the Palestinians. It is of
the utmost importance that Israel should do everything
possible to avoid creating conditions that could have a
deleterious effect on the atmosphere of mutual confidence
and trust which has been critical to the peace process and
has proved vital to its sustenance. It would be a tragedy
if Israel and the PLO were to lose the political and
diplomatic peace initiatives to the enemies of the peace
process.

The peace process is at a critical stage. The parties
should rely on each other's fortitude and determination to
remain committed to negotiations in good faith even in
the face of continuous and often murderous sniping by
their detractors and their fellow-travellers. This is not the
time for unilateral decisions. This is not the time to
pollute the peace process with controversy over
settlements. Fortunately, Israel still has an opportunity to
rescind the decision.

My delegation is fully aware of the strong views of
some, including the Government of Israel, who hold that
this issue should not be discussed in the Security Council
since it involves complex and sensitive negotiations. As
argued by Israel, it runs counter to article XV of the
Declaration of Principles and article XVII of the Gaza-
Jericho Agreement. We are acutely sensitive to such
views. Nevertheless, it is unacceptable that one of the
parties to the Israeli-Palestinian negotiations should take
decisions or actions which have the effect of disparaging
the negotiations. In the circumstances, the Security
Council is compelled to pronounce itself one way or the
other, however delicate the question. The Council is duty-
bound to call upon the Government of Israel to rescind its
decision to expropriate the 53 hectares of disputed land in

 

East Jerusalem and to treat the Israeli-Palestinian peace
process with more sensitivity and care. We must act to
preserve the integrity of the agreements signed by the two
parties, Israel and the PLO: no more, no less.

