President Abbas (Palestine) (spoke in Arabic): I
have come bearing a message from a wounded people
who are being subjected to a new tragedy of
destruction, killing, siege, unremitting Violence and
lack of respect for the most basic human rights.

The massacre today in the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East (UNRWA) school at the Jabaliya refugee camp is
new proof of the heinous crimes being committed
against our people. I come to bear witness to the
suffering of the people of Gaza. Children fall before
their mothers. Roofs fall on entire families. The cries
of the innocents, in their agony, rise. Death and
destruction spread throughout every village and every
camp.

Gaza today is witnessing a new Palestinian
catastrophe. It has been over 60 years since our first
catastrophe. The Israeli machine of destruction
continues to kill and to commit the most heinous of
crimes. It continues to do so despite unprecedented
international unanimity in calling for an end to this
massacre of innocent civilians, who do not deserve
such brutality or such blind aggression.

Before laying out the details of possible solutions
to the impasse we face, I call on this Security Council
to take the necessary first step to save our people in
Gaza. This Council must adopt a resolution calling for
an immediate and full cessation of Israeli aggression.
The cannons must fall silent so that the voice of
dialogue can be heard and a political settlement to this
major crisis and this human tragedy can be found. Any
delay in ending the fighting and killing will only
deepen the tragedy that we have all lived in the past
few days. Any delay will make all our people,
particularly the young, feel that placing hope in peace
and relying on international legitimacy and
commitment to international law are all pipe dreams
that will never bear fruit and that the present and future
offer nothing but more extremism, violence and
destructive wars.
The choice before the members of the Security
Council is clear-cut. Any message they choose to send
to the peoples of our region - indeed, to all peoples of
the world - calling for an end to the aggression will
reiterate and underscore the fact that the United
Nations will not ignore the tragedy of our people today
or allow the Middle East to fall victim to a cycle of
bloodshed, extremism, Violence and new hatred.

The widows and mothers of Gaza who walk with
their children in the streets; the thousands of wounded
in hospitals; the corpses under the roofs of mosques,
schools and homes; the mothers and fathers who
cannot bury their children under the hail of bombs and
fire; the Arab and Islamic peoples and, indeed, public
opinion around the world will accept nothing less than
an urgent intervention by the Security Council to halt
the firing and stop the aggressor.

That is my message, which I believe cannot be
subject to any compromise, procrastination or delay.
There is an urgent need to lay a firm foundation upon
which we can build towards a comprehensive political
settlement of this destructive and bloody conflict. Let
me state that a commitment to respect any agreement
we may reach is necessary to avoid the tragedy being
repeated. It means providing effective and sufficient
protection for all our people and establishing an
international force that will help them regain security
and peace, contribute to ending the unjust siege that
has suffocated Gaza for so long, assist us in opening all

border crossings - particularly those between the
Gaza Strip and Israel and at Rafah between the Gaza
Strip and Egypt - in accordance with international

agreements and ensure a comprehensive, reciprocal and
permanent ceasefire.

In that regard, I would like to express my
appreciation and support for the plan set in motion
today by Presidents Mubarak of Egypt and Sarkozy of
France.

Our people in the West Bank, in Al-Quds
Al-Sharif and in the Gaza Strip have suffered enough
under Israeli occupation, the settlements, the separation
wall, the hundreds of checkpoints and the detention of
over 11,000 of our people in Israeli jails. It is enough.
All those present are aware of that and of our belief in
international legitimacy. We seek and defend
international legitimacy to confront the policy of
occupation and its measures, to put an end to Israel's
stranglehold on our future and to ensure our right to
independence and self-determination.

That is why we seek above all the application of
international law and agreements with regard to the
borders and crossing points. We do not want anyone to
feel threatened. No one's security should be threatened
and we want no one to threaten our security. I do not
believe that, in the context of the settlement we seek,
the Council can condone the ongoing unjust siege and
blockade imposed on our people in Gaza, where all
elements of a normal life are negated. How can a
people - any people - remain deprived of food,
medicine, electricity, water and all necessities for
development, construction, movement and travel?

A lasting end to the siege is non-negotiable. It is
essential if peace is to prevail. Let me stress that when
the aggression against our people stops, we shall
relentlessly continue to work to overcome our internal
Palestinian crisis by restoring national unity, based on
the resolutions adopted by the Council of the League of
Arab States, which provide for a national unity
Government that would oversee simultaneous
legislative and presidential elections. The only way to
restore unity is through dialogue.

In that regard, we would like to express our
sincere appreciation for the efforts being made by
President Mohamed Hosni Mubarak of sisterly Egypt
to encourage national reconciliation and unity and for
the unanimous resolutions of the League of Arab States
on the need to pursue efforts in that regard.

I should like to emphasize that we will accept no
formula that would impose the status quo through
separation and allow steadfast Gaza to remain an entity
separate from the body of Palestine. The Gaza Strip has
undergone all the stages of our national struggle and
has fought hard to maintain our Palestinian national
unity. It was the birthplace of our national liberation
movement and has held high the flame of independence
and freedom. How can we accept a fate for Gaza other
than that of being an integral and proud part of a united
Palestinian nation - one independent Palestinian
State, with Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its capital?

I should like, Sir, to thank you, your friendly
country and the entire international community for
their sincere messages of peace, calling for an
immediate end to the aggression. I would like to pay
tribute to the important role played by the agencies of
the United Nations, particularly UNRWA, to save our
people and to ensure that they receive the basic
essentials of life. I appeal to all to provide the
necessary assistance to those agencies, to all civil and
international organizations that are saving the lives of
our wounded people and to those seeking to convey an
accurate picture of the new catastrophe to the world. I
should like to thank all Arab and friendly countries that
were quick to provide humanitarian and medical
assistance. Let me express the hope that such support
will grow to contain the huge consequences of the
tragedy we are facing. I should like to express my
appreciation for the efforts being made by Egypt and
Jordan to ensure that this assistance reaches its targets.

The experiences of the past few decades have
proved that military aggression, however massive,
cannot be a Viable and lasting solution to conflict. The
continued suffering of our people through killing and
destruction will not bring our people to its knees. That
people, like any other, will accept nothing less than
freedom and justice. We shall remain committed to the
path of just peace, committed to continuing the
political process and true to the commitments we have
undertaken, based on the balanced solution set out in
the Arab Peace Initiative and under international law
and resolutions of international legitimacy.

We know that some Powers wish to abort the
two-State solution. They wish to bury the chances for
peace under the rubble of the war against steadfast
Gaza. We put our trust in this Council's role and in its
determination to prevent such nefarious circles from
harming the interests of our peoples.

The resolution to be adopted by the Security
Council on the cessation of aggression and war against
Gaza must reiterate the need for the political process to
continue under genuine and effective international
supervision in order to ensure that an independent
Palestinian State will be created within the 1967
borders and with Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its capital; that
a just and agreed solution will be found to the issue of
Palestinian refugees in accordance with General
Assembly resolution 194 (III) of 1948; and that all
detainees and prisoners will be released.

Like all the rest of the Palestinian people
everywhere, the people of Gaza are a people of peace.
They have fought for peace in the past and will
continue to fight for peace in the future. Let us give
them the peace that they deserve today and put an end
to the genocide and destruction. Let us not allow the
killing of one more Palestinian child. Let us not allow
one more Palestinian mother to cry for her children.
We must not allow it. We must put an end to the
massacre of my people. Let my people live and let my
people be free.

