Mr. Egeland: I thank you, Mr. President, for this
opportunity to brief the Council on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict.

The tenth anniversary of our collective failure to
protect 800,000 defenceless men, women and children
from the brutal deaths they suffered in Rwanda
provides a chilling impetus for us to reflect on ways to
better protect vulnerable civilian populations at the
height of crises and in their immediate aftermath.

In the intervening years since the Rwanda
genocide, civilians have continued to be defenceless
Victims of conflict, more often than not deliberately
targeted by parties to conflicts and subjected to
extreme violence and other grave human rights abuse.
The impact of long-term conflicts has been particularly
devastating. The situation in West Africa has been
described as a crisis of protection, due to the
widespread sexual violence and other human rights
Violations, child soldier recruitment, population
displacement and restrictions on humanitarian access.

In the Middle East, innocent civilians have been
killed and injured by suicide bombings, as well as by
missile and other attacks on civilian neighbourhoods
and camps. The construction of a barrier through the
West Bank is having a profound humanitarian impact
on civilians by separating Palestinian communities
from their land, jobs and social services. In the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, the recent eruption
of fighting in the east has shaken the country's delicate
emergence from a brutal eight-year conflict and has
compounded what was already a serious humanitarian
situation.

These and other protection concerns are outlined
in the fourth report of the Secretary-General to the
Security Council on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict, which I have the honour to present to the
Council this morning. The report that we are presenting
to the Council this morning is the product of extensive
consultations with United Nations departments,
agencies and programmes, chiefly through the
Executive Committee on Humanitarian Affairs
Implementation Group on the Protection of Civilians in
Armed Conflict. It also reflects the outcomes of the
two roundtables that were held earlier this year of
Member States, United Nations departments, agencies
and programmes, the International Committee of the
Red Cross (ICRC) and key non-governmental
organizations on the ten-point platform on the
protection of civilians, which I presented at my last
briefing in December. I wish to thank the Governments
of Canada and Norway for hosting those round tables.

The ten-point platform embodies many of the key
issues set out in the broader protection framework
provided by the aide-memoire on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict. I would like now to
summarize some elements of the report and to update
members on developments in recent weeks.

First, in ensuring sustained humanitarian access
to civilians in need, Governments bear the primary
responsibility to provide humanitarian assistance and to
protect civilians. It is when Governments do not have
the capacity or are unwilling to provide assistance and
protection that the United Nations must execute its
special role and responsibilities. But we cannot do so
when we are denied access to populations in need and
when the safety and the security of our personnel are
threatened.

In 20 conflicts around the world humanitarian
access is either denied or obstructed. I believe that
there are at least 10 million people in the world in need
of food, water, shelter, medical care and the basic
means for survival, to whom we have no access.

In the Darfur region of the Sudan we are
currently in a desperate race against the clock to save
more than a million civilians displaced by
indiscriminate violence, who are now threatened with
starvation and disease. As an international community,
we are late in responding to this crisis. We were largely
prevented from entering Darfur with our relief workers
until the past few weeks. We are making progress in
terms of food and shelter, but we are desperately
behind in other sectors. We may need the Council's
help, especially in getting into Darfur water and
sanitation equipment and other key non-food relief
supplies. We are also deeply concerned that attacks on
civilians in Darfur are continuing, despite the
commitment made by the parties to the N'djamena
humanitarian ceasefire agreement to refrain from any
act of violence or other abuse against civilian
populations, particularly women and children. The
deployment of observers by the African Union and the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
(UNHCHR) will be critical to the monitoring of the
situation.

My second concern, safeguarding the security of
its humanitarian personnel, remains a key challenge to
the United Nations and its humanitarian partners. The
past 18 months have witnessed ongoing threats and
horrific attacks against humanitarian personnel in many
conflict situations, including Afghanistan, Chechnya,
cote d'Ivoire, Iraq, Liberia, the occupied Palestinian
territories and the Sudan. Humanitarian workers have
also been specifically targeted in Somalia, where five
staff members of international non-governmental
organizations have been killed in the past six months.

Religious and cultural leaders may have an
important influential role in protecting humanitarian
work, in taking a strong stand on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict and in condemning the
attacks against humanitarian workers. In the past two
weeks alone, we have seen further examples of the
disturbing trend of blatant disregard for humanitarian
principles and deliberate targeting of humanitarian
workers for political or tactical purposes. In
Afghanistan, on 2 June, five humanitarians from the
Dutch branch of Medecins sans Frontieres were shot
dead in an ambush in north-west Afghanistan. On 3
June, 16 humanitarian workers were detained by the
Sudanese People's Liberation Movement for three
days. In recent days, in the eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo, staff from United Nations
humanitarian agencies and their non-governmental
organization partners were attacked and their offices
and equipment destroyed or damaged.

By further restricting humanitarian access, these
acts ultimately aggravate the suffering of the civilian
population. A sustained humanitarian presence to
provide protection and assistance wherever needs exist
is fundamental to our humanitarian mandate. For
humanitarian agencies to continue to work effectively,
we will need to reinforce collective approaches to
protection and security coordination. The perpetrators
of attacks on humanitarians must be held accountable,
as affirmed in Security Council resolution 1502 of
August 2003.

My third concern is the need to better protect
women and children in armed conflict. In Cote
d'Ivoire, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Haiti,
Liberia, northern Uganda and other conflict situations,
sexual Violence and other particularly abhorrent human
rights abuses against women and children have been
committed on a horrifying scale. Rape continues to be
used as a brutal weapon of war. A particularly
terrifying consequence that many face is the spectre of
HIV/AIDS. According to reports, in numerous villages
and displacement camps in Darfur, women and children
have been systematically raped. In the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, brutal sexual violence has once
again devastated the lives of women and children
during the recent eruption of fighting. Beyond the
devastating physical, psychological, emotional and
social trauma suffered by the women and children who
are brutally attacked, these egregious crimes undermine
cultural values and community relationships and can
destroy the very ties that bind society together.
Extraordinary protection measures are needed.

In such Violent and distressing circumstances,
peacekeepers and United Nations staff must demonstrate
exemplary personal conduct and behaviour. The deeply
disturbing issue of sexual exploitation and abuse of
women and children in armed conflict by United
Nations affiliated personnel demands our urgent
attention. These acts do irreparable damage, both to the
image of the United Nations and - more
importantly - to our ability to serve and protect war-
torn societies. Following the promulgation of the
Secretary-General's bulletin last October, prevention
and protection measures at the field level are beginning
to be implemented. In order to be truly effective, these
efforts need to be reinforced by demonstrated action on
the part of personnel-contributing countries, including
punitive measures against offending personnel. I
encourage the Security Council to urge personnel-
contributing countries to cooperate fully in this effort.

My fourth concern is the plight of refugees and
internally displaced persons. The fact that a staggering
50 million people worldwide have been displaced from
their homes by conflict is one of the most pressing
protection concerns we currently face. In Colombia, in
May, I saw the poverty of two million displaced
people. Their safety has been further jeopardized by a
dramatic increase in the use of landmines by rebel
groups. The number of internally displaced persons in
Ingushetia in the Russian Federation has decreased in
recent years, from 250,000 to 50,000. As these
civilians return to Chechnya, however, new protection
needs arise. Civilians living in refugee and internally
displaced camps are vulnerable to attack by armed
groups. Only late last week, the Lord's Resistance
Army (LRA) mounted another brutal attack on
civilians living in an internally displaced persons camp
in northern Uganda. This is the fourth attack on
internally displaced persons camps in as many weeks,
attacks that have left more than 120 people dead,
mostly women and children. These deplorable attacks
by the LRA must end. I also call on the Government of
Uganda to redouble its efforts to protect internally
displaced persons and other civilians and to do more to
seek reconciliation and dialogue that can demobilize
and reintegrate the child soldiers who now cause so
much suffering.

In several countries, armed elements infiltrate
refugee and internally displaced persons camps in order
to recruit or abduct men, women and children for
military and other purposes and to steal food and other
goods, endangering not only the inhabitants of the
camps but also the host communities. The infiltration
of armed elements and combatants blurs the civilian
character of camps and exposes civilian populations to
the increased likelihood of attack by opposing forces.
This problem must be addressed through the
identification, separation, disarmament and internment
of the combatants. I am pleased to report that the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees (UNHCR) convened an expert meeting in
Geneva from 9 to 11 June on maintaining the civilian
and humanitarian character of asylum. This expert
group is formulating standards, principles and, most
importantly, tools for use at the field level to assist host
countries and other relevant actors to manage this
important and sensitive security issue.

My fifth point concerns issues related to
compliance and impunity. Violations of international
humanitarian and human rights law characterize
today's armed conflicts. In too many conflicts around
the world, these crimes continue to be committed with
total impunity. Perpetrators must be brought to justice,
and potential perpetrators must be deterred.

It is encouraging that the Security Council has
recognized the importance of strengthening the legal
framework that underpins the protection of civilians.
Later this year the United Nations will hold a treaties
event - Focus 2004 - that will concentrate on
multilateral treaties relevant to the protection of
civilians. I wish to echo the Secretary-General's recent
call to Member States to demonstrate their commitment
to the central role of the rule of law in international
relations and to the protection of civilians by using the
occasion of Focus 2004 to sign, ratify or accede to
these treaties.

My final concern is "forgotten" emergencies.
Political interests, strategic priorities and the media
spotlight create enormously disproportionate responses
to humanitarian and protection crises. Experience
shows that skewed flows of humanitarian funding for
complex emergencies undermine protection and
assistance to civilians in need.

Sadly, it is often in the forgotten emergencies that
the risks to civilians are greatest. For example, Somalia
has remained off the international community's radar
screen for some time now, yet the protection concerns
in that country are grave. The continuing factional
fighting is causing daily civilian casualties. Access to
populations in need is increasingly restricted and
increased flows of illegal arms further exacerbate the
suffering of civilians. The absence of governance for
the last 13 years has created a vacuum in terms of
protecting civilians in Somalia. International action is
needed. In the Central African Republic, restrictions on
access and lack of resources continue to deny life-
saving assistance to some 2.2 million people. In
Guinea, lack of funding has prevented effective
humanitarian assistance from being provided to
displaced people, returnees and host communities. I
encourage the Security Council to consider the links
between the maintenance of international peace and
security and inadequate funding in certain crises.

When confronted with challenges of this
magnitude, it is important to recognise that progress
depends on incremental change. In the five years since
the Security Council adopted its first resolution on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict, some progress
has been made. Peacekeeping mandates have been
broadened and have a stronger protection focus. These
mandates have been complemented by swifter
deployments of peacekeeping troops when needed to
avert an immediate crisis of protection and to restore
order. We should be encouraged by the real efforts
being made at the regional level to start to address the
protection of displaced persons and other civilians,
particularly in Africa, where the problems are grave.
The African Union and the Economic Community of
West African States are making concerted efforts to
systematically incorporate these issues. Their work can
only be further consolidated by the work undertaken by
the New Partnership for Africa's Development. In
addition, the humanitarian operational response to
protection concerns on the ground has been extensive,
the policy framework has been strengthened and there
is now stronger inter-agency coordination and
collaboration within the United Nations system.

But as long as civilians continue to constitute the
majority of victims in situations of armed conflict, this
progress is not nearly enough. The establishment of the
culture of protection called for by the Secretary-
General is still a distant goal. The Security Council is
the United Nations principal mechanism for the
promotion of peace and security around the globe. The
humanitarian community administers to victims in the
absence of peace and security. Our roles are intricately
and fundamentally linked and it is for this reason that I
appreciate the commitment that the Council has shown
to the protection of civilians agenda by establishing
regular dialogue on this increasingly important issue.

We must, at the same time, be honest about what
we achieve and when we fail. In northern Uganda, the
abduction and killing of children by children is worse
today than when I last spoke on this subject before the
Council in December. In Darfur, the crisis for hundreds
of thousands of civilians is deepening by the day. We
need to find better ways to provide humanitarian
assistance quickly and efficiently, as soon as the
security situation on the ground allows, whenever
civilians are in desperate need.

We believe that the time is right for the Council
to consider adopting another resolution on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict. It has been
four years since the Security Council adopted its most
recent resolution. We should now update resolution
1296 (2000) in order to reflect the important
developments that have taken place over the past four
years and to support further measures to improve the
protection afforded to civilians in times of armed
conflict. The Secretary-General's report sets out a
number of recommendations to this end. Measures that
we believe would enable us to assist the Council in its
response include more systematic information on key
protection issues and earlier reporting on situations of
concern so that humanitarian and protection support
can be provided as efficiently as possible.

The dire consequences of the failure of each of us
to speak out and act were tragically illustrated by the
genocide that took place in Rwanda 10 years ago.
There is no substitute for the willingness to act if we
want to transcend the cycles of armed conflict and to
provide civilian men, women and children with a life
free from Violence, suffering and fear.

