The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of Somalia in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
consideration without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Hashi
(Somalia) took a seat at the Council table.

The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Security Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the
report of the Secretary-General on the situation in
Somalia, document S/2005/392. I wish to draw the
attention of members to document S/2005/153,
containing the text of a letter dated 8 March 2005 from
the Chairman of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 751 (1992)
addressed to the President of the Security Council.

After consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council reaffirms all its
previous decisions concerning the situation in
Somalia, in particular the statements by its

President, S/PRST/2004/43, dated 19 November
2004, and S/PRST/2005/11 of 7 March 2005.
"The Security Council welcomes the report of
the Secretary-General of 16 June 2005 (S/2005/392)
and reaffirms its commitment to a comprehensive
and lasting settlement of the situation in Somalia
and its respect for the sovereignty, territorial
integrity, political independence and unity of
Somalia, consistent with the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations.

"The Security Council is encouraged by the
relocation now under way of the Transitional
Federal Institutions (TFIs) to Somalia, urges further
progress in this regard and calls upon the Somali
leaders to continue to work towards reconciliation,
through inclusive dialogue and consensus-
building within the framework of the TFIs, in
accordance with the Transitional Federal Charter
of the Somali Republic adopted in February 2004.

"The Security Council expresses its concern
at the recent disagreements and increased
tensions among Somali leaders, which threaten
the viability of the TFIs. The Security Council
calls on all leaders in Somalia to exercise
maximum restraint and take immediate effective
steps to reduce tension. Violence or military
action by any members of the TFIs or other
parties is unacceptable as the means for dealing
with the current differences within the TFIs. The
Security Council reiterates that any members of
the TFIs or other parties who persist on the path
of confrontation and conflict, including military
action, will be held accountable.

"The Security Council urges the
Transitional Federal Institutions to conclude
without delay a national security and stabilization
plan, to include a comprehensive and verifiable
ceasefire agreement leading to final disarmament,
and welcomes the willingness of the United
Nations to provide advice in this regard.

"The Security Council commends the
commitment of the African Union (AU) and the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development
(IGAD) in support of the TFIs' relocation to
Somalia and reiterates its support for those efforts
in assisting the process of transition in Somalia.
The Security Council welcomes the readiness of
the AU and IGAD to reinforce their continued

support for the establishment of a functioning
central government of Somalia, including the
possible deployment of a Peace Support Mission
to Somalia, and encourages the AU Peace and
Security Council (PSC) to keep the Security
Council informed of all developments. The
Security Council expects the AU and IGAD to
work out a detailed mission plan in close
coordination with and with the broad consensus
of the TFIs and consistent with a national security
and stabilization plan.

"The Security Council takes note of the PSC's
request to the Security Council for the authorization
of an exemption on the arms embargo imposed
against Somalia by resolution 733 (1992) of 23
January 1992, contained in the AU's PSC
Communiques of 12 May and 3 July 2005. The
Security Council stands ready to consider this
matter on the basis of information on the mission
plan mentioned in paragraph 6 in due course.

"The Security Council further reminds all
parties in Somalia, including all members of the
TFIs, as well as all Member States, of their
obligation to implement and enforce the arms
embargo imposed by the Security Council under
resolution 733 (1992). Continued non-compliance
with this measure undermines the efforts of those
who seek to establish peace in Somalia. There can
be no effective and lasting progress in Somalia as
long as arms and ammunition flow unchecked
across Somalia's borders. A stable and secure
environment in Somalia is essential to the future
success of the national reconciliation process.

"The Security Council welcomes the
continued engagement of donors in supporting
the establishment of a functioning government in
Somalia through the mechanism of the
Coordination and Monitoring Committee (CMC)
and in fulfilment of the Declaration of Principles.
The Security Council encourages donor countries
and regional and subregional organizations to
continue to contribute to the reconstruction and
rehabilitation of Somalia, in particular through the
mechanism of the Rapid Assistance Programme
and efforts coordinated by the United Nations.

"The Security Council stresses that
improving the humanitarian situation is an
essential component of support for the peace and
reconciliation process. The Security Council
reiterates that ensuring humanitarian access to all
Somalis in need and providing guarantees for the
safety and security of aid workers is an immediate
priority and obligation of the TFIs. The Security
Council further welcomes the ongoing efforts and
work of the business community, humanitarian
organizations, non-governmental organizations,
civil society and women's groups to facilitate the
demilitarization of Somalia.

"The Security Council deplores the recent
hijacking of a vessel off the coast of Somalia that
had been chartered by the World Food
Programme (WFP) and was carrying food aid for
tsunami victims, and notes the subsequent
decision by the WFP to suspend all shipments of
humanitarian assistance to Somalia. The Security
Council expresses its concern at the impact of
these developments, and calls for the quick and
appropriate resolution of this incident. The
Security Council condemns in the strongest terms
the brutal murder of Somali peace activist
Abdulkadir Yahya Ali on 11 July in Mogadishu.
The Security Council calls for the incident to be
investigated immediately and for those
responsible to be held fully accountable.

"The Security Council welcomes the steps
being taken to strengthen the capacity of the
United Nations Political Office for Somalia
(UNPOS) and reaffirms its strong support for the
leadership of the Secretary-General's Special
Representative (SRSG) in his efforts in fostering
inclusive dialogue among the leaders of the TFIs.
The Security Council calls upon all Somali
parties and Member States to extend to him their
fullest cooperation in this regard.

"The Security Council reaffirms its full
support for the peace process in Somalia and the
commitment of the United Nations to assist the
regional and subregional efforts in this regard."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2005/32.

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 12.20 p.m.

