Nana Effah-Apenteng (Ghana): I wish, first of
all, to thank the Chairpersons of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC), the 1267 Committee and the 1540
Committee, Ambassadors Ellen Margrethe Loj, Cesar
Mayoral, and Peter Burian, respectively, for their
comprehensive briefings and for their leadership.

The Counter-Terrorism Committee, established
by United Nations Security Council resolution 1373
(2001) to monitor the implementation by States of anti-
terrorism measures adopted by this Council, is the
foremost tool in the arsenal of the international
community in the fight against international terrorism.
On this point, we need to stress the importance of
getting all Member States to support the work of the
Committee through cooperation and by providing the
necessary resources.

Within this context, we welcome the process of
the revitalization of the CTC and the consequent
establishment of the Counter-Terrorism Executive
Directorate (CTED) under United Nations Security
Council resolution 1535 (2004) to give expert advice
and analysis to the CTC in the execution of its
mandate. In this connection, we are happy to note that
the CTED is now fully operational and has taken up its
responsibilities.

The core responsibility of the CTC in its
monitoring role is to collate and evaluate States'
reports in order to assess the level of their
implementation of Security Council resolution 1373
(2001). It is evident that, while the commitment to
fight international terrorism is not lacking, and is in
fact universal, compliance with resolution 1373 (2001)
has not been perfect. This could be due to the
following factors; first, the lack of a sense of
immediacy of the problem; and, secondly, the lack of
capacity to meet the reporting requirements in some
countries.

On the first point, there is a need for all Members
to be sensitized to the problem of terrorism as a
universal plague from which no individual, and no
country, is immune. Any feeling that the problem is
remote is a dangerous illusion. It is this kind of false
sense of security that provides opportunities for
terrorism.

On the question of capacity, my delegation
wishes to express its appreciation to the CTC, CTED
and its Secretariat for the advice and assistance they
have been offering to individual countries from the
developing world so as to enable them to meet their
reporting obligations. In this regard, we wish to
suggest that, in addition to CTC/CTED assistance to
countries and country-to-country assistance, the CTC
should consider organizing regional and subregional
seminars for countries within particular areas. This
one-stop approach would be a very efficient method of
channelling technical assistance, where experiences,
best practices and common problems could be shared.

My delegation also wishes to call for the
simplification of the reporting regime to make it more
user-friendly. It is necessary to avoid a situation of
reporting fatigue. For this reason, we call on the CTC,
in consultation with the 1267 and 1540 Committees, to
speed up the task of consolidation of the three
reporting regimes, as recommended by the 2005 World
Summit Outcome (resolution 60/1). We believe that
this will not only help in coordinating the work of the
three Committees for more efficient results, but will
also ease the reporting burden on States.

The war against international terrorism requires
all States to muster the necessary political will, human
and material resources to design innovative and
effective approaches to confront and neutralize this
menace. The only way to achieve this is to sustain our
momentum and pressure, a task in which the CTC is
playing a prominent role as the vanguard. It will
therefore need our strong commitment and support in
the coming years.

With regard to the Al-Qaida and Taliban
Sanctions Committee, my delegation is pleased to note
that work is proceeding on the revised Guidelines of
the Committee and that agreement has been reached on
a partial revision. We believe that it is necessary for
transparency and clarity in the Committee's working
methods and decision-making process that the process
be pursued to its logical conclusion: the complete
revision of the guidelines.

Since its inception, the Taliban and Al-Qaida
sanctions Committee, set up pursuant to resolution
1267 (1999) with the aim of implementing sanctions
targeted at Al-Qaida, the Taliban and associated
entities, has had an important impact on the global war
on terror. That achievement can, undoubtedly, be
attributed not only to the commitment of its
membership and its secretariat, but also to the
cooperation of Member States.

As a specific, operational body with its sanctions
targeted at identified individuals and entities, the
Committee needs to develop a strong global network of
contacts with law-enforcement and security agencies at
both the bilateral and multilateral levels so that it can
discharge its mandate effectively. That requires serious
cooperation and commitment from all Member
States - which, we are gratified to note, is not lacking.

It is in that context that we support the increased
cooperation and the formalized arrangement between
the Committee and Interpol, which culminated in the
issuance by Interpol, on 6 December 2005, of the first
four Interpol-United Nations special notices on
individuals placed on the consolidated list. We hope
that this arrangement will be broadened to cover
cooperation with other law enforcement agencies at the
multilateral, regional and subregional levels.

The steps being taken to ensure that the United
Nations system does not inadvertently enter into any
contractual relationship with any individual or
institution on the consolidated list are necessary, since
such an unfortunate situation would undermine the
credibility of the system of anti-terrorism measures
that is in place. The attempt to review internal
procedures with the aim of developing uniform
procedures for all sanctions regimes is, therefore,
timely and should be pursued as a matter of urgency.

The issue of the listing and delisting of
individuals and entities with regard to the consolidated
list, which is at the core of the mandate of the 1267
Committee, raises certain pertinent questions which
will have to be tackled boldly if we are to avoid the
perception of lack of transparency, which could
damage the credibility of the Committee.

There is no doubt that, under Chapter VII of the
Charter, Member States are under an obligation to
comply with sanctions imposed by the Security
Council. However, the methodology of the
Committee's listing process has led to serious
problems, with some Member States being under the
mistaken impression that criminal proceedings in
national courts are necessary before action can be
taken against listed individuals. It is important that the
Committee engage with Member States on this point so
as to ensure that the discretion or judgement of
national courts is not substituted for a decision of the
Committee. Differing procedures in different countries
on listing and delisting introduce a discriminatory
element in the enforcement measures under resolution
1267 (1999), thus weakening the effectiveness of the
resolution.

Linked to this is the issue of confidentiality. Can
the Committee raise the issue of confidentiality to deny
a listed individual the right to know the basis of his
designation? It is clear that the Committee will have to
find a way to balance carefully the need for
confidentiality and the requirements of due process. In
this regard, we note with concern a number of lawsuits
by listed individuals raising issues of due process, a
development which could undermine the credibility of
the Committee if the causes of the lawsuits are not
addressed. That calls for an in-depth review of the
listing and delisting procedures. The Committee will
have to put listing requests under more rigorous
scrutiny in the future. In that task, the cooperation and
understanding of all Member States is essential.

Finally, on the 1540 Committee, my delegation
wishes to refer to the underlying reason for the
adoption of resolution 1540 (2004), which was the
grave concern of Member States about the menace of
terrorist groups acquiring weapons of mass destruction.
It therefore behoves us all to ensure the achievement of
the ultimate objective of the resolution. Thus, while
acknowledging the positive efforts of the Committee,
my delegation cannot but admit that much remains to
be done, given that 67 countries have yet to submit
their reports. In my delegation's view, this is not a
reflection of inertia on the part of those countries,
many of which are African, but an indication of their
well-known lack of capacity to meet the reporting
requirements of the resolution.

It is for that reason that my delegation welcomes
the decision by the Committee to prioritize outreach
activities in various regions, since the Committee has
to receive the national reports of all countries before it
can provide a comprehensive omnibus report to the
Security Council so as to ensure that the Council can
assess the progress of implementation of the resolution
by Member States. In this regard, I wish to inform the
Council that my Government is seriously considering a
request to host one such programme for Africa.

Those programmes are an imperative, as they
offer forums for in-depth discussion on substantive and
procedural issues, as well as for exchanges of views
among Member States on the implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004). They also create opportunities
for members of the Committee to appreciate the
practical challenges inhibiting the submission of
reports by Member States that have yet to do so,
thereby enabling the Committee to take effective
measures to surmount those problems. The submission
of reports is not an end in itself; it is a means towards
the attainment of the ultimate goal. The crucial aspect
lies in the implementation efforts. We are therefore
encouraged by the determination of the Committee to
use outreach activities to assess States' implementation
and to facilitate assistance to those facing various
constraints in that regard.
I would be remiss if I failed to pronounce a
positive assessment of the introduction of the
legislative database to be used as a supplementary
source of information and of the Committee's decision
to make the information available to Member States.

In conclusion, my delegation wishes to urge all
Member States to cooperate fully with the Committee
in the execution of its mandate, which is crucial to our
common determination to contain a grave challenge to
international peace and security in the twenty-first
century.

