Mr. Errazuriz (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): I
thank Deputy Secretary-General Eliasson, Assistant
Secretary-General Simonovic and Permanent
Representative of Ukraine Sergeyev for their statements.

The Security Council is meeting at a sensitive
moment. The 16 March referendum was held in
Crimea and has been judged as unconstitutional and
has been seen as undermining the territorial integrity
of Ukraine, a sovereign State Member of the United
Nations. The circumstances around the vote has led to
worry in the international community, which questions
its legitimacy. The holding of the referendum has no
doubt contributed to the worsening of the situation.
Chile would reiterate the need to restore the rule of
law and respect for the sovereignty, independence and
territorial integrity of Ukraine, in keeping with the
Charter of the United Nations and international law.

The death ofa Ukrainian soldier in an assault in one
of the military barracks in Crimea and the increased
tensions in the eastern part of the country reveal an
escalation of the crisis that has to be stopped. In that

context, we value the briefings of Deputy Secretary-
General Eliasson and Assistant Secretary-General for

Human Rights Simonovie.
In truth, we are observing a growing deterioration
of the situation. Chile believes that it is necessary to
broaden the space for a solution through diplomacy.
That is why we endorse the efforts of the Organization
and, most especially, the efforts being undertaken by
the Secretary-General.

Chile regrets that Mr. Simonovie and observers
from the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe were not allowed to enter Crimea. We call for
the actions of the United Nations not to be impeded,
with a view to ensuring timely and truthful information
in order to be able to assess the human rights situation
on the ground. The situation of ethnic minorities in
Crimea is of concern for us, especially that of the Tatar
minorities, who have started moving to other areas of
Ukraine. The existence of internally displaced persons
is the clearest sign of a worsening of the crisis. That
fact strengthens the call of the international community
to seek a negotiated solution.

It is indispensable that the Council contribute to
and generate maximum restraint and moderation among
both parties. Accordingly, it makes a new appeal for
all sides to avoid unilateral actions that might escalate
the crisis still further. Now is the time for constructive
participation in an inclusive process that would
guarantee the rule of law, human rights, fundamental
freedoms and respect for human rights.

