Ms. Kamara (Liberia): I am grateful for the
opportunity afforded me to participate in this briefing
as the Council prepares to consider the twenty-fourth
progress report of the Secretary-General (S/2012/64l)
on the activities of the United Nations Mission in
Liberia (UNMIL).

As routine as such reports may seem, each one
presents an occasion for reflection and a renewal of
commitment, especially as they are usually linked to
decisions on the extension of mandates. I hope that
on this occasion consensus will be facilitated by the
Council's earlier endorsement, in April 2012, ofthe plan
for a phased transition, leading to the reconfiguration
of UNMIL's presence by June 2015.

In that regard, I would like to express my
Government's deep appreciation of the steadfast
support that the Council has provided to Liberia and
for the decision that it will hopefully take on the
continuation of our partnership with the United Nations
through UNMIL.

I would like to echo the sentiments of welcome
to the new Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Ms. Karin Landgren, which she has already
received from my President and other officials of the
Liberian Government in Monrovia. My colleagues at
the Permanent Mission of Liberia and I look forward
to working with her in her challenging, but hopefully
enriching, assignment.

I thank Ms. Landgren for her very informative and
insightful overview of the situation in Liberia, which
highlights the areas of progress and the challenges that
remain, with all of which we can fully associate. We
are confident that her vast professional experience will
enable her to fulfil her duties very well indeed.

I wish also to recognize the good stewardship of
Mr. Moustapha Soumare, who steered the UNMIL
ship for the past six months and is deserving of
our commendation. In his presentation, the Chair
of the Liberia configuration, Mr. Tillander, also
demonstrated the value added of Liberia's engagement
with the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC). Both
presentations demonstrate the complementarity and
mutually reinforcing effect of those two arms of the
United Nations peacebuilding architecture. Needless to
say, the PBC is helping to build capacity, to promote
decentralization and to provide support for national
reconciliation. Bringing the two arms together in such
a briefing can only be immensely beneficial to the
Council's work. Much has already been said. I do not
intend to repeat, but simply to emphasize a few points.

The first point is that security along the
Liberia-cote d'Ivoire border is a major preoccupation
of my Government. That worrying situation requires
close attention and a high level of vigilance, since it
poses potential risks to national and regional security.
The deployment of civilian and military forces to
border areas for protracted periods is stretching already
scarce Government resources. The capacity to meet our
obligations to the refugees in the camps is strained.
That was mentioned by the Special Representative. In
a visit to the Economic Community of West African
States Commission in Abuja last Friday, the President
of Liberia, Her Excellency Mrs. Ellen Johnson-Sirleaf,
underscored the gravity of the situation and warned of
the possibility that it could overwhelm Liberia's nascent
security services, with implications for both sides of the
border. In commending actions that UNMIL and the
United Nations Operation in Cote d'Ivoire are taking in
support of the national forces to manage the situation,
we stress the imperative of continued cooperation and
collaboration between national and international forces
on both sides of the border.

Secondly, I want to reaffirm my Government's
intention to honour the commitments that it has made,
whether in the Statement of Mutual Commitments with
the PBC or in other instruments and plans concluded
with UNMIL in the pursuit of indentified priorities.
The Government has subscribed to certain principles
of governance as a matter of national policy and has
aligned itself with countries of a similar persuasion in
the Group of Seven Plus. We seek to promote justice,
security, popular participation for our people and the
effective management and use of our national resources
for their benefit. The seemingly slow progress in
certain areas, which we acknowledge, does not reflect
a wavering of political will, but rather a limitation of
means, notably in the capacity and financial resources
available. They are ultimately the determinants of
allocations in a small budget that aims to address
immense needs. Let me affirm that the Government is
very anxious to accelerate progress to a level that meets
the expectations of our friends in the international
community and also responds to the aspirations of the
Liberian people.

The third point of emphasis relates to the Secretary-
General's report on UNMIL of 15 August, which is
the basis for our discussion today. We appreciate the
effort to present a balanced account of developments,
which is usually the hallmark of such reports. However,
I have been instructed to express my Government's
disappointment that a few assertions do not reach the
expected level of accuracy. For the purposes of the
closed consultations, I have taken the liberty to share
with members of the Council - I do not know if they
have received them - my Government's comments on
the report, which were conveyed to Mr. Herve Ladsous,
Under-Secretary-General and Head of the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations.

We believe that the relatively open and constructive
relationship that has been nurtured between my
Government and UNMIL over the years should allow

for a discussion of some of those draft documents, not
reserving any right to veto for the Government but
enabling a joint effort to vet and verify assertions that
would be put in the public domain. The reports help to
shape and can influence the views of the international
community about Liberia, including its potential
investment partners. Notwithstanding the United
Nations culture and practice, which may prohibit the
sharing of such draft documents a priori, it is prudent
that some arrangement be agreed to avoid that type
of intervention. In making public its assessments, the
United Nations is respectfully encouraged to observe the
principle of do no harm so that it does not inadvertently
deepen the fault lines in our society, many of which are
still triggers of conflict.

The United Nations engagement in Liberia,
in all of its aspects, continues to be critical to the
country's stability and progress. The nature and form
of that engagement will inevitably change, but we are
receptive to a smooth and orderly transition in line with
conditions on the ground. That is why my Government
has endorsed the recommendations of the technical
assessment mission, as contained in the April report
(S/2012/230). We already see the United Nations country
team redesigning its programmes in the United Nations
Development Assistance Framework for 2013-2017
and synchronizing activities with UNMIL's drawdown
plan. On Monday, we participated in the presentation of
the draft country programme for Liberia of the United
Nations Development Programme, which covers the
same four-year timeframe.

All of what I have referred to are indicators of a
long-term partnership. Liberia appreciates the Security
Council's invaluable contribution to the partnership
and to the maintenance of an environment conducive to
the implementation of activities aimed at improving the
well-being of the Liberian people. We are also grateful
to our bilateral partners, many of whom some of those
around the table represent, for the support. We look
forward to continued engagement.

