Mr. Fowler (Canada): Canada is pleased to join
previous speakers in welcoming Ms. Del Ponte to the
Security Council today and wishing her every success in
her vitally important task. These two Tribunals play an
extremely important part in the promotion of international
peace and security. We regard their work as essential in
ending the cycle of violence and impunity that has had
such an impact on the Council's agenda of late. We
welcome the emphasis that the Prosecutor has placed on
pursuing high-level civilian, police and military leaders

 

responsible for crimes under the jurisdiction of the
International Criminal Tribunals' Statutes.

In 1993 and 1994 Canada welcomed the creation of
the two Tribunals as an innovative and progressive step by
the Council towards a broader definition of security. By
establishing the Tribunals, the Security Council - a body
traditionally focused on inter-State security issues -
recognized that gross and systemic human rights abuses
within States also merit a forthright response by the
international community. The Tribunals are a signal that
such abuses will not be allowed to stand and, as such, serve
an important norm-reinforcing function. They also provide
a deterrent to would-be Violators by demonstrating that
there must be accountability for genocide, for war crimes
and for crimes against humanity.

We are pleased with the Tribunals' success not only
in obtaining custody over high-ranking accused persons and
completing trials, but also in providing ground-breaking
decisions. We are also pleased that the Stabilization Force
and the Kosovo Force continue to provide the support for
the work of the International Criminal Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia in the Balkans, including in the
protection and preservation of evidence.

Clearly, however, much more support from the
international community is needed. Many alleged war
criminals remain at large, and some States still refuse to
cooperate with the Tribunal. As the President of the
Tribunal pointed out in her speech to the General Assembly
earlier this week, and as Ms. Del Ponte has reaffirmed
today, the Council is ultimately responsible for ensuring
State compliance. We must send from this Council the
message that cooperation is not a choice but a clear
obligation for all States, and that this is not an issue which
is in any way subject to debate or legal dispute. We
reiterate our call, therefore, on all States to fulfil these
obligations.

I would be remiss if I did not also stress the extent to
which Canada concurs with the point made by Ambassador
Petrella that the work of the International Tribunals has
contributed significantly to the development of international
criminal law and will greatly assist efforts in the
Preparatory Commission for the International Criminal
Court.

We note the fact that Ms. Del Ponte chose to focus
her remarks today on the situation in the Balkans. We do,
however, look forward to hearing a similarly detailed report
on her findings following her visit to Rwanda.

We commend Ms. Del Ponte on the assumption of
the challenging and important post of chief Prosecutor to
both Tribunals. We know that this is an extremely
challenging and demanding position which involves
extreme pressures. We are confident that she will follow
the fine tradition established by her predecessors, Richard
Goldstone and Louise Arbour, and that the Tribunals will
continue to advance the cause of international justice.

