The President (spoke in Chinese): I shall now
make a statement in my national capacity.

I thank Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Kubis for his briefing. I highly commend
his efforts in leading the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) during his tenure as Head
of the Mission.

China congratulates His Excellency Mr. Barham
Salih on his election as President oflraq, Chinawelcomes
the progress made in forming the new Iraqi Government
and hopes that the new Government will continue to
promote economic development, improve people's
living conditions and accelerate Iraq's reconstruction
process. As mentioned by other colleagues before me,
peace, stability and reconstruction in Iraq are now at a
critical stage. I would like to make the following points.

First, the general direction towards a political
solution to the Iraqi issue should be adhered to. The
parties in Iraq should, within framework of the
Constitution, settle their differences through dialogue,
promote national reconciliation and achieve lasting
peace and security in the country. The international
community should effectively respect the sovereignty,
independence, unity and territorial integrity of Iraq,
support the United Nations in its good offices and
provide constructive assistance for an inclusive
political solution.

Secondly, there should be continued support for
combating terrorism in Iraq. The relevant parties
should strengthen counter-terrorism cooperation, unify
standards and fight against all Council-listed terrorist
organizations, as well as resolutely contain terrorist
forces and curb the return of their activities and the
momentum of their spread. The international community
should support Iraq in its effort to bring perpetrators to
justice in accordance with its domestic law.

Thirdly, efforts must be made to actively push for
the economic recovery and accelerated reconstruction of
Iraq. The Iraqi Government should speed up its national
reconstruction process, give full play to its resource
advantages, promote its economic development, enhance
its capacity to provide public services and improve
people's livelihoods. The international community
should continue to provide support and assistance to
Iraq, help ease its humanitarian situation, assist in its
economic recovery and create a favourable environment
for the national reconstruction of the country.

UNAMI has played an important role in supporting
the Iraqi Government for an inclusive political dialogue
and national reconciliation and reconstruction, and it
is continuing to push for enhanced bilateral relations
between Iraq and countries of the region, such as
Kuwait, as well as the settlement of the remaining
bilateral issues. The international community should
jointly support UNAMI in carrying out its work
according with its mandate.

China supports any efforts conducive to the
political settlement of the Iraqi issue and the fight
against terrorism. As always, China will participate
in the economic reconstruction of Iraq and continue to
provide assistance to the best of its ability.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I give the floor to the representative of Iraq.

