Mr. Rodriguez (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): I
welcome the initiative to convene this open debate on a
matter of great importance for my country: the
participation of children in armed conflicts. I am
grateful to Ms. Radhika Coomaraswamy, Mr. Atul
Khare and Ms. Hilde Frafjord Johnson for their
briefings. It is only appropriate that I make special
mention of the courageous testimony provided by
Ms. Manju Gurung.

My country supported the adoption of Security
Council resolution 1882 (2009), which unquestionably
marked significant progress in the protection of
children in armed conflict. It enabled the Secretary-
General to name in the annexes of his reports parties
that have committed acts of sexual violence, killing or
maiming against children in armed conflict. But more
work is needed to ensure proper implementation of the
resolution. In that regard, it is necessary to build the
capacity of United Nations agencies, programmes,
funds and missions to carry out new tasks and
mandates.

It must be recalled that, as the Secretary-General
indicates in his report, the low incidence of sexual
violence against children reported does not reflect the
true depth and extent of that practice; rather, it reflects
the challenges encountered in collecting and verifying
information on that issue. To that end, it is necessary to
consider mechanisms that will make it possible for
United Nations agencies and, above all, the various
Security Council sanctions committees and the
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict, to
exchange reliable information on acts of sexual
violence with a view to taking steps to reduce and
combat that scourge. The political will of the parties is
essential for proper implementation of resolution 1882
(2009). The parties must therefore commit themselves
to develop zero-tolerance policies against sexual
violence, and to fight against the killing and maiming
of children.

At the same time, implementation of resolution
1612 (2005) must continue, in particular as regards the
preparation of specific action plans with timelines for
putting an end to the recruitment and use of children in
armed conflicts. The report of the Secretary-General
indicates progress in that regard, and it is vital that
donations to ensure the sustainability of such
programmes continue to flow, making it possible to
maintain the rehabilitation of former child soldiers and
their reintegration into their communities.

It is cause for concern to read in the report of the
Secretary-General about impunity for perpetrators of
these heinous crimes against children. This is due in
part to a lack of political will, but also to the fragility
of legal and judicial systems and to a lack of resources
and experience for carrying out investigations. Hence,
the Peruvian delegation considers that United Nations
field missions should play a key role by focusing their
efforts on strengthening the legal and judicial systems
of countries emerging from conflict and on supporting
legislative reform and training for those involved in
law enforcement.

My country also believes that the Peacebuilding
Commission must incorporate the issue of children
affected by armed conflict into plans and programmes
for recovery and reconstruction. The Commission's
working group on lessons learned should take account
of successful experiences in reintegrating former child
soldiers into various areas of economic and social life
following conflict.

The establishment of the Working Group on
Children and Armed Conflict - and here I hail
Mexico's excellent work as its Chair - reflects the
Security Council's commitment to protecting children
in situations of armed conflict. Hence, pursuant to
resolution 1882 (2009), the Group should be given
appropriate administrative and substantive support to
enable it to carry out its tasks.

I wish also to acknowledge the dedicated work of
Ms. Radhika Coomaraswamy, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed
Conflict, and the important work of UNICEF, the
Committee on the Rights of the Child and other
relevant entities. We call on States and on all parties to
conflict to cooperate with them.

We possess a broad legal framework to combat
the use of children in armed conflict, to protect them
and to ensure their safety in times of violence. The
well-being of children depends on the sense of
responsibility and political will of States in complying
with our obligations.

