Mr. Berruga (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset, we would like to express our appreciation to
you, Mr. President, for having convened this timely
meeting. Let me stress that the delegation of Mexico
endorses the statement just made by the Ambassador of
Argentina on behalf of the Rio Group.

Nevertheless, we would like to make a few
observations and proposals in a national capacity.

Meeting the challenges we face in the struggle
against terrorism requires the coordinated and
integrated action of States. It involves not only the
Security Council but also the General Assembly and
other organs of the multilateral system. Above all, it
requires international cooperation in the broadest sense
of the term.

My delegation has participated in this process and
has followed with interest and in a constructive spirit
developments and proposals aimed at strengthening
institutional mechanisms designed to increase the
effectiveness of the United Nations in its fight against
terrorism.

In that context, we would like to express our
gratitude for the intensive work done by the Counter-
Terrorism Committee and in particular by its current
Chairman, Ambassador Inocencio Arias, in submitting
the document entitled "Proposal for the revitalization
of the Counter-Terrorism Committee".

We are pleased that the proposal takes as its
reference point the strengthening of international
cooperation and assistance to States within the
framework of resolution 1373 (2001), without
neglecting the principle of the sovereign consent of
States. Our experience inside and outside the
Committee has convinced us that the fight against
terrorism cannot be effective, nor can it enjoy the
necessary cooperation of the international community,
if we do not develop transparent mechanisms that
guarantee observance of the Charter of the United
Nations and in particular the protection of human
rights.

Mexico has stressed the importance of
strengthening the link between the machinery
established for the protection of human rights and that
designed to combat terrorism. For that reason, we are
pleased to see that the proposal considers making the
Assessment and Technical Assistance Office the link
with the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights and with other competent bodies,
including special rapporteurs.

Along those same lines, we believe that the
revitalization of the Committee will facilitate the
implementation of Security Council resolution 1456
(2003) and of General Assembly resolution 58/187,
entitled "Protection of human rights and fundamental
freedoms in the fight against terrorism", which, as the
Council is aware, was promoted by Mexico and
sponsored by a substantial number of States.

Without minimizing any of the aforementioned
considerations, Mexico believes that the illicit trade in
small arms and light weapons requires priority
attention. That reality has a devastating effect on the
civilian population in various parts of the world,
especially when terrorist acts are involved.

In the light of these considerations, Mexico
believes that revitalization should be based on the
following criteria.

First, in addition to the link with the High
Commissioner for Human Rights, a human rights
expert should be appointed to the Assessment and
Technical Assistance Office. Secondly, we should also
have an expert in the area of the illicit trade in small
arms and light weapons. Thirdly, the new Office should
be an integral part of the structure of the Secretariat,
under the competence of the Secretary-General with
respect to the appointment of personnel. In that respect,
we feel that it would be extremely positive if broad-
based consultations could be held before we appoint an
Executive Director.

Fourthly, we believe that the appointment of staff
and experts envisaged in the context of the
revitalization should be based on regional
representation criteria. Mexico believes that this will
not be sufficiently guaranteed if we rely solely on the
proposed criterion of representativity of the principal
legal systems.

Fifthly, and lastly, the budgetary aspects of
revitalization must be transparent and disseminated in a
timely fashion to all of the members.

In conclusion, it is clear that a resolution on the
revitalization of the Committee will be limited to
issues of administrative structure and that we will have
to begin the discussion on whether or not it is
necessary to adopt it under Chapter VII of the United
Nations Charter.

