Sir Emyr Jones Parry (United Kingdom): I wish
to thank you, Madam President, for organizing this
debate on such a vital and current issue. It is an honour
to have you and other ministers present with us,
especially Commissioner Djinnit from the African
Union (AU). I would align myself with the statement to
be made subsequently by Ambassador Matussek on
behalf of the European Union.

Cooperation between the United Nations and
African regional and sub-regional organizations is an
issue that goes right to the heart of the current
challenges, dilemmas and opportunities facing
peacekeeping in Africa. Let me pose some questions.

First, how can the dimensions of violent conflict
be best understood? Many recent African conflicts
have been civil wars, layered with regional issues such
as the flow of arms, refugee movements, trade in
conflict resources, links between rebel groups in
different countries and wider political dynamics
between Governments. When an international
peacekeeping operation deploys in these situations for
the first time, it has to assess and understand the
complexities within a matter of months. Regional
organizations, on the other hand, usually have a shared
history with the local actors and a deeper knowledge
and understanding of the conflict. From a practical
standpoint, therefore, partnership between the United
Nations and African regional organizations makes
sense. Partnership is also important on the full range of
work against threats to international peace and security.
In that context, I would like to highlight the work
being done on the counter-terrorism front between the
Security Council Counter-Terrorism Committee and the
African Union.

Secondly, how can a peacekeeping operation be
structured and designed to ensure political will to
support the mandate of the operation? Here, we need to
be realistic. The sort of peacekeeping operation
deployed will depend on the political and geographical
context. Often, either for logistical and/or political
reasons, a United Nations operation with a regional
component will be needed. Such hybridity - if I can
use that word - has become commonplace. In 2006,
we saw partnerships for peacekeeping in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Sudan and
Timor-Leste, each case taking a different form. In
Africa, it is the United Nations, the African Union and
the European Union that have worked together in
several different and often difficult configurations.
That kind of cooperation is here to stay and, certainly
in the United Kingdom's view, in no way undermines
the prerogatives of United Nations peacekeeping, but it
does draw on the political and practical advantages of
cooperation.

Thirdly, how can the capabilities of regional
organizations best be deployed in the framework of
Chapter VIII of the United Nations Charter? The
United Nations Charter provides for regional
organizations to undertake interventions in matters of
peace and security within its framework, but there is no
one-size-fits-all Chapter VIII model. We need to
consider the specifics of how that is to be done in each
case. It might be useful for the United Nations to work
with the AU and other regional organizations on a
framework for cooperation in the most likely hybrid
scenarios. We would then have a clearer understanding
of the possible options available - indeed a template
for such operations - and this should help us reach
agreement faster on the kind of operation to deploy.

Fourthly, how should the international
community ensure a sustained resource base for
regional efforts? Without question, we have to find a
way of ensuring predictable and sustainable support for
regional efforts in matters of international peace and
security. Here I have the example of Darfur in mind,
where the African Union Mission in the Sudan (AMIS)
operation has necessarily received substantial
international support, including from the European
Union. However, it has always been a struggle to keep
resources flowing for more than a matter of months.
We need a better way of doing this, serious debate and

an earnest search for a solution, respecting the
respective competencies of the different bodies
involved.

That is why I welcome the request in today's
presidential statement, for a report from the Secretary-
General on how the United Nations can support
arrangements under Chapter VIII. Formal funding from
the peacekeeping budget for a strictly regional
organization may not be possible, but other assistance
should be automatic.

Finally, my fifth question: how can the
international community support the development of
the African Union's peacekeeping capabilities over the
longer term, in particular the African Standby Force?
Because there is no doubt that we need to develop an
effective partnership between the international
community as a whole and the AU, geared to
delivering effective AU peacekeeping capacities on the
continent. Making the African Standby Force and its
five constituent regional brigades an operational reality
by 2010 is a real challenge. Currently the efforts of the
Group of Eight, the United Nations, the European
Union and major bilateral donors are not as effectively
coordinated as they should be. Time is not on our side,
and so we need to address this issue as a matter of
urgency in 2007. I hope, therefore, that the newly
established AU support cell within the Department for
Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO) will play an
important role in facilitating that coordination.

I would like to finish by addressing quickly three
current challenges facing the United Nations and
African regional organizations. First, the architecture
for dealing with partnerships, both within and between
the AU and with the United Nations must be more
clearly defined and resourced. We have an opportunity,
with the realignment of DPKO, to ensure that structure
and resources for partnership work and are given the
right attention. Within the AU, there is also an urgent
need for an enhanced staffing structure in order to be
able to plan and manage future operations. I hope that
that can be agreed upon soon. The United Kingdom,
along with many other partners, is providing
substantial support to the AU as it develops its peace
and security architecture, and we remain committed to
supporting the AU and the regional economic
communities in this area as well as to continuing our
substantial operational training support.
Secondly, the United Nations and the AU should
ensure that where we are dealing jointly with
situations, we work hand-in-glove together as the
situation evolves. I am pleased that this issue is
highlighted in today's presidential statement - which
we absolutely support - because it is so pertinent to
the situation we face in Darfur. We welcome there, the
excellent, unprecedented institutional cooperation
between the United Nations and the AU.

In your intervention, Madam President, you
recalled the AU appeal to the United Nations to
become involved in Darfur after 30 June 2007. Let me
simply say that in August 2006, this Council adopted
resolution 1706 (2006) under which 17,300 United
Nations peacekeepers would have been deployed to
Darfur. President Al-Bashir denied consent for that
operation and continues to do so. The three-phase
approach was then agreed by the African Union, the
United Nations and the Sudan in Addis Ababa in
November. I know, Madam Minister, that you played a
direct hand in those negotiations in Addis, but
implementation is again being blocked by President
Al-Bashir.

I think that the time has come when the United
Nations and the African Union must stand together and
insist - very clearly - that President Al-Bashir fulfil
the commitments he has repeatedly made but not
actually implemented. Otherwise, Madam President, as
you said in your opening address, there will be an acute
security problem in Darfur at the end of June.

Thirdly, taking another example, we believe that
the United Nations, and specifically this Council,
should accelerate action on Zimbabwe to match that of
the African Union and other regional organizations
such as the Southern African Development Community
(SADC). In this regard, the United Kingdom welcomes
the discussions to be held on Zimbabwe at the SADC
summit tomorrow. We hope that summit will send a
strong message about the human rights and
humanitarian situation in Zimbabwe, where daily the
news seems to get worse.

We need to strengthen inter-institutional
cooperation and inter-operability between the United
Nations and the African Union on operational and
tactical issues as well as at the strategic level. That
sounds like jargon. It is not. It is at the heart of whether
troops put into theatre can actually do the job together,
working together. It is basic and absolutely essential.

Joint training and simulation exercises, sharing of
lower-level doctrines, joint best practices work are all
crucial in ensuring that the two organizations are
capable of working together on the ground. In this
regard, I am encouraged to see that the African Union
is intending to adopt the model of senior mission
leadership training recently instituted by the United
Nations.

The United Kingdom has great hopes for the
future partnership between the African Union and the
United Nations. We have seen great progress in recent
years, both between us and within the African Union.
For our part, the United Kingdom stands ready to
maintain our support for the partnership and for the
African Union and to help both of them to work even
better in the years to come.

