Mr. Vassilakis (Greece): I would like to thank
Sir, for convening this very important meeting. I would
also like to thank the Under-Secretary-General,
Mr. Egeland, for his informative briefing. I would like
to take this opportunity to express to him our sincere
appreciation for his dedication and hard work in
addressing all kinds of issues, particularly the suffering
of civilians caught in situations of armed conflict.

Greece aligns itself with the statement to be made
later by the Permanent Representative of Finland on
behalf of the European Union.

Only some months ago the Security Council
adopted its latest resolution, 1647 (2006), on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict, demonstrating
its determination to enhance and improve its response
to the protection needs of civilians in armed conflict.
The resolution also reaffirms the pledge of the world
leaders during the World Summit in September last
year to protect their own citizens and the citizens of
other States if the latter manifestly fail to do so. Today,
given the deterioration of the humanitarian situation in
many conflict situations, the resolution remains as
timely as ever. We believe that this meeting offers a
good opportunity to reaffirm our commitment to its full
implementation.

In his earlier presentation, Mr. Egeland painted a
disturbing picture of protection crises around the world
where violence has become deeply entrenched despite
the many efforts made by the international community
to ensure sustained and coordinated international
attention during the post-peacekeeping phase.

We are gravely concerned about that
development. Deliberate violent attacks against
civilians, unchallenged sexual violence against women
and girls, recruitment, trafficking and other forms of
exploitation of children, new waves of displacement
and violence, abuse of displaced persons and refugees
and blatant attacks against humanitarian staff cannot be
tolerated and must come to a halt.

To that one should also add the deliberate attacks
against journalists and media staff in situations of
armed conflict. The number of casualties among that
category of civilians has increased considerably during
the past years. Such attacks aim at interfering with the
free flow and dissemination of information, which is
crucial for the protection of civilians and an important
component in every democratic society.

Journalists are entitled to the protection afforded
to them by the relevant provisions of international
humanitarian law. States and non-State actors should
respect that law. For that reason we welcome
Mr. Egeland's reference to the safety and security of
journalists. With that mind, my country, along with
France, Denmark, Slovakia and the United Kingdom,
will submit to the Security Council a concrete proposal
regarding the protection of journalists in armed
conflict.

Preventing protection crises from becoming
entrenched is an important element of civilian
protection. Prompt and early action is required to
prevent such crises. Systematic reporting to the
Security Council is important to facilitate and
strengthen decision-making and effective response. In
that respect we encourage briefings, not only those by
the Under-Secretary-General, Mr. Egeland, but also by
the High Commissioner for Human Rights regarding
her on-the-ground monitoring of serious violations of
international humanitarian law and human rights law.

Respect for the principles of the rule of law and
international humanitarian law and fighting impunity
are essential for civilian protection. States and non-
State actors have the obligation to respect international
humanitarian law, human rights law and refugee law,
and perpetrators should be brought to justice. In that
respect, the role of the International Criminal Court
and its impact on those committing such atrocities
could be crucial, and the international community and
the States concerned should fully cooperate with the
Court and support its difficult task. National judicial
institutions should also be in a position to tackle
impunity, and local justice systems should be
supported. The Security Council should continue to
give attention to rule of law issues, which should be
incorporated in the mandates of peacekeeping
missions.

The protection of civilians is a complex and
difficult issue, given the many challenges involved.
However, it is important that today's peacekeeping
missions provide protection against violence for
civilians trapped in situations of armed conflict.
Peacekeeping missions should be in a position to
protect innocent civilians and vulnerable populations
against physical violence. The creation of secure

environments in and around the camps to facilitate the
delivery of humanitarian assistance and safeguard
humanitarian staff should be clearly spelled out in the
mandates of the missions. It is also important that the
missions ensure that humanitarian principles are
upheld.

As Under-Secretary-General Guehenno said some
time ago,

"however robust United Nations peacekeeping
operations military capabilities might be, they
alone cannot ensure security in post-conflict
environments absent the right political strategy
and the political will of the relevant national and
international actors." (S/PV.5225, p. 5)

We fully agree with his remarks and believe that such
political will and leadership are needed to bring a war-
torn society together around common agenda and steer
the delicate balance between promoting national
reconciliation and unity, on the one hand, and
accountability for war crimes on the other. Much
remains to be done both at the international level and
in the field of national institution-building and security
sector reform.

If peace and security are to be lasting, many
international and national actors have to work together.

