Mr. Corr (Ireland): I would like, first of all, to
thank you, Mr. President, for arranging today's open
meeting of the Council on the work of the Counter-
Terrorism Committee (CTC). Ireland fully associates
itself with the statement to be delivered later in the
debate by Spain on behalf of the European Union.

Resolution 1373 (2001) set in motion the
construction of global scaffolding against international
terrorism. Clear and defined tasks are required of all
States through resolution 1373 (2001) - tasks relating
to legislative and executive actions against
international terrorism. The provisions of resolution
1373 (2001) involve the establishment and
maintenance of a global consensus of action. Those
who perpetrate acts of international terrorism are the
enemies of all States, and they must be the friends of
none.

It is now realistic to assess what has been
achieved. At one important level, there has been a
dramatic and welcome increase in the number of States
that have ratified some or all of the 12 international
conventions and protocols against terrorism. At another
level, throughout the world legislative measures are
being put in place in response to resolution 1373
(2001), and executive decisions are being taken. In
summary, a strong architectural framework in the fight
by the international community against international
terrorism is now clearly visible.

I want to pay special tribute to the Chairman of
the CTC, Ambassador Greenstock, and his colleagues
in New York and London, for the leadership and
support given to the Committee since its establishment.
We appreciate this work, which has been well done.
My delegation also appreciates the work of the three
Vice-Chairmen - Ambassador Koonjul, Ambassador
Lavrov and Ambassador Valdivieso - and thanks the
experts and the Secretariat for their commitment and
dedication in the complex and difficult work of the
CTC.

At this stage in our debate, I would like to make a
few general points of importance to my delegation.
First, the CTC must continue to avoid at all costs - as
it has done to date - any simplistic formula, such as
"You have succeeded; you have not succeeded", in its
approach to States. Many of the detailed
requirements - on banking or finance, for example -
are extremely complex. Many States - often because
their economies are not fully or even partially
integrated into the global economy - never had any
need until now to put in place technical legislation in
respect of financial flows or regulatory frameworks.
All of this will take time and effort. What is
noteworthy today is how much has already been
achieved. That said, it is important that all States reply
to the CTC as required under resolution 1373 (2001).

Secondly, the CTC must continue to be vigilant in
the extreme in not going beyond the letter or the spirit
of what is required by resolution 1373 (2001). The
CTC, and the wider United Nations, must complement
the work of other institutions, which have their own
specific mandates or roles in the struggle against
terrorism. They must not duplicate this work or replace
it. The role of the United Nations is to provide global
legitimacy, to build a global consensus, to act as the
defender and promoter of multilateralism and
internationalism against those who are enemies of the
international good.

In so doing, we must continue to be guided by the
need to avoid any actions that could undermine this
sense of international legitimacy in the struggle against
international terrorism, just as we must also progress in
our work of protecting that sense of international
legitimacy. As we advance in the implementation of
resolution 1373 (2001), it may well be necessary at
some stage for the Security Council to strengthen and
protect this sense of legitimacy by a renewed mandate
in the light of our experiences to date.

Thirdly, Ireland attaches great importance to
generous assistance by the international community in
supporting the efforts of developing countries to
implement resolution 1373 (2001). That is what we
agreed to do in resolution 1377 (2001). Ireland
welcomes the work of the CTC to date in this area. We
hope the concept of a trust fund will also be kept under
review. We understand the problems but hope that they
can be solved.

Ireland, for its part, is in the process of compiling
a list of experts who could be included in the CTC's
directory of advice and expertise in the areas of
legislative and administrative practices, as set out in
the relevant provisions of resolution 1373 (2001). We
are also ready to support capacity-building in relation
to the specified areas through existing bilateral aid
programmes at country level and the provision of
fellowships for participation in relevant courses or
seminars in Ireland.

Ireland will continue to work with our developing
country partners to come up with a list of areas in
which relevant assistance can be provided, either
within the framework of existing programmes or by
means of additional mechanisms.

Fourthly, and most important, the fight against
international terrorism can never be at the expense of
human rights. This is not a point of narrow emphasis: if
we in the international community go down that
road i and it is a slippery road - then we are lost, as
are the core values that the United Nations stands for.
The United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights, Mary Robinson, in a speech to the
Commonwealth Institute in London on 6 June, spoke of

"a subtle change in emphasis in many parts of the
world; order and security have become the
overriding priorities. In the past, the world has
learned that emphasis on national order and
security often involved curtailment of democracy
and human rights. As a result, a shadow has been
cast".

We need to heed those words of wisdom and warning.

Finally, Ireland fully shares the view that regional
organizations have a critical role to play in the
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001), and we
warmly welcome progress in that area to date.

