Mr. Tuy (Cambodia): First of all, allow me to
express my congratulations to you, Mr. President,
on assuming the presidency of the Council for this
month, and to thank you for organizing this important
debate. I would also like to express my gratitude to the
Secretary-General for briefing the Security Council
on this important issue, which can serve to make our
discussion more comprehensive.

Cambodia aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the Permanent Representative of Viet Nam on
behalf of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations
(ASEAN).

Further to the points made in the ASEAN
statement, I wish to state that Cambodia, as a post-
conflict country, is determined to protect children and
their rights in situations of armed conflicts. As a State
party to the Convention on the Rights of the Child and a
signatory to its Optional Protocol on the involvement of
children in armed conflict, in 1992, Cambodia believes
that the United Nations should continue to work more
to protect children in armed conflicts.

My delegation condemns all forms of violence
perpetrated by the terrorist organizations, particularly
violence against children. As the primary responsibility
for the maintenance of international peace and security
rests with the United Nations, we, as the international
community, must fight this evil scourge resolutely.
Furthermore, we must strengthen the existent legal
instruments for the protection of children in armed
conflicts. To that end, the Secretary-General's report
and other relevant recommendatory documents should
be based on clear, accurate and verifiable data.

As we debate here today, thousands of children
are serving as soldiers in armed conflicts throughout
the world. Some of those children were conscripted,
and some were abducted and forced into combat. Yet
others joined armed groups of their own volition, out of
desperation, having been instilled with the erroneous
ideology of non-State armed groups. Therefore, whether
they partake in the violence and combat, or refuse to
do so, children end up being trapped and victimized.
To prevent the victimization of children, we must
address the deep-rooted causes of conflict. Conflict
prevention is the prerequisite for sustainable peace
and respect for human rights. Poverty, discrimination,
lack of education, social exclusion and inequality only
perpetuate the cycle of violence.

The ongoing intergovernmental negotiation on
the post-2015 sustainable development agenda is an
opportunity to address these issues. It can also inform
the means of implementation on issues relating to the
protection of children in armed conflicts. The post-
2015 sustainable development agenda should continue
to emphasize inclusive, equitable development and
economic growth, aimed at effectively addressing
inequalities and the factors underpinning them. In that
way, it will contribute to creating a more inclusive,
secure and peaceful world.

As stated here today, education should be viewed as
a long-term investment. With knowledge, children can
stay away from being recruited as combatants. Girls
and boys embody the meaning of children. Since we
are giving importance to gender equality, girls should
also enjoy equal opportunities and equal access to
education. Therefore, Cambodia is fully supportive of
the "Let Girls Learn" initiative, as it has been envisaged
and made well-known to the people of Cambodia by
the First Lady of the United States, Michelle Obama,
during her recent three-day official cultural visit to
Siem Reap province from 20 to 22 March.

Ending grave violations against children in
armed conflict requires joint global action. The Royal
Government of Cambodia is committed to working
with our global partners, with Member States and
with United Nations agencies in our effort to end the
victimization of children by non-State armed groups.
My delegation appreciates the dedicated work of the
Council to advance the issue of the plight of children
and to protect children's rights in situations of armed
conflict. The tireless efforts of the Council will
further advance our cause and help ensure that future
generations of children live in freedom and in peace.

