Mr. Lake: I would like to thank you, Mr. President,
for inviting me to participate today. Let me begin by
thanking in absentia Radhika Coomaraswamy and
Alain LeRoy for all of their work. I also want to heartily
welcome our new partnership with Leila Zerrougui
and Herve Ladsous. We very much look forward to
ever stronger work together in this tremendously
important field. Let me also thank Germany and you,
Mr. President, for your devoted, even passionate, work
in this cause and all your work as Chair of the Security
Council Working Group on Children and Armed
Conflict.

More than ever - under the leadership of the
Council, the Secretary-General, you, Mr. President,
and so many others - the issue of children and armed
conflict is getting more of the focus, attention and
action that it deserves, as participants you heard from
my colleagues. But it deserves still more.

In a child's eyes one will find the light of hope
and of promise for the future. But look into the eyes
of former child soldiers, or the eyes of children who
have suffered from terrible abuses, or even the eyes of
those who have simply witnessed the horrors of war.
That light is still shadowed by fear, pain and the terrible
knowledge of humanity at its worst. Those children
have seen too much, too soon.

An orphan boy from a small village recruited at
gunpoint to become a soldier, handed a gun of his own
to recruit others, blinded by prejudice and hate, trained
to kill without emotion. A girl living through the horror
of rape. A boy robbed of his legs after stepping on a
landmine planted outside his school. A sick, bed-ridden
child waiting for medicine that will never arrive in her
village because soldiers stand in the way.

The world is making progress in holding perpetrators
of such acts accountable. The recent verdicts against
Thomas Lubanga by the International Criminal Court,
and against Charles Taylor by the Sierra Leone Special
Court, for example, demonstrate global progress
against impunity and for justice. But accountability
runs in many directions. Just as perpetrators need to
be held accountable for the fate of children in conflict
zones, so do Governments, and so do we.

The nine resolutions adopted by the Council since
1999 represent a clear commitment to accountability
and action on behalf of children trapped in the horror
of conflict. That includes last year's ground-breaking
resolution 1998 (2011) to make attacks on schools and
hospitals an automatic trigger for listing parties in the
Secretary-General's report.

The United Nations monitoring and reporting
mechanism is also built around accountability and a
commitment to end grave abuses of children's rights.
The information on violations collected by United
Nations task forces around the world is helping us
to shape timely and appropriate responses in regions
blighted by conflict, and to meet our goal of protecting
all children.

UNICEF is working closely with Governments
and communities to protect and rehabilitate children
affected by conflict. In addition to monitoring and
reporting violations, we are offering a range of
responses, including mine-risk education, psychosocial
support, vocational training, assistance to survivors of
sexual violence and help for children who are being
reintegrated into society after their association with
armed forces and groups.

We must recognize that the future of those children
hangs in the balance. We cannot leave them to fend
for themselves. This is our commitment and our
accountability. The responsibility of Governments to
their citizens, and of citizens to each other, is most fully
measured by their accountability to the most vulnerable
in their societies. They must therefore support efforts to
monitor, report and respond to grave violations against
children and their rights.

Governments and others must allow United
Nations involvement to help them establish national
systems to prevent sanctions violations and deliver the
right response services to those who need them without
delay. Those actions cannot take place in isolation. They
can only be effective through the active involvement
of all those concerned, including Governments and
communities, as well as the engagement even of those
responsible for perpetuating violations against children.
That work includes negotiations with armed forces and
groups to secure the release of children who have been
recruited, sometimes abducted and forced into combat.

In Mali, for instance, UNICEF and our partners
have engaged with community leaders who are in active
contact with armed parties to the conflict to advocate
for children's rights and to end child recruitment. In
the Central African Republic we are working with three
armed groups with whom we have signed action plans
to release children from their ranks. Similar efforts
are under way in Afghanistan, Chad, Myanmar, the
Philippines, Somalia, South Sudan and elsewhere.

This work is enormously complex, especially in
situations involving cross-border conflicts and refugee
flows into neighbouring countries. For the United
Nations it demands that we leave room for negotiation
and walk a fine line - between our hunger for
justice and our thirst for peace, between our work on
prevention and our work to rehabilitate the victims, and
between our outrage at the perpetrators and our need to
persuade them.

In short, there is a natural tension at the heart of
UNICEF's efforts to deliver impartial humanitarian
assistance while protecting and advocating for children's
rights. That work, of course, is not only inherently
intense, it is also resource-intensive, especially as we
establish the monitoring and reporting mechanism in
new situations and implement various action plans with
parties to the conflicts.

As we accept those necessary costs and ask for help
in managing them, we will always keep our eyes on
our ultimate goals, namely, protecting, rehabilitating
and upholding the rights of children trapped in conflict
zones. When one meets one of these children face-
to-face, as many of us have, one notices something
extraordinary. A few kind words; a welcoming ear of
an adult who is not there to take advantage of them or
to cast judgment upon them; an offer of food, water
or medicine - those simple gestures can bring her or
his guard down, even for just a moment. Despite the
horrors endured, there is resilience there, a glimmer of
gritty hope.

These children are not beyond our reach. Our
message to them must be that noe of us will not turn
away; that our resolve to bring perpetrators to justice
will not falter; and that every one of us accepts the
burden of accountability.

