Mr. Pressman (United States of America): I thank
you, Madam President, for organizing this important
debate. We would also like to thank the Secretary-
General for his briefing.

While the nature of threats to global security has
become more complex and challenging over the course
of the United Nations 70-year history, the partnership
between the United Nations and regional organizations
has become truly indispensable. We have made much
progress in strengthening these partnerships, and we
must collectively recommit to continuing to do so. Part
of that effort will have to grapple with two increasingly
relevant phenomena in the evolving relationship between
regional organizations, subregional organizations and
the United Nations: overlapping responsibilities and
inequities and the need to improve the support provided
by the international community to support the work of
regional organizations.

In the United States about 50 years ago, a
programme known as Neighbourhood Watch was
created. The idea was simple. Neighbours note when
something is awry and they have a vested interest in
ensuring that their communities and neighbours are
safe. Now regional and subregional organizations are
obviously much more than the Neighbourhood Watch of
the international system, but regional and subregional
organizations, as neighbours, are uniquely positioned to
recognize root causes more accurately and to identify
solutions earlier than organizations further away.
When regional or subregional organizations engage,
they do so with the benefit that comes from being a
neighbour. They bring a unique capacity to understand
local experiences, cultures and the complexity of the
challenges being confronted. As neighbours, they are
often better positioned to watch for problems and to act
on them.

Butpeacemakingandpeacekeepingarenotandnever
should become something that concerns neighbours
alone. Indeed, the United Nations system, and United
Nations peacekeeping especially, are premised on the
idea that sometimes those further removed from deeply
engrained challenges - strangers, even, rather than
neighbours - are in a unique position to neutrally and
effectively engaged to protect people endangered by
their neighbours. That is why the Charter of the United
Nations envisions a robust partnership between those
closest to conflict and the United Nations itself. Both
roles are essential.

As the complementary and, at times, overlapping
responsibilities of regional organizations, subregional
organizations and the United Nations develop, there
appears to be an increasing bifurcation of political
and peacekeeping processes. Regional and subregional
organizations have taken on an increasingly important
role in facilitating, if not running, political processes
to resolve conflicts and reach peace agreements, even
when the Security Council has deployed a peacekeeping
operation with responsibility for protecting civilians
from being victimized in that conflict. This bifurcation
of responsibilities sometimes offers important
benefits, but it can also come with a price. While
neighbours bring familiarity and ownership, they can
also bring independent equities and interests. In order
for our partnerships to be effective, we need to share
responsibility and accountability even as we divide our
labour based on comparative advantages.

In South Sudan, while the Security Council has
deployed over 12,000 troops to the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan, the Security Council has
deferred to the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development to lead mediation efforts. Given the
outrageous failure of the parties to reach an agreement
yesterday, support for the regional political process now
must mean a readiness of the Security Council to take
action, mobilize our collective resources, and increase
pressure accordingly on those who frustrate peace. We
must advance meaningful efforts to hold perpetrators
of atrocities accountable.

As part of our commitment to strengthening the
United Nations capacity to support peacekeeping
missions, the United States will co-host a summit this
fall at the United Nations to secure new commitments
and greater international support for United Nations
peacekeeping. We must also, however, ensure that
regional forces have the necessary support, training and
equipment to carry out their critical work. Where the
Security Council has authorized a regional organization,
such as the African Union, to undertake critical actions
to advance international peace and security, we need
to ensure that the regional mission has the resources
needed to execute its mandate effectively.

But just as the Security Council needs to remain
involved when political processes are being carried out
by regional actors, so too does the Security Council
need to retain accountability and oversight when it
authorizes regional or subregional organizations to
undertake peace operations. In particular, we need to
ensure that all operations carried out under Security
Council authority operate with the same respect for
human rights and zero tolerance for sexual exploitation
and abuse.

The stakes for getting the relationship between
regional subregional organizations and the United
Nations right could not be higher. As neighbours close
to a conflict or strangers far from it, each of us must do
more to work cooperatively and effectively to support
our partners in the important work of advancing peace.

