We thank David Shearer for the update. Russia consistently supports the activities of the Blue Helmets in South Sudan, who play an important role in stabilizing the situation in the country. We also listened carefully to Edmund Yakani. South Sudan faces challenges unprecedented in its history. We are convinced that the task of the international community, including the Security Council, is to provide the South Sudanese with the necessary support during the period of formation of this young State. We note that, despite all difficulties, the parties to the conflict have managed to achieve significant progress in the peace process. The formation of new governing bodies and the completion of the pre-transitional period create the necessary conditions for South Sudan to advance towards political stability and national reconciliation, and the successful resolution of urgent tasks of socioeconomic development in the interests of the entire South Sudanese nation. It is important that the parties be ready to overcome disputes through dialogue. We look forward to continuing the implementation of the transitional arrangements as soon as the necessary conditions are in place. We are encouraged by the information that the revitalized Transitional Government of National Unity has achieved an agreement on the distribution of governor posts for 10 states. This opens a window of opportunity to calm the situation, removes obstacles to the peace process and creates the necessary preconditions for reducing the level of intercommunal tension. We commend the overall decline in the level of armed violence since the signing of the 2018 Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in South Sudan. South Sudanese refugees and internally displaced persons are gradually returning to their places of permanent residence. We link this to the implementation of confidence-building measures and contacts between the protagonist parties on the ground. It is important that they continue to respect the ceasefire. We urge the South Sudanese to strictly adhere to these agreements. We also encourage non-signatories to join the State-building process. When evaluating the latest news about intercommunal clashes, Juba is often admonished while the objectively difficult context of developments is often disregarded. South Sudan is experiencing the negative impact of the coronavirus pandemic, which has not spared even the country's leadership. Outbreaks of violence in South Sudan each happen for different reasons at different times and places, but - most importantly - they do not pose a direct threat of large-scale destabilization. We therefore call for less pressure on Juba and more support for the South Sudanese people in this difficult period. We hope that regional organizations will continue to play a leading role in accompanying the South Sudanese peace process. In that regard, we welcome the efforts of the Intergovernmental Authority on Development and the African Union, in accordance with the principle of African solutions to African problems. In conclusion, we would like to emphasize that the progress made in the South Sudanese peace process was not due to the pressure of increased sanctions on the country nor - in any way - because of unilateral restrictions. Instead, the key factor was the contribution of regional mediators. We therefore expect that the Council, in accordance with resolution 2521 (2020), will soon launch a comprehensive review of the sanctions regime with a view to adapting it to the realities on the ground.
