Mr. Elaraby (Egypt) (interpretation from Arabic):
The Security Council exercises today its responsibilities
under the Charter to maintain international peace and
security and to protect legitimacy. In November of last
year the Government of Sierra Leone and the
Revolutionary United Front (RUF) signed the Abidjan
Peace Agreement, which ushered in a new stage in Sierra
Leone, a stage of national reconciliation and accord that
would have allowed the people of Sierra Leone to begin
a new phase of development and peace.

Our hopes were subsequently bolstered by the
presidential elections, the progress of which we monitored
in the Security Council. The international community
attested to the fairness and openness of these elections,
which led to President Alhaji Ahmad Tejan Kabbah
taking power. In this context, we should play tribute to
the historic role played by Ambassador James Jonah
personally in supervising the preparations for the
restoration of the constitutional regime in Sierra Leone.

However, the military coup that took place last May,
overthrowing the Government of President Kabbah and
the constitutional regime, has turned the clock backwards.
I am not going to go into detail regarding the grave
human and social consequences. Everyone is aware of the
profound effects of that setback on the people of Sierra
Leone.

During the last summit meeting of the Organization
of African Unity in Harare, Africa adopted a firm position
vis-a-vis the coup. The African countries unanimously
rejected and refused to recognize the illegal Government,
condemned the coup and its leadership, and demanded
that the international community adopt immediate
measures to restore legitimacy as represented by the
government of President Kabbah. The OAU also fully
supported the efforts of Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) in that context.

This adoption of this unanimous position by the
African countries undoubtedly represents an important
turning point in the modern history of Africa. We are
satisfied that ECOWAS, represented by the five-member
ministerial committee, adopted a pioneering approach, a
gradual approach to deal with the crisis in Sierra Leone.
It began with dialogue and proceeded to the taking of all
possible measures to pressure the coup leaders to
acquiesce to the will of the people of Sierra Leone and to
the will of the international community, renounce power
and allow for the return of the legitimate government
which was democratically elected.

 

It is thus perfectly clear that there is a new, unanimous
African position regarding military coups in the countries
of the continent. This position should definitely be
supported and bolstered by the United Nations.

The draft resolution before the Council today reflects
the international will, and we hope that the leaders of the
coup will understand the dimensions of that will and the
seriousness of the international community's commitment
to see it through. We hope they will use the opportunity of
the ECOWAS meeting which starts tomorrow in Abuja to
make a real and positive response to the proposals of the
ministerial Committee of Five, with a view to finding a
peaceful solution to this crisis.

The draft resolution also reflects a practical framework
for cooperation which we hope will take place between the
United Nations and the regional and subregional
organizations in the context of Chapter VII of the United
Nations Charter.

In the course of negotiating the draft resolution
diverging opinions and proposals were made regarding the
time-frame for the enforcement of the measures contained
in it. Egypt supports the concept of the time-frame for the
present sanctions so that there will be the necessary
flexibility to face various contingencies which require the
imposition of sanctions. We hope the Council will review
comprehensively the present sanctions system in general,
taking into account what the General Assembly recently
adopted in the context of an Agenda for Peace with respect
to this issue. The Security Council should not act within a
framework which differs from principles adopted by the
General Assembly.

The Egyptian delegation is fully convinced that the
ECOWAS countries will seriously consider the exemptions
which guarantee delivery of material and supplies for
humanitarian purposes to Sierra Leone. We hope that there
will be close coordination between ECOWAS and the
United Nations in this respect and that this coordination
will be intensified with the various international
humanitarian agencies so as to make humanitarian
assistance available to the people of Sierra Leone in order
to mitigate their suffering from the impact of these
sanctions.

Egypt supports fully operative paragraph 18, which
urges all States to provide technical and logistical support
to help ECOWAS carry out its responsibilities in the
implementation of this resolution. We hope there will be an
effective international response to that appeal.

Finally, I reiterate the support of Egypt for the draft
resolution.

