Ms. Raemer: I thank you, Madam President, for
inviting me to address the Security Council today. It is
an incredible honour, and while I speak to the Council
representing the residents of the Eshkol region in Israel
along the frontier with Gaza, my views and opinions
are my own and reflect my personal experiences living
in Kibbutz Nirim on the border with the Gaza Strip
since 1975.

Has anyone here ever had to literally run for their
life? When I hear the red-alert early-warning system
for incoming rockets, I know that I have from 5 to
10 seconds to get to someplace safe, regardless of
where I am in my little kibbutz house. From my kitchen,
I can sprint to the safe room in about three seconds.
If it catches me while I am in the shower, I am out of
luck. There is no way I can jump out and make it to the
safe room before impact without slipping. IfI am out
walking my dogs, I either throw myself down next to a
wall or just lie down wherever I am, cover my head and
hope that whatever falls does not fall too close.

Until two years ago, we did not have the Iron Dome
system to protect us. Now we do, but that brings its own
dangers of deadly, falling debris when it makes impact
with the rocket. Every siren means that something - be
it rocket impact or an intercept - will explode nearby,
and, during the 11 rounds of escalated rocket fire that
we have had in the past year and a half, there were
numerous alerts every single day. One thousand eight
hundred rockets were launched at our communities in
the Eshkol region alone during that period - 1,800.
What would anyone here do if that number of proj ectiles
were launched over their country's border?

On 26 August 2014, on what was to become the
final morning of the last major operation - Operation
Protective Edge - my bedroom was invaded by deadly
shrapnel from a mortar that exploded just outside and
ripped through the walls. The electricity of our entire
community was knocked out in that same barrage,
which could have killed me had I been in my bedroom
rather than in my safe room. And here I am, five and
a half years after that bloody summer, speaking before
this great international body, and nothing has changed.
If anything, it has gotten worse.

My community was a paradise for raising children
when mine were growing up, but today, as my two
little granddaughters romp on our lawns, I do not have
the same sense of security for them that I had when
raising my children. Just last week, I stood with Israel's
Ambassador to the United Nations, Danny Danon - and
possibly others in attendance here today - in the bowels
of a now-neutralized terror tunnel, a mere five minutes'
jog from my house. It is sinister and frightening, built
with a complex infrastructure for communications

and electricity that was developed solely for purposes
of death.

Can those here imagine how our children feel when
they know that terrorists could come bursting through
a tunnel under our community at any time? Thanks
to technology, that threat will soon be eliminated, but
there are other threats that throw a shadow over our
lives here in what we like to refer to as "95 per cent
paradise and 5 per cent hell".

Within the past two years, Hamas has been
organizing weekly riots along the border - every
Friday after the group's prayers. The Great March of
Return is, in fact, weekly, violent riots, which involves
throwing Molotov cocktails and grenades, vandalizing
our border fence and attempted infiltrations, which
often spiral into retaliatory rocket fire after someone is
killed from among the rioters.

Every Friday, rather than welcoming in the
peaceful Sabbath, as most of the Jewish world does,
we on the border brace ourselves for the possible
escalation of violence and rocket fire. In fact, we never
know when we will wake up to find our lives put on
pause and roads and schools closed for one to two days,
or possibly longer, owing to rocket and mortar fire.
Just last night, the people in my community were on
alert as the Israel Defense Forces (IDF) killed another
armed terrorist attempting to cut through the border
fence and infiltrate Israel through our fields, as Special
Coordinator Nickolay Mladenov mentioned earlier.

During the past two years, we have also had to live
with a new threat - balloons, kites and drones that have
brought over flaming coals and incendiary explosives
that detonate overhead or ignite our crops. They have
burned down 35 square kilometres of agriculture,
forests and nature reserves. That is comparable to
igniting a little more than half the island of Manhattan.
They have sent over balloons attached to explosive
booby-trapped books and toys. During the past two
years, 17 more terror tunnels have invaded our borders
and have been discovered and neutralized.

As a result, the rate ofpeople seeking psychological
aid in our region has risen by 231 per cent in the past
five years, since Operation Protective Edge. More than
half of them have been children. Yet despite everything
and against all odds and seeming logic, our region
continues to grow and thrive. Our 95 per cent heaven
comprises an award-winning educational system,
innovative agricultural endeavours and beautiful
expanses of desert, which come alive with red poppy
blooms in late winter. All that, in addition to a strong
sense of community pride, encourages young families
to come and settle here despite the challenges.

All of the residents in our region, both on the Israeli
side and the Gazan side, are hostages ofHamas - some
even more literally than us. I am referring to the two
Israeli citizens being held in Gaza and the bodies of
our two fallen soldiers, Hadar Goldin and Oron Shaul.
Eleven times in the past two years, I personally have
been held hostage by Hamas rockets. My life was put on
hold. Work, routines and plans were cancelled. Hamas,
and Hamas alone, decides when there will be a ceasefire.
Even today, Hamas chooses to construct terror tunnels
rather than buildings to house their people or factories
to generate industry. They keep their population
poor and unemployed by funnelling funds from the
international community into their own pockets rather
than to those for whom the aid was intended - their
citizens. Luckily for me, Israel builds safe rooms to
protect its citizens. Every home Within 7 kilometres of
the border has a reinforced, rocket-proof safe room built
on its premises paid for by the Government of Israel.
Hamas, on the other hand, builds safe rooms to protect
its weapons. Hamas brings Gazans, including women
and children, to the border riots to lose life or limb.
Hamas aims its rockets at Israeli civilian communities,
including my own, from within schools, mosques and
homes, knowing full well that the IDF is reluctant to
retaliate where there are innocent civilians nearby who
could be harmed.

I know that not all Gazans are part of Hamas. I
know that most Gazans want the same things that I
do - safety for their children, food on their tables and
to enable their children to have a horizon of hope. I
have that horizon because I have seen it. When I came
to live in my kibbutz, we used to drive to the beach
or the market in Gaza, and Gazans used to come to
my area. I have that horizon because I am personally in
contact with Gazans who want to educate their children
to have different hopes and realities. I have that horizon
because I have spoken with Gazans and worked with
them recently on educational projects, for which they
risk their lives. I have even had a chance to hug a Gazan
woman who lives just on the other side of our border
from my home, a couple of weeks ago, right here in
Tel Aviv, while taking part in the women's leadership
seminar, run by the Geneva Initiative.

It is only a fence that divides us. We all know that
Gaza and the western Negev mirror each other, with
the same climate, fauna and flora. A border fence can
keep people in or out, but it cannot stop the pollution
that threatens the underwater aquifers that supply
water to both sides of the border, due to the crumbling
sewage system in Gaza caused by the conflicts of
recent years and by Hamas's failure to prioritize
civilian infrastructure.

In preparation for this talk, I spoke with our mayor,
Mr. Gadi Yarkoni, who lost both legs in one of the
rocket attacks on the last day of Operation Protective
Edge. Mr. Yarkoni said that he knows that the only
solution is for us to live together. He told me that he
and the other mayors of the region have extended their
hands in peace, cooperation and collaboration. I asked
him how they did that. That is when he told me about
the plans that we have for building an electricity plant
to provide electricity to Gaza, with the backing of Arab
and European investors. He also described the plans
that they have for another collaboration to answer the
needs of Gazans, a plant for treating sewage in Gaza
and turning it into electricity, because Gazans do not
have electricity 24/7, thanks to the infighting between
Fatah and Hamas. The people of our region in Israel
know that if we want our lives to be good and that for
our region to thrive and prosper, we need to see to it
that our neighbours, too, can thrive and prosper.

I live in the shadow of the threat of rockets and
attack tunnels, and I know only too well that until
the Gazans have something to live for, they will only
have reasons to die for. I understand that until the
unemployment level drops and their ability to put
food on their tables increases, our safety will remain
compromised. I have no doubt that until Palestinians in
Gaza are able to construct housing, they will continue
to construct tunnels and rockets, and that until they
are able to raise their children in homes rather than in
the rubble of the conflict, they will be raising another
generation of Israel-haters, and my grandbabies will not
be able to play outside without their mother worrying
about the eventuality of a blaring siren.

Coexistence begins with education and
responsibility. I hold Hamas responsible for finding a
way to stop investing in terrorism and incitement to
hatred, and to start making choices that will enable
the people of Gaza to thrive and prosper. I call on my
Government and the leaders of the Palestinian side
to get to the table to work out a long-term political
agreement. I call on the countries of the world and their
representatives, the members of the Security Council,
to compel Hamas to abandon its path of violence and
empower all the people in our region, on both sides of
the border, and provide them with the conditions they
need to live in a way in which the human rights of all of
us will be truly respected.

We all need to be able to raise the next generation
to respect our neighbours, not to fear them. That is
clearly not a conflict that can be resolved by weapons.
It can be resolved only by courageous leaders and
diplomacy. I warmly invite you, Madam President, and
the Ambassadors in attendance today to come visit me
in my 95 per cent heaven and see it first-hand.

