Mr. Kama] (Pakistan): On behalf of the
delegation of Pakistan, I should like to convey warm
congratulations to you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month and to
express our hopes for the successful discharge of your
responsibilities.

I should also like to convey my delegation's
appreciation to Ambassador Karel Kovanda for the very
fine manner in which he presided over the work of the
Council last month.

It is with a sense of deep shock and concern that the
Government of Pakistan views the recent action of the
Israeli Government to confiscate 53 hectares, from East
Jerusalem, belonging to Palestinian Arabs and to use this
land for Israeli settlement. We fully support the
Declaration recently adopted in Bandung by the
Committee on Palestine of the Non-Aligned Movement,
which states, inter alia, that

"all Israeli practices aimed at changing the status
and demographic composition of Jerusalem and the
establishment of settlements and expansion of
existing settlements are null and void."

The details of the Israeli action and the contemplated
action of confiscation of additional hundreds of acres of
Palestinian land have been described by the Permanent
Observer of Palestine. As has been pointed out by
Ambassador Nasser Al-Kidwa, the decisions are in
contravention of the Fourth Geneva Convention of 1949
as well as the relevant Security Council resolutions. This
action is particularly disturbing as it has a direct bearing
on the peace process which had been arrived at through
bold and courageous initiatives taken by the Palestinian
and Israeli leadership.

The international community has viewed the historic
Declaration of Principles as paving the way for a
comprehensive, just and lasting peace in the Middle East.
The recent Israeli measures are, therefore, in direct
contradiction with the spirit of the Declaration. They also
contradict the letter of the Declaration, which clearly

 

stated that the permanent status negotiations on the
remaining issues, including Jerusalem, would commence as
soon as possible, but not later than the beginning of the
third year of the interim period.
It is imperative to maintain the present momentum that
has been attained in the negotiating process. We share the
expectation of the international community that there should
be no delay in the implementation of the agreements
reached so far, and that provisions of those agreements
should be fully complied with by all parties. A sincere and
concerted effort needs to be made to achieve peace and
stability in Palestine. To achieve this objective, which has
for so long defied solution, it is essential that all new
settlements should be stopped forthwith. It is only by taking
such an obvious and imperative measure that true peace in
the Middle East can be achieved.

The Government and the people of Pakistan are
incensed at the latest acts of the Israeli Government and
call upon it to rescind its decisions which have put the
peace process in danger. They also call upon the Security
Council to take urgent measures to redress this grave
situation as it imperils the peace of the Holy City of
Al-Quds Al-Sharif. We firmly believe that the Council has
the duty to order the Israeli authorities to reverse the
declared confiscation orders and to desist from taking any
further illegal measures.

That is Why we support the draft resolution before the
Security Council.

