The President: I will now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Indonesia.

Like others, I want to thank High Representative
Valentin Inzko for his important briefing. We assure
him of our support. Unlike our German colleague,
I hope it does not take another 10 years for him to
complete his job. We would like to see more progress.

My statement will focus on three key messages. The
first is making progress on the five objectives and two
conditions. My delegation attaches great importance
to reaching those targets in order to underpin longer-
term stability. We will need the strong and relentless
commitment and dedication of all stakeholders in
Bosnia and Herzegovina to achieve those targets. As
many others have done this morning, we therefore
encourage the country's authorities to make progress
on the five objectives and two conditions. That also
means that everyone should focus on full compliance
with the General Framework Agreement for Peace.

My second point is on the establishment of the
rule of law. Indonesia is pleased to see meaningful
progress, as shown by the Parliament of Bosnia and
Herzegovina's adoption of numerous new laws at many
levels. Nonetheless, enforcing those laws is still the key
factor. We support the High Representative's View on
the necessity of maintaining the rule of law, particularly
with regard to the many unimplemented court decisions.
We also share his concern about the limited progress
made on the anti-corruption measures that have not yet
been implemented. The rule of law should be respected
in order to preserve and further strengthen the basic
structure of democracy. We believe that Bosnia and
Herzegovina will find its own way to democracy, but
the bedrock of democracy is the rule of law. No country
can maintain a compass or moral guidance without it.

That brings me to my third point, which is unity.
Bosnia and Herzegovina is undeniably multi-ethnic
and multicultural, but we must focus on what make us
stronger together, not on what divides us. Coming from
Indonesia, which has more than 1,200 ethnic groups
and more than 650 languages, and whose people live
on 17,000 different islands, we have found strength,
stability and prosperity in being together. Unity is
important. Although the differences are real, we must
act together for a better future. Progress will be a
long way off in Bosnia and Herzegovina until there is
unity in the country. I believe that it is time to move
forward. As an example and as mentioned by the High
Representative, local elections in Mostar should be held
immediately to ensure the participation of all people
of Bosnia and Herzegovina in determining their future
as a country. For Indonesia, the priority is clear. The
people's interests must be put first.

I would like to conclude by once again expressing
our long-standing support for the authorities of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, with a view to reaching a
lasting solution that can accommodate the needs of all
stakeholders and, most importantly, the needs of the
people of Bosnia and Herzegovina. We underscore the
critical need for respecting the country's sovereignty
and territorial integrity, together with a shared sense of
ownership and belonging among the people.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I give the floor to the representative of Bosnia
and Herzegovina.
