Mrs. Viotti (Brazil) (spoke in Spanish): I would
like to extend to you, Mr. President, our full solidarity
in this time when Mexico is confronting the serious
swine flu epidemic. I also wish to express the
appreciation of my delegation for the presence of
Foreign Minister Patricia Espinosa at this discussion.
Her participation adds even more political significance
to our dealing with the important topic that brings us
together today. It also underlines Mexico's
commitment to this issue and celebrates Mexico's
competent presidency of the Council.

(spoke in English)

I would like to thank the Secretary-General for
his statement this morning and for the report before us
(S/2009/158). I also wish to commend Ms. Radhika
Coomaraswamy for the remarkable work she has been
doing. I wish to recognize as well the important
contribution that the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations and UNICEF bring to our common
endeavours.

The moving testimony of Grace Akallo is a
reminder to all of us of the need to pursue and
strengthen our efforts to protect children in armed
conflict.

My delegation is pleased with the progress
achieved in the implementation of Council resolutions
on the protection of children in armed conflict,
especially resolution 1612 (2005). Monitoring and
reporting mechanisms have been established for all
situations listed in annexes I and II to the Secretary-
General's 2007 report (S/2007/757). Just as important,
new action plans have either been signed or are being
discussed with parties to conflicts. We encourage the
continuation of such efforts, always in close
consultation with interested Member States.

We also welcome progress made in
mainstreaming children and armed conflict issues in
United Nations peacekeeping and political missions.
One aspect that deserves particular attention is the
protection of displaced persons camps, where
recruiting of children is reported to take place. Failing
to protect families and individuals from such a scourge
not only means inflicting new suffering on people
already struck by tragedy, but threatens the
Organization and its missions with unacceptable
discredit.

There has also been progress in specific conflict
situations. However, in reviewing the document, my
delegation was particularly struck by instances where a
variety of State actors were engaged in acts of violence

against children or in behaviour that endangered them.
Although such acts are to be condemned regardless of
their perpetrators, States bear a special responsibility.
They must lead by example in their own territories and
in those territories where their forces are placed for
whatever reason and purpose. From the mountains in
Afghanistan to the towns in Gaza and the villages in
Africa, children in armed conflicts must find in States
an active protector and never an agent of violence,
even if unintended.

Brazil is particularly concerned with all forms of
sexual violence against children in armed conflicts.
Not only are such crimes particularly traumatizing but
they may also pose further obstacles to future
reconciliation. We therefore support efforts to better
monitor violations, provide reliable information on
sexual abuse by forces of all origins and improve
coordination among United Nations agencies. The
proposed inclusion of rape and other grave sexual
violence as a trigger for inclusion in the annexes to the
Secretary-General's report certainly merits careful
consideration in light of the mandate of the Security
Council. In so doing, Council members should reflect
on the most appropriate way to address killing and
maiming of children.

Brazil is also concerned with the reintegration of
children in countries emerging from conflict. The
Peacebuilding Commission has an important role to
play in that matter. Disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programmes must address the recovery
and development of children affected by violence
committed by armed forces.

The report of the Secretary-General is yet another
powerful call to Member States to fight violence
against children in armed conflicts. We should heed the
call. In so doing, we will help lay a solid basis for
peace, stability and human development not only in
countries emerging from conflict, but also in their
regions. Importantly, the future of those children will
have been safeguarded and our mission accomplished.

