Mr. Komada (Slovakia): I am delighted to be able
to congratulate you warmly, Mr. President, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council,
and to wish Sweden every success in promoting global
security and stability during its term as an elected
member of the Council for 2017 and 2018. I would also
like to join others in thanking the Secretary-General
for his briefing on how he intends to improve our peace
and security architecture's functioning in the areas of
conflict prevention and sustaining peace.

I would like to take this opportunity to condemn
the terror attacks that took place in Afghanistan today
and to express our condolences to the families of the
victims and our wishes for a speedy recovery for the
injured. We believe that the perpetrators of such acts
must be held accountable for them.

While we align ourselves with the statement
delivered early by the observer of the European Union,
we also support the statement made by the Chair of the
Group of Friends of Mediation. I would now like to
make some observations in my national capacity.

In 2015, all the major peace and security reviews
stressed the centrality of conflict prevention to the work
of the United Nations. We believe we should consider
taking eight steps to help to implement that prevention.

First, we should increase the sensitivity to conflict
and strengthen the foundations for conflict prevention
across the whole United Nations system, so that the
Organization is in a better position to prepare and
implement preventive action and mediation in order
to address threats to international peace and security
more efficiently.

We also need continuing engagement and greater
coherence and coordination among the General
Assembly, the Security Council and the Economic and
Social Council, consistent with their mandates as set
out in the Charter of the United Nations.

With regard to early warning, we should put
considerable emphasis on the importance of detecting
emerging conflicts early, in order to prevent them from
erupting in the first place. The Secretary-General
should provide the Security Council with good analysis
and correct, detailed information and advice.

Where mediation and gender equality are
concerned, we should to draw on the best available
expertise in the global community of mediators, both
men and women. By now it is a well-established fact
that women's involvement in mediation and conflict
prevention is essential rather than optional.

Strengthening and streamlining the Secretariat's
political, strategic, analytical and deployment
capacities would benefit both the Security Council and
the wider membership.

Regarding engagement with regional organizations,
we should consider taking further steps to promote
closer operational cooperation between the United
Nations and its regional partners.

In the area of national capacities, the United
Nations should do more to help countries build their
own national capacities for conflict prevention.

Last but not least, we believe that we can arrive at
more effective measures by examining the root causes
of conflict. We encourage the Secretary-General to
propose the measures needed to improve management
and financing within the Secretariat, including
suggesting and identifying funding for strengthening
and streamlining prevention and mediation capacities.
My delegation is ready to work with the Secretary-
General on developing a comprehensive, modern and
effective operational peace architecture that integrates
prevention more systematically into the three pillars
of the work of the United Nations. In that context,
Slovakia stands ready to support and contribute to the
preparation and holding in September 2017 of a high-
level meeting on peacebuilding and sustaining peace.
In spite of the many successful efforts that the United
Nations has made in the past to help entire nations and
millions of people, in many situations we have either
arrived late, or were unable to intervene, or have been
prevented by subjective political interests from even
discussing the possibility of how to prevent conflicts,
despite having plenty of evidence of emerging threats.

It has been generally recognized that nationally
owned institution-building efforts are at the core
of peacebuilding. When the Security Council
unanimously adopted resolution 2151 (2014), it
reaffirmed that reforming the security sector in post-
conflict environments is critical to consolidating peace
and stability; promoting poverty reduction, the rule of
law and good governance; extending legitimate State
authority; and preventing countries from relapsing
into conflict.

Slovakia, as a long-term troop-contributing country
that places strong emphasis on applying prevention
measures to broader multilateral concepts, stands ready
to contribute and offer its capacities and experience,
in particular in the area of security sector reform, in
collaboration with members of the Group of Friends of
Security Sector Reform, the relevant departments of
the Secretariat and external partners.

A recent report of the International Peace Institute
states that sustaining peace is "a goal and a process to
build a common vision of society". While this process is
hard to define and harder to break down into concrete,
operational steps, we have a number of building blocks
at our disposal, including, but not limited to, greater
links between peace, development and human rights;
inclusive national ownership, where local actors have
a consistent voice and women and youth play a critical
role; and more strategic and close partnerships with
diverse stakeholders that are better utilized.

Last year, during the Secretary-General campaign,
the words "prevention" and "sustainable development"
were among those most quoted by all candidates,
and rightly so. Prevention may make it possible to
save considerable resources needed for sustainable
development, and sustainable development may prevent
conflict relapse, which is clearly a win-win situation.

Finally, another word often quoted was
"implementation". Indeed, if we implement our
agreements under the pillars of development and
peacekeeping/peacebuilding, and support the efforts
of the Secretary-General to strengthen those pillars
within the Secretariat, we may be very well on our way
to achieving a peaceful and sustainable planet.
