Mr. Valle (Brazil): Brazil is indeed very pleased
to see you, Ambassador Cesar Mayoral, holding the
presidency of the Security Council once again. We are
thankful to Ms. Hannelore Hoppe for her presentation
of the Secretary-General's report on the important item
under consideration. We associate ourselves with the
statement made by the representative of Guyana on
behalf of the Rio Group.

The ready availability and misuse of small arms
and light weapons pose a great threat to the security of
States. Such weapons exacerbate conflicts, fuel
international terrorism, undermine peacebuilding
efforts and contribute to immense suffering. The
subject of small arms, whether in the context of
disarmament, national security, public security or from
a humanitarian perspective, must therefore be
discussed in all relevant and appropriate forums. A
solution to this problem will require the commitment
of all States and the assistance of civil society, as well
as the necessary input of international, regional and
subregional organisms.

The delegation of Brazil is pleased to see that the
Secretary-General's report indicates that some progress
has been achieved by the General Assembly in the
implementation of his recommendations since our last
debate on small arms. The steps taken by the General
Assembly towards combating the illicit trade in small
arms are crucial. Despite national efforts, there are still
loopholes in the regime for the legal transfer of arms
that allow for their diversion to the illegal market.
Much more remains to be done.

The international community has been working
together in order to establish effective mechanisms to
deal with the illicit traffic in small arms and light
weapons. These efforts have been successfully
conducted under the auspices of the General Assembly,
which is the primary forum for dealing with issues
related to the international disarmament and non-
proliferation regime. In that context, attention should
continue to be given to the process of monitoring the
implementation of the measures contained in the
Programme of Action of the 2001 Conference on the
Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All
Its Aspects. This is particularly important in the light
of the upcoming Conference to review the
implementation of the Programme of Action.
The adoption by the Security Council of a
resolution on small arms is a contribution to those
efforts, given that small arms are the ones most used in
conflicts, including those under Security Council
consideration. The resolution underlines the
importance of multilateralism in dealing with global
challenges and is a timely initiative towards
addressing, in particular, the recommendation
contained in the Secretary-General's report for greater
interaction between the Security Council and the
General Assembly in developing a comprehensive
United Nations policy on small arms.

Brazil attaches great importance to the issue of
the illicit trade in small arms and light weapons, given
its adverse effects on national public security. Brazil
has adapted its legislation to current necessities. In

2003, President Lula sanctioned an innovative
Disarmament Statute, which restricts the bearing and
possession of and commerce in arms, and criminalizes
international arms trafficking. Brazil has also adopted a
national arms system as a measure of preventive
control.

At the subregional and regional levels, there have
also been important developments. Along with the
reinforcement of internal legislative measures, Brazil,
together with its MERCOSUR partners, is
progressively strengthening cooperation to curb the
illicit trade in small arms and light weapons.

At the global level, Brazil attaches the utmost
importance to the Programme of Action adopted by the
2001 Conference. Like other countries affected by the
illicit trade in small arms and light weapons, we
emphasize the need for concrete measures to be applied
by States in the follow-up process to the Conference. It
is our collective duty to address the problems and
outstanding issues identified at both Biennial Meetings,
thus paving the way for the June Conference.

In order to fully implement the goals set out by
the Programme of Action, the international community
must address the many areas that so far have not been
adequately dealt with, such as marking and tracing,
export and import controls and brokering.

As regards marking and tracing, during the
recently concluded negotiations on the instrument to
enable States to identify and trace illicit small arms and
light weapons, Brazil supported legally binding
commitments. Regrettably, in spite of the strong
support of the vast majority of delegations, measures to
this effect are still lacking. We continue to believe,
however, that giving legally binding status to the new
Instrument would considerably improve the
effectiveness of the initiatives in this area. Brazil also
called for the inclusion of regulations related to
ammunition in the Instrument. The group, however,
could not reach consensus on this issue either, despite
the fact that nearly all existing multilateral treaties on
the matter recognize the intrinsic connection between
the problem of illicit small arms and their ammunition,
and the need to deal with both in a coordinated manner.

Brazil has also been actively supporting
discussions on the adoption of international controls on
transfers of small arms and light weapons. Such
controls may include common criteria for the
authorization of transfers - provided that such criteria
are objective, transparent and non-discriminatory - as
well as common operational procedures for the
enforcement of national and international regulations
on exports, imports and transit of small arms and light
weapons. In this context, one of the most urgently
needed measures is an effective ban on transfers of
weapons to non-State actors not duly authorized by the
competent authorities of the importing State. Within
the United Nations, we expect States to agree on basic
common control and cooperation elements, so that
brokering activities can be effectively controlled and
illicit brokering halted.

We are confident that the international
community will carry on its work in a cooperative
manner so that these major deficiencies do not prevent
the steadfast combat against the scourge of the illicit
trade of small arms and light weapons. Brazil will
continue to work with determination towards achieving
that goal.

