Ms. Wolcott Sanders (United States of America): I would like to thank all three chairmen for
their briefings. Terrorism and the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction are the pre-eminent
threats to international peace and security, and the
Council has a critical responsibility to counter those
threats. Ambassadors Loj, Mayoral and Burian show
dedicated leadership that helps to drive the
international community's fight against terrorism and,
in Chairman Burian's case, the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction and their means of
delivery, including the threat that terrorists and other
non-State actors could access those items.

Today's presentations all refer to cooperation
among the committees, which is essential and must be
enhanced. The committees are the Council's public
voice on terrorism, regularly interacting with States,
other parts of the United Nations system, as well as

Sll'V.5446

 

international and regional organizations. For the
Council's counter-terrorism efforts to succeed, they
must speak with one voice on terrorism and operate in
a coherent and coordinated manner. To do so, the
Counter-Terrorism Executive Directorate (CTED) and
the Monitoring Team of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999) must conduct more
joint visits to States. When the two expert bodies
cannot do so, they should coordinate their visits to
produce the broadest impact. The two committees
should share information they gather on those visits
and, as appropriate, coordinate follow-up. We also urge
the committees and their experts to consult one another
more on engagement with other international and
regional organizations to be sure that those efforts
reinforce one another. Finally, reporting requests also
need careful thought and review to avoid reporting
fatigue.

We remain concerned that States still have much
to do to implement the obligations the Council has
established. The Secretary-General's recently released
recommendation for a counter-terrorism strategy has
called on the Council bodies dealing with terrorism to
develop standards of accountability and compliance
against which individual States' efforts can be
measured. The Council should take the steps necessary
to ensure that its subsidiary bodies heed that call.

I would like to say a few brief words about each
presentation.

The United States appreciates the leadership of
Chairman Loj, particularly her push for the Counter-
Terrorism Committee (CTC) to achieve concrete
results. We also are grateful for the hard work and
expertise of the Committee's Executive Directorate,
under Ambassador Ruperez's leadership.

We welcome the CTC's recent accomplishments.
We applaud its efforts to streamline its reporting
procedures and to keep the CTC and States focused on
the implementation of resolution 1373 (2001). We also
are pleased to hear that the CTC is preparing its fifth
special meeting with international and regional
organizations, as part of its work to strengthen
coordination with those organizations and highlight
issues that have yet to receive the attention they
deserve, namely restricting terrorist travel and denying
terrorist safe haven. To achieve the best results, all
United Nations Members must be invited to participate
as observers, as in previous meetings.

We also welcome CTED's outreach to potential
donors on issues concerning technical assistance. The
United States provides extensive technical assistance,
including, for example, $1.5 million for the Pacific
Islands Forum to enhance existing anti-money-
laundering and counter-terrorism finance regimes in
that region. We also welcome New Zealand's
successful programme to help Pacific Islands Forum
States prepare reports to the CTC, as well as to the
committees established pursuant to resolutions 1267
(1999) and 1540 (2004).

Facilitating technical assistance must not become
an end in itself for the CTC, however. The CTC must
remain focused on its primary mandate - monitoring
States' implementation of their obligations under
resolution 1373 (2001). If States have received
technical assistance but still have not met their
obligations, the CTC must take action to ensure that
they do so. We welcome the CTC's new preliminary
implementation assessment tool, which presents a
useful way to measure States' implementation of
resolution 1373 (2001). We are glad that the CTC and
its CTED are working to identify best practices or sets
of best practices relevant to resolution 1373 (2001).
Once they have done so, the CTC should endorse or
adopt and disseminate those best practices, and use
them to measure States' compliance with resolution
1373 (2001).

Looking ahead, we hope that the CTC's next
work programme will cover a 180-day period. Doing
so will help streamline its work, freeing up the CTC
and CTED to focus on States' implementation of
resolution 1373 (2001), and not on administrative
matters.
The Committee established pursuant to resolution
1267 (1999) has focused on many important issues
since Ambassador Mayoral's last briefing and the
United States commends his leadership. The
Committee, with the invaluable help of its Monitoring
Team, is working hard to strengthen the sanctions
regime, address States' concerns, and ensure that the
international community remains energized and united
in fighting Al-Qaida and the Taliban.

Under his stewardship, the 1267 Committee
turned its attention to the Afghan Government's
requests to delist former Taliban members who have
completed the reconciliation programme. The United
States strongly supports Afghanistan's efforts to

S/l'V.5446

 

reconcile former Taliban to the Afghan Government.
We appreciate Ambassador Mayoral's decision to send
the Monitoring Team to Kabul to strengthen the
dialogue between the Committee and the Afghan
Government and to gather the information necessary
for the Committee to hold a constructive discussion on
the delisting requests.

In a further move to bolster dialogue, he recently
travelled to Qatar, Yemen and Saudi Arabia, as he
mentioned. All three States are important allies in the
fight against Al-Qaida. The United States was pleased
to join his delegation. Meetings with Member States
are often the most effective way to improve
cooperation and resolve differences, and thus help to
strengthen sanctions implementation.

Finally, Ambassador Mayoral is presiding over
the Committee's important discussion about revising
the listing and delisting guidelines. Reflecting our
commitment to fairness and transparency in the
Committee's work, the United States has submitted a
comprehensive package of recommendations. We
realize that the task is difficult, but we hope the
Committee will focus on this important issue and will
remain flexible in order to reach agreement.

With regard to the 1540 Committee and
Ambassador Burian, we welcome the Council's recent
adoption of resolution 1673 (2006). Resolution 1540
(2004) is a vital step in the international effort to
address the threat to international peace and security
posed by the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction (WMD) and their means of delivery,
including to terrorists and States that seek to use
proliferation of those items to threaten the civilized
world. As the 2006 United States National Security
Strategy states, "There are few greater threats than a
terrorist attack with WMD". Resolution 1540 (2004), if
fully implemented, will ensure that no State or non-
State actor is a source of WMD proliferation for
terrorists.

The Committee has a crucial role in assessing
States' implementation of the resolution and ensuring
that States remain focused on fully implementing its
requirements. As the Committee's April 2006 report to
the Council (S/2006/257) illustrates, much remains to
be done. The Committee must work with States to
identify gaps they must close to comply fully with
resolution 1540 (2004). The Committee should aim to
establish concrete standards for measuring States'

compliance with their obligations under resolution
1540 (2004), taking as an initial starting point the
elements of its matrix.

We also agree that the Committee should
continue to serve as a clearing house for information
concerning technical assistance. The United States is
working on its own plan to determine what assistance
we can provide other States to fully implement
resolution 1540 (2004). We encourage other
Governments to reach out to those that need to build
their capacity to comply with the resolution.

One vital mechanism to counter proliferation that
the Committee has not addressed adequately is the
need to choke off the supply of funds to proliferators.
Whatever else motivates proliferation, there can be no
doubt that it is money-driven. In that context, the
Committee must pay more attention to the provisions
of resolution 1540 (2004) that require States to take
measures against proliferation financing.

Last June, the United States took steps to
implement those obligations, when President Bush
issued Executive Order 13382. That order, consistent
with our obligations under resolution 1540 (2004),
establishes a targeted financial sanctions program that
blocks the assets of designated WMD proliferators and
their support networks. The order also prohibits United
States nationals and others within the jurisdiction of
the United States from engaging in transactions with
those to whom the United States has applied such
sanctions. We stand ready to share our experiences and
efforts with the Committee and with all interested
States, and we look forward to engaging in the
Committee's discussions on this issue.

