Mr. Gata Mavita wa Lufuta (Democratic Republic of the Congo) (spoke in French): Since this is the first
time I have taken the floor in the Council, I would like at
the outset to perform the pleasant duty of congratulating
you, Sir, on your accession to the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of October. I would
also like to echo the unanimous commendations of the
Russian presidency of the Council last month.

I would like to sincerely thank Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon for his commitment to the defence and
promotion of the purposes and principles of the Charter
of the United Nations, as well as for the tireless efforts
he continues to lead to restore peace in my country, the
Democratic Republic of Congo.

This meeting also gives me the opportunity to
greet Mr. Martin Kobler, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, and Mr. Said Djinnit, Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Great Lakes
Region. I am grateful to them for their presentation of
the Secretary-General's report on the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (S/2015/741), and that on the
implementation of the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework for the Democratic Republic of Congo and
the Region (S/2015/735). I also acknowledge the key
nature of the briefings that they have just made.

I would like to confine myself to briefly setting
out the points of view of my Government on a certain
number of questions raised in the reports before us.

In regard to child protection, in particular the issue
of child soldiers, my Government recalls that since
2001 the recruitment of children has been formally
outlawed in my country. Indeed, the Government has
taken drastic measures to eradicate the phenomenon,
first by carrying out a biometrics census within the
army, and then through the enactment and strict
enforcement of the law and other regulatory measures
on child protection.

To date, with 46,000 child soldiers identified by the
Government and returned to civilian life, there are no
more children within the Forces armees de la Republique
democratique du Congo (FARDC), as attested to by
the joint audit mission conducted by UNICEF and the
Democratic Republic of Congo from October 2014
to March 2015, whose report was transmitted to the
United Nations on 22 May. The Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo is determined to
neutralize all armed groups that recruit children. As
pointed out in paragraph 71 of the current report, and
citing the example of the decision of the Military High
Court dated 8 November 2014, which found a senior
officer of the national army guilty for sexual violence
and child recruitment and demoted him, we reaffirm
here our firm determination to bring to justice all
persons found guilty of engaging in child recruitment,
particularly the supposed perpetrators of the kinds of
violations inscribed on the list.

As to the issue of sexual violence, which rightly
alarms national and international public opinion, His
Excellency Mr. Joseph Kabila Kabange, President of
the Republic, has taken draconian measures to eradicate
these scourges, which were due mainly to newly
integrated armed groups. In response, the Supreme
Commander took strong measures, particularly by
decreeing zero tolerance in that sphere, by deploying
mobile courts throughout the country to render justice,
by prioritizing the diligent judicial treatment of cases
of sexual violence for a total of 135 judgments handed
down in 2014, by targeting senior officers of the army,
and by appointing a special representative responsible
for combating sexual violence and the recruitment of
child soldiers.
Today, thanks to the active cooperation of the
United Nations system as a whole, multilateral and
bilateral partners, and civil society through the
implementation and supervision of the military plan on
combating sexual Violence of October 2014, significant
progress has been made by the Democratic Republic
of the Congo in combating sexual violence and the
recruitment of child soldiers. I would ask the Security
Council to take due note thereof, and to duly take into
account those positive developments of the situation in
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

Turning to neutralization of the Forces democratiques
de liberation du Rwanda (FDLR), the FARDC has
itself conducted operations of forced disarmament
against that negative force following the withdrawal of
MONUSCO forces. Initially estimated at 1,200 FDLR
elements - a figure confirmed by the joint mission of
the chiefs-of-staff of the countries of the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region (ICGLR),
including that of the Republic of Rwanda - FDLR
numbers have been significantly reduced. The rise in
power of the FARDC and the effectiveness of their
operations against the FDLR have achieved significant
degradation of that negative force. Moreover, vast
human and material sacrifices have been made by the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
allowing us to achieve the following results. During
the phase of voluntary surrender, from May 2014 to
20 January 2015, 438 FDLR surrendered; during the
intermediate phase, from 2 to 27 January 2015, 13
FDLR surrendered; and during the forced disarmament
phase, from 28 January to 31 July 2015, 415 FDLR were
neutralized. As to the residual FDLR force, 334 FDLR
fighters remain to be neutralised.

As the report of the Secretary-General states,
disarmed FDLR ex-combatants have been cantoned in
well-identified sites. Their number can therefore easily
be certified. Responding on 11 February to a question
from an elected member of the Standing Committee
on Foreign Affairs, Cooperation and Security of the
Rwandan Parliament, General James Kabarebe, the
Rwandan Minister of Defence, affirmed that the FDLR
no longer constituted a military threat to Rwanda. In
other words, even the Rwandan authorities recognize
the remarkable progress achieved to put to an end to the
threat of that negative force.

The Government of the Democratic Republic of
Congo wishes to confirm its firm resolve to continue
operations against all negative forces until their total
neutralization. The support of MONUSCO and that of
the United States Africa Command, where it is most
needed, in support of the efforts of the Government, is
greatly appreciated and we thank them sincerely.

My Government reiterates its appeal for greater
involvement on the part of the international community
in general, and of the Security Council in particular, in
the repatriation to Rwanda or the swift reintegration in
a third country outside the Great Lakes region of FDLR
ex-combatants who have been disarmed and cantoned
in Walungu, Kayabayonga and Kisangali. Pending
their repatriation or reintegration, material provision
for those people and their families should continue to
be provided by the international community so as to
prevent any risk of backsliding, with unpredictable
consequences.

Turning to the specific case of the former
Mouvement du 23 mars (ex-M23), and the sluggishness
noted in the implementation of the Nairobi Declaration,
we note that this rebel movement was defeated militarily
on 5 November 2013 that and its combatants fled to
Rwanda and Uganda; 786 were taken in by Rwanda
and about 1,600 in Uganda. Two identification missions
were despatched by the Democratic Republic of Congo
to Rwanda and Uganda before the repatriation of the
defeated ex-M23s. While the results on the ground have
helped identify the presence of 1,600 ex-combatants in
Uganda, by contrast, in Rwanda, we have noted only
453.

As noted by the Secretary-General in paragraph 75
of his report, the lack of progress in the implementation
of the Nairobi Declarations of 12 December 2013
carries risks both for the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and the Great Lakes region. That failure
is mainly due to bad faith on the part of the ex-M23.
Indeed, the official representative of M-23 appointed to
the National Oversight Mechanism of the Framework
Agreement, Mr. Rene Abandi, never came to Kinshasa
to occupy his offices and participate in the various
meetings to assess the implementation of the Nairobi
Declaration road map. All invitations to him, as well as
the appeals of the international community, have so far
all gone unanswered.

In that context, the meetings scheduled for 20 May
2014 in Goma and 1 September 2014 in Kinshasa were

boycotted by Mr. Rene Abandi, who had proposed
instead a meeting in Kampala. In the presence of the
Special Representatives and Envoys, guarantors of the
Framework Agreement, and pursuant to the Nairobi
Declaration, an official invitation was sent to him for
the meetings of7 and 8 November 2014 in Kinshasa. He
also declined that invitation.

The National Oversight Mechanism established a
road map to address the assessment of commitments
undertaken by the Government under the Nairobi
Declaration. Several meetings to assess the road map
were held in the presence of the guarantors of the
Framework Agreement, who all condemned the absence
of the representative of the former M-23, which blocked
any significant progress in the implementation of the
Nairobi Declaration.

The working group - made up of representatives
from the United Nations, the ICGLR, the Government
of Uganda and the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and established at the request
of the Luanda Summit of May 18 - noted that the
political and military leadership of the ex-combatants
of the M-23, based in Kampala and headed by Messrs.
Sultani Makenga and Bertrand Bisimwa, continued to
influence former combatants by urging them to refuse
repatriation to the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

On that basis, it should be noted that the Democratic
Republic of the Congo is the only party to implement
the Nairobi Declaration. On the other hand, the former
M-23 combattants refuse systematically to honour their
commitments and oppose the voluntary repatriation of
their combatants, despite the flexibility shown by the
President of the Republic in deciding to repatriate them
unconditionally to the disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration sites and, thereafter, to allow them
to reintegrate within communities of each individual's
own free choosing.

We agree with the Secretary-General that it is important
for all other stakeholders concerned - especially those
sheltering ex-combatants of M-23 - to translate their
commitments into actions and find lasting political
solutions to the obstacles preventing the repatriation of
these ex-combatants and their reintegration within the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

The conclusions of the meeting of 24 September
in Kigali between the Ministers of Defence of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Republic
of Rwanda bodes well for moving the process forward,
both in terms of the repatriation of ex-combatants of
M-23 living in Rwanda, as well as the eradication of
residual FDLR forces in the Congo. My Government
continues to believe that if the command of the ex-
combatants of M23 obstinately continues to refuse to
comply with the provisions of the Nairobi Declaration,
sanctions should be applied against them in accordance
with the decision taken by the Heads of State of
signatory countries to the Framework Agreement, who
met in New York on 29 September in the context of
the sixth high-level meeting of the Regional Oversight
Mechanism of the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Region.

Today, we can note a significant restoration of State
authority throughout the country. At the military level,
three rapid-reaction brigades are already operating
with personnel previously deployed and the scheduled
individual and corps equipment. Territorial authorities
have been created; the police have been deployed;
courts and tribunals are functioning properly again;
internally displaced persons and some refugees have
begun to return to their homes; and the army is present
throughout the country to combat armed groups, where
it is necessary and to protect the population.

On the political front, as Mr. Raymond Tshibanda
N'tungamulongo, Minister for Foreign Affairs and
International Cooperation has reminded us here at
the United Nations, in accordance with the electoral
calendar published by the Independent National
Electoral Commission, the Democratic Republic of
the Congo is preparing for general elections for the
third time following those of 2006 and 2011. The
organization of those elections, scheduled for the
2015-2016 cycle, marks a definitive break in the spiral
of violence and instability that has characterized the
process in recent decades and engages the people of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo in a perennial
democratic culture.

For the Congolese Foreign Minister, despite the
many financial and logistical constraints that have
marked the electoral process, the Independent National
Electoral Commission, with the help ofthe Government,
is doing all in its power to meet the challenge of
organizing elections that respect all international
standards in terms of inclusiveness, transparency,
credibility - and all ofthis against a backdrop ofpeace.

To that end, convinced that dialogue is a central
pillar of democracy and a component of social cohesion,
Mr. Joseph Kabila Kabange, President of the Republic,
has undertaken considerable efforts since May to
increase contacts with all segments of Congolese
society - including political actors, civil society,
and religious and traditional authorities - to launch
a national dialogue that seeks to establish consensus
on the electoral process under way. With each of these
segments having had the opportunity to express its
point of view, a review of all the opinions voiced will
allow us to reach a lasting consensus on the elections
that will truly reflect the will of the Congolese people,
in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Constitution.
The Government duly appreciates the valuable
observations and recommendations contained in
paragraphs 72 and 73 of the report, and calls on the
United Nations and the international community as
a whole to support steadfastly and at every stage an
electoral process that respects the Constitution, human
rights and fundamental political rights and freedoms.

Regarding the strategic dialogue between the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the United Nations, official talks have stalled,
as the Secretary-General recognizes in paragraph
42 of his report. My Government has been hoping
for a successful outcome to the strategic dialogue
engaged with MONUSCO, on the recommendation of
the Secretary-General, since March 2015 with with a
view to developing an action plan and exit strategy for
MONUSCO, especially as its terms of reference have
been agreed by the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
because they cover all of the major concerns of the
Government.

Far be it from me to go into the details of the
exchanges. I agree with the Secretary-General that
the dialogue must offer an opportunity to rethink and
bolster the partnerships between the Government and
the United Nations. My Government, which remains
committed to continuing discussions with the United
Nations in a spirit of mutual trust believes, however, that
the United Nations presence in Congolese territory must
be reconsidered and that the personnel of MONUSCO
contingents must be progressively reviewed.

I take this opportunity to thank the international
community, which came to the aid of my country in
protecting its territorial integrity and sovereignty.
I also echo the Foreign Minister of the Democratic
Republic of Congo in commending the international
solidarity that the Republic has enjoyed on the part
of other Member States, in particular those that have
contributed troops to MONUSCO.

I hail the determination of the Congolese people,
who - having suffered the yoke of an unnecessary
and equally unjustified war - spared no sacrifice to
preserve the sovereignty and integrity of our national
territory against all odds. I also heartily commend the
defence and security forces of my country for their
concerted action in the service of peace. The obligation
now incumbent upon the Government of the Republic
of the Congo and all of its partners is to ensure the
consolidation of all of those achievements.

The strategic dialogue under way with the the United
Nations must therefore result in a recommendation for
a significant drawdown of the military component of
MONUSCO. My country expects the Security Council
to support this legitimate and responsible request of a
State Member of the United Nations, in full exercise
of its sovereignty a a request that already enjoys the
support ofthe regional economic communities of which
the Democratic Republic of the Congo is a member:
the Southern African Development Community, the
ICGLR and the African Union.

In conclusion, I would be remiss if I finished
my statement without welcoming and expressing
my full appreciation of the partnership that has been
so successfully established between the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the Security Council for the
return of normalcy to my country, so that my people
can finally benefit from the peace dividends.

