Mr. Quarrey (United Kingdom): The United
Kingdom strongly supports the negotiation process
under the auspices of Ambassador Ross, which, as this
Council has long maintained, should lead to a just,
lasting and mutually acceptable political solution that
provides for the self-determination of the people of
Western Sahara. The unanimous adoption of resolution
1920 (2010) today sends an important message of the
Council's support for Ambassador Ross in his efforts to
build confidence between the parties.

The failure to resolve this conflict affects both the
peoples of the region and regional cooperation to
address the serious security threats that it faces. We
strongly urge all those involved to remain committed to
the negotiation process and to demonstrate further
political will towards a solution by drawing on and
developing the current proposals. They should avoid
activity that could damage the negotiations, including
acts that could violate the ceasefire agreements, which
have played an important role in preserving peace.

We share the Secretary-General's concerns about
the human dimension of the conflict and his call to
address it through confidence-building measures. We
welcome the expansion of the family visits programme,
and we urge the parties to cooperate fully with the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees to implement their agreement.

We also share the Secretary-General's concerns
about the human rights situation. We believe that
transparency and openness on human rights will do
much to establish trust and confidence between the
parties and thereby enable further progress in the
negotiations. As noted by the Secretary-General, it is
important to ensure respect for the human rights of the
people of Western Sahara, both in the territory and in
the refugee camps. We encourage the parties to make
progress before next year by engaging with the Office
of the High Commissioner for Human Rights, as called
for by the Secretary-General, and by exploring options
for the creation of other mechanisms to monitor the
human rights situation.

We have today renewed the mandate of the
United Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western
Sahara (MINURSO) for another year. In line with our
ongoing discussions on peacekeeping, we underline the
need for the Council to take a strategic view of all its
peacekeeping operations. We should ensure that
MINURSO is making a positive contribution to the
resolution of the conflict in Western Sahara and not
mandate a mission that entrenches the status quo. In
this respect, we ask the Secretariat to develop suitable
benchmarks against which the progress of MINURSO
in achieving its mandate can be measured and to
include an assessment of such progress in the next
report with a view to its future configuration.

