Mr. MacKay (New Zealand): I should like to join
others in congratulating Russia on its assumption of the
presidency and in thanking Norway for the way in
which it presided over the Council last month.

The issue under consideration by the Council
today is one of the utmost gravity. New Zealand
deplores in the strongest terms the increased intensity
of the violence, which is simply putting a durable
solution farther out of reach. The fact that it has
escalated so dramatically in such a short period
prompts us to address the Council today. We urge both
sides to reflect on where this terrible violence is
leading.

New Zealand has already criticized the use of
excessive force by the Israeli Defence Force, along
with its stated policy of assassinations, which should
be halted immediately. New Zealand condemns the
policy of extrajudicial executions and joins others in
urging an end to the occupation of the Palestinian
Authority headquarters in Ramallah and the attempted
isolation and exile of the Palestinian leader, Chairman
Arafat.

New Zealand Views plans to further expand
Israeli settlements in the occupied territories as a
particularly provocative obstacle to reconciliation and
calls on the Israeli Government to halt such action.

We also deplore and condemn in the strongest
terms the suicide bombings that have claimed the lives
of innocent Israeli civilians. Those responsible for
sending young people to their deaths in this way and
arbitrarily slaughtering civilians should be brought to
justice. Neither side in this conflict will come closer to
achieving their objectives by the use of Violent means.

Together with other speakers today, we urge full
and immediate implementation and compliance with
resolutions 1397 (2002) and 1402 (2002). The
international community has reflected in those
resolutions its strong commitment to a peaceful,
negotiated settlement in the Middle East. New Zealand
has consistently supported a two-State solution that
recognizes Israel's right to secure, agreed borders and
that of the Palestinians to have a viable State in which
self-determination and social and economic progress
can be achieved.

We reinforce the calls made by the European
Union, Chile and others today for the parties to accept
observers. A neutral third party monitoring mechanism
under a Security Council mandate would help support a
ceasefire and begin the rebuilding of trust between the
two parties. There is an urgent need for the leadership
of both the Palestinian and Israeli peoples to display a
goodfaith return to the peace process and seek a
durable solution based on respect for human rights and
international law. We call on both parties to turn their
backs on Violence and demonstrate a willingness to
begin a process that may lead to the durable peace for
which we all so greatly hope.

