Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian):
First of all, I should like to welcome you, Sir, the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Argentina, as you preside over
today's meeting of the Security Council. I should also like
to wish you every success as head of the Ministry of
Foreign Affairs of the Argentine Republic, a country with
which Russia enjoys traditional bonds of friendship. We are
also grateful to the delegation of Argentina for taking the
initiative to convene the Council to consider this very
important set of issues relating to the protection of United
Nations personnel, associated personnel and humanitarian
personnel in conflict zones.

Ensuring the security of such personnel has become
an integral part of all Security Council resolutions dealing
with peacekeeping operations. The Council has repeatedly
addressed this issue specifically, as it is doing today, and
yet there are serious reasons why it should once again
examine this important problem thoroughly and draw the
necessary practical conclusions. The United Nations is
usually called upon to deploy its operations in situations
that represent a real danger for the personnel involved in
them, and we note with great alarm that, during the course
of their work, United Nations personnel, associated
personnel and humanitarian personnel are with increasing
frequency becoming the victims of terrorist acts, murder,
abduction, kidnapping and hostage-taking. We need only
look at what happened recently in such hot spots as
Kosovo, Sierra Leone and East Timor.

In all these operations, there were incidents of
violence against peacekeepers and the staff of international
organizations. The degree of danger to which they are
exposed in what would appear to be the most innocuous
circumstances - that is, as they carry out purely
humanitarian tasks - is borne out by the recent attack on
peacekeepers who were accompanying children on their
way to school. This occurred in Kaminica, in Kosovo.
Similarly, there was the attempt by Albanian extremists to
storm the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo headquarters in Mitrovica, also in Kosovo, and the
fire set to the office of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe in the Albanian part of that same
city. All these events attest to the need for urgent measures
to be taken for the practical defence of international
personnel.

In sharing the general concern over the problem of
safety of international personnel, we are not speaking only
on the basis of hearsay. Russia, from its own, direct
experience has come to grips with the tragic consequences
of this problem. Russia is actively involved in United
Nations peacekeeping operations, and it also bears the
brunt of the peacekeeping burden in the settlement of
numerous conflicts in the territory of the Commonwealth
of Independent States (CIS). This activity is carried out in
cooperation with the United Nations in strict compliance
with the provisions of Chapter VIII of the Charter, and it
is confirmed by relevant Security Council resolutions. The
CIS Collective Peacekeeping Forces in Tajikistan are
made up almost entirely of Russian troops. About 1,700
Russian soldiers are deployed in the zone of the conflict
in Abkhazia, Georgia, and the achievement of a stable
ceasefire and the prevention of large-scale fighting in both
these regions were achieved by Russia at a very high
price. In the years of the operation of Russian
peacekeepers in Abkhazia, Georgia, over 70 of our
servicemen have died and over 200 have been injured as
a result of armed provocation or terrorist acts.

As has already been mentioned today by my
colleagues, the Security Council has repeatedly pointed
out that it is the responsibility of the States and the
parties involved in a conflict to ensure the proper
conditions for the work of international personnel and the
punishment of those responsible for attacks against these
personnel. We consider it appropriate and important for
the Council to reaffirm this position.

There is an indisputable need for a solid legal basis
for the protection of such personnel. We welcome the
entry into force of the 1994 Convention on the Safety of
United Nations and Associated Personnel. The
Government of Russia is taking the necessary steps to
accede to this international instrument; the complete
package of instruments necessary for Russia's ratification
of the Convention is before the national Duma. A
significant role in strengthening the legal basis for
improving the security of international personnel is to be
played by the resolution on the safety and security of
humanitarian personnel and protection of United Nations
personnel adopted by the General Assembly at its fifty-
fourth session. At the fifty-fifth session of the General
Assembly we are expecting a comprehensive report of the
Secretary-General on this item.

 

Many practical proposals have already been made
today on how to improve the security of these personnel,
and, like Ambassador Dejammet, we consider it essential
for all the specific proposals made by Ms. Frechette and
Ms. Bertini to be considered most thoroughly. We also
consider that one of the practical ways to improve the
security of United Nations personnel could be to include
anti-terrorism experts in the staff of the various missions.
This is particularly important when United Nations and
associated humanitarian operations are conducted in areas
of heightened terrorist risk. Such experts could assume
coordinating functions in the anti-terrorist effort, within the
general and overall security plans that are developed and
elaborated for each United Nations and humanitarian
operation. On the whole, the problem of clear coordination
between international personnel deployed to zones of
conflict is extremely important, especially since the number
of actors in field operations is very large and includes not
only United Nations personnel, but also the staff of other
organizations, including non-governmental organizations.

We are convinced that after adopting today's useful
presidential statement, the Security Council will in the
future follow most attentively the question of the proper
protection of United Nations personnel and will adequately
respond to all instances in which the lives and health of
these people are threatened.

