Mr. Alsaidi (Yemen) (spoke in Arabic): On the
morning of Wednesday, 8 November 2006, the peoples
of the world, together with the remaining inhabitants of
beleaguered Beit Hanoun in Palestine, were shocked to
awaken to the sight of scattered body parts, houses
razed to the ground and squares drenched with blood
and filled with the remains of children, the elderly and
women - a surreal, abhorrent, alarming and painful
scene rejected and despised by any sane human being.
That scene resulted from Operation Autumn Clouds, in
which the occupying Israeli forces rained artillery
shells down on the residential areas of Beit Hanoun, a
densely populated village with innocent and
defenceless elderly persons, women and children. It
was a horrific war crime against the rights of the
Palestinians and of humanity as a whole - a barbaric
act that runs counter to any rational, logical or legal
justification other than the desire of Israel, the
occupying Power, to continue a systematic war of
genocide, targeting humans, trees and animals and all
forms of life. The question now is: will the
international community stand idly by in the face of
this brutal massacre?

The Republic of Yemen, while expressing its
deep concern and strong condemnation of those
barbaric acts, calls upon all members of the family of
nations, including the Security Council, to take a firm
stand against the State terrorism carried out by the
Israeli occupation forces so that they halt their
ceaseless violations of the rights of the Palestinian
people, who have been subjected for more than half a
century to all kinds of repression, oppression, injustice,
coercion and torture.

We believe that the Council's inability to take
practical deterrent measures that prevent the recurrence
of aggression - which would further inflame the
already burning situation in the region and broaden the
cycle of violence there - and the Council's hesitation
to take decisive steps to silence the tanks, artillery,
helicopters and Israeli jets targeting a defenceless,
imprisoned people living in an open jail, crying out in
deteriorating conditions of poverty and destitution,
have given rise to a double blockade. One blockade has
been imposed on the Palestinian people for quite some
time by the occupation authorities, who disregard the
moral norms set out in the instruments of international
law, and the other is an international blockade that has
increased desperation and suffering since the
Palestinian elections at the beginning of 2006.
If the situation continues to deteriorate, it will lay
fertile ground for extremism and terrorism and stifle
the voices of wisdom, reason and moderation. It will
also lead to chaos, instability and grave consequences.
My country therefore believes that it is now essential
for the Council, which is responsible for the
maintenance of international peace and security, to

adopt a binding resolution on an immediate ceasefire
and the dispatch of an international observer force to
monitor that ceasefire and protect Palestinian civilians.
It must also make a serious political effort to return the
parties to the negotiating table, in accordance with
international resolutions, the Arab initiative, and
mutually concluded agreements.

