Mr. Moraes Cabral (Portugal): I would first like
to thank Ambassadors Peter Wittig, Hardeep Singh Puri
and Baso Sangqu for their comprehensive briefings and
to commend them for their work, leadership and
commitment in chairing the three Committees focused
on the fight against terrorism.

The statement to be made on behalf of the
European Union naturally reflects Portugal's views on
this important issue. Allow me, however, to emphasize
some aspects of particular relevance to my country,
starting with the Committee established pursuant to
resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) concerning
Al-Qaida and associated individuals and entities, which
has produced some intensive and commendable work,
particularly regarding the review of its sanctions list.

On the delisting side, we are pleased to express
our appreciation for the significant improvements
introduced by the Office of the Ombudsperson in the
area of fair and clear procedures for delisting, thus
reinforcing the sanctions mechanism and its efficiency.
We take this opportunity to highlight once again the
active role of Judge Kimberly Prost in achieving these
goals according to her mandate. Like the United
Kingdom, we have concluded an agreement for sharing
classified information with Judge Prost, and we
encourage other States to do the same. In our View, the
success achieved so far and the role played by the
Ombudsperson in that sanctions regime should
encourage us to look at the next logical step - the
introduction of the same mechanism into the
framework of other United Nations sanctions
regimes - an idea that deserves our active support and
that of other members of the Council.

On the other side of that issue, and again in order
to reinforce the efficiency of the sanctions regime, we
believe that enhanced efforts should be made to
continue to update the list in order to include those
individuals and entities currently leading or supporting
Al-Qaida or its affiliated groups but not yet listed. We
also welcome the highly effective work that continues
to be done under the Committee's guidance by its
Monitoring Group.
Concerning the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1373 (2001) concerning counter-terrorism,
I would like to highlight three aspects. First is the need
to encourage and assist States in developing
comprehensive and integrated counter-terrorism and
preventive strategies: strategies that are not only
devoted to law enforcement and reactive approaches,
but are also designed to address the conditions
conducive to radicalization and recruitment for terrorist
purposes, which means that they must include
consistent preventive efforts and measures of a
structural and cross-cutting nature. We would advocate
that the special meeting to be held by the Counter-
Terrorism Committee (CTC) later this year be devoted
to that important matter.

Secondly, we very much value the attention given
to the efforts made by CTC and the Counter-Terrorism
Executive Directorate (CTED) to help strengthen,
when requested, multilateral and bilateral technical
assistance programmes to aid States and regions
especially affected by terrorism. Indeed, a regional
approach often seems to make for the most effective
framework, by promoting regional solutions more
tailored to realities on the ground and better adapted to
respond to similar challenges and build on common
strengths and capacities. In that regard we welcome the
CTED thematic and regional presentations on West
Africa, the Horn of Africa, the Sahel and the Maghreb.

Last but not least, let me reiterate the special
importance of ensuring that counter-terrorism measures
fully comply with obligations under international law,
particularly in the areas of international human rights,
refugee and humanitarian law. Full respect for human
rights, fundamental freedoms and the rule of law is
also, in our View, an indispensable tool for effective
counter-radicalization and for combating terrorism
narratives and appeals. In that regard, we continue to
support the efforts undertaken by the Committee and
CTED and look forward to the upcoming thematic
presentation on human rights and counter-terrorism.

Turning now to the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), I want to commend
its fulfilment of the main provisions set out in
resolution 1977 (2011), namely, the first annual review
on progress made by Member States and other
stakeholders in implementing resolution 1540 (2004),
as well as the recommendations put forward by the
Committee for the establishment of a group of experts.
The group of experts will play a fundamental role in
assisting the Committee, and I share the sense of
urgency about completing the process. Finally, I would
also like to thank the Office for Disarmament Affairs
for its readiness to engage with the 1540 Committee in
supporting implementation of the resolution at the
regional, subregional and national levels.

To conclude, I would like to reiterate our support
for every measure that could be instrumental in
maximizing coordination among all the United Nations
entities relevant to efforts to prevent and combat
terrorism. Among those tools, we believe that United
Nations political missions and offices in the field -
which are particularly well placed for assessing
terrorism risks and forms of violent extremism -
should be given mandates and resources adequate to
advising and assisting on appropriate preventive efforts.
As with many other international threats, we believe
strongly that prevention is key to achieving medium-
and long-term success in fighting terrorism.

