Mr. Levitte (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank and congratulate you, Mr. President, for
organizing this debate today. We are very happy that
this debate is taking place under the Malian presidency.
President Konare, Chairman of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS), is one
of the sages of Africa today. He has made tireless
efforts not only to help resolve regional disputes but
also to strengthen the relationship between the
subregional organization ECOWAS and the United
Nations. Today, this relationship is indeed a model and
a reference for the other relations between our
Organization and subregional organizations.

I should also like to thank the Assistant
Secretary-General for Political Affairs, Mr. Ibrahima
Fall, who once again has presented to us in a very clear
way the principal elements of the subregional dynamics
in West Africa. After his statement, the need to develop
a coherent regional approach is even clearer.

At the end of the debate, the Ambassador of
Belgium will make a statement with which France
associates itself fully. Therefore, Mr. President, I shall
confine myself, especially in view of what you have
just said, to a few brief remarks.

First of all, the challenges facing West Africa
include three that clearly have a subregional
dimension. The first is the proliferation of small arms,
the second is the return and reintegration of refugees
and displaced persons, and the third is the disarming of
irregular forces. By way of example, there is talk of
some 40,000 Liberian combatants supposedly present
in cote d'Ivoire, Burkina Faso, Gambia and Guinea. It
is therefore at the subregional level that these three
challenges can effectively met.

In addressing these problems, West Africa knows
that it can count on an organization that has been well
tested and tried: the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS). Its moratorium on small
arms and light weapons is an example that is now being
taken up throughout Africa and the world. Another
example is its mediation in the Mano River Union
crisis. Thanks to the tireless efforts of ECOWAS and
President Konare, the three heads of State will meet
with one another in January. Strengthening the
subregional approach requires, above all, strengthening
ECOWAS.

The inter-agency mission to 11 countries in West
Africa last March, which was led by Ibrahima Fall and
included representatives of the Secretariat, the United
Nations Children's Fund, the United Nations
Development Programme and the World Food
Programme - effectively played a precursory role.
Our Council began to implement the mission's
recommendations last month by approving the
establishment of the post of Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for West Africa. The success of
the Special Representative's Office will be determined
by its ability to work with ECOWAS and the three
Mano River Union countries.

As to ECOWAS, it would be useful for the
regional office to help establish the early warning zonal
observation centres and to support the Council of
Elders. In the context of the small arms moratorium, it
would be valuable for the office to assist in
strengthening the Programme for Coordination and
Assistance for Security and Development.

As to the Mano River Union, the regional office
must support the implementation of confidence-
building measures, as decided by the three Ministers in
September and October. Further confidence-building
measures could be approved at the forthcoming summit
of heads of State scheduled for January. At the
subregional level, the Mano River Union requires
special attention. The situation may be improving in
Sierra Leone, where elections are scheduled for May,
but the situation in Liberia remains tragic. The three
countries are closely interdependent.
The recommendations contained in the Fall report
have not yet been fully implemented. Further decisions
must follow. We believe that one area - disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration - must receive
special attention. That is the key to stability throughout
the subregion. Thought must also be given to how to
increase the participation of West African armies in
peacekeeping operations.

These are but a few of the areas that must be
looked into further. Our work is far from finished and
the Council will certainly have to take this matter up
again in due time.

