Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): First of
all, allow me to express my gratitude for the statements
and kind words made by my colleagues in response to
the report, which was the product of work done with
the members of the Committee. In that regard, I should
like to thank the Committee's experts, who do their
work with great seriousness and competence, thereby
contributing to making these reports as transparent and
objective as possible. I should also like to express my
gratitude for the important contribution of the Secretariat
on this subject.

With regard to the Panel of Experts, as all members
have recognized, the group is coordinated by Ms. Salome
Zourabichvili, who displays a commendable level of
seriousness and professionalism. We are certain that,
with the renewal of its mandate, the Panel will continue
to assist us and inform us on the progress made in
implementing the sanctions regime.

As has been mentioned, I note that there
are members that attach great importance to the
Committee's work being extended and better known
by the general membership of the Organization. The
open briefing that we have scheduled for 9 July will
be a significant opportunity, not only from the point of
view of transparency and the information that members
should receive but also in urging that there be a very
clear appeal to Member States to contribute to the
smooth operation of the sanctions regime and meet their

notification obligations so that the regime can be fully The President (spoke in Chinese):

I thank

observed.

Speaking in my national capacity as the
representative of Colombia, I would like to add my voice
to those calling for the talks of the 5+1 group and Iran
on Iran's nuclear programme and its implications that
have been taking place to be as successful as possible
and for the upcoming meeting scheduled in Moscow to
be fruitful.

Ambassador Osorio for the additional remarks and
clarifications that he has provided.

There are no more names inscribed on the list of
speakers. The Security Council has thus concluded
the present stage ofits consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 4.20pm.
