Mr. De La Sabliere (France) (spoke in F rench): I
thank Mr. Vieira de Mello for his visit to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo from 12 to 15
January and for having come here to present us with
his conclusions. I also thank Mr. Guehenno for his
briefing.

The information conveyed to us by Mr. Vieira de
Mello is extremely disturbing, in particular as regards
the situation in the eastern part of the country. It is
certainly dire with respect to the governmental sector.
The death sentences are unacceptable, as the High
Commissioner has already told the Kinshasa
authorities. The European Union has taken steps in that
regard. The atrocities committed in the East - in Kivu
and now in Ituri, as just described to us - are of a
gravity rarely achieved.

France supports all of Mr. Vieira de Mello's
comments. The fighting and abuses are unacceptable,
all the more so since the Pretoria Agreement now
offers political prospects. The culture of impunity must
not be entrenched. In echoing the principal messages
from the High Commissioner for Human Rights,
France, together with its partners on the Security
Council, will be preparing a presidential statement in
the days to come.

It seems necessary in particular to condemn the
atrocities that have been committed and to call upon
the parties to identify without delay those who are
responsible and bring them to justice. It will also be
necessary to send an unambiguous message to the
parties to the effect that by the end of the month they
must have arrived at solid decisions of principle with
regard to the constitution and to ensuring that the
transition takes place in a climate of security. If that
does not happen, the hopes that arose as a result of the
Pretoria Agreement will be dashed.

In conclusion, I wish to put a question to Mr.
Vieira de Mello. We note with satisfaction that the
Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Ms. Motoc,
will be travelling to that country at the end of the
month. We would like to know whether she will be
giving priority to the east of the country, which would
seem desirable. Furthermore, will other special
rapporteurs - for example, Ms. Jahangir, the Special
Rapporteur on extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary
executions - be going to the Democratic Republic of
the Congo again?

