Mr. Ripert (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to extend France's condolences to
the families of the victims of the attack that today
killed the Afghan member of parliament Dad
Mohammad Khan and four other individuals. France
firmly condemns this assassination.

The Permanent Representative of the Czech
Republic will later make a statement on behalf of the
European Union, with which France, of course,
associates itself. At this stage, I would like to make a
few additional comments.

As others have done before me, I would like to
express my gratitude to Mr. Kai Eide for his briefing
and in particular for the untiring efforts he has
undertaken since his appointment to ensure better
overall cohesiveness in the international community's
work in Afghanistan under United Nations auspices.
These efforts are beginning to bear fruit.

The international community firmly reiterated its
support to the people and Government of Afghanistan
in June 2008 in Paris. The following Moscow and The
Hague conferences will provide us with an opportunity
to reiterate this common and lasting commitment and
to take stock of the implementation of commitments
undertaken and of the priorities for the coming months.

These conferences are part of the general trend of
increased involvement by the international community.
This momentum is something that the Special
Representative has done a great deal to nurture by
actively contributing to the implementation of the
comprehensive approach, which brought together
political, security, reconstruction and development
efforts.

I would highlight in particular the essential issue
of aid effectiveness and coordination, where progress
unfortunately remains insufficient. The most pressing
issue in this regard is transparency in terms of aid. To
ensure that the United Nations is able to carry out its
coordination mission, it must be able ensure that it and
the Afghan authorities are in a position to have a clear
overall picture of the efforts of all donors. This is
something the Special Representative referred to earlier.

The United Nations must also continue, through
its Special Representative, to symbolize the voice of
the international community to the Afghan authorities
and people. Mr. Eide has been successful in playing
this role in an impartial manner. He has addressed a
number of difficult topics such as good governance,
corruption, human rights and the problem of civilian
victims with the political, democratic authorities and
civil society in Afghanistan and with international
stakeholders.

I would like to again reiterate France's full
confidence in Mr. Eide in the period leading up to the
elections, which is particularly critical to the
democratic future of the country.

The upcoming presidential and legislative
elections are in fact a major step in the process of
Afghans taking ownership of their own democracy. All
Afghan political officials must work to ensure the
conduct of free and fair elections throughout the
country and to preserve stability and security
throughout the electoral process. The United Nations
has an important role to play, at both the technical and
the political levels, to help them.

But the elections should not distract us from the
other pressing problems facing Afghanistan. The
Special Representative has drawn up a convincing list
of these. Significant progress has been achieved in
various fields over the past year, progress that now
needs to be consolidated. In the field of security, the
Afghan National Army has been considerably
strengthened and is increasingly in a position to take
over from international forces.

The police remain the weak point in the security
system. Since his appointment as Interior Minister, Mr.
Atmar has started an in-depth reform of the police that
the international community must back via initiatives
in keeping with the stakes. France is committed to
participating actively with its European partners in this
effort.

Encouraging developments have also taken place
in the fight against drug trafficking. They remain to be
confirmed, including in the fight against the diversion
of the chemical precursors of heroin, which is subject
of resolution 1817 (2008).

The situation in the field of human rights is a
serious topic of concern, especially because of the
increase in attacks against the media and civil society.
Significant progress made since 2001 remains
precarious. The authorities must, with the assistance of
the international community, act more firmly to
guarantee journalists and representatives of civil
society conditions that enable them to engage in their
activities freely and safely.

I would also like to reiterate our concerns
regarding the issue of civilian casualties, which - we
need to underscore this point - are mainly the result
of deliberate attacks by the Taliban and other extremist
groups that display thereby their absolute disdain for
human life. At the same time, France is aware of the
need to continue, with its partners and its allies,
significant efforts achieved by Government and
international forces to avoid civilian casualties.

The President of the French Republic,
Mr. Nicolas Sarkozy, has reiterated on numerous
occasions the priority that the stabilization of
Afghanistan and the region as a whole has for France.
Over the past two years, France has carried out a major
reinforcement of its military commitment in
Afghanistan. Anxious to ensure that we have a
comprehensive approach, we have also significantly
strengthened our civilian and political commitment
since 2008. But over and above that, the depth of the
Afghan crisis, the evolution of the international
commitment and the increasing interrelations among
the problems that affect Afghanistan and its neighbours
have led France to further integrate the regional aspects
of the problem in its approach.

It is in this context that the President of the
Republic, on 26 February, appointed a Member of
Parliament, Mr. Pierre Lellouche, as his Special
Representative for Afghanistan and Pakistan. This
decision is in line with France's belief that the Afghan
crisis cannot be dealt with in isolation from the
situation in the region, and primarily in Pakistan. Our
priorities are to promote the emergence of a stable,
prosperous and democratic Afghanistan, to contribute
to the stabilization of democratic Pakistan and to
reduce the terrorist threat of which this region has
become the epicentre.

It is also to lend political momentum to the theme
of strengthening regional cooperation that our Foreign
Minister, Mr. Bernard Kouchner, invited Afghanistan,
its neighbouring States and the key cooperation
partners of the international community to France in
December 2008 for a ministerial meeting, held in La
Celle Saint-Cloud under the co-chairmanship of the
United Nations. We welcome the will demonstrated by
Afghanistan and its neighbours during this meeting to
make concrete progress to strengthen their cooperation
against drug trafficking and terrorism, as well as to
develop regional economic cooperation. We hope that
the positive trends in relations between Afghanistan
and Pakistan will contribute to achieving concrete
results during the upcoming Regional Economic
Cooperation Conference in Islamabad.

UNAMA will have to face many challenges in the
coming year. It will require our full support. I therefore
welcome the proposal to hold Security Council
meetings every three months. That will enable the
Council to provide more active follow-up to the
implementation of the mandate entrusted to UNAMA
and thereby to provide more effective support for the
action of the Special Representative.

