Mr. Pfanzelter (Austria): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the European Union and the other
countries aligning themselves with this statement.

Let me start by thanking Mr. Christian Schwarz-
Schilling, High Representative and European Union
Special Representative, for his very informative
briefing on developments in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
We would also like to warmly welcome the
participation of Mr. Adnan Terzic, Chairman of the
Council of Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

The European Union commends the High
Representative for his contribution to peace and
stability in Bosnia and Herzegovina. We particularly
welcome and support his approach of promoting
ownership by strengthening State institutions, reviving
the economy and implementing the rule of law.

On ll March, Foreign Ministers of the European
Union and the Western Balkans reaffirmed their full
support for the agenda set out at the 2003 Thessaloniki
summit, as well as for the Stabilisation and Association
Process, which will remain the framework for the
European Union perspective on the Western Balkans.
The EU confirmed that the future of the Western
Balkans lies in the European Union. In practical terms,
the European Union supports that perspective through
its various instruments of financial and technical
assistance by the European Commission, the Common
Foreign and Security and Common Security and
Defence Policies and the traditional bilateral support of
the Union's 25 member States.

The European Union has been strongly involved
in supporting, inter alia, the justice, security and
defence sectors in Bosnia and Herzegovina. In that
respect, the European Union military mission
(EUFOR), working in close cooperation with NATO,
has assumed the main peace-stabilization role under
the Dayton Peace Agreement. It has proven to be an
important factor in maintaining security and stability
on the ground. The Liaison and Observation Teams
have also become valuable elements in the confidence-
building process.

Similarly, the European Union Police Mission
(EUPM) has provided useful advice and support for
Bosnia and Herzegovina's own efforts in bringing its
police structures fully in line with European standards.
The international community's continued support is
needed in order to implement police restructuring,
which is a key reform issue for Bosnia and
Herzegovina and a requirement for further EU
integration.

Finally, the European Union continues to provide
significant financial support to Bosnia and
Herzegovina. Since 2000, a total of more than €500
million has been allocated to Bosnia and Herzegovina
and, under the Community Assistance to
Reconstruction, Development and Stabilization
(CARDS) programme, some €50 million will be
committed in 2006.

The European Union welcomes the political
agreement reached on 18 March on constitutional
reform. The agreement constitutes a significant step
forward towards making Bosnia and Herzegovina's
State institutions more functional and efficient. We
urge Bosnia and Herzegovina to ensure that the
necessary legislative steps are taken in order to
implement the constitutional amendments in time for
the October 2006 elections. The process of
constitutional reform must also continue after the
elections to resolve outstanding issues and to make
Bosnia and Herzegovina a fully self-sustainable,
efficient and multinational State that serves its citizens.

The European Council also welcomes the
progress made on the negotiations for a stabilization
and association agreement with Bosnia and
Herzegovina since the opening of negotiations in
November 2005. We encourage the relevant authorities
in Bosnia and Herzegovina to continue to make swift
progress in those negotiations and to implement the
necessary reforms. The conclusion of the negotiations
will establish a comprehensive formal contractual
relationship between the European Union and Bosnia
and Herzegovina. For Bosnia and Herzegovina, this
will mark another important step on the path to
membership of the European Union.

In this context, let me recall that the pace and the
conclusion of negotiations will depend in particular on
Bosnia and Herzegovina's progress in developing its
legislative framework and administrative capacity, in
implementing police reform in compliance with the
agreement on police restructuring of October 2005, in
adopting and implementing all necessary public
broadcasting legislation and in achieving full
cooperation with the International Criminal Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY). Full cooperation
with the ICTY is essential if lasting reconciliation in
the region is to be achieved. The EU Council of
Ministers has therefore repeatedly urged both Serbia
and Montenegro and Bosnia and Herzegovina to take
decisive and immediate action to ensure that all
remaining fugitive indictees, including, in particular,
Radovan Karadzic and Ratko Mladic, are finally
brought to justice without delay.

In the past, the High Representatives in Bosnia
and Herzegovina have used their powers effectively to
defend the spirit of the Dayton Peace Agreement, to
overcome political blockages, to tackle the support
network for persons indicted for war crimes and to
boost the reform process. Whereas the authority of the
High Representative remains an important factor in the
support for meeting these objectives, the European
Union fully agrees with the High Representative that,
10 years after the conflict, it is now time for Bosnia
and Herzegovina to take a greater degree of ownership
in these processes and to stand on its own two feet. The
European Union therefore welcomes the intention of
the High Representative to restrict the use of the Bonn
powers, to the extent possible, to the areas of ICTY
cooperation and Dayton stability.

With regard to the issue of police certification,
the European Union notes that on 15 March 2006, the
Peace Implementation Council (PIC) Steering Board,
meeting at the Political Directors" level, expressed its
support for a limited role for the Office of the High
Representative if the United Nations were ready to take
the lead in resolving the situation. In this context, the
European Union notes that the EUPM. does not have an
executive mandate, but it has agreed that the EUPM
should stand ready to provide limited logistical support
to the United Nations in addressing the outstanding
issues of police certification, within the existing budget
and without prejudice to the implementation of its
mandate.

Bosnia and Herzegovina still has much work to
do in implementing the reforms and meeting the
European Union integration benchmarks. It will require
continued determination and resolve on the part of the
authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina to meet those
challenges and to continue the reform processes.

As a potential candidate of the European Union,
Bosnia and Herzegovina enjoys a privileged
relationship with the Union. We have been standing
steadfastly at the side of the people of Bosnia and
Herzegovina throughout the past 10 years by providing
significant financial, military and human resources. We
will also continue our support to Bosnia and
Herzegovina in the future.

