Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We have carefully considered the initiative of
the League of Arab States to ask the Security Council
to take a comprehensive look at the situation
developing in the Middle East. Given the fact that the
peace process in the region has suffered tangible
damage, we believe that collective efforts to restore the
political dialogue between the Arab parties and Israel
would be timely and useful.
The war in Lebanon demonstrated once again that
force not only fails to resolve problems, but also delays
progress in moving towards just and lasting peace in
the world. We need new and substantial momentum
towards the resumption of the peace process on all
tracks, within the framework of attaining a
comprehensive settlement. The release of Palestinian
prisoners and of the kidnapped Israeli soldier would
create the conditions necessary to help resolve the
humanitarian crisis.

Despite the complexities of the situation, we do
not consider it hopeless. We continue to believe that
the Israeli-Palestinian conflict holds the key to the fate
of the region. It is obvious that as long is the conflict
remains unresolved, the region will serve as a breeding
ground for extremism, producing an ever growing
number of hot spots, and not only in the Middle East.

Opportunities exist for finding political solutions
to the conflict between Israel and the Palestinian
Authority. We need to take advantage of those
opportunities, in particular because the basic
programme of action is well known: the road map
endorsed by both parties to the conflict. We believe
that a leading role must be played by the Quartet of
international mediators. At yesterday's ministerial
meeting of the Quartet, we took a decision to
reinvigorate the work of the Quartet's special envoys
and ministers with Israel, the Palestinians and leading
Arab countries.

We also welcome Kofi Annan's initiative to
return James Wolfensohn to his Middle East team. We
believe that Mr. Wolfensohn's considerable experience
will help in resolving the Palestinians' social and
economic problems. We are convinced of the need to
continue to provide robust support to the Palestinian
leader, Mahmoud Abbas - whose presence in this
Chamber we welcome - in his efforts to establish a
government of national unity on a platform reflecting
movement towards the Quartet principles. At the same
time, it is important that the Palestinians clearly
understand the link between their steps to
accommodate Israel and progress towards a settlement.

We hope that the international community will
support the head of the Palestinian Authority as the
leader of the Palestinians, including by providing
economic assistance to the Palestinians and releasing
sources of financing. Given the extremely complex
humanitarian situation in the Palestinian territories,
that is very important.

With regard to the Lebanese track, things are
generally headed in the right direction, although the
situation remains fragile. The implementation of
Security Council resolution 1701 (2006) continues and
must be completed. That clearly means that, among
other things, all Lebanese political forces must be
involved, including Hizbollah. We consider Israel's
lifting of the air and sea blockade of Lebanon to be an
important step. In addition, we welcome the
deployment of units of the regular Lebanese army to
southern Lebanon and the continued deployment of a
strengthened United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon.
It is essential that the withdrawal of the Israeli army be
completed in the coming days, as scheduled.

We are all concerned by the humanitarian
situation in Lebanon. Russia will provide Lebanon with
assistance in the form of engineering and sapper units
of the Russian army to restore the infrastructure.
Preparations are well under way for their deployment,
which will occur at the end of the month.

The Syrian track, long dormant, must also be
brought back to life. From our contacts with the
leadership of the Syrian Arab Republic, we have the
impression that Damascus is interested in establishing
a lasting peace in the region.

Finally, I should like to emphasize once again
that we have a favourable view of the League of Arab
States initiative to begin preparations for the convening
of an international conference on the Middle East.
Russia has always supported that idea, as President
Putin noted during his visit to the region in 2005. We
understand that it will not be easy to implement this
initiative, but we must make progress as soon as
possible in our collective efforts to resolve of one of
the most complex problems of our day. The conference
must be carefully prepared for; it must not be reduced
to just a one-day event consisting only of speech-
making. The conference is essential as a starting point
for the process of negotiating a Middle East settlement
on all interrelated tracks.

We must not forget that it was the Security
Council that originally adopted the resolutions that
form the basis of the process aimed at a comprehensive
settlement in the Middle East. Our first obligation is to
help begin the practical work to achieve that objective.

