Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): Allow
me to begin by thanking all the briefers who spoke
this morning. I would like to pay particular tribute to
Ms. Audrey Azoulay, who has been appointed the new
Director-General of the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization.

According to the agenda, this will be the last formal
Security Council meeting under the Italian presidency,
so allow me, Sir, to convey to you and your entire team
our congratulations on the excellent work that you have
carried out. You and your team are duly complimented.
Cultural goods are a physical manifestation of a
people's identity, history and culture, and for this reason
they deserve to be safeguarded. Cultural artifacts
that fall within the category known as world cultural
heritage have exceptional universal value, and therefore
protecting them is a right and obligation borne by all.
We owe it to our ancestors and future generations.

The international community has recognized this
value and the need to safeguard it, and it has adopted
legal instruments such as the Hague Convention of 1954
for the Protection of Cultural Property in the Event of
Armed Conflict, which provides that harm done or
damage caused to cultural property belonging to any
people is an attack against the cultural heritage of the
entire human race. The 1972 Convention concerning the
Protection of the World Cultural and Natural Heritage
holds that the deterioration or disappearance of cultural
heritage represents a harmful impoverishment of the
heritage of all peoples of the world.

Uruguay attaches great relevance to efforts to
protect and preserve cultural heritage, and here we
underscore the central role and importance of the work
of UNESCO, with which Uruguay maintains close
cooperation links.

We also recognize the value of coordinating
action with other United Nations entities, international
organizations and non-governmental organizations,
including INTERPOL, the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime, and the World Customs
Organization, to name just a few. We welcome the letter
of intent signed by the International Criminal Court and
UNESCO last November to formalize and strengthen
their cooperation.

Resolution 2347 (2017) provides that Member
States have the primary responsibility for protecting
their cultural heritage. It urges them to take effective
measures to prevent and counter the trafficking of
cultural property and related crimes and to cooperate
in various ways and at different levels. In that regard,
we wish to emphasize that, thanks to police andjudicial
cooperation, Uruguay was recently able to seize
archaeological pieces from various sources, including
some from the city of Palmyra.

Uruguay ratified the 1954 Convention for the
Protection of Cultural Property in the Event of
Armed Conflict and acceded to its Second Protocol.
It also ratified the 1970 Convention on the Means of
Prohibiting and Preventing the Illicit Import, Export
and Transfer of Ownership of Cultural Property.
In the area of regional cooperation, last April,
the Technical Committee to Prevent and Combat
Illicit Trafficking in Cultural Goods of the Southern
Common Market (MERCOSUR) and Union of South
American Nations (UNASUR) was established in order
to facilitatejoint work on combating the trafficking and
illegal sale of cultural property and on its recovery.

At the national level, as noted in the report of the
Secretary General, Uruguay enacted Law No. 18.494
on the Control and Prevention of Money-Laundering
and the Financing of Terrorism. That law includes
auctioneers and the natural and legal persons engaged
in the purchase and sale of antiques, works of art
and precious metals and gemstones among those that
must report to the Financial Information and Analysis
Unit of the Central Bank of Uruguay on transactions
considered suspicious or unusual, in accordance with
the provisions of the law.

Also, under decree 42/017 of February of this year,
the National Committee to Prevent and Combat the
Illicit Trafficking of Cultural Property was established.
The tasks of the Committee include the drafting
of joint strategies to reduce and to combat the illicit
trafficking of cultural property, the administration
of a register of stolen or trafficked cultural property
and the development of protocols for the prevention,
identification, recovery and restitution of such goods.
The Committee is composed of representatives of
the Ministry of Education and Culture, the Ministry
for Foreign Affairs, the Ministry of the Interior, the
Ministry of Economy and Finance and the Association
of Mayors, which brings together the regional governors
of Uruguay.

The Chair of the Committee is also the focal point
for cooperation among the technical committee on the
illicit trafficking of cultural property of MERCOSUR,
the working group on the illicit trafficking of cultural
heritage of UNASUR and other international areas in
which the country participates or may participate on
that issue.

In addition, with regard to the adoption of
legislative measures, the executive branch is drafting
a bill that includes aspects such as police procedures,
delivery protocols, formalities and communications
with ministries of culture of third countries, as well as
the establishment of a database on stolen, recovered or
lost objects of cultural heritage and the obligations of
pawnshops, auction houses and antique dealers.

In conclusion, we would like to express our
commitment to continuing to work to implement
resolution 2347 (2017) and our willingness to continue
to cooperate bilaterally, regionally and multilaterally
for the protection of cultural property and heritage.

