Mr. Onemola (Nigeria): On behalf of the
Nigerian delegation, I thank you, Sir, for convening
this open debate on children and armed conflict and for
the concise concept paper circulated by your
delegation. I thank the Secretary-General for his
briefing and illuminating reports on that subject. I also
commend Ms. Radhika Coomaraswamy, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict, Edmund Mullet, Ann Veneman
and Kathleen Hunt for their instructive and very candid
briefings.

Nigeria considers the protection of children in
armed conflict to be one of the most daunting
humanitarian and security challenges facing the
international community today. Despite stronger global
action and reported progress in Cote d'Ivoire and, to a
lesser extent, in Nepal, the Secretary-General noted in
his recent reports the continued recruitment of child
soldiers and grave violations against children,
including killing, maiming, rape and the denial of
humanitarian access. He also drew attention not only to
the manipulation and coercion of children to participate
in political demonstrations, strikes and roadblocks, but
also to the increasing cross-border recruitment of
children.

Nigeria finds that state of affairs intolerable and
thus lends it full support to the country- or case-
specific recommendations contained in the Secretary-
General's latest reports on children and armed conflicts
in Nepal, Somalia and Uganda. Nigeria believes that
that those targeted measures would strengthen the
implementation of existing norms and legal
frameworks, while reinforcing the advocating and
monitoring mechanisms on children in armed conflict.
We therefore urge the parties to which those
recommendations are addressed to fully implement
them.

In lending our voice to the Secretary-General's
targeted measures, Nigeria believes that political will
and a firm commitment to the implementation of peace
agreements are crucial to moving the child protection
agenda forward, especially in Africa. As regards
Somalia, we encourage the Government and factions in
the country to commit fully to the implementation of
the peace agreement signed on 9 June in Djibouti.
Particularly, we encourage them to implement the
recommendation that calls for an end to the
proliferation of small arms and light weapons, and
support the call on the Council to deploy a more robust
peacekeeping force to the country to restore stability.
Regarding the need to ensure the rights and needs
of all children, I would like to make five points.

First, Nigeria calls for a development-oriented
approach to children and armed conflict. Such an
approach would require greater attention to be paid to
child-focused health care needs, rehabilitative care,
education and the empowerment of women, families
and communities to provide a secure environment for
children.

Secondly, good governance, democracy and
conflict prevention are vital to building a culture of
peace and respect for human rights, including
children's rights. My delegation therefore calls for the
implementation of existing conflict prevention
mechanisms in Africa to free resources for human and
social development. Additionally, children's rights
should be at the core of humanitarian, peacekeeping
and peacebuilding efforts.

Thirdly, Nigeria calls on the Council to
strengthen and expand the scope of the existing
monitoring and reporting mechanism and to take
targeted measures against perpetrators who repeatedly
violate children's rights.

Fourthly, Nigeria fully supports the role of the
International Criminal Court in investigating and
prosecuting such violations.

Fifthly, we call for greater collaboration between
the African Union Committee of Experts on the Rights
and Welfare of the Child and the Council's Working
Group on Children in Armed Conflict, and for the
strengthening of the relationship between the United
Nations and African civil society in monitoring
children's rights in conflict and post-conflict situations.

As a signatory to the Convention on the Rights of
the Child since 1991 and to the African Charter on the
Rights and Welfare of the African Child since 2001,
Nigeria believes that the need for the enhancement of
collaborative efforts among the various international
and regional frameworks for the protection of children
in armed conflict can never be overemphasized.
National programmes are nonetheless imperative. We
have, through the Nigerian Child Rights Act, made
remarkable progress in the implementation of
international frameworks.

Children represent our collective posterity.
Nigeria believes that it is incumbent on us to protect
them. It is also our Charter obligation to do so.
Ensuring the rights and needs of children, not just the
rights of child soldiers, requires the involvement of all
Governments, international agencies and civil society
actors.

Let me conclude by thanking the Working Group
for the work it has done and by indicating the full
support of the Nigerian delegation for the draft
presidential statement on children and armed conflict.

