Mr. Kuchinsky (Ukraine): Let me warmly
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council. According to
recent weather forecasts, it seems that November will
be rainy and windy. I am confident that, under your
wise leadership, the Council, vessel will navigate
successfully, avoiding all reefs that threaten to split it
apart.

My special thanks go to Under-Secretary-General
Jean-Marie Guehenno. His comprehensive briefing, as
well as the report of the Secretary-General on the
activities of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), as usual, have provided
us with a clear picture of the situation on the ground.

At this late hour I will be very brief.
Since my country's position and assessment of
the ongoing developments in Kosovo have been
presented at our previous meetings and basically
remain unchanged, I will limit myself to just a few
remarks on the latest events.

Visible progress achieved by UNMIK in
promoting the benchmark processes, strengthening the
rule of law and laying the foundations for economic
stabilization in the region give us good reason for
optimism. But, I believe, it should be a very cautious
optimism. The outcome of the municipal elections held
on 26 October enables us to draw the conclusion that,
while significant improvements have been made in the
province, there are still many hurdles ahead.

The democratic nature of the elections has been
widely recognized. We were pleased to learn that the
voting was carried out in a calm and peaceful
atmosphere. In our view, the people of Kosovo should
be congratulated for their political maturity. My
delegation also pays tribute to the representatives of
the international presence in the region, who
significantly contributed to the general success of the
elections.

Undoubtedly, the Kosovo electorate has placed
great trust in the hands of its newly elected leaders.
Now it is important to ensure effective governance with
benefits for all the national communities by proper
implementation of the election results.

In this regard, I must mention that for the first
time the ballots reflected the full ethnic diversity of
Kosovo. Therefore, the reported information on low
participation in the voting by the minorities, especially
Kosovo Serbs in certain areas, was most regrettable.

However, let us face the reality. Apathy is a
younger sister of a fatality. The murder of the president
of the municipal assembly and two other individuals in
Suva Reka, a mob attack on a group of Serb prisoners,
together with a number of further security incidents,
have demonstrated that UNMIK and KFOR cannot
weaken their efforts to eliminate an ideology of
political and ethnic intolerance in the province.

It was reported in the media that during the visit
to Kosovo the Special Envoy of the United Nations
Commission on Human Rights for Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia and Bosnia-Herzegovina, Mr. Jose
Cutileiro, acknowledged no improvement in the status
of human rights in the region. He particularly referred
to the slow process of minority returns. Of course, the
press is not the most reliable source of information on
such delicate issues as Kosovo. I hope that Mr.
Cutileiro's final conclusions will soon appear in his
report.

Nevertheless, the problem still remains. Despite
intense international efforts to improve security
conditions, Kosovo Serbs and other non-Albanians
living in mixed ethnicity areas still fear violent
intimidation. During the month of October there have
been occasional flare-ups of ethnic-related violence
throughout the whole region. Let me once again stress
that Ukraine strongly condemns outbursts of all kinds
of violence in Kosovo and calls on UNMIK and KFOR
to continue their resolute actions to stop this dangerous
trend.

We would also like to endorse the relevant
position of the European Union and urge all Kosovo
authorities to work closely with UNMIK and the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
to improve the inter-ethnic climate, as well as the
conditions for sustainable returns.

In our view, active cooperation of UNMIK with
Belgrade authorities, as well as the implementation of
new initiatives, undertaken by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Michael
Steiner, together with Kosovo leaders, will definitely
bring tangible results. An old proverb says that:
"Everybody talks about the weather, but nobody does
anything about it". The result-oriented efforts of the
Special Representative leave us with the impression
that the Kosovo weather could be changed. At the same
time, a wide range of urgent tasks in the security,
political, economic and humanitarian spheres, I
believe, require more than his prompt reaction. They
demand further increased attention on the part of the
Security Council and appropriate coordinated support
from the international community.

I wish to conclude by reaffirming Ukraine's
strong commitment to the stabilization processes in the
province and our readiness to continue our
participation in the international activities there.

