Mr. Fonseca (Brazil): The Security Council is
honoured today to have been presided over by the Foreign
Minister of Canada. Canada is widely recognized within the
Organization for its outstanding actions in favour of peace
and humanitarian causes. Brazil also warmly welcomes the
presence of Mr. Joao Bernardo de Miranda, the Angolan
Minister for External Relations, during the Council's
deliberations.

This meeting opens new and promising perspectives
for Angola. We remember that in the closing days of
February 1999, the expiration of the mandate of the United
Nations Observer Mission in Angola occurred amid a deep
sense of frustration over the fact that the resources applied
by the international community and the people of Angola
in the peacekeeping process were not bearing fruit.

UNITA's responsibility for the frustration of the peace
process was clear and indisputable. Today, in resuming
consideration of the follow-up to the report of the Panel of
Experts on violations of Security Council sanctions against
UNITA, the circumstances are very different, and hopeful.
The Angolan Government has been able to muster its forces
and break UNITA's capacity to wage conventional warfare,
and the Security Council and the United Nations have
re-established working links with Luanda.

The adoption on 13 April of Security Council
resolution 1294 (2000) illustrates this improved relationship.
We understand that the Special Adviser of the Secretary-
General for Special Assignments in Africa, Ibrahim
Gambari, an able and talented diplomat, will soon visit
Angola. We are certain his mission will succeed.

This new situation is welcome. Brazil has always
underlined the important role that the United Nations
should play in Angola. The draft resolution about to be
adopted will strengthen the United Nations presence and
again brings hope for peace.

In this, the role of the Canadian Ambassador to the
United Nations has been decisive. His leadership,
determination, genuine belief in United Nations principles
and clear understanding of the difference a determined
action by the Security Council can make allowed for the
elaboration of the comprehensive and innovative draft
resolution now under consideration in the Council. The
report upon which the draft resolution is based, prepared
by the team led by Ambassador Fowler and
Ambassador Anders Mollander, imposes upon us the
challenge of working seriously and effectively to stop
disrespect for the decisions of this Council.

It is a milestone in the effort to strengthen the ability
of the United Nations to solve regional conflicts and
promote peace, development and democracy. The Fowler
report is a model of such a role, as recognized by the
majority of the Members of our Organization. In this
regard, Brazil would like to stress the decision of the
recent Ministerial Conference of the Non-Aligned
Movement, held in Cartagena, which urges the Security
Council to "adopt the report and pass a resolution on the
recommendations contained therein".

That resolution should provide a further legal basis
for outlawing any support for Mr. Savimbi's UNITA and
send a clear signal that he is no longer an acceptable
interlocutor for the peace process. Of great importance is
the establishment of a follow-up and monitoring
mechanism, as mentioned in recommendation 39 of the
report. The report demonstrates in detail the procedures
used by UNITA to finance its activities, purchase
weapons and involve third parties to avoid compliance
with the obligations it undertook with the "Acordos de
Paz" and the Lusaka Protocol.

Brazil has always favoured dialogue and the peaceful
settlement of conflicts and will continue to do so in
Angola. We advocate, however, that a clear message
should be sent to Savimbi now declared a war
criminal by the Southern African Development
Community (SADC) and the Organization of African
Unity - and his supporters. Brazil wants peace in

 

 

Angola and is ready to contribute to that end. We know
that the most difficult tasks are yet to come. They are to
rebuild the country, provide millions of destitute citizens
with a minimum level of well-being and the fruition of
their rights as human beings.

Brazil wishes to commend the Angolan Government
for announcing its intention to hold general elections in late
2001 and the beginning of consultations on a draft new
constitution for the country. The next step will be devising
measures to complete the construction of a fully democratic
State based on the full enjoyment of human rights for all
Angolans. The United Nations Office in Angola, through its
capacity-building arm, has an important role to play. We
hope that it will soon be operational.
That will be possible only if sanctions are enforced
and respected so as to ensure disarmament and the
complete military demobilization of UNITA. Savimbi must
be prevented from completing any financial transaction and
from continuing to pursue the diamond trade. His
representatives must lose the ability to travel and to work
on UNITA's behalf abroad. Those who persist in offering
support to UNITA should be convinced that they are
extending the suffering of the Angolan people and that they
will face public exposure and shame.

The implementation of the measures envisaged in the
draft resolution will require additional efforts from the
SADC countries and other neighbours of Angola. It is
important that the international community extend to them
the necessary assistance to shoulder those new tasks.

I wish to reiterate the position Brazil has long
defended in this body. The Security Council has to be firm
on UNITA and its supporters. This is the only way to bring
about the peace that for so long has eluded the brotherly
people of Angola.

Peace in Angola will have decisive consequences for
the conflict that has been tormenting the region for years.
We want Angola to have an important regional and
international role commensurate with its economic potential
and with the courage displayed by its people.

