Mr. Liden (Sweden): The lack of progress towards a
peaceful solution of the conflict in Abkhazia, Georgia is
utterly disappointing. The reports of continued violence
against civilians and peacekeepers in that region cannot but
cause us deep concern. Sweden deplores the renewed
hostilities that took place in May, with a major loss of life
and a further aggravation of an already precarious
humanitarian situation.

Despite the ceasefire of 25 May, the situation on the
ground regrettably remains very tense. Sweden is
particularly concerned about the plight of refugees and
displaced persons. Both parties must fulfil their obligations
to see to it that these people can return to their homes
under secure conditions.

A growing number of other civilians depend on
outside assistance for their subsistence. It is unacceptable
that acts such as renewed mine laying hamper the work of
those who provide assistance and claim victims, including
among United Nations and Commonwealth of Independent
States peacekeepers.

The United Nations Observer Mission in Georgia
(UNOMIG) continues to be an important stabilizing factor.
As a troop contributor to UNOMIG, Sweden is well aware
of the crucial role played by the Mission, but also of a
security situation which severely restricts its ability to do its
job. Sweden supports today's Security Council decision to
extend UNOMIG's mandate. We have also emphasized that
the proposal for a self-protection unit to facilitate the work
of the military observers needs to be kept in mind.

The draft resolution which we are about to adopt sends
a clear message to the parties. We expect them to create the
conditions in which UNOMIG can carry out its mandate
and we will bear this in mind as we review the situation.
Beyond that, we expect the parties to show the political will
to move the process of negotiations forward and produce
tangible results.

Sweden firmly supports the negotiation process
initiated by the Secretary-General and the efforts of his
Special Representative, Mr. Bota. The support given to this
process, in particular by the Russian Federation as
facilitator, is important. Joint international action is
indispensable for the promotion of a comprehensive
settlement. But the responsibility for finding such a
settlement rests ultimately with the parties themselves. It is
time for them to demonstrate their full readiness to assume
that responsibility.

