Mr. Schulz (Germany): First of all, I would like to
thank our briefers, Under-Secretary-General Voronkov,
Mr. Billingslea and Ms. Buku, for their insightful and
informative briefings.

Our efforts to combat the financing of terrorism
need to be part of an all-encompassing and holistic
approach. We need to fight the financing of terrorism
with all the instruments at our disposal. I congratulate
our friends from France on the adoption of today's
important resolution 2462 (2019) and commend the
French leadership in bringing it to fruition. Germany is
very proud to be a sponsor of this important resolution.

Our fight against terrorism cannot be successful
unless we effectively cut the financial bloodline that
keeps the terrorist threat alive. Fighting terrorism is
not only a matter of military force, effective police
work and successful prevention and deradicalization;
above all, it is a race for knowledge. We have to find
the marks left by terrorists and trace their steps back to
their homes. The money trail helps us to do that. But,
of course, terrorists do their best to cover their tracks.
Many of them avoid the official banking sector and
instead use informal, more anonymous ways to transfer
money in an increasingly sophisticated way, as we have
learned once again from our briefers today. That is a
serious threat to our security and those loopholes must
be addressed. The resolution that we just adopted does
exactly that. States are called on to keep a watchful
eye on those informal systems, and Germany strongly
supports that effort. Informal money transfers should
be regulated, and we commend the Financial Action
Task Force (FATF) for its work in that field.

Today's debate also seeks to share good practices
in countering the financing of terrorism. We are not
starting from scratch. With the FATF, we can already
rely on global standards agreed on by eminent specialists
and experts in the field. Let me very briefly highlight
some measures that we have taken in Germany and the
European Union (EU).

In the European Union, in addition to the
implementation of Security Council sanctions, we fight
terrorist financing with two autonomous sanctions
regimes, one against terrorist groups in general and the
other against the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
and Al-Qaida specifically. The EU is also constantly
reviewing and improving its own internal regime with
regard to anti-money-laundering and countering the
financing of terrorism. In Germany, laws to that end
have been tightened even further and organizations
with ties to terrorist financing have been exposed
and banned.

Before concluding, I would like to address a few
of the concerns that some humanitarian organizations
have expressed during the discussions in recent
weeks. Many of us have been receiving telephone
calls from humanitarian organizations, including the
International Committee of the Red Cross and others.
Those organizations fulfil a crucial role in many
conflict regions by providing indispensable aid to those
who are the hardest hit by violent conflict. For the
most vulnerable, their work often makes the difference
between life and death. Some of those organizations
have voiced concern about the possible negative
consequences of resolution 2462 (2019) for their work,
and we feel that they deserve to be listened to closely.

Without money one cannot provide humanitarian
assistance to people in need. Financial transactions
are needed to buy food and medicine. It is therefore
paramount that we do not erect barriers to humanitarian
assistance by restricting the access of humanitarian
personnel to funds in conflict regions. We believe
that the resolution that we adopted today strikes the
necessary balance in a very convincing way, promoting
effective counter-terrorism measures, on the one hand,
and a safe space for principled humanitarian action,
including with the necessary financial transactions, on
the other.

We know that every text can be interpreted, but
I want to be absolutely clear. Today's resolution must
not be misused to criminalize impartial, neutral and
independent humanitarian action. Rather, it reaffirms
and reminds us of our obligations under international
law, including international humanitarian law, human
rights law and refugee law. All the counter-terrorism
measures that we have agreed on today must comply
with those bodies of law. The resolution is absolutely
clear on that issue. Safeguarding the necessary space
for humanitarian action is therefore by no means a step
backwards in our counter-terrorism efforts. On the
contrary, it is a step forward in an approach that takes
international law seriously.

