Major General Kazura: It is indeed an honour and
a privilege to address the Council.

The changed security environment I am going
to talk about in the next 10 minutes or so is one
that is threatened by armed conflicts and religious
fundamentalism, in addition to economic, political,
social and environmental crises. This security
environment is fuelled and sustained by such existing
complex and unresolved security challenges as
corruption, internal tensions, violent extremism and
radicalization, illicit trafficking and terrorism. That is
the kind of security environment under which Mali has
been living for quite some time.

In fact, the security environment in Mali was
threatened for a long time by a series of coups d'etat,
which created a political and constitutional crisis, on
top of which was an already extremely vulnerable
situation characterized by a volatile mix of problems
such as drought, food shortages, migration, armed
insurrections and heavy weapons proliferation.

In addition to that, the recent increase in criminal
activity perpetrated by a variety of armed movements
and terrorist groups, such as Al-Qaida in the Islamic
Maghreb, Ansar Eddine and the Movement for Unity
and Jihad in West Africa, has recently proceeded to
violently change the same security environment and to
sow further chaos, especially in the northern part of the
country.

The successful Operation Serval and the African-led
International Support Mission in Mali, and especially
the Chadian operations conducted last year, broke those
groups' backbone and managed to stop their criminal
activities, which they had sought to extend throughout
the entire country. The relative stability following the
operation allowed MINUSMA to carry out its mandate
successfully. As a result, peaceful elections were held,
State authority was gradually brought back to the north
and people were expecting the signing ofthe final peace
accord according to Ouagadougou agreement.

The failure to implement some provisions of the
accords, as well as the occurrence of the sad events
of 17 and 21 May in Kidal, have completely changed
the security environment in northern Mali. The whole
area was and is still occupied by the armed movements
and the terrorists. Since May, the terrorist groups have
managed to reorganize themselves and have increased
their deadly operations against international troops,
especially MINUSMA, which has a greater presence in
that area and is paying a heavy and deadly price.

Today more than ever, MINUSMA has serious
concerns related to re-emerging terrorist threats in
that area. The northern ungoverned area is becoming
a sanctuary for terrorist activities that are coordinated
and facilitated by organized networks with financial,
military and human resources, which, in time, will
be able to conduct even more lethal operations with
horrendous security consequences for the whole region
and beyond.

The reality on the ground today is that MINUSMA,
which is supposed to be a peacekeeping mission, is
facing a terrorist network that is combining patience,
intelligence, coercion and brutality to design and direct
its attacks when and where it wants. MINUSMA is in
a terrorist-fighting situation without an anti-terrorist
mandate or adequate training, equipment, logistics or
intelligence to deal with such a situation.

The questions we are likely to ask ourselves here
today include: What is MINUSMA there for if it cannot
deal with the situation? What should we do to stop
the killings if MINUSMA should stay there, and who
should do it? How long will it take us to answer those
questions satisfactorily?

Many questions can be raised and many answers
can be found, but today is not a good time for questions;
it is time for action, and the decision to act has to be
taken now, because, as we gather here today, we may
very well receive bad news again - God forbid!

The new security environment MINUSMA is trying
to handle is a security situation for which it was not
ready. If it has to change its role from peacekeeping to
antiterrorism fighting, that should be urgently planned
for and done properly. It is against that backdrop that
I wish to express the following expectations from
MINUSMA military contingents, which could be
expected from any contingent under such a security
environment.

With regard to immediate action, I wish here to
salute the successful Serval/Barkhane Operations,
which led to the stability that Mali has enjoyed for
months, and to state that today more than ever before
operations against terrorists in northern Mali are
absolutely crucial, with a view to regaining initiative
and allowing MINUSMA forces to be reinforced in
terms of necessary equipment, training, intelligence
collection and logistics to be able to fulfil its mandate.

In addition, the laudable efforts of United
Nations leadership to give force command authority
and flexibility to deploy troops where and when it
is deemed necessary with required means to do so
should be continued. Furthermore, armed movements
should be made to understand that they should be held
accountable for what is happening in the areas under
their control.

The second phase will see the pace of the Mali
Defence and Security Force reorganization stepped up,
with a View to taking over and fulfilling its mandate of
defending the nation.

In the long term, there will be a need for the
international community to continue to support Mali
in its efforts to rebuild the country through a variety
of processes, such as disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration, and security sector reform processes,
justice and national reconciliation and socioeconomic
development.

I have used the case of Mali as a clear example
of showing that the specific challenges military
contingents are facing today under new security
environments require new organization, planning and
guidance. As for MINUSMA, it needs to adapt itself to
new challenges and stay the course. Its contribution to
transforming northern Mali into a stable area is more
necessary now than ever before. Otherwise, that part
of the world would increasingly become a dangerous
place to live, and the threats to troops, allies and the
population would be even more severe, with negative
effects for the entire region.

