Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): Unfortunately, we heard nothing new from
some of our colleagues, who continue unabashedly
and unblinkingly to affirm Russia's guilt and demand
that we shed light on the incident. We too would very
much like to see the truth emerge, and we hope that
the further we go, the more green shoots of truth will
find their way towards the light. I would like to thank
my Dutch colleague for his persistent proposal that we
cooperate with the British, but I will most likely not do
that, because the meaning attached to this proposal for
cooperation is nothing like what we understand by it.

We are essentially being called on to respond to one
question, which is "Admit that you did it." We answer,
"We did not do it." To that, they say, "That is not enough.
How did you do it?" We say, "Give us proof." They say,
"No, but admit it anyway. It will be better that way." Can
it really be that no one here understands that this is all
a sort of theatre of the absurd? We have said repeatedly
that the United Kingdom has not been following the
Chemical Weapons Convention's procedures, and the
Council can read about that in the memorandum that
we have circulated.

I would like to note that today the Ambassador of
the United Kingdom expressed her readiness to share
information on the course of the investigation with
Member States. We eagerly await that. We also hope that
the information provided to us will be based on materials
that are more convincing than the ones I showed the
Council today. By the way, we found the explanation by
the Permanent Representative of the United Kingdom
of the reasons and legal niceties for the use of the
expression "highly likely" as an instrument of British
justice - or in the context of British justice - very
diverting. We will take it into consideration.

In conclusion, there is really nothing new under the
sun. Once upon a time in Britain there lived a wonderful
children's author - and not just for children - who
was both a mathematician and a writer and who wrote
a marvellous book entitled Alice's Adventures in
Wonderland. Here it is. I would like to read to the
Council a short excerpt from the book about the trial of
the Knave of Hearts. It is very short.

"'There's more evidence to come yet, please
your Majesty,' said the White Rabbit, jumping up in
a great hurry; 'this paper has just been picked up."'

Perhaps I should read the rest in English.
(spoke in English)
"'What's in it?' said the Queen.

'"I haven't opened it yet,' said the White Rabbit,
"but it seems to be a letter, written by the prisoner
to - to somebody.'

"'It must have been that,' said the King,
'unless it was written to nobody, which isn't usual,
you know.'

6"Who is it directed to?' said one ofthejurymen.

'"It isn't directed at all,' said the White Rabbit;
'in fact, there's nothing written on the outside.'...

"'Are they in the prisoner's handwriting?'
asked another of the jurymen.

"'No, they're not,' said the White Rabbit, 'and
that's the queerest thing about it.' (The jury all looked puzzled.)

"'He must have imitated somebody else's hand,'
said the King. (The jury all brightened up again.)

"Please your Majesty,' said the Knave, 'I didn't
write it, and they can't prove I did: there's no name
signed at the end.'

"'If you didn't sign it,' said the King, 'that only
makes the matter worse. You must have meant some
mischief, or else you'd have signed your name like
an honest man.'

"There was a general clapping of hands at this:
it was the first really clever thing the King had said
that day

"'That's the most important piece of evidence
we've heard yet,' said the King, rubbing his hands
"'Let the jury consider their verdict,' the King
said, for about the twentieth time that day.

"'No, no!' said the Queen. 'Sentence
first - verdict afterwards.'"

(spoke in Russian)

Does that remind you of anything, Mr. President?
But if Council members think this has to do only with
fairytales from a previous century - which are very
relevant ones, incidentally - I would like to show them
one more thing, an article from today's Independent,
entitled "Whether we can prove Moscow's involvement
in the Skripal case or not is irrelevant". Here is one
brief quote from it.

(spoke in English)

"The Russians' response to all of this is to
say "prove it", as if in a court of law. Even on a
legal test such as being beyond reasonable doubt
or on the balance of probabilities, the Russians are
plainly culpable."

I rest my case.

