Ms. Adam (Somalia): I am sincerely delighted to
be here again today to share my perspective on the key
challenges and opportunities in Somalia. As the Council
deliberates on the conclusions of the joint United
Nations-African Union review and the subsequent letter
from the Secretary-General dated 14 October 2013
(8/2013/606), I again appeal for the Council's support,
as I truly believe that there are immense opportunities
in Somalia as our State emerges from a fragile political
transition and its new Government asserts itself.

As the Deputy Secretary-General has said today,
Somalia is changing. I thank him for the time he took
from his busy schedule to see the reality on the ground
in Somalia.

We are much obliged to the Council and the United
Nations for sustaining international attention and focus
on the plight of the Somali people. I wholeheartedly
thank you, Mr. President, and the members of the
Council for their personal engagement in supporting
Somalia. We have no doubt that our collective desire for
peace and a stronger Somalia will prevail. The Council's
commitment and sustained partnership in support of
critical priorities in Somalia is at a turning point, with
a View to advancing global peace and security.

Significant progress has been achieved in
Somalia, and the Somali Government and its people
are determined to further strengthen cooperation with
our friends and with the rest of global society. Somalia
is still vulnerable to domestic and external threats as
it builds its power to assert its authority and seeks to
strengthen the rule of law. In that context, the Somali
State has made significant progress within the past year.
The election of President Hassan Sheikh Mohamud has
given the Somali people hope and a sense of optimism.
The Somali Government is therefore guided by three
principles, namely, building national democratic
Government institutions with development priorities
that are fair, inclusive and sensitive to the diverse
interests of the country; fostering national unity based
on the principles of individual human rights, equality
and justice; and strengthening our partnerships with all
global actors on the basis of mutual interest, respect
and cooperation.

In the current international system under the
founding principles of the United Nations, functioning
and legitimate States are indispensable to international
security, trade and political relations. Somalia is no
longer a failed State. Many Somalis have returned to
the country to invest in it and rebuild it. In addition,
because of our partnership with the global community
and its steadfast support, together we have pushed
Al- Shabaab out of Mogadishu and other major cities and
towns. Many embassies and international organizations
have opened up their offices in Somalia. And, as the
Deputy-Secretary-General said today, the United
Nations has reopened its office in Mogadishu. Roads
have been rehabilitated and the provision of services
has been gradually revived. Democratic rule in Somalia
is slowly but surely taking root.

Following the success of the landmark London
Somalia Conference in May 2012, a "new deal"
conference for Somalia, co-hosted by the Somali
Federal Government and the European Union, was held
in Brussels on 16 September 2013, with the participation
of many friendly Governments, international
organizations and partners. The Conference endorsed
a new deal compact for Somalia that establishes
measurable goals for Somalia's reconstruction and
requires specific commitments for implementation
from the Somali Government and its international
partners. That arrangement provides a more resilient
design for joint partnership between the Somali people
and the international community. Our Government has
moved swiftly to ensure the successful implementation
of the compact and has established a national security
council chaired by President Mohamud.

We understand that sustainable security in Somalia
depends on the development of a robust Somali
security sector that includes the involvement of the
people as an active component of reconstruction. Our
Government realizes that its citizens are not ciphers
but active participants. They must be convinced that
their security and development, and the Government's
ability to provide both, exist in a reciprocal relationship
that must become ever more resilient. Furthermore,
we would like to note that Al-Shabaab's recruitment
strategy targets urban centres and impoverished areas.
By including the participation of citizens, the seams
of weakness in Al-Shabaab's organizational structures
and its asymmetrical advantage will be uncovered and
countervailed. That requires improving the capacity of
the security forces, strengthening the rule of law and
developing an effective judicial system. We cannot
expect peace in Somalia if peace is not owned by its
citizens.

We are grateful to the Security Council for partially
lifting the 20-year old arms embargo, so as to allow the
Somali defence forces, supported by the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), to fight Al-Shabaab.
Achieving that goal remains a top priority for Somalia.
We have been improving the necessary mechanism for
the successful accomplishment of that objective. When
our President joined his fellow African leaders earlier
this month in Addis Abeba, he sent a powerful message
to the world that demonstrated continental unity against
extremism.

Somalia is cognizant of the high cost involved in
providing new funding for the logistical supplies that
our troops critically need. We also understand the logic
and the thinking that may make some Member States of
the Security Council feel a bit reluctant about starting a
new chapter that may reverse the regular and traditional
funding system package. We urge those countries to see
things differently because, in the face of the scourge of
Al-Shabaab/Al-Qaida and their tactics of asymmetrical
warfare aimed at maximizing their mayhem, the status
quo is not an option. Hence, we also seek to provide
the Somali national army the timely logistical support it
requires to enhance its capacity and ultimately to defeat
Al-Shabaab.

The Somali Government wishes to remind everyone
that AMISOM's decision, on 10 April, to suspend
operations due to severe logistical limitations - also
understandable - has provided Al-Shabaab with the
breathing room to regroup and take the offensive.

I wish to encourage and urge the members of the

Security Council to act swiftly so that AI-Shabaab is not
provided further opportunities to regroup and infiltrate
urban centres and export their evil ideology. However,
it is no secret that we all risk the danger that Al-Shabaab
will be reinvigorated by the lack of sustained military
engagement. That group continues to be a global threat,
as evidenced by the recent attacks on our brothers and
sisters in Kenya. That shows that the gains made so
far in Somalia can quickly unravel if we continue with
business as usual. The international operational support
to Somalia should be enhanced given the unique current
conditions and the opportunities that exist.

The Somali people know full well that local
leadership is critical in defeating terrorism. According to
the letter of the Secretary-General, peace consolidation
requires that we improve the capacity and effectiveness
of the Somali army. That, in turn, requires the use of
"smart" power in both the short and long term, with a
training and capacity programme that has components
to improve both commissioned and non-commissioned
officer sectors. AMISOM. and the United Nations
are convinced that the Somali national army has the
capability and the determination to secure major cities
and key infrastructure; what they require is increased
basic logical support. Again, that requires an inclusive
approach that develops the eyes and ears of the public
as a component of the public space in the campaign
against Al-Shabaab.

Citizens are the foundation of any intelligence
network and are both essential and necessary for
leveraging resources. The overarching strategy for the
provision of security after war may be conceptualized
in the phrase "welcome, build and defend". The ultimate
strategic objectives of the current peace enforcement
operation in Somalia are to recover areas occupied by
Al-Shabaab, restore and secure the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Somalia, support the Federal
Government of Somalia in its struggle to disrupt,
degrade, weaken and defeat Al-Shabaab by providing
tangible and effective logistical support to Somalia that
will sustain the military operation on the ground to
enable them to expand, stabilize and control recovered
areas and deny Al-Shabaab any possibility of a relapse
into insecurity. A further goal is to provide AMISOM
the enablers and multipliers in needs in terms of troop
increases, military hardware and resources that will
allow them to significantly expand into new areas of
cooperation and recover the entire territory of Somalia.

It is critical for the Federal Republic of Somalia
and the international community to close the serious
gap between the support given to AMISOM. and the
tempo and scale of operations, so that we do not allow
the terrorists to use that gap to regroup, give the enemy
a free hand, recruit and intensify their infiltration into
urban centres and strengthen their ability to destabilize
the region. At the same time, we need to enhance the
capacity of the Somali national army forces and public
safety and law enforcement institutions, as well as to
support the establishment of effective governance, to
enable us to conduct a general election in 2016.

Therefore, to make the presence of the Federal
Government of Somalia felt in the recovered areas, it is
the plan and firm intention of the Somali Government to
immediately establish stability, peace and security, as
well as the provision of services. Providing non-lethal
and logistical support to the Somali forces, as proposed
by the Secretary-General, will surely guarantee short-
term capacity and long-term resiliency for the Somali
forces.

We believe that this new approach should be adopted,
and I request the Security Council today to give our
Somali National Army that support by authorizing the
provision of extensive non-lethal and logistical support.
By supporting that vision, Al-Shabaab/Al-Qaida will
be defeated, and as the Somali security forces regain
control of the country, the combat role of the AMISOM
forces can be reduced.

In conclusion, Somali troops are engaged in active
war against Al-Shabaab and in peace development
across the nation. Logistical support at the unit level
must be available in order to initiate sustainable
military and civilian operations. That logistical support
is needed immediately and thus should not be tied to the
timelines of troop increases and/or development.

Let me conclude by thanking the President and
Council members again for their tireless efforts in
supporting the Somali nation.

