Ms. DiCarlo: The Joint Comprehensive Plan of
Action (JCPOA) on the Iranian nuclear issue, endorsed
by the Security Council in resolution 2231 (2015), is
the result of 12 years of intense diplomatic efforts and
technical negotiations. The Secretary-General regards
the plan and the resolution as hard-won achievements of
successful multilateralism, nuclear non-proliferation,
dialogue and diplomacy. He welcomes the latest report
of the International Atomic Energy Agency, which
states that Iran continues to implement its nuclear-
related commitments.

At the same time, the Secretary-General is
concerned about recent developments. He regrets
that the United States recently decided not to extend
waivers with regard to the trade in oil with Iran and not
to fully renew waivers for non-proliferation projects
in the framework of the JCPOA. Those actions may
impede the ability of Iran and other Member States to
implement certain provisions of the Plan.

The Secretary-General also regrets Iran's
announcement on 8 May that it would not commit itself
to respecting the JCPOA limits on its enriched uranium
stockpile and heavy water reserves at the current stage,
and that it would further suspend compliance with the
uranium enrichment limits and measures to modernize
the Arak heavy-water reactor should other participants
not fulfil Iran's demands, especially in the areas of
banking and oil, within 60 days. He further regrets the
subsequent announcement on 17 June that Iran may
surpass on 27 June the limit on its enriched uranium
stockpile set under the JCPOA. Such actions are not
in the interest of the participants of the Plan and may
not help preserve it. The Secretary-General encourages
Iran to continue to implement all its nuclear-related
commitments despite the considerable challenges
it faces.

The Secretary-General welcomes the initiatives
of the other participants, which should be given full
effect as a matter of priority. It is essential that the Plan
continue to work for all its participants, including by
delivering tangible economic benefits to the Iranian
people. Member States and other relevant actors should
also work effectively with JCPOA participants towards
the preservation of the Plan. At the same time, the
Secretary-General encourages Iran to carefully consider
and address the concerns expressed by Member States
about its activities in relation to the restricted measures
contained in annex B to resolution 2231 (2015).

Recent events in the Gulf are a reminder that we
are at a critical juncture. The Secretary-General calls
on Member States to avoid actions that may result in
a further deterioration of the current situation. He
urges all parties to engage in dialogue and diplomacy
to address their differences, exercise maximum
restraint and de-escalate current tensions to avoid the
risk of miscalculation and accidents. In that regard,
the Security Council has an important role to play. As
stated by the Secretary-General in his briefing to the
Council on 13 June,

"If there is one thing the world cannot afford,
it is a major confrontation in the Gulf region."
(S/PV8548, p.3)

Let me now turn to the seventh report of the
Secretary-General on the implementation of resolution
2231 (2015) (S/2019/492). As guided by the Security
Council and consistent with our previous reports, the
one before the Council today is focused on annex B to
the resolution.

First, with regard to the implementation of the
nuclear-related provisions, we have not received new
reports on the supply, sale or transfer of items to Iran
contrary to annex B, paragraph 2. The procurement
channel established for the transfer of nuclear-related
items to Iran remains an important mechanism for
transparency, and all States and the private sector are
encouraged to fully utilize and support it.

In that connection, the Secretary-General noted
the 3 May announcement by the United States that
involvement in certain activities set forth in annex
B, paragraph 2, may now be exposed to its national
sanctions. He points out that the exemption provisions
in paragraph 2 allow for the transfer of such items,
materials, equipment, goods and technology required
for the nuclear activities of Iran under the JCPOA,
subject to the relevant notification requirements.

Secondly, with regard to the ballistic missile-related
provisions, the report reflects information provided
to the Secretary-General and the Security Council by
France, Germany, Iran, Israel, the Russian Federation,
the United Kingdom and the United States. Those
Member States conveyed their views on Iran's test-firing
of a medium-range ballistic missile on 1 December
2018, flight tests of additional ballistic missiles from
December 2018 to February 2019 and launches of
space-launch vehicles in January and February.

The information provided reflects divergent
views among those Member States as to whether those
launches are inconsistent with annex B, paragraph 3,
which calls on Iran not to undertake any activity related
to ballistic missiles designed to be capable of delivering
nuclear weapons, including launches using such ballistic
missile technology. In addition, the report reflects our
analysis of subcomponents retrieved from ballistic
missiles launched at the territory of the Kingdom
of Saudi Arabia by the Houthis from March to June
2018. We ascertained that those subcomponents were
produced from 2000 to 2010 and that some were sold as
recently as 2012. In our assessment, those production-
and sale-date ranges are incompatible with the Scud
missiles known to be in Yemeni stockpiles prior to the
outbreak of the current conflict in early 2015.

Thirdly, in terms of arms-related provisions, the
report reflects information regarding individuals found
guilty in the United Kingdom of exporting combat
aircraft parts from the United States to Iran through
companies located in various countries. The Secretariat
also examined a number of additional arms and
related materiel recovered in Yemen. Those included
a second surface-to-air missile, wings for a new type
of unmanned aerial vehicle and a new unmanned
surface vessel with explosives. On the basis of design
characteristics, markings and types and manufacturers
of specific subcomponents, the Secretariat is confident
that those arms and related materiel, or parts thereof,
are of Iranian manufacture. However, the Secretariat
has no indications as to whether those items were
transferred from Iran after 16 January 2016.

Furthermore, the Secretariat examined samples of a
shipment of small arms and light weapons seized by the
United Arab Emirates in Aden in December 2018 and
observed that part of the items had characteristics of
Iranian manufacture. The Secretariat is still analysing
the available information on that shipment and intends
to report back to the Council accordingly.

The report also noted a televised speech of the
political leader ofHamas, Yahya Sinwar, and a statement
by the Al-Quds Brigades spokesperson, Abu Hamza, in
May that pointed to ongoing Iranian military support
to Hamas and Palestinian Islamic Jihad in Gaza. Any
Iranian arms transfers after 16 January 2016 would have
been undertaken contrary to the provisions of annex B
to resolution 2231 (2015). The report also highlights the
continued participation of Iranian entities in foreign
arms defence exhibitions.

Fourthly, the report provides additional information
on previous and new travel allegedly undertaken by
the Commander of the Al-Quds Force of the Iranian
Revolutionary Guard, Major General Qasem Soleimani.
It also reflects information received by the Secretariat
on an individual and several entities on the 2231 list
that may have violated the assets freeze or travel-ban
measures. To facilitate the implementation of those
measures, the Secretary-General recommends that the
information related to individuals and entities on the
2231 list be updated by the Council.

In conclusion, I would like to acknowledge the
leadership of His Excellency Mr. Marc Pecsteen
de Buytswerve in his role as Facilitator for the
implementation of resolution 2231 (2015) and to
assure him once again of our full support. I would
also like to thank the Coordinator of the Procurement
Working Group of the Joint Commission for our
continued cooperation.

