Mr. Antonio (African Union): Let me take this
opportunity, on behalf of the African Union (AU)
Commission, to congratulate you, Mr. President, on
the United States' assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for this month and on its initiative to
convene this meeting on the ongoing Ebola scourge that
continues to reign in Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone,
creating a crisis of alarming proportions.

I would also like to thank all members ofthe Council
for unanimously voting in favour of resolution 2177
(2014) and all Member States that sponsored it.

I would like to salute the presence among us of the
Ministers who have also made very rich and insightful
statements. I would like to recognize the presence of
the Director-General of the World Health Organization
and the presence of Dr. Nabarro, Senior United Nations
System Coordinator for Ebola.

Since the outbreak of the deadly Ebola virus in
West Africa in December 2013, the citizens of the
affected countries have been in great trepidation.
Traders, farmers and health officials can no longer go
about their daily business without fear of the unknown.
It is even more difficult for post-conflict countries on
a serious course of reintegration, rehabilitation and
rebuilding of their social fabric. The retardation of
economic development is all the more worrisome.

Beyond the affected countries, all the countries of
the West African region remain on constant alert as
updates are being released. Because the Ebola virus is
so deadly, apparent tendencies of mistrust and sieges
among families, communities and countries have
been arising. I wish to quote the Chairperson of the
African Union Commission, Ms. Nkosazana Dlamini-
Zuma, who indicated in her statement at the emergency
meeting of the African Union Executive Council heads
on 8 September that

"the drive to protect unaffected areas is the proper

response, but it must be done in a manner that does

not fuel isolation or lead to the stigmatization of
victims, communities and countries".

Also critical is the impact on cross-border trade
and food security as people are unable to trade and
work their fields, leading to a rise in food prices. The
need to take preventive measures to halt the spread of
the Ebola virus and avert an economic disaster cannot
be overemphasized. Measures should therefore be put
in place to enable agriculture to continue and support
traders, the majority of whom are women.

The Ebola crisis has highlighted the weakness of
the public health systems in Africa in general, thereby
vindicating the various AU frameworks that call for
universal access and people-centric and effective public
health institutions. The African health strategy 2007-
2015 has identified weak and under-resourced health
systems as a major impediment to progress. This is
particularly true for countries emerging from conflict.

Desperate times call for desperate measures.
We can no longer procrastinate about combating this
disease. The time to act is now. It is for this reason
that the African Union Commission has mapped out
two priority approaches. The first is the emergency
approach; the second is the long-term approach. The
emergency approach focuses on the establishment of an
African public health emergency fund managed by the
World Health Organization (WHO), since the emergence
of the Ebola outbreak in West Africa. In addition, a
monetary pledge has been made by the AU from the
Humanitarian Assistance Fund and the Department of
Political Affairs. The long-term approach in dealing
with the Ebola crisis has resulted in the creation of an
African Centre for Disease Control and Prevention for
early detection. We also focus on the speeding up of
the operationalization of the African Centre for Disease
Control so that information can be shared about the
development of the disease and implement an effective
coordinated response.

Subsequently, on 21 August, the Peace and
Security Council of the African Union authorized the
immediate deployment of a joint AU-led military and
civilian humanitarian mission comprised of medical
doctors, nurses and other paramedical personnel to
tackle the emergency situation caused by the Ebola
outbreak. Utilizing the infrastructure of the peace
support operations, the African Union support for the
Ebola outbreak in West Africa is deploying civilian and
military volunteers from across the continent to ensure
that Ebola is contained. This operation is expected
to run for six months with the monthly rotation of
volunteers. The operation aims at bridging the existing
gap in international effort, and will work with WHO,
the United Nations Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, the United States Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention, the European Union
Centre for Disease Control and Prevention, and other
agencies already on the ground.

The Commission has also sought the assistance
of and is working with WHO and the United Nations
Department for Peacekeeping Operations and
Department of Field Support towards the lifting of
border closures by putting in place sanitary measures
and screening passengers at airports in Monrovia,
Freetown and Conakry. The objective is to open up
these airports to humanitarian and commercial flights.
Furthermore, the medical services have put in place a
contingency plan to strengthen the AU medical service
emergency response for AU-infected staff or staff of
AU member States in Addis Ababa.

I also wish to draw the Council's attention to
the changes in the mandate and replacement of the
AU Special Emergency Assistance Fund for Drought
and Famine in Africa, as it relates to the Ebola
epidemic. Recently, the Permanent Representatives'
Committee's Sub-committee on the Special Emergency
Assistance Fund for Drought and Famine in Africa
and its Sub-committee on Refugees, Returnees and
Internally Displaced Persons in Africa established a
dialogue to identify ways to harmonize the roles of the
two sub-committees and make necessary changes to
their mandates in view of recent developments on the
continent. It is notable that the Sub-committee on the
Special Emergency Assistance Fund for Drought and
Famine in Africa has made funds available to the three
most affected countries by broadly interpreting the
mandate of the fund.

Before concluding, it is worth stressing that
while assessments and analyses serve very useful
purposes, I cannot emphasize enough how important
it is for us to listen and to be guided by the realities
on the ground. Today we heard a very personal and
powerful testimony by Jackson Niamah of Medecins
Sans Frontieres in Monrovia. There is another story
that I have heard personally. It is the story of a doctor
working assiduously in an Ebola unit, with some steady
and good results. The sad part of this story is that the
researchers he is working with do not share his strong
determination and good will to save lives. As we move
together in our common fight against the Ebola disease,
their stories should drive and focus our efforts.

Finally, I wish to reaffirm the AU's continuous
support and efforts to ensure the adequate coordination
and harmonization of all strategic efforts in the
implementation process to achieve our desired goal on
the continent of Africa. Cognizant of the fact that no
country can act alone while we are engaged in fighting
Ebola, we would like to thank all our partners from
Member States, inter-governmental organizations, civil
society and non-governmental organizations for their
contributions and efforts on the ground. We would like
to especially recognize the announcement today by the
Secretary-General of the deployment of an emergency
mission to the region, but we should bear in mind that
while we are committed to fighting Ebola, together we
stand and divided we fall. Worse still is that divided we
can fail.

