Mr. Eldon (United Kingdom): I should like to
begin by focusing on an issue which is of concern to
the entire international community and of particular
interest to the 76 countries whose citizens are seconded
to the United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo (UNMIK). I am referring to the arrest by the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia authorities of two
British policemen employed by UNMIK, together with
two Canadian citizens.

The delay of 10 days between the arrest and the
granting of consular access was unacceptable. The
conditions under which the detainees are being held are
also unacceptable. They are in solitary confinement.
Only very short periods of consular access have been
allowed. They have been allowed only to make one
telephone call to their families; and meetings with
consular officials and legal representatives should be
held in private. These irregularities are inhumane and
unjustifiable.

Over three weeks after their arrest the detainees
have still not been charged. We call upon the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia authorities to immediately
release the men or bring charges. The current situation
is a sad comment on the state of the regime in
Belgrade.

The two British policemen were employed by the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) pillar of UNMIK and were working to restore
stability and peace in Kosovo. They were involved in
projects particularly benefiting the Kosovo Serb
community. It is frankly in no one's interest that this
work should be interrupted.

I should now like to make a few comments on
Mr. Annabi's excellent and informative briefing. We
welcome Special Representative Kouchner's
announcement that municipal elections will be held on
28 October. These elections, which as Ambassador
Levitte has said, are fully within the ambit of Security
Council resolution 1244 (1999), are an essential step in
building a democratic framework for Kosovo and key
for the normalization of a shaken society.

It is essential that we do everything we can to
make them a success. I cannot agree with the doubts
Ambassador Lavrov has expressed about this process,
which is designed to help establish the democratic and
multi-ethnic society for which we are, I hope, all
working.

The OSCE is doing good preparatory work to
ensure that the elections take place in the best possible
circumstances. The United Kingdom will continue to
do what it can to support this important work.
Following the OSCE's request for additional staff, the
United Kingdom has responded quickly by providing
12 people to work in the elections department. We hope
other nations will do the same.

In the run-up to the elections, our key concern is
the security situation. As Mr. Annabi and Ambassador
Lavrov have both said, we have already seen an
increase in ethnic and politically motivated violence
connected with the elections. We deplore this. Together
with our European Union partners, we condemn the
attack on 18 August which injured 9 Serb children. We
condemn the attack on the OSCE building housing
Kosovo's political parties and the office of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia Committee for Cooperation.

Those responsible for these attacks must be
prosecuted, and quickly. The clear message must be
that violence against democracy is unacceptable and
that it will be brought to justice. We urge Kosovo's
leaders to support the efforts of UNMIK and the
Kosovo Force (KFOR) to prevent further violence.

I would like also to record the United Kingdom's
support for the action taken by KFOR and UNMIK to
temporarily close down and repair the Zvecan lead
smelter on health grounds. This was clearly in the
interest of all the residents of Mitrovica, both Serb and
Albanian. The levels of lead pollution were
unacceptably high. Blood tests for many workers in the
factory have shown levels of lead far beyond what is
considered medically safe. That simple fact
demonstrates that, on health grounds, UNMIK's action
was entirely justified.

Finally, I should like to make it clear that the
United Kingdom fully supports the UNMIK-KFOR
joint declaration and the associated UNMIK regulation
on the status of personnel in Kosovo. Contrary to
Ambassador Lavrov's implication, it is within the
mandate of the Special Representative to take this step
under the terms of Security Council resolution 1244
(1999). This is no reflection on the sovereignty of the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia.

