The President (spoke in Russian): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received letters from
the representatives of Algeria, Bangladesh, Brazil,
Canada, Cuba, Egypt, India, Indonesia, Iraq, Israel,
Japan, Jordan, Kuwait, Malaysia, Mongolia, Morocco,
Pakistan, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, South Africa, Spain, the
Sudan, Tunisia and the United Arab Emirates, in which
they request to be invited to participate in the
discussion of the item on the Council's agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives
to participate in the discussion, without the right to
vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Jacob
(Israel) took a seat at the Council table; Mr. Baali
(Algeria), Mr. Chowdhury (Bangladesh),
Mr. Fonseca (Brazil), Mr. Heinbecker (Canada),
Mr. Requeijo Gual (Cuba), Mr. Aboul Gheit
(Egypt), Mr. Sharma (India), Mr. Hidayat
(Indonesia), Mr. Aldouri (Iraq), Mr. Haneda
(Japan), Prince Zeid Ra'ad Zeil Al-Hussein
(Jordan), Mr. Abulhasan (Kuwait), Mr. Zainuddin
(Malaysia), Mr. Enkhsaikhan (Mongolia),
Mr. Bennouna (Morocco), Mr. Ahmad (Pakistan),
Mr. Al-Bader (Qatar), Mr. Rashwan (Saudi Arabia), Mr. Kumalo (South Africa), Mr. Arias
(Spain), Mr. Erwa (Sudan), Mr. Mejdoub (Tunisia)
and Mr. Al-Shamsi (United Arab Emirates), took
the seats reserved for them at the side of the
Council Chamber.

The President (spoke in Russian): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received a letter dated
18 April 2002 from the Permanent Observer of
Palestine to the United Nations, which will be issued as
document S/2002/439 and which reads as follows:

"I have the honour to request that, in
accordance with its previous practice, the
Security Council invite the Permanent Observer
of Palestine to the United Nations to participate
in the meeting of the Security Council to be held
today, Thursday, 18 April 2002, regarding the
situation in the occupied Palestinian territory,
including Jerusalem."

I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite the Permanent Observer of Palestine to
participate in the meeting in accordance with the rules
of procedure and with previous practice in this regard.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Al-Kidwa
(Palestine) took a seat at the Council table.


The President (spoke in Russian): The Security
Council will now continue its consideration of the item
on its agenda. The Security Council is meeting in
response to the request contained in the letter dated
17 April 2002 from the Permanent Representative of
Tunisia to the United Nations, which is contained in
document S/2002/43l.

I should like to say at the outset that the Council
will meet until 7 pm. If there are speakers remaining
on the list at that time, we will resume the meeting
tomorrow morning.

The first speaker inscribed on my list is the
Permanent Observer of Palestine, to whom I give the
floor.


