Ms. Enge (Norway): Norway fully supports the
current efforts to resume final status negotiations. A
political framework for a two-State solution based on
the Road Map is necessary in order to mobilize broad
international support for Palestinian State-building.
Without such a political framework, we fear that
international support may be eroded. The time has
come to hold the parties to account and to demand that
they honour their Road Map commitments and other
key obligations. Without tangible improvements on the
ground, the work of the negotiators will be undermined
and public support for the two-State solution will
evaporate.

Norway strongly supports Egyptian efforts to heal
the internal division among Palestinians. We commend
Egypt for its patience and hard work in trying to find a
political solution that will make it possible for a
legitimate Palestinian Government to be in full control
of both Gaza and the West Bank.

The situation of the civilian population of the
Gaza Strip is unacceptable. In January this year, the
Security Council called on Member States to support
international efforts to alleviate the humanitarian and
economic situation in Gaza, including through the Ad
Hoc Liaison Committee. For life in Gaza to improve,
the civilian population must be allowed freedom of
movement. For the economy in Gaza to revive, the
import and export of goods must be restored. Norway
urges the Government of Israel to reconsider its policy
towards the civilian population in the Gaza Strip. At
the same time, Norway demands an end to the
indiscriminate firing of rockets and mortars against
Israeli civilians and the immediate release of Corporal
Gilad Shalit; now in his third year of captivity.

In View of Norway's role as chair of the Ad Hoc
Liaison Committee - the international donor group
supporting the Palestinian Authority - let me make a
few observations focused on the connection between
the political and the economic aspects of the peace
process.

First, we must all act on our long-held
understanding that economic progress in the
Palestinian territory is essential to bringing the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict to an end. The institutions of the
Palestinian Authority are the foundation of the future
Palestinian State. Through timely budgetary support
from major donors, Prime Minister Salam Fayyad has
staved off the impending crisis for now. However, a
considerable remaining gap must be filled to enable the
Palestinian Authority to pay salaries and utility bills
throughout the year. Western and Arab donors alike
should therefore honour their pledges from the donor
conferences of Paris and Sharm el-Sheikh.

On the other hand - and this is my second
point-the parties are ill-advised to take the donors
for granted. The international donor community's
support to the Palestinian Territory is in essence
political, not humanitarian. Our aim is to facilitate the
establishment of an independent, democratic and viable
Palestinian State, living side by side in peace and
security with Israel. Without the political endgame in
clear view, donor commitment at current levels can
hardly be sustained.

Third, donor dependency is not a solution, while
private value generation is. Let us not forget that, 10
years ago, the Palestinian Authority ran a budget
surplus. Israel must lift restrictions on commercial
flows to, from and within all parts of the Palestinian
territory, including the Gaza Strip. The many
roadblocks that literally stand in the way of economic
development must be removed, in accordance with
Israel's international obligations.

Finally, let me conclude by turning to the work of
the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee. The June meeting in
Oslo took stock of the grave economic situation of the
Palestinian Authority. The meeting sought to identify
measures that would underpin sustainable economic
growth in the Palestinian territory, including the Gaza
Strip, and mobilize much-needed budget support for
the Palestinian Authority. The next Ad Hoc Liaison
Committee meeting will take place in New York in the
margins of the opening of the sixty-fourth session of
the General Assembly.

One of the objectives of the upcoming Ad Hoc
Liaison Committee meeting in New York is to provide
Prime Minister F ayyad with an opportunity to lay out
his recently announced vision for establishing a
Palestinian State within a two-year time frame. Norway
is pledging its full support for Prime Minister Fayyad's
vision. We expect Prime Minister Fayyad to use the
occasion in New York to explain to donors in some
detail how they can help turn his vision into reality.

We, the donors, in close coordination with the
Security Council and the Middle East Quartet, should
be prepared to act on these proposals, mindful that the
next couple of years may be our last chance in the
foreseeable future to salvage the two-State solution.

