Mr. O'Brien: Next month we will mark a grim
anniversary. The brutal conflict will have torn Syria
apart for five long years. It has been a relentless period
of violence and destruction. The Syrian people have
seen their country reduced to rubble, loved ones killed
or injured and millions of people displaced either
inside the country or in the region and beyond. They
have suffered far too much and for far too long. The
international community watched as Syria became
one of the largest and most destructive crises of our
times, with the majority of the population - some
13.5 million people - in dire need of protection and
humanitarian assistance.

The announcement by the Chairs of the
International Syria Support Group - the United States
and the Russian Federation - of a nationwide cessation
of hostilities, scheduled to come into effect this
weekend, is a welcome development and a long-awaited
signal of hope to the Syrian people. I echo the call of
the Secretary-General for the parties to abide by the
terms of the agreement, to bring about an immediate
reduction in violence as a first step towards a more
durable ceasefire and to create the conditions necessary
for increased delivery of humanitarian aid.

I would like to take this opportunity to update the
Council in detail on the most up-to-date information on
humanitarian access.

As of 17 February, United Nations and Syrian
Arab Red Crescent convoys had reached the following
towns as part of the four towns agreement: 62 trucks
to Madaya, reaching 40,000 beneficiaries; 3 trucks to
Zabadani, reaching 1,000 beneficiaries; and 18 trucks
to Fu'ah and Kafraya, reaching 20,000 beneficiaries.
The convoys have preceded without any major security
incident, although there have been delays in delivery
as parties disagree over the terms of the agreement.
The second and last part of the deliveries is tentatively
planned for 28 February. The United Nations has
supplies ready to be loaded and delivered. Facilitation
by all parties, including the relevant letters from the
Government of Syria, must be provided. As part of
the agreements facilitated through discussions in
Munich earlier this month, we have been able to deliver
62 trucks in Madimayet, reaching 40,000 people. There
is another convoy planned through Madimayet, which
must happen this week. Again, it requires facilitation
by all parties, including the relevant letters from
the Government.

Despite those achievements, the process of
delivery has not been straightforward. For example,
the second Madimayet convoy left the warehouse on
Sunday, 21 February at 8 pm. local time. By Tuesday
at 1 am. local time, we still had trucks waiting outside
the checkpoint to enter the town. Brave and dedicated
humanitarian workers slept in trucks in adverse
weather, waiting patiently to get help to the people that
needed it. Eventually supplies were delivered, and the
team worked through the night to unload the supplies.
Their bravery and commitment is humbling, and I
salute them all. I would like to remind the Council that
Madimayet is a mere 15- to 20-minute drive from central
Damascus. There is no reason that the mission should
take over 48 hours to reach the people who need help. It
is a clear violation of the safe, unhindered, unimpeded
access that the Security Council has continually called
for through its resolutions and other statements.
Finally, in Kafr Batna, in eastern Ghuta, 15 trucks
delivered assistance to 10,000 people. Again, that was
not without complications. My team received approval
from the Government at 5.30 pm. on 21 February to
deliver assistance to over 44,0000 people in several
towns in eastern Ghuta. After extensive negotiations,
the United Nations team finally departed in the early
afternoon on 23 February, and was only actually able
to deliver to one town - Kafr Batna. The date of the
next convoy is yet to be approved. Again, I insist on
immediate approval to allow the convoys to deliver. We
need immediate approval for the next round of convoys,
which will deliver to eastern Ghutah, Horns, Aleppo
and southern Syria.

Health supplies for some 30,000 people have been
denied for the convoys by the Ministry of Health. The
Resident Coordinator will submit an official request
to the Government for all medical items that were
removed to be included in future convoys. The Resident
Coordinator is also putting together a proposal to the
Government of Syria to reduce the number of procedures
and the length of time needed for inter-agency convoys
move. Humanitarian operations cannot continue to
be bogged down by unnecessary and unacceptable
restrictions, obstructions and deliberate delays that
are costing people their lives. The number, scope and
complexity of bureaucratic and other obstacles that are
placed in the path of simple aid deliveries are staggering.
To move a single truck, United Nations teams on the
ground need to acquire multiple layers of approvals
from officials at various different levels, necessitating
repeated rounds of negotiations over everything
from the target location, the amount and type of aid
supplies, the date, the time and the route to take. When
approvals are forthcoming, they are often not respected
or adequately implemented. In order for people in
dire need to receive the assistance they so desperately
require, the system must be urgently simplified.

The United Nations has also begun to use airdrops
as a means of humanitarian delivery in Syria. Although
there are a number of operational risks associated with
airdrops, we recognize that there are benefits to that
approach in some areas of Syria as a last resort. Earlier
this morning, a World Food Programme plane dropped
the first cargo of 21 tons of items into Deir ez-Zor. We
have received initial reports from the Syrian Arab Red
Crescent team on the ground that pallets have landed in
the target area as planned.

In summary, the United Nations and its partners
have reached 110,000 people in besieged areas. We have
approval to reach a further 230,000 people, including
through the airdrops in Deir ez-Zor. But we are still
waiting for approval for an additional 170,000 people.
We expect those approvals to happen immediately.
And, more broadly, the use of siege and starvation as
a method of war must cease immediately. The main
responsibility for doing so rests with the parties
maintaining the sieges, but it is shared by those who
put civilians in harm's way by using them as shields for
military activities in besieged areas.

I cannot emphasize enough how high the stakes are
at this moment in the conflict. The Syrian people - who
are rightly sceptical of the international community's
desire and ability to bring about an end to this hideous
war after years of inaction - need to see an immediate
difference in their daily lives on the ground because, up
until this point, it is they who continue to bear the brunt
of this crisis as violence has become more widespread,
systematic and extreme. Since the start of the year,
thousands of civilians have been killed, injured or
displaced as a result of air strikes, barrel bombs,
shelling, mortars, rockets, car bombs, improvised
explosive devices and suicide attacks, day after day,
right across the country.

This month alone, it is estimated that several
hundred people have been killed and over 70,000
displaced due to intense aerial bombardment in Aleppo
governorate. Heavy fighting and aerial bombardment
also continued in other parts of the country, including
parts of Idlib, Homs, rural Damascus and Dar'a. All too
often, that included attacks on civilian infrastructure
and basic services - including medical facilities,
schools, bakeries, places of worship and internally
displaced person camps, with a devastating impact on
hundreds of thousands of civilians. On 15 February,
on one single day, seven health-care facilities were
attacked in Idlib, Aleppo and Dar'a, reportedly by
Government and allied forces. Numerous civilians,
including medical staff, were killed or injured, and the
facilities largely destroyed. In Idlib alone it is estimated
that some 40,000 people will be left without access to
medical services as a result.

Groups designated as terrorist have similarly
continued their indiscriminate attacks on civilian-
populated areas. A few days ago, car-bomb attacks for
which responsibility was claimed by the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant reportedly killed more than 155
people in Damascus and the city of Homs. In January,
similar attacks in the same locations killed dozens more.
Meanwhile, non-State armed groups have continued
shelling populated areas of Damascus, killing and
injuring many civilians over the past few weeks.

It is hard to believe that this conflict can be resolved
as long as there continues to be a complete absence of
protection for civilians. The agreement on a cessation
of hostilities must finally and unequivocally produce
what the Council's resolutions and the basic tenets and
obligations that apply under international law have
not been able to achieve so far - an immediate end
to all targeted or indiscriminate attacks on civilians
and civilian infrastructure, and improved protection
of civilians. Enough is enough. This brutality must be
brought to an end.

Despite the intensified fighting, the United Nations
and its partners have continued to scale up assistance to
people in need, albeit at great personal risk to their staff.
Last month, the United Nations and its partners reached
millions of people in need with assistance through
all available routes. The World Food Programme, for
example, delivered food for 3.6 million people. UNICEF
provided water, sanitation and hygiene supplies for
more than 2 million people, and the World Health
Organization delivered nearly 660,000 treatments.

This month, significant amounts of supplies were
delivered through cross-border operations authorized
by the Council. During the first three weeks ofFebruary,
food assistance reached some 960,000 people, which
represents a 48 per cent increase as compared to the
same period in January. Health supplies were also
delivered for some 300,000 people in February. Large,
multi-truck convoys are crossing the three border
crossings of Bab Al-Salam, Bab Al-Hawa and Ar
Ramtha on a nearly daily basis. We will continue to stay
and deliver, but we remain concerned about the impact
of fighting and insecurity on humanitarian access and
operational space, in particular to the eastern areas of
the city of Aleppo. This fragile access to people in need
must be safeguarded at all costs.

Let me be frank. While the United Nations and its
partners are ready to take advantage of any opportunity
to reach people in need, granting access should never
be dependent upon political negotiations or ad hoc
deals on the ground. The protection of civilians and
the facilitation of humanitarian assistance are legal
obligations that are incumbent upon all parties to the
conflict at all times and for all types of assistance. That
is a fundamental and irrefutable tenet of international
humanitarian law and it must be respected. In that
regard, I once again call urgently on the Government
of Syria to approve without delay the more than 40
requests outstanding for inter-agency convoys to
deliver assistance to hard-to-reach and besieged areas. I
also call on non-State armed groups and listed terrorist
groups to fulfil their obligations.

There are no winners in the Syrian conflict.
Everyone is losing. But the highest price is being paid by
Syrian men, women and children who are seeing their
country, homes and families torn apart. This war has to
end. As much as we try, the delivery of humanitarian
assistance can address only the symptoms, not the root
causes. The international community and the parties
to the conflict must seize the momentum created
around the nationwide cessation of hostilities to bring
a political solution to the crisis. I cannot stress enough
that we must not let this opportunity pass. We cannot
take away that glimmer of hope from the people who
need it most.

