Mr. Jenie (Indonesia): I would like to begin by
congratulating you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council for the month of November.
We wish you every success.

My delegation is always grateful for the
opportunity to participate whenever the Security
Council deliberates the agenda item on Timor-Leste,
which is a neighbour, a close friend and a partner of
Indonesia.

My delegation would also like to thank the
Secretary-General for his report in connection with
progress towards the achievement of key tasks by the
United Nations Mission of Support in East Timor
(UNMISET). In that context, we would also like to
welcome the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Timor-Leste, Mr. Hasegawa.

As the work of UNMISET begins to wind down,
my delegation would like to recall its consistent
support for the mandate by which it was set up and for
its work ever since. Indonesia has always maintained
as a fundamental principle that UNMISET provides the
necessary assistance for Timor-Leste to meet the goals
of political stability, security and self-reliance in the
shortest possible time.

In that connection, we are pleased that the report
observes that Timor-Leste is now generally peaceful
and stable, with the Government making considerable
efforts to address pressing internal issues confronting
the country, including the veterans issue and violence
between martial arts groups. We are further pleased by
the efforts by the Government of Timor-Leste that have
yielded positive results in various fields, including the
quest for self-reliance.

In the consolidation phase of UNMISET, which
began last May, we see that steps have been taken,
including the establishment of eight working groups by
the Mission to address the key areas of concern that
were highlighted by Member States here in the Council
on 24 August. Properly implemented, we are certain
that the working groups can help in the desired
identification of activities necessary for a smooth
transition from peacekeeping to institution-building
and sustainable development assistance. That will
further create a steady and conducive opportunity to
complete the mandate of UNMISET successfully
within a secure time frame.

Similarly, we note that an integrated technical
assessment mission from the United Nations visited
Timor-Leste in early October, in accordance with
resolution 1543 (2004), and returned with favourable
reports of further progress in the development of key
State institutions and security agencies, including the
adoption of some important pieces of legislation.

It is significant to point out, however, that the
technical assessment team also reported that Timor-
Leste has yet to reach the threshold of self-sufficiency.
It noted that areas of public administration -
particularly the finance, banking and justice sectors -
remain weak and fragile. We hope that the United
Nations and the international community will continue
to stand by the Government of Timor-Leste and,
through appropriate development assistance
mechanisms, support its dedicated efforts.

As the members of the Security Council well
appreciate, Indonesia places great value on its
relationship with Timor-Leste. We note that the report
of the Secretary-General observes that relations
between both nations were further strengthened by the
visit of Prime Minister Alkatiri to Jakarta on the
occasion of the swearing-in ceremony of the new
Indonesian President, Mr. Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono,
on 20 October.

With regard to the issue of land border
demarcation, both nations have continued to hold
consultations. It should be recalled that, at the Bali
meeting of our Foreign Ministers last June, they did
reach a provisional agreement to be submitted to their
heads of Government, whereby 90 per cent of the land
border demarcation was agreed upon. I should like to
add that there has also been steady progress at the
working level to settle the remaining 10 per cent,
which consists of nine unresolved segments. At the last
meeting of the Technical Sub-Committee on Border
Demarcation in Yogyakarta on 29 and 30 October -
concerning which my colleague Jose Luis Guterres has
also informed the Security Council - the two sides
further concluded six of those segments, according to
the record of discussion signed by both delegations,
leading to a total conclusion of about 96 per cent of the
land border demarcation, which represents a difference
of 1 per cent with my colleague. They are scheduled to
meet again on 21 and 22 December to try to resolve the
outstanding three unresolved segments. That meeting
will also determine further work on the densification of
coordinates and, later on, schedule demarcation work.

Therefore, when perusing the Secretary-General's
report, one should realize that both Indonesia and
Timor-Leste understand that there is indeed more field
work to be done in order to arrive at the final
agreement. In that context, Indonesia did not expect
that the final agreement could have been concluded at
the technical meeting in October and we believe that
our partner, Timor-Leste, did not expect that either.

In that regard, Indonesia would like to reiterate
its position once again that, in order to facilitate border
management activities as soon as possible, Indonesia
stands ready to Sign a provisional agreement at any
time, while continuing to seek agreement on the
remaining issues in the not-too-distant future.

Let me conclude on two other matters that are of
concern to Indonesia. First is the reference in the report
to an Indonesian naval ship that entered Timor-Leste
territorial waters on 19 September in pursuit of a
private tour boat. I would like to clarify that matter for
the record. On that day, an Indonesian naval ship
detected an unattended boat floating near the
Indonesian maritime boundary with Timor-Leste. It
sailed towards the boat in order to ascertain the nature
of its presence. However, after repeated requests for
contact, the boat, while continuing not to give any
response, sped away at high speed. During the event,
the ship experienced a mechanical problem and was
brought by the currents into the territorial waters of
Timor-Leste unintentionally. After a while, the
mechanical problem was fixed and the ship turned
back. While fixing the problem, the ship tried to
contact local authorities in order to avoid
misunderstanding, but was unsuccessful.

What is important is that the Government of
Indonesia has been in contact with the Government of
Timor-Leste and satisfactorily clarified the matter. It is
important to point out that no hostile intention
whatsoever on the part of the naval ship was evident.
In order to avoid similar misunderstandings in the
future, however, tourist boats in the border areas,
especially those unattended ones by divers, will need to
give clear signs concerning their activities.

The second point of concern pertains to the
statement that, on 2 November, Indonesian military
personnel crossed the Tactical Coordination Line
(TCL) in the Cruz area of Oecussi. I would like to
inform the Council that, to date, the Government of
Indonesia has never received any communication or
complaint on that issue, either from the Government of
Timor-Leste or from UNMISET. In order to dispel any
wrong impressions, I will explain what actually
happened on that day.

As we all know, pending the land border
agreement, security personnel of both parties use a
Tactical Coordination Line that was agreed upon by
field officers. There are three zones under the TCL,
namely, zone 1, which is patrolled by Indonesia, and
zone 3, which is patrolled by Timor-Leste. Both sides
also agreed that, in zone 2, no one is allowed to
conduct patrols or any other activities. On 2 November
2004, while patrolling in zone 1, Indonesian security
officers spotted three people from Timor-Leste who
were clearing and burning bushes in zone 2. When the
Indonesian side, still in zone 1, walked towards them,
they went away. The Indonesian security officers then
continued their patrol in zone 1. However, some time
afterward, the people who had been burning bushes
earlier returned with a bigger group, of about 30
people, and began to throw stones at the Indonesian
security officers who were patrolling in zone 1. In
order to avoid unnecessary problems, the Indonesian
security officers left their patrolling area, which
actually was in zone 1.

Given those facts, the portrayal of the incident by
the Secretary-General would have been different had
clarification from all the parties been sought. As a
result, the account given in the report is capable of
creating unnecessary negative perceptions towards
Indonesia, which we regret. We believe that the United
Nations should work to facilitate forward-looking
relations between the two countries.

