Mr. Auvaart (Estonia): I would like to thank you, Sir, for your briefing as well as your leadership in leading the work of the Committee established pursuant to resolution 751 (1992), concerning Somalia, including for having organized a visit to Mogadishu last month. Estonia participated in that visit and found it very useful. We would like to add our voice to your statement: we, too, hope that, as a result of the visit, the Federal Government of Somalia and the Panel of Experts will be able to reset their relations. Given their mutual aim of countering the threat of terrorism, we believe that the Panel of Experts is a natural partner for the Somali authorities. Estonia fully supports the priorities of the Panel of Experts for 2020, especially the expanded focus on Al-Shabaab'srevenue sources, the ban on components for improvised explosive devices, the charcoal ban and weapons and ammunition management. The Panel's priorities are closely aligned with the priorities of the Somali authorities, as both aim to build a peaceful and stable Somalia. It is important to recall that the sanctions regime is in place with the sole purpose of supporting the Somali authorities in achieving the stabilization of Somalia. It is, inter alia, preventing illegal arms trafficking and Al-Shabaab from getting weapons. It cuts revenue sources for Al-Shabaab. It helps the Somali authorities to enhance security-sector reform and weapons and ammunition management capacities. It is also important to note that the sanctions regime entails notification and exemption procedures, which ensure that the Somali authorities can get the necessary equipment for their defence and security forces. A lot has been achieved since the last briefing by the Chair, including the adoption of resolution 2498 (2019), which consolidated and streamlined the provisions of the arms embargo and imposed an improvised- explosive-device components ban. This goes to show that the sanctions regime is customized in a way aimed at best helping the Somali authorities in continuously changing circumstances. The sanctions regime is a tool to help to transform Somalia. Estonia would like to commend the Federal Government of Somalia on the progress achieved, including in the area of security-sector reform. We also welcome the fact that the coordinator of the Panel has visited Somalia three times already, and we encourage the Somali authorities to grant access to all members of the Panel, as only then will the Panel be able to begin its important work. Estonia hopes that in 2020 the Council, the 751 Committee, the Panel of Experts and the Federal Government of Somalia can all work together in good faith with strong unity of purpose to make long-term peace and stability in Somalia a reality.
