Ms. Morrison Gonzalez (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): I would like to thank Mr. Zenenga,
Ms. Mueller and Mr. Madeira for the information they
provided today.

We welcome the efforts of the Federal Government
of Somalia to develop and approve the draft framework
for national reconciliation, with the goal of ending the
Violence and restoring trust among communities in
order to overcome differences. Therefore, we ask the
parties, in particular Somali leaders, to make every
effort to find a peaceful and lasting solution to their
political differences.

We note the political stalemate between the
Federal Government and the federal member states.
We understand that breaking the impasse should be the
priority objective to support the national reconciliation
process taking place in Somali society. We also express
our deep concern about the fragility of security in
Somalia and condemn the attacks perpetrated by the
terrorist group Al-Shabaab.

We welcome the progress made in the constitutional
review process and urge actors to continue to make the
necessary efforts to ensure that its review is inclusive
and transparent and guarantees the participation of all
sectors of society. In that regard, more progress must
be made in approving the draft electoral law based on
the principle of proportionality and inclusion, including
adding provisions that provide more opportunities for
women. We realize that it is essential to continue working
together to increase women's political participation and
share of power so that they are involved at every level,

which is why increasing the electoral law's gender
quota is crucial to achieving a minimum of 30 per cent
seats for women in the 2020 elections.

With regard to young people in Somalia, we note that
70 per cent of the population is under the age of 30 and
that the youth unemployment rate is one of the highest
in the world. The lack of job opportunities and social
and recreational activities makes young people even
more vulnerable, driving young people into conflicts
and participation in radical groups or piracy as a way to
survive. We encourage the continued implementation of
programmes that promote comprehensive change in the
lives ofyoung people so that they can find opportunities
and achieve their potential.

The Dominican Republic urges the parties to
continue working to end the recruitment and exploitation
of children, to secure their release, reintegration
and appropriate compensation, as well as pardoning
children who have been sentenced to prison for their
association with armed groups. We urge all the entities
concerned with the protection of civilians in Somalia to
redouble their efforts to create the mechanisms needed
to protect the most vulnerable among them, particularly
the internally displaced and women and children, who
are exposed to high levels of insecurity and violence.

The effects of climate change, manifested in
a serious drought, continue to be a challenge for
Somalia. Added to communities' vulnerabilities and
lack of resilience, those effects have resulted in a
worrying increase in humanitarian needs in a country
where a third of the population needs assistance to
survive. Food insecurity, caused largely by adverse
weather conditions and the loss of crops and livestock,
continues to threaten the lives of 1.5 million people,
mainly children. In that regard, we are very concerned
about the difficulties that humanitarian actors are
encountering in their efforts to access vulnerable areas,
where they increasingly end up becoming victims of
violence, kidnappings or movement restrictions both
within and outside the areas where humanitarian
assistance is needed. We welcome the efforts of State
and local authorities in monitoring and implementing
humanitarian programmes, and we understand that it
is essential to ensure that the international community
redoubles its cooperative efforts, which is why we
suggest that those who are in a position to do so
contribute to the Somalia Humanitarian Fund, with
a view to alleviating the greatest humanitarian needs
in Somalia.
Lastly, I would like to highlight and acknowledge
the roles that the United Nations Support Office in
Somalia, the African Union Mission in Somalia and
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia
have played. I would also like to acknowledge all the
actors who have been working alongside the authorities
in order to achieve lasting and sustainable peace and
stability in Somalia.

