The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Afghanistan, Canada, India, the
Islamic Republic of Iran, Japan, the Netherlands,
Norway, Pakistan and Portugal, in which they request
to be invited to participate in the consideration of the
item on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the
usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the
Council, to invite those representatives to participate in
the consideration of the item without the right to vote,
in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation ofthe President, Mr. Tanin
(Afghanistan) took a seat at the Council table; the
representatives of the other aforementioned
countries took the seats reserved for them at the
side ofthe Council Chamber

The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Tom Koenigs,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Afghanistan and Head of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan.

It is so decided.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2007/555, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in Afghanistan and
its implications for international peace and security.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Mr. Tom Koenigs, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Afghanistan and Head of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan.

As Council members are aware, this will be
Mr. Koenig's last briefing to the Security Council as
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Afghanistan. On behalf of the members of the Council,
I would like to warmly thank Mr. Koenigs for the work
he has done in Afghanistan under very challenging
circumstances, for the useful briefings he has given
this Council over the past two years and for his
dedicated efforts in implementing the Council's
resolutions on Afghanistan. In bidding him farewell, I
wish him success and fulfilment in his future
endeavours.

I now give the floor to Mr. Koenigs.


