Mr. Salam (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, allow me to thank you, Mr. President, for
steering the work of the Council during this month.
Allow me to thank also Mr. Pascoe for his instructive
and important briefing.

One week ago, this Council considered the
ongoing crisis in Gaza stemming from the siege
imposed by Israel. During that week, many voices were
raised to denounce the collective punishment imposed
by Israel on Palestinian civilians. More importantly,
the resolution that you referred to, Sir, adopted by the
Human Rights Council last week in Geneva, called for:

"international action to put an immediate end to
the grave violations committed by the occupying
Power, Israel, in the Occupied Palestinian
Territory". (A/HR C/S-6/L. 1)

People are still watching this Council to verify
that it is able to meet the challenge, that there is a
lifting of the blockade and that crossings are opened to
allow civilians to cross them immediately. Despite
frustrations with respect to the Council's shortcomings
in dealing with the substance of the Israeli-Arab
conflict, many still place trust in this body and believe
in its role in maintaining international peace and
security. No one is disappointed if peace remains the
ultimate goal.

The Commissioner-General of the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East, Ms. Karen Koning AbuZayd, said in an
article published in The Guardian on 23 January 2008:

"There has never been a more urgent need
for the international community to act to restore
normality in Gaza. Hungry, unhealthy, angry
communities do not make good partners for
peace."

It is necessary today to normalize living
conditions in Gaza and the West Bank, not only to put
an end to the suffering of the people, but also to ensure
that the comprehensive peace process that should have
continued in the wake of the Annapolis conference has
its credibility restored. That credibility was tainted and
obstructed by the policy of fait accompli imposed by
Israel, which is relying on the use of force and
completely flouting international law and the relevant
resolutions. The settlements have not been frozen,
despite the inclusion of that measure in the initial
commitment undertaken under the Quartet's Road
Map, and the separation wall is still being built. The
blockade at the crossing points has not been lifted, nor
are Palestinian institutions allowed to work in occupied
territories.

Those are confidence-building measures that
would make it possible to deal with the question of
final status. The Annapolis participants came to an
agreement on that, that is, borders, Jerusalem, security
and refugees. That was all based on the baseline
document of Madrid, the relevant international
resolutions and the Arab Peace Initiative, announced in
Beirut by the Arab heads of State in 2002, and was
confirmed at the Riyadh summit in 2007. That
initiative calls for a comprehensive peace based on an
Israeli withdrawal from all occupied territories in 2007,
particularly the West Bank, Gaza Strip, Golan and the
remaining occupied Lebanese territories.

From this standpoint, my country, Lebanon,
insists that the issue of refugees should be resolved on
the basis of General Assembly resolution 194 (III). We
reiterate our call for that repatriation, which is
necessary. If it is not carried out, that will jeopardize
the national identity of those Palestinians.

Israel's behaviour in the occupied Palestinian
territories, particularly in Gaza, reminds us of the
recent atrocious images of the war that Israel
perpetrated against Lebanon in 2006, in which they
systematically destroyed infrastructure and deliberately
targeted civilians. The Lebanese Government has
undertaken to implement the provisions of resolution
1701 (2006) adopted by this Council after the war of
2006. The goal is to restore security and stability in
southern Lebanon. However, Israel continues to Violate
that resolution by continually Violating, on a daily
basis, the sovereignty of Lebanon. Last year, those
Violations totalled 872. There were 711 air violations,
32 sea violations and 128 land Violations. The latest
incursion took place in 2008, when Israelis went 200
metres into Lebanese territory, bypassing the Green
Line and detaining a Lebanese citizen for one day.
Israel continues to refuse to provide landmine maps. It
dropped cluster bombs over southern Lebanon in the
last war and refuses to provide maps showing their
location.
We welcome the appointment by the Secretary-
General of a representative to play a facilitator role in
the issue of the two kidnapped Israeli soldiers, but

Israel still refuses to resolve the issue of the Lebanese
detained in its prisons for decades in very trying
conditions. We call once again for their immediate
release.

With respect to the Shebaa farms, despite the fact
that we applaud the provisional geographic
demarcation contained in the regular report of the
Secretary-General on the implementation of resolution
1701 (2006), we believe that that should be part of a
diplomatic process in which all States and stakeholders
must be involved in order to bring about a complete
Israeli withdrawal. In the meantime, the identity of
those farms needs to be determined once and for all.
We call for a reconsideration of the proposal by the
Lebanese Government, within the framework of the
several proposals it had submitted that advocate putting
the farms under a temporary United Nations mandate.

Since 24 November 2007, there has been no
presidential election in my country. That is a source of
concern for the international community and our
brothers. In fact, this Council adopted, on
11 December, a presidential statement expressing its
concern with respect to the postponing of presidential
elections. The Lebanese Government has supported the
comprehensive plan worked out by the meeting of the
League of Arab State ministers, held in Cairo on 5 and
6 January 2008, in order to facilitate immediate
elections, in accordance with which General Suleiman
would be the consensus President of Lebanon. That
same initiative was reiterated by the Arab ministers at
their meeting held on 28 January.

Allow me to draw attention to the fact that the
continuation of the political crisis once again raises the
threat of more Violent acts, as we saw last weekend
with the death of eight citizens. Those unfortunate
incidents, after which we announced special measures,
are now being investigated by the judicial authorities.
This Council is not unaware that terrorist operations
have continued for the past three years. Such attacks
weaken the stability, independence, sovereignty and
security of Lebanon. They are aimed at eminent figures
in the political, media and security areas and at
constitutional, security and civilian institutions. In late
2007, a terrorist attack led to the assassination of
General Francois el-Hajj, who was an eminent figure in
Lebanon who had vanquished terrorism in the
Palestinian refugee camps. The Council fully
condemned that attack. 2008 began with another phase
of terrorist attacks, and civilians were killed in an
attack targeting a diplomatic car in January 2008.
Those attacks also targeted the internal security
institutions, killing Captain Wissam Eid of the
intelligence services, as well as a number of civilians.
The Security Council condemned that crime in its
statement yesterday. Attacks have also sought to
destabilize southern Lebanon and to terrorize the
international forces and their members. The most
recent such attack targeted the Dutch unit.

None of those terrorist attacks has shaken the
Lebanese from their commitment to the independence,
unity and freedom of their country. The attacks will not
undermine our resolve to renew national consensus or
halt the march towards international justice that we
have undertaken together. That is why I commend the
efforts of the Secretary-General to take the steps
necessary to establish a special international tribunal
on the assassination of former Prime Minister Hariri
and his companions in order to prevent the criminals
from pursuing their terrorist activity and thereby to
strengthen peace and stability in Lebanon.

