Mr. Wittig (Germany): I would like, at the
outset, to acknowledge the presence of Deputy Foreign
Minister Ludin here in the Chamber. We thank him
very much for joining us today and for his remarks. We
also thank Under-Secretary-General Ladsous for his
comprehensive briefing. Germany thanks Mr. Staffan
de Mistura wholeheartedly for his enormous
contribution to United Nations support for Afghanistan
and for his personal dedication in one of the most
challenging positions that the Organization has to offer.
The new Italian Government's choice of Mr. De Mistura
for his important new position there is ample proof of
his outstanding qualities.

I would also like to take this opportunity to thank
and welcome the incoming Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Afghanistan and the new
head of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA), Mr. Jan Kubis. My delegation
wishes to congratulate him on his new position and
assure him of the full support of the German
Government. His vast political experience will serve
the United Nations Mission very well. I would also like
to assure him of the strong support of my country and,
I assume, of the Council, for which Afghanistan is a
high priority, as has been proven by the high degree of
consensus displayed over time.

Germany aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered later by the observer of the European Union.

Mr. Kubis is going to Kabul at yet another
defining moment in modern Afghan history, only days
after the International Afghanistan Conference in Bonn
on 5 December, which, as Mr. Ludin said, was a
historic milestone. Ten years after the first conference,
in St. Petersburg, Afghanistan is on its way to full
sovereignty again. The transition is starting to show its
first results. As announced by President Karzai, soon
more than 50 per cent of Afghan territory will be
considered to be transition areas. By 2014 the Afghan
Security Forces will have full responsibility for
Afghanistan's security.

The truly remarkable message from Bonn is
clear: the international community renews its
partnership with Afghanistan and defines a clear and
reliable long-term perspective, based on firm mutual
commitments. For its part of the agreement, the Afghan
Government commits to continued progress in all key
areas, such as democracy, human rights and
governance, and reaffirms its international obligations
in that regard. More generally, the so-called
transformation decade of 2015-2024 emphasizes a
strategic consensus. The international community
stands by Afghanistan. We will make sure that the
important achievements over the past decade will not
be reversed and that much-needed reforms and
capacity-building will remain priorities, for the benefit
of all Afghans. Terrorists must not be allowed to find a
safe haven in Afghanistan again.

In all of that, sustainability, including fiscal
sustainability, is a key concern. One example is that the
Afghan Security forces have almost reached their
target size. The focus must now be on further
qualification and empowerment of lasting Afghan-
owned structures.

Bonn also underlined the international support for
a political solution. The permanent stabilization of
Afghanistan requires an Afghan-led peace and
reconciliation process that combines the legitimate
interests of all groups within Afghan society, including
those Taliban who want to break with their past. In that
context, Afghanistan and the world community have
defined seven clear principles for such a process,
showing unequivocally that peace cannot be had at any
price. However, participants were very clear that the
outcome of a peace and reconciliation process based on
those principles needed to be respected and supported
by the region. Regional support remains essential -
and a functional relationship with its closest neighbour,
Pakistan, even more so. The German delegation is fully
supportive of the new Istanbul Process to gradually
build and renew trust and confidence in the region.

Finally, the central role of the United Nations in
Afghanistan found much support and appreciation in
Bonn. While we are optimizing the United Nations
footprint in view of transition, Germany shares the
view expressed by the Secretary-General at the
Conference that the United Nations was active in
Afghanistan well before 2001, and will be needed in
Afghanistan long after 2014.

As my delegation has repeatedly said in this
Chamber, it is our common responsibility to ensure, in
the best possible way, the safety and security of United
Nations personnel, working under significant risks and

at the cost of personal sacrifice. Germany condemns in
the strongest of terms the attack against the United
Nations compound in Kandahar in late October and,
once more, expresses its sincere condolences.
Reminded by the report presented today, we strongly
call for respect for the humanitarian space in which
those who come to help the most vulnerable operate.

Before concluding, I wish to offer some remarks
on security. We remain concerned by the overall
volatility and the continued high level of violence. The
shocking Ashura attacks against innocent worshippers
this month are the latest example. However, despite an
increase in the visibility of attacks, the overall security
situation shows clear signs of stabilization. We believe
that a negative trend might have been halted. While
transition progresses, the international engagement
needs adaptation. As one element of the transformation
of the provincial reconstruction teams before they are
phased out, Germany has decided to place its team
under civilian leadership, the Faizabad team being the
first last week.

Let me end by underlining once more the
gratitude of the German Government for its Afghan
partners, particularly President Karzai, Foreign
Minister Rassoul, Deputy Foreign Minister Ludin and
Ambassador Tanin here in New York, for their
outstanding cooperation in preparation for the Bonn
Conference. Germany highly values its close friendship
with Afghanistan and will continue to exert influence
in support of the bright future Afghanistan deserves.

