Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Assistant Secretary-General Jenca for his briefing.

The Palestinian question has been lingering for
many years and is the crux of the crisis in the Middle
East and one of the underlying causes of the problems
in the region. Palestine and Israel are neighbours that
share the same fate. Accelerating a political settlement
of the Palestinian question through dialogue and
consultation is in the fundamental interests of both
the Palestinian and the Israeli peoples and will help to
bring about durable peace and stability in the region.

The Palestinian-Israeli situation is currently very
fragile. The conflict around the issue of settlements
is still acute, and the humanitarian situation in Gaza
is grave. The Palestinian people are demanding to
see their historical wrongs corrected and to be able
to exercise their inalienable national rights. The
international community should ramp up its sense of
urgency and agitate for a political settlement of the
Palestinian question.

First, it should resolutely push for a two-State
solution, which is the foundation for any political
settlement process. Such a solution best fits the regional
realities, is most widely recognized internationally and
has been called for in General Assembly resolutions.
The parties concerned should work diligently to resume
the peace talks and seek a speedy, just, comprehensive
and lasting solution to the Palestinian issue, based on
the relevant Security Council resolutions, the principle
of land for peace and the Arab Peace Initiative.

Secondly, we should adhere to the concept of
common, integrated, cooperative and sustainable
security and eliminate all the negative factors impeding
the resumption of peace talks between Israel and
Palestine. In that regard, China calls for the effective
implementation of resolution 2334 (2016). The parties
concerned should translate their words into action and
demonstrate their full willingness to engage in peace
talks, build mutual trust and cease all actions that
undermine the possibility of a two-State solution. It
will be essential to halt all settlement activities in the
occupied territory and put an end to the closure of Gaza.
Measures to improve the livelihood of the Palestinian
people and to prevent violence against innocent
civilians should be bolstered as soon as possible.

Thirdly, we should further coordinate the efforts
of the international community and foster synergy for
peace. China supports all efforts aimed at promoting
peace between Palestine and Israel. The international
community has been increasing its focus on the
question of Palestine for some time now, and the
parties concerned have, from different perspectives, at
different levels and with different emphases, promoted
the resumption of peace talks by actively engaging in
various diplomatic activities.

Progress has recently has been made with
intra-Palestine reconciliation, which should help to
promote unity within Palestine, the resumption of
peace talks, Palestine's achievement of independent
statehood and peaceful coexistence between Palestine
and Israel. China appreciates Egypt's efforts to promote
such reconciliation. We hope that the international
community will build on the progress made and further
strengthen its coordination in order to take steps to
promote peace through joint engagement as soon
as possible.

China is a staunch supporter of the Palestinian
people's just cause and an active mediator for peace
between Israel and Palestine. We firmly support the
concept of a two-State solution and the establishment
of a Palestinian State with full sovereignty and
independence, on the basis of the 1967 borders, with
East Jerusalem as its capital. China will use President
Xi Jinping's four-point proposal as its general guide for
settling the Palestinian question and will work with the
other parties involved for its political settlement.

China continues to believe that the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action on the Iran nuclear
question has helped to defuse the Iranian nuclear crisis
and strengthen the nuclear non-proliferation regime,
with the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons as its cornerstone. It is an important result for
international security, governance and multilateralism
and a good example of the effectiveness of addressing
difficult issues through diplomatic and political means.
We hope the parties concerned will work together
to maintain and safeguard the Plan of Action as a
historic achievement, and that they will honour their
respective obligations under the agreement, ensure
its comprehensive execution and implementation and
settle their differences appropriately through dialogue
and consultation in a concerted effort to preserve peace
and stability in the Middle East.

