Mr. Heller (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation is grateful for the convening of this debate,
which is taking place at a time when the protection of
civilians in armed conflict is taking on very special
proportions and demanding the urgent attention of the
international community. Mexico attaches great
importance to this issue and fully supports the holding
of Security Council debates on the subject.

We welcome the presence of Under-Secretary-
General John Holmes and thank him for his briefing,
which focused our attention on the seriousness of the
situations of which he spoke.

The challenges that our Organization faces
regarding the protection of civilians in armed conflict
are very diverse and have become increasingly
complex. Recently we have witnessed the
consequences of violence in the Gaza Strip, where the
large number of deaths and injuries among the civilian
population has resulted in a humanitarian crisis of
major proportions, as Under-Secretary-General Holmes
reported today.

In this regard, as it has done before in the
Council, Mexico reiterates its deep concern about the
violence unleashed over the past 19 days and
condemns the Israeli army's excessive use of force in
Gaza, as well as the launching of rockets into Israeli
territory from the Gaza Strip by Hamas, which has also
resulted in deaths and injuries among the civilian
population.

It is of particular concern to Mexico that in any
conflict situation the parties should recognize that it is
imperative to respect the provisions of international
humanitarian law, in particular those set out in the
Fourth Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of
Civilian Persons in Time of War. In particular, my
delegation reiterates its call for the parties concerned to
respect and fully implement resolution 1860 (2009),
which will lays the foundations for the immediate
attainment of a durable ceasefire that will permit the
humanitarian needs of the civilian population to be
addressed and put an end to the pointless loss of
innocent lives in the region. We consider that this
objective can be reached only through the
establishment of an international ceasefire monitoring
mechanism that, among other provisions of the
resolution, will allow unrestricted access for
humanitarian assistance, ensure the protection of the
civilian population and address the human rights
situation.

Some of the challenges that demand concrete
action are: including the protection of civilians in the
mandates of peacekeeping operations; sexual and
gender-based violence; and the use of cluster
munitions.

Access of humanitarian assistance to civilians
during armed conflict is an issue to which Mexico
devotes particular attention and which it considers to
be a sine non qua for the protection of civilians. My
delegation underscores its disagreement with
interpretations that can restrict or exclude human
dignity in complex situations and that favour positions
that set this humanitarian principle against the
principle of sovereignty.

Member States have an obligation to implement
the relevant provisions of the Charter of the United
Nations with a timely, proportionate and preferably
preventive focus, in order to limit or minimize the
effects of armed conflict on civilians, in accordance
with international humanitarian law.

Gender-based violence, including sexual
violence, whose main victims are women and children,
constitutes another major challenge. In that regard,
Mexico recognizes the Organization's efforts to combat
this problem, such as the adoption of resolutions on
peacekeeping operations in all of their aspects and on
assistance to and support of victims of exploitation and
sexual abuse committed by United Nations personnel.
Such actions contribute to strengthening the image,
credibility and effectiveness of the Organization.

Mexico calls upon all States to avoid the use of
cluster munitions during armed conflict, because of
their harmful nature and their indiscriminate effects,
which affect entire civilian populations and constitute
an obstacle to sustainable development. On
3December 2008, in Oslo, Mexico signed the
Convention on Cluster Munitions.

Mexico also advocates that the resolutions
adopted by the Security Council regarding the
protection of civilians in armed conflict should be duly
based on and inspired by the norms and principles of
international humanitarian law. That would foster the
further consolidation and development of that body of
norms and would provide additional legitimacy for the
actions and decisions of the Council.

In addition, States, as parties to the four Geneva
Conventions of 1949, have the obligation to respect
and enforce the norms of international humanitarian
law at all times and under all circumstance. That
obligation is binding in particular on all parties to a
conflict, whose duties and responsibilities are based
not only on international humanitarian law, but on
international law in general and customary
international law.

Mexico stresses the importance of cooperation
between States and the United Nations and, in
particular, between the Security Council and the
International Criminal Court, with a view to
strengthening the Court and enabling it to fully achieve
the goals it was created to accomplish. The existence
of the International Criminal Court should not only be
an incentive to strengthen national judicial systems, but
should also provide effective mechanism to address
crimes defined in the Rome Statute when national
judicial structures have disappeared as a consequence
of conflict. For that reason, Mexico recently ratified
the Rome Statute, which is a legal instrument of
enormous importance.

The update of the aide-memoire for the
consideration of issues pertaining to the protection of
civilians in armed conflict, whose main objective is to
facilitate the evaluation that the Council conducts on
that topic, will be a practical tool that will provide a
base on which to improve analysis and diagnosis of the
key aspects of civilian protection, in particular during
deliberations on the mandates of peacekeeping
operations, and for the strengthening of action in this
sphere, taking into consideration the specific
circumstances of each conflict situation.

Based on what I have outlined, my Government
reiterates its call for all Member States to support the
United Nations and other actors involved in efforts to
create a culture of protection, in which Governments
shoulder their responsibilities; armed groups respect
the norms of international law; the private sector
recognizes the impact of its engagement in countries in
conflict in the context of international humanitarian
law and human rights; and finally, Member States, as
well as regional and international organizations, act in
a swift and decisive manner when facing humanitarian
crises.

