The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of New Zealand.

I want to begin by thanking the Secretary-General,
Ms. Liu and Mr. Maurer for their briefings, and I want
to underline the gravity of the messages they have
conveyed to the Council.

We adopted resolution 2286 (2016) in May with a
degree of optimism and a strong sense of unanimity.
Eighty-five countries sponsored the resolution, making
it one of the most widely sponsored Security Council
resolutions ever. As one of the drafters, New Zealand
hoped the strong message it sent about the need to
protect health-care workers and facilities in times
of armed conflict would be heeded where it most
matters - in the conflicts that are currently on the
agenda of the Council. The past few months have been
more than dispiriting.

As we have heard, attacks against medical workers
and facilities and against the humanitarian convoys
delivering medical supplies, have increased since the
adoption of the resolution. As others have reminded
us, these attacks are taking place in various places
around the world, but for frequency and ferocity Yemen
and especially Syria are in classes of their own. In
Yemen, indiscriminate attacks, including the deadly
attack on the hospital in August, resulted in Medecins
Sans Frontieres having to withdraw support from
six hospitals in northern Yemen. The result has been
increased suffering and deaths ofinnocent Yemenis.

Syria is the most dangerous country in the world
for health-care workers, largely as a result of the
actions of the Syrian Government. We have seen a
clear pattern of systematic targeting of hospitals,
clinics and ambulances, obstructing health workers and
confiscating life-saving medicines and equipment. It
has been reported that all hospitals in eastern Aleppo
have been subject to military attacks and are only
partially functioning as a result. As we have reported
today, there have been two more attacks on hospitals in
eastern Aleppo overnight.

The apparently deliberate attack last week on
a humanitarian convoy near Aleppo represented a
new low for a conflict that has been characterized by
flagrant violations of international humanitarian law.
Like so many other recent attacks on healthcare and
humanitarian workers, it probably constitutes a war
crime. Such attacks show that some Member States of
this Organization are willing to deliberately breach or
show reckless disregard for international law in order
to achieve their military and political ends. That charge
applies both to those that carry out such attacks and
to those who ally themselves with such states. Such
behaviour is utterly unacceptable.

The Secretary-General's letter (S/2016/722, annex)
provides recommendations that we fully support. If
followed, they will help operationalize the measures
contained in resolution 2286 (2016), which reflect well-
established and long-standing rules of international
humanitarian law. I wish to highlight several that
deserve particular attention.
First, States can and should do more to ensure that
international legal frameworks relating to the protection
of medical care in armed conflict are reflected in
domestic law, as well as in relevant rules of engagement,
military manuals and other operational guidelines.
Compliance with international humanitarian law is not
discretionary. It is as binding on States as any other rule
of international law.

Secondly, States must promote understanding of
international humanitarian law within their armed
forces through regular training and the enforcement of
military discipline.

Thirdly, we must get serious about holding to
account those most responsible for attacks on health-
care workers. Resolution 2286 (2016) strongly
condemns the widespread impunity for attacks against
health care, and urges States to conduct full, prompt,
impartial and effective investigations. It is critical that
these investigations be rigorous and serve the interests
ofjustice, including the rights of victims.

The Security Council has an important role to play
in ensuring that violations of international humanitarian
law are properly investigated and, where appropriate,
that those responsible are held accountable. While the
Council cannot be the global enforcer of international
humanitarian law, we must be willing to use the tools
available to us when the circumstances demand.

Finally, continuing assaults on medical workers
and facilities demonstrate the critical need for ongoing
oversight by the Council. We ask the Secretary-General
to continue drawing attention to this issue in his
regular reports to the Council. This reporting must be
supported by the consistent collection of relevant data,
including through information-sharing between the
United Nations and relevant entities, such as the World
Health Organization.

The Council should use the annual briefing
provided for in resolution 2286 (2016) to highlight key
challenges and to press States to take further steps,
including by using their influence over warring parties,
to improve compliance with international humanitarian
law. We owe it to all those civilians caught up in
conflict, as well as those who risk their lives to save
others, to ensure that health-care workers are protected
and that their neutrality is respected. Most of all,
Council members have to show by their behaviour here
and in the conflicts in which they are involved that their
respect of international law is real. If they do not, they
call into question the very purpose of this body and
their right to sit on it.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

The representative of the Russian Federation has
asked to make a further statement.

