Mr. Vieira (Brazil):I would like to thank you,
Sir, for the invitation extended to me in my capacity
as Chair of the Guinea-Bissau configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC). In that capacity,
I conducted a visit to Bissau and Lisbon, from 25 to
28 July, to obtain first-hand accounts concerning efforts
to end the ongoing political impasse.

During the Visit, I was able to consult with a broad
range of stakeholders, including the President, the
Speaker of the National Assembly, the Prime Minister,
the President of the Supreme Court and a number
of Ministers and members of all political parties
represented in the National Assembly. I also held
meetings with the Chief of Staff of the Armed Forces,
the National Election Commission and representatives
of the international community, including the United
Nations. Moreover, I took part in meetings with
representatives of Guinea-Bissau civil society.

In Lisbon on 28 July, I met the Executive Secretary
of the Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries
(CPLP), Ms. Maria do Carmo Silveira, at which time
we discussed the role of the Community in supporting
Guinea-Bissau and in helping find a solution to
the political situation. As members of the Council
know, Brazil is currently the Chair of the CPLP. It is
our firm belief that those increased synergies and
complementarities among the relevant international
partners have been beneficial for an effective
peacebuilding endeavour in Guinea-Bissau.

My consultations served to highlight the
complexity of Guinea-Bissau's political impasse. The
Conakry Agreement, signed in October 2016, remains a
fundamental point of reference for most political actors,
although it continues to be the subject of conflicting
interpretations. The meetings that I held made it
clear that there are two distinct narratives on what
was reached in Conakry. For one group there was no
agreement on who should have been appointed Prime
Minister; others, however, believed that one name was
in fact agreed during the negotiations.

Some interlocutors noted that the African Party for
the Independence of Guinea and Cape Verde (PAIGC)
no longer controlled the National Popular Assembly,
while others underlined that the 2014 elections gave
the majority to the PAIGC and that this could not be
changed through the establishment of a block of 15
dissident parliamentarians. I did not find that those
differing positions were moving closer together.

Most stakeholders consulted were supportive of
the efforts of the women's facilitation group, aimed
at facilitating dialogue among key actors so as to
overcome the political impasse, while noting that it had
been effective as a confidence-building measure and
that it had positive effects in de-escalating tensions.
It was also instrumental for opening up lines of
communication among some actors who had not spoken
to one another directly for more than one year.

The group is composed of 10 women from different
local organizations. When I was in Bissau, the process
had already gone through one round of bilateral
meetings between the President and key actors, and
my visit coincided with a second round of discussions,
on 27 and 28 July. It was decided that during this
facilitation process no declarations should be made to
the press. The actors initially involved in the dialogue
were the President of the Republic, the Speaker of the
National Assembly, the Prime Minister, the President

of the Supreme Court and the Presidents of the PAIGC,
the Party of the Social Renovation and the group
of 15 dissident parliamentarians of the PAICG. The
other three political parties with representation in the
National Assembly were also invited to the second
round of meetings.

In my meeting with President Jose Mario Vaz, he
was very supportive of this process and affirmed he
would wait for a report of the group before making any
decision on next steps. According to the report issued
on 2 August, the facilitation has contributed to fewer
incidents of violence, a de-escalation of tensions and
the fostering of dialogue in order to reach a consensual
solution and implement the Conakry Agreement.

I also had an opportunity to be in contact with two
other initiatives from local civil society. A network of
youth organizations presented to me their view that there
had been little effort in having the youth population
involved in decisions on policy. Additionally, I was
briefed by the Organizing Committee of the National
Conference, which hopes to identify a model of national
reconciliation to be considered at a national conference
to be held in early 2018.

The National Electoral Commission (CNE)
informed me that it had already finalized a timeline for
holding legislative elections in May 2018, which must
now be approved by the President of the Republic. It
noted that prior to the elections, it was necessary for the
CNE to update the voter-registration lists. That process
should happen between January and March 2018. There
are currently 775,500 registered voters, and the number
is expected to increase. In the CNE's view, the elections
could be held within the foreseen framework, provided
that the needed resources are obtained.

One point that some interlocutors expressed to me
was that the CNE President's mandate had already ended
and that the position was currently being occupied ad
interim. They informed me that the appointment of a
new Commission had to be approved by the National
People's Assembly, which would be difficult in view of
the paralysis in the Parliament.

Sufficient time must be allowed for technical
preparations, including the update of the voter-
registration lists. However, many believe that elections
alone cannot solve the impasse without a political
solution to the crisis. Finally, it is important to note that
some stakeholders requested that the United Nations
follow and support the electoral process in Guinea-
Bissau.

The leadership of the armed forces again provided
assurances of their strict respect for the constitutional
order. A request was made for cooperation to train
and modernize the armed forces and to resume their
participation in international peace operations. Concern
was expressed regarding the fact that there had been no
progress in the implementation of plans for the creation
of a pension fund for the military.

Several interlocutors expressed concern about the
possible negative effect of an eventual departure of the
Economic Community of West African States Mission
in Guinea-Bissau (ECOMIB). Some of my interlocutors
also called for sanctions to be imposed on civilians,
in particular on politicians, for not implementing
the Conakry Agreement. On the other hand, other
stakeholders expressed their strong opposition to
that idea, seeing it as interference in the country's
internal politics.

With regard to the police force, a request was made
to develop capacity. The importance of countering
international crime, enhancing border controls and
maritime security and supporting the expansion of
community policing were underlined.

With respect to public demonstrations, it was
noted that, following confrontations between the police
and demonstrators in April, the situation had become
calmer. However, some interlocutors raised the issue
that public demonstrations had been restricted. Many
stakeholders noted that little progress had been made
with regard to the prevailing climate of impunity.

Several interlocutors noted that the economy was
doing well. The gross domestic product is expected to
grow at around 5 per cent in 2017. The Government
remains the largest employer in the country. The
President underlined to me the importance of making
Guinea-Bissau food sufficient. However, other actors
noted that many people continued to struggle, with the
lack of health and education services. Interlocutors
also noted that in 2015 the Brussels Round Table had
pledged $1.5 billion in support of the Terra Ranka
programme. They stressed the importance that donors
fulfil their pledges. However, it should be underlined
that a solution to the current crisis would enable the
international community to fulfil its commitments.
It will also provide the country with stability and
contribute to its development, benefiting the people of
Guinea-Bissau.

I would like to make the following final remarks,
which have also been endorsed by CPLP. I would
conclude my statement by reaffirming that the PBC will
continue to make every effort to support the country.
I reiterate the PBC's backing for the various efforts
made by international and regional stakeholders aimed
at assisting the Bissau-Guineans to end the political
stalemate. I urge all key political actors to engage in
a national dialogue with a view to implementing the
Bissau six-point road map and the Conakry Agreement.
I also welcome the political consultations that have
taken place with the support of the group of meen
facilitators. I underline the importance of holding
elections in the country with the necessary preparations,
in particular the update of the voter-registration lists.
I congratulate the armed forces of Guinea-Bissau for
respecting the Constitution. I recognize the efforts of
the Economic Community of West African States in
the mediation of the crisis as well as the important role
being played by ECOMIB.

