Mr. Shen Guofang (China) (spoke in Chinese):
First of all, I would like to welcome the High
Commissioner for Refugees, Mr. Lubbers, back to the
Council, and to thank him for his very detailed
briefing. The Chinese delegation believes that the
views that he expressed are very important; his
proposals deserve our careful study and consideration.

China expresses its concern about the continuing
deterioration of the humanitarian situation and the
ever-more precarious situation of the refugees and
displaced persons in the West African region. We noted
that High Commissioner for Refugees himself, and the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees (UNHCR), are making efforts to alleviate the
humanitarian situation in the region and have done a
great deal to provide relief and assistance to refugees
and displaced persons in the region.

Here, I should like to emphasize the efforts made
by the High Commissioner and UNHCR to seek free
access to and safe passage for refugees. China believes
that the initiative of the four parties concerned aimed at
reaching a formal agreement on the fundamental
principles concerning free access to and safe passage
for refugees is a very good one. We are very
encouraged by the willingness expressed by the
Governments of Sierra Leone, Guinea and Liberia to
cooperate in this regard. The fact that the
Revolutionary United Front (RUF) has also expressed
its intention to provide certain cooperation in this area
is even more encouraging. Although I myself still have
some doubts as to whether the RUF will continue to
show that willingness to cooperate, we do need their
cooperation.

China believes that the repatriation of the
refugees will require much work. Of course, the efforts
made by UNHCR and the assistance provided by some
countries are important, but they are not sufficient. I
would like to emphasize two points here. First, we
should continue to support the work of UNHCR. Donor
countries and the international community should
contribute to UNHCR's special programme. China has
provided humanitarian assistance to Guinea and Sierra
Leone through bilateral channels. Although that
assistance was not in the form of a direct contribution
to UNHCR, it can be understood as being support for
its work. Secondly, Mr. Lubbers has just said that the
Council should take measures to strengthen the role of
UNAMSIL. We of course support his proposal, which
deserves our careful consideration.

The humanitarian situation along the borders of
Sierra Leone, Guinea and Liberia is closely connected
to the peace and stability of the region. Fundamentally
speaking, the continued armed conflicts along the
borders of these three countries and the impasse in the
peace process in Sierra Leone are the root causes of the
political and security instability in the region and of the
deteriorating humanitarian situation in the area. The
crucial issue in this regard is that for a long period of
time sanctions have not been applied against the RUF.
Yesterday the Council unanimously adopted a
resolution. We hope that this effort by the international
community can contribute to stability in the region and
to the alleviation of the humanitarian situation.

China believes that the current situation in the
West African region is at a very crucial point. The
Council should by no means diminish its efforts. But
we also believe that the role of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) is very
important. We hope that ECOWAS can continue to play
its active role in this area.

