Ms. Loj (Denmark): I would like to fully
associate Denmark with the statement of the European
Union to be made shortly by the Permanent
Representative of the United Kingdom.

First of all, let me thank the Special Coordinator
for the Middle East Peace Process and Personal
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Alvaro de
Soto, for his thorough briefing and insightful
observations.

Denmark has continuously been of the view that
Israel's withdrawal from Gaza and the northern West
Bank, if successfully implemented, can be an initial
stage towards achieving a fair, lasting and
comprehensive peace in the Middle East. In order for it
to be a success, it must be consistent with the road
map, it must be complete, and it must be coordinated
with the Palestinians as well as with the international
community. Therefore, Denmark strongly urges that all
efforts be focused on making the disengagement
successful.

In that regard, we are encouraged by the political
courage shown by the leaders of the two sides. We
hope that, with only one month to go, coordination
between Israel and the Palestinians will be intensified,
especially with regard to such key issues as access to
and from Gaza. Moreover, Denmark encourages the
Palestinian Authority to accelerate reforms and Israel
to put in place the conditions essential to a viable
Palestinian economy. Denmark is of the view that the
Quartet and its Special Envoy for Gaza
Disengagement, James Wolfensohn, deserve all
possible support from the international community.

Denmark has noted the ongoing contacts,
including at a high level, between Israel and the
Palestinian Authority. It is essential to progress that
such contacts improve both in substance and frequency
and take place at all levels. Moreover, it is of great
importance that both parties renew their efforts to
implement the commitments made in Sharm el-Sheikh
and that they refrain from taking unilateral measures
that might prejudice the outcome of negotiations on the
final settlement. In that context, Denmark remains
concerned about the continued construction of the
separation barrier on Palestinian land, which is
contrary to the relevant provisions of international law.

In that light, I would like to reiterate that
Denmark will not recognize any change to the pre-
1967 borders other than those arrived at by agreement
between the parties. Denmark is of the view that the
way to achieve a permanent peace is a viable two-State
solution achieved through the full implementation by
both parties of their commitments under the road map.

Denmark is very concerned about the recent
escalation of violence in Israel and the occupied
territories. We have condemned in no uncertain terms
the recent terrorist attacks on Israel, as well as the
violence by Palestinian militants against Palestinian
security personnel. While we recognize Israel's right to
protect its citizens, we are against extrajudicial
killings, which are contrary to international law.

In order to avoid a return to the cycle of violence
that has characterized recent years, Denmark urges
Israel to exercise maximum self-restraint and the
Palestinian Authority to take immediate and effective
action against those involved in the attacks.
