Mr. Errazuriz (Chile) (spoke in Spanish):
Mr. President, please accept the congratulations of
my country, Chile, on Guatemala's assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
October. The Chilean delegation endorses the statement
made by the Permanent Representative of Uruguay on
behalf of the Group of Friends of Haiti. The delegation
also thanks Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Mariano Fernandez Amunategui for his
briefing, and we commend him on his able leadership
of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH), even as we thank the men and women
who staff the Mission for their work and dedication.
Chile reiterates its support for the Mission and for the
process of its consolidation.

We reiterate once again Chile's strong and
continued commitment to the people of Haiti and their
development, a commitment consistently proven since
2004. We agree with the conclusions of the report of
the Secretary-General on MINUSTAH (S/2012/678).
We agree also that the time is ripe for the Haitian
authorities to make progress in rebuilding their country
and strengthening their institutions.

My delegation believes that full adherence to
the rule of law remains essential to Haiti's security,
stability, governability and economic and social
progress. We hope that Haitians will be able to meet
the challenges in the areas of justice, human rights,
prison administration, gender-based violence and the
protection of children.

During the visit to Haiti in May by the Economic
and Social Council's Ad Hoc Advisory Group on Haiti,
my delegation was able to witness on the ground the
improved conditions in the country. Nevertheless, the
Haitian people continue to face serious challenges
that must be tackled by Haitian national institutions,
with the support of the international community. The
reduction in the number of internally displaced persons
certainly represents progress, but we also note the
many humanitarian challenges that remain. In that
context, we are encouraged by the steps taken by the
Haitian authorities, such as implementing the strategic
development plan in order to connect local needs with
international donors, and developing a new coordination
framework, which will improve accountability between
donors and beneficiaries of such assistance.

My delegation notes and commends the
institutional progress made by the Haitian authorities
in strengthening the rule of law. In addition to the
swearing in of a new Government by the Parliament
and the establishment of the Superior Council of the
Judiciary, we note the publication of amendments to
Haiti's Constitution, the institution of the Permanent
Electoral Council, which we hope will soon enjoy full
membership, and the call for partial parliamentary and
municipal elections before the end of 2012.

The holding of those elections would be a clear
reflection of the required positive interaction between
the three branches of Government. That interaction
is essential for maintaining political stability and
achieving development.

Chile is pleased with the progress made in the
area of security and values the important role that
MINUSTAH has played in stabilizing Haiti. Its work
to support the activities of the Haitian National Police
is crucial. It is to be expected that, in the medium term,
the Haitian National Police will gradually be able to
take over all security-related functions in accordance
with what was established by the authorities in the
development plan for the Haitian National Police for the
period 2012-2016. My delegation believes it is essential
for the Government of Haiti to strictly conform to that
plan and to comply with the process of recruiting and
training police officers stipulated for every year in
order to have the appropriate number of police officers
at the end of the period. For that purpose, we believe it
is essential that the international community continue
supporting the strengthening of the Haitian National
Police. In that sense, the Government of Chile will
continue with the bilateral cooperation plans for police
training.

Chile supports the proposal to strengthen
MINUSTAH presented in the report of the Secretary-
General and hopes it will take place gradually and on
the basis of conditions in the field. My delegation will
continue to watch that process.

As we have said on previous occasions in the Council,
security and development are two complementary
concepts, which cannot be dealt with separately. For
that reason, we believe that changes to the composition
and size of the Mission should be compensated for
by strengthening the presence of the development
component through United Nations agencies in Haiti.
In that regard, we support the implementation of the
new integrated strategic framework for the period
2013-2016, as it strengthens the coordination between
MINUSTAH and the United Nations country team
in Haiti and aligns its priorities on the basis of the
strategic plan for the development of Haiti drawn up by
the Government.

We also recognize MINUSTAH's contribution to
development through the quick-impact projects and the
programmes to reduce community violence. For that
reason, we believe that maintaining those programmes
is essential. Those projects are crucial because they
make it possible to increase the confidence of the local
population in the Mission, especially in urban areas
where institutions are weak and there are socioeconomic
problems which can lead to social unrest. We also
believe it is important for MINUSTAH to contiue taking
measures to fight the cholera epidemic, together with
local authorities, and to strengthen its zero-tolerance
policy towards cases of sexual abuse and misconduct by
some members of its personnel.

The Government of Chile believes it is necessary
to continue cooperating with the development of
institutional capacity in Haiti, under the principle of
national ownership. Chile will continue to support that
process through multilateral and bilateral channels.
I conclude with an expression of my delegation's
support for the extension of MINUSTAH's mandate, as
recommended by the Secretary-General in his report.
We hope that the Security Council will accept those
recommendations.

