Mr. Sharma (Nepal): Let me congratulate you,
Sir, for the outstanding manner in which you have been
presiding over the Security Council in the month of
September. Your convening of this open debate on the
dangerous situation obtaining in the Middle East also
deserves our full appreciation.

The escalating cycle of violence in the Middle
East has reached new heights in the last few days. In
response to two suicide bombings by Palestinian
militants that killed six Israeli citizens, the Israeli
Defence Forces have mounted a massive retaliatory
action, using excessive and disproportionate force.
They have laid siege to Palestinian Authority
headquarters, razed its buildings to the ground and
partially torn down the living quarters of Palestinian
President Yasser Arafat. His life appears to have been
placed in imminent danger by default, if not by design.

The Middle East has been experiencing deep
turmoil and an endless spate of violence for quite some
time. In an effort to prevent attacks on Israel, the
Israeli Defence Forces have reoccupied the West Bank
and destroyed most of the Palestinian security and
development infrastructure. Curfews and restrictions
have been imposed on Palestinian cities and towns.
Consequently, people are living in conditions of
profound hardship, without jobs and without incomes.
The overall situation in the West Bank and in the Gaza
Strip remains extremely precarious.

This must change. As the immediate first step, the
Israeli Government must withdraw from the occupied
territories, stop using excessive force against the
Palestinian people and lift the siege of Palestinian
towns and cities. It must not do anything that is likely
to harm President Arafat personally. Harming him
would be an affront to civility and to the human
conscience.

Nepal supports the legitimate aspiration of the
Palestinian people for a State, for freedom and for
progress. We also recognize Israel's right to live in
security and to protect its citizens. However, neither
side will achieve what it wants by stepping up the
violence and further deepening hatred and animosity
between the two peoples.

Indeed, there is no military solution to the Middle
East problem. Only a fair and just proposal from Israel
will generate hope among the Palestinians and provide
them incentives to seek a peaceful, negotiated
settlement.

Meanwhile, the Palestinian Authority should
restore its security and development infrastructures, try
to prevent attacks against Israel and promote economic
development and social progress for its peoples. The
international community must help the Palestinian
Authority to rebuild its infrastructure and to get a fair
deal from Israel in the negotiations.

The Oslo Accords gave rise to that hope, only to
see it dashed in the current cycle of bloodshed. Now
the process will have to be built from the ground up
once again. Security Council resolution 1397 (2002)
and the Quartet agreement of July 2002 provide a way
forward for a comprehensive peace in the Middle East.

Nepal values all lives, irrespective of their
nationality, race or religion. Geography, as much as
history, has put the Israelis and Palestinians together.
They will have to learn to live with each other.
Violence will only breed violence and hatred.

The Security Council must therefore do
everything in its power immediately to stop the
ongoing bloodshed, to build bridges between the two
peoples and to launch a political process to find a
comprehensive peace in the Middle East.

