Mr. Al-Malki (Palestine) (spoke in Arabic): I
would like to begin by expressing my sincere thanks
and gratitude to the President of the Security Council
and the Russian delegation for their able leadership of
the Council and for convening this important meeting.
We also thank Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process and
Personal Representative of the Secretary-General,
for presenting the report of the Secretary-General on
the implementation of resolution 2334 (2016). I also
welcome His Excellency Mr. Ayman Safadi, Minister
for Foreign Affairs and Expatriates of the sisterly
Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan.

We listened today to the eleventh report of the
Secretary-General on the implementation of resolution
2334 (2016). Unfortunately, it lists only further crimes,
violations and arbitrary, as well as illegal Israeli
policies. As was the case with previous reports, its
outlook is not at all promising in terms of progress in
the implementation of the resolution's provisions.

That leads us to wonder: In requesting the
Secretary-General to submit these required reports,
did the Security Council not intend to follow up on the
implementation of the resolution on the ground, assess
the parties' commitment to it and consequently take the
necessary measures to ensure its implementation? We do
not believe that the purpose ofthe Council's request for
periodic reports by the Secretary-General was to listen
only to the extent of violations of international law and
the number of civilian casualties and ignore the reports'
warnings about the diminishing prospects for peace,
further incitement, violence and settlement activities.

At the next presentation of the report of the
Secretary-General, we will not expect to hear any
mention of positive steps towards the implementation
of 2334 (2016), as long as there is no motivation or
deterrence that would lead Israel to reconsider its
military occupation of our Palestinian land, cease
targeting Palestinians civilians and reverse its
expansionist colonialist settlement activity, which
preclude all hope of ending the illegal occupation of our
territory and may render the two-State solution within
the 1967 borders all but impossible.

Israel is not committed to upholding the relevant
resolutions or the Charter of the United Nations; it has
never respected the rights of the Palestinian people or
recognized the Palestinian people's natural right to self-
determination and to establish their independent and
free Palestinian State. Israel has arrogantly continued
to violate international law and resolutions without any
regard for either, believing that it enjoys an exceptional
status that affords it the right to assault the rights
and territories of others and shields it from criticism
and accountability.

Israel's disregard for the rights of the Palestinian
people and for the security of the region as a whole
has reached the point at which our precious national
territories are presented as gifts to bribe extremist right-
wing Israeli groups and win their votes. Netanyahu's
declaration that he intends to annex occupied land in
the valleys and the area north of the Dead Sea is merely
a criminal's confession of the crime he has perpetrated.
Will the criminal enjoy impunity?

Israel's systematic attempts to change the
demographic and geographic structure of the Palestinian
land, including East Jerusalem, occupied since 1967
are illegal and rejected, and will not change the legal
status of Palestinian territory as occupied. Nor will
such attempts legitimize the Israeli occupation of our
land. The intention of the occupation authorities has
been revealed. It is to usurp the occupied land by force,
annex it, forcibly displace Palestinians and transfer
Israeli citizens to our lands, which is in stark violation
of international humanitarian law and constitutes war
crimes under the Rome Statute.

Israel is the occupying Power. It has imposed an
illegal blockade on the Gaza Strip, built an expansion
racist wall in the West Bank and isolated occupied
East Jerusalem. It deliberately murders a nurse and a
journalist, kidnaps a child sleeping in his own bed at
night and shoots him in the head or heart in a cowardly
manner. It prevents a young girl from going to school
in Khan Al-Ahmar; it demolishes a family home
in Sur Baher; it stops a young man from Gaza from
travelling abroad to pursue his studies or a woman from
receiving urgent health care; it deprives a man of the
right praying in Jerusalem; and it protects settlers who
have seized a Palestinian house and forcibly taken up
residence therein.

Israel also carries out provocative activities at
Al-Haram Al-Sharif and other holy sites. It rejects the
international presence documenting its racist practices
in Hebron. It establishes arbitrary military checkpoints
extending from the far north to the far south of our
occupied land. It storms Palestinian villages and
refugee camps searching for anyone who rejects its
injustice and suppression, and locks away in its prisons
and detention centres anyone who seeks freedom and
dignity. It pillages our money and natural resources and
refuses to accept any criticism at the United Nations or
any other international forum.

Is that reasonable? Israel, the occupying Power,
continues to create new realities on the ground with the
purpose of changing the nature ofthe final status, while
seeking to subjugate the Palestinian people, antagonize
their leadership and blackmail their Government, while
rejecting the implementation of all signed bilateral
agreements. It imposes further absurd conditions
requiring the Palestinian side to be content with that
reality and accept the little offered to it, as though this
were the only road that we can take in order to achieve
a fair and lasting peace among the peoples of the region
and ensure the safety of future generations.

Is there anyone in the Council who would accept
such a settlement? Our rights are not mere aspirations,
and they are not to be compromised. We are a proud
people, our land is precious, and our just cause is not
for sale.

In fact, a peace plan that does not consider the
presence of Israel on our land an occupation and
considers the two-State solution a mere slogan, while
it sees that the international resolutions and the agreed
terms of reference are obsolete and out of date, as well
as expecting from the international community as a
whole to anticipate that the Palestinians would accept
such a situation, runs counter to the conditions for
peace. Any serious negotiation process must be based
on ending the occupation since 1967, including that of
East Jerusalem, within a set time frame and with the
aim of addressing all final-status issues in line with the
internationally agreed parameters, the relevant United
Nations resolutions and the Madrid terms of reference,
including the principle ofland for peace, the Arab Peace
Initiative and the Quartet road map, as well as the two-
State solution and the establishment of an independent
Palestinian State within the 1967 borders, with East
Jerusalem as its capital under international sponsorship,
in line with the statement of President Mahmoud Abbas
to the Council in February 2018 (see S/PV.8183).

It is not a Palestinian condition or argument, as
some claim, to avoid dialogue, reject negotiations or
obstruct peace. It is the settlement to which the entire
world agreed. Today we reiterate our acceptance of
that solution and our commitment to it. The reference
to international law for negotiation is a requirement of
common sense for any negotiation process and political
initiative to resolve a conflict.

The Palestinian question must not be an exception.
It is not reasonable that international resolutions be
selectively implemented based on narrow interests.

(spoke in English)

While important, it is not enough to declare that
there is no plan B. We need to identify the means for
plan A to prevail and to be aware of the alternative
reality that Israel is creating on the ground.

In order to be able to counter it, let us give it a
name. It is not a one-State reality but an apartheid
reality. The will of peacebuilders needs to prevail over
that of bulldozers.
In that regard, allow me to commend the steady
and consistent positions expressed by Security Council
members and the international community at large
by demonstrating how deeply rooted and constant the
international consensus for just and lasting peace is.
I also wish to thank all those that provide support to
the Palestinian people, including Palestinian refugees
through the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East. We also
commend the strong response of the Arab world, the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation and freedom- and
peace-loving nations around the world to provocative
statements regarding the annexation of Palestinian land.

I also take this opportunity to thank Jordan for its
role in support of the rights of the Palestinian people
and as custodian over the Christian and Islamic holy
sites in East Jerusalem, including its role in protecting
the historic status quo of Al-Haram Al-Sharif.

In adopting its resolutions, including resolution
2334 (2016), the Security Council was motivated by
the pursuit of international peace and security in
fulfilment of its mandate. However, stating the law
is not enough. We must find the channels to act so as
to ensure its enforcement. Each country represented
here at the United Nations can further contribute to
peace by upholding its obligations, including pursuant
to resolution 2334 (2016). Member States should do
that, first, by supporting our rights, including to self-
determination and their fulfilment, and by providing
humanitarian and development assistance to the
Palestinian people. Secondly, they should not recognize
Israel's illegal activities, including those that seek to
alter the character and status of Jerusalem. Thirdly,
they should not support or assist illegal settlement
activities. Fourthly, in their relations Member States
should distinguish between the territory of the State of
Israel and the territories occupied since 1967. Fifthly,
they should ensure accountability, since impunity is the
greatest obstacle to peace.

We should make no mistake. At the United Nations
the real bias towards Israel shields it from accountability.
Impunity is the greatest obstacle to peace, as it allows
the occupying Power to take advantage of its occupation
instead of facing the consequences and promotes illegal
actions instead of ensuring compliance with the law.

A State that believes that it is beyond the law will be
tempted to continue to act as an outlaw State.

For the sake of peace, the benefit of all peoples of
the region and the authority of international law, we
must urgently and collectively act to change course,
restore hope and achieve a just and lasting solution to
the conflict. We seek justice, not vengeance, freedom,
not conditional liberty, and peace, not apartheid.

