Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
the French presidency of the Council for its initiative to
convene this meeting on cooperation between the United
Nations and the European Union. I listened attentively to
the briefing of Her Excellency Ms. Federica Mogherini,
High Representative of the European Union for Foreign
Affairs and Security Policy.

The United Nations is the most universal
and representative international intergovernmental
organization. In accordance with the provisions of the
Charter of the United Nations, the Security Council
bears the primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security. Cooperation between
the United Nations and the Council with regional
and subregional organizations in political, security
and development areas is conducive to achieving the
objectives of maintaining world peace and promoting
common development.

The EU is an important partner of the United
Nations. In recent years, the EU participated actively
in settling the Iranian nuclear issue and on various hot
spots in the Middle East and other regions, and has made
a positive contribution to maintaining international
peace and security. The EU has provided support to
African Union (AU)-led peacekeeping operations,
extended assistance to AU regional organizations and
played a positive role in maintaining peace and stability
in Africa, while promoting the continent's overall
development.

The EU is a major force on the world stage. China
encourages and supports the EU in continuing to play a
constructive role in United Nations affairs. We believe
that the cooperation between the EU and the United
Nations and the Security Council needs to adhere to the
following principles.

First, it must advocate the political settlement of
hot-spot issues through dialogue, abide by the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations,
respect the sovereignty, independence and territorial
integrity of countries and not interfere in States'
internal affairs, and facilitate the peaceful settlement of
disputes through dialogue, consultation, good offices,
mediation and other diplomatic means.

Secondly, it must adhere to a common,
comprehensive, cooperative and sustainable concept of
security. It must respect and ensure security for all. It
must adopt an integrated response to security in both
traditional and non-traditional areas. It must promote
security for all countries and regions through dialogue
and cooperation. It must strike a balance between
development and security in achieving lasting security.

Thirdly, it must respect the sovereign choice of
countries to determine their own social systems and
paths to development. It must abide by the principles
of equality and mutual respect. It must be objective in
its perspective of the historical, cultural and religious
backgrounds of different countries and regions. It
must be fair, objective and balanced in its evaluation
of countries' human rights situations and facilitate
constructive dialogue and cooperation.

Fourthly, it must generate synergy for the efforts
of the United Nations to promote economic and social
development. It must leverage the EU's comparative
advantage and, in the light of the needs of developing
countries, strengthen North-South cooperation and
support developing countries in achieving the goals of
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.

China views and develops relations with the
EU from a strategic, long-term perspective. China
hopes that the EU will make a greater contribution
to the achievement of the purposes and principles of
the Charter of the United Nations. China is ready to
strengthen its interaction and cooperation with the
EU in the framework of the United Nations, while
continuously facilitating a greater role for the United
Nations in international affairs and making joint efforts
to forge new types of international relations with
win-win cooperation as its core for a human community
of common destiny.

