Ms. Loj: I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for this opportunity to present the
twenty-second progress report (8/2011/72) of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Mission in
Liberia (UNMIL). Given the Council's busy schedule, I
will keep my remarks brief. The full text of my
statement will be distributed to Council members.

Liberia concluded voter registration on
12 February. The exercise went well, with no major
security incidents or prohibitive logistical challenges.
The Liberia National Police provided static security
where materials were stored and, with UNMIL
assistance, increased patrols to voter registration
centres. There were some concerns, however, including
reports of political aspirants transporting supporters to
register in counties other than where they resided, and
some reports of attempted multiple registrations and of
registrations of foreign nationals. However, these were
not of a magnitude to undermine the process. Simple
logistics will make it difficult to successfully vote
twice on election day.

It is encouraging that 1.79 million registration
forms were retrieved, representing 89 per cent of the
estimated number of eligible voters - an almost
30 per cent increase from the 1.3 million people who
registered in 2005.

UNMIL provided targeted assistance and
logistical support by airlifting registration materials to
and from inaccessible locations. I would like to
underline how encouraged I am that the National
Elections Commission and other national institutions
maximized their logistical capacities and were
successful in deploying to most of the 19 warehouses
and to all registration centres.

Lessons drawn from this process will be used in
planning the referendum and the general elections later
this year. However, the challenges involved in those
will be significantly greater, as they will be one-day
events and logistics will be complicated by Liberia's
heavy rainy season.

In terms of funding the $47 million electoral
budget, the response has been positive. However, a
$4 million gap remains in the basket fund managed by
the United Nations Development Programme. I call on
donors to help fill that gap.
11-26479
I cannot overstate the importance of successful
elections and a peaceful post-election transition to
solidifying the progress in Liberia. A major piece of the
success will be about ensuring an environment
conducive to healthy political debate and competition.
The National Elections Commission has a major
responsibility in that regard. It must retain its
independence and objectivity in order to instil
confidence in the electoral process. The political
debate is likely to intensify, with several elections-
related challenges already in the courts. I will therefore
continue to encourage all political actors to express
their ideas, but to do so in a way that does not
undermine trust and confidence in the democratic
system, and UNMIL will continue to employ its
impartial good offices in this regard.

As requested in resolution 1938 (2010), UNMIL's
consolidation, drawdown and withdrawal benchmarks
have been revised to create a set of transition
benchmarks. They focus on core areas considered vital
to the process of handing over security responsibilities
from UNMIL to the Government. They also outline
contextual areas that have been identified as central to
Liberia's long-term stability, including the range of
institutional capacities to address the root causes of
Liberia's conflict.

Work towards planning for the transition of
security responsibilities from UNMIL to the
Government of Liberia has continued apace, and I have
been encouraged by the commitment of the joint
UNMIL/Government transition working group.
However, the process has also illustrated how
significant the challenges still are to Liberia's security
sector, especially with regard to the logistics,
communications and mobility capacities of the police
and the immigration service. Continued international
engagement and assistance to the process will be
crucial.

Liberia's inclusion on the agenda of the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC), and the
Government's decision to identify security sector
reform, rule of law and national reconciliation as
priorities under the PBC, is a major opportunity for
Liberia. Prince Zeid, Chairman of the Liberia country
configuration, will brief the Council on his findings
from his two recent visits to Liberia.

Since the report was issued, there has been
significantly increased focus on Liberia's border with
11-26479

C6te d'Ivoire. In the first approximately three months
of the Ivorian crisis, the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees registered almost
40,000 refugees in Liberia. In just the past 18 days,
however, at least another 50,000 are estimated to have
crossed into the country. The influx has stretched the
resources of generous host communities that were
already living under difficult conditions, and poor
infrastructure and insufficient resources are huge
challenges to the humanitarian response.

A humanitarian flash appeal for Liberia
requesting $55 million was launched in January to
cover an influx of 50,000 refugees. We now have over
90,000 refugees, and the flow continues. The original
appeal is being revised to reflect the increased
numbers, and I cannot emphasize strongly enough the
need for a much more generous response to this appeal.

In addition to the humanitarian challenges, the
situation poses security concerns. Both UNMIL and
Government security institutions have increased their
presence and patrolling along the border, but ensuring
coverage of all vulnerable areas along the over 700-
kilometre and extremely porous border is proving
overwhelming. These operations have also clearly
highlighted security agencies' capacity gaps. The
efforts of the Police Emergency Response Unit and the
immigration service to reinforce their presence in key
areas are often paralysed by basic equipment and
logistical deficiencies.

Since I last briefed the Council (see S/PV.6379),
the political and security environment in Liberia has
become more complex. Not only is the election
calendar coming clearly into view, but the situation
along Liberia's border with C6te d'Ivoire requires
close monitoring for potential security fallouts. Liberia
is much stronger today than it was eight years ago
when UNMIL arrived on the ground. Nevertheless, we
should not take these eight years of unbroken peace for
granted, and continued and increased international
engagement will be needed.

I cannot conclude my remarks without expressing
gratitude to all our troop- and police-contributing
countries. They provide us with the resources to carry
out our mandate. I continue to prioritize the welfare
and care of our troops and police, and I urge the troop-
and police-contributing countries to continue to
support us through regular and improved
predeployment training and in-mission inspections. I
3
also attach great importance to strict compliance with
the United Nations policy on sexual exploitation and
abuse, and would like once again to urge contributing
countries to ensure that investigations and action are
promptly followed up and shared with the Mission.

