Mr. Pleuger: I appreciate very much that the
obituary comes first. This will be the last report on the
work of the 661 Committee, which was terminated,
according to resolution 1483 (2003), on 21 November
2003, after 13 years of a comprehensive sanctions
regime.

As a subsidiary organ of the Security Council, the
Committee had to execute the political decisions of the
Council as manifested in the relevant Security Council
resolutions. The mandate of the 661 Committee thus
comprised two major elements: the implementation and
supervision of the sanctions regime against Iraq and of
the humanitarian programme, oil-for-food.

Germany chaired this Committee in two crucial
stages of its history: first in 1995 and 1996, when the
oil-for-food programme was originally designed in
order to alleviate the negative repercussions of a
comprehensive sanctions regime on large parts of the
Iraqi population and economy; secondly, in 2003, when
the focus of the Committee was substantially shifted
from its usual business in the past, due to the war-
related interruption of the programme in March,
followed by the end of the former regime, the lifting of
sanctions in May and the termination of the
humanitarian oil-for-food programme on 21 November.

Confronted with the interruption of the
programme in March, the Committee, upon request of
the Security Council, negotiated the content of Council
resolution 1472 (2003), which would allow
humanitarian emergency deliveries out of the existing
pipeline of approved contracts. This resolution was
adopted on 28 March and, for the first time, after
months of division in the Council, achieved consensus
among Council members on an issue related to Iraq.

After the war and the adoption of resolution 1483
(2003) on 22 May, the Committee was tasked with
supervising the transitional process leading to the
termination of the humanitarian oil-for-food
programme on 21 November and to the transfer of all
responsibilities from the Office of the Iraq Programme
(OIP) to the Coalition Provisional Authority. As chair
of the 661 Committee, we have tried to ensure
maximum transparency in this transitional process.

This required permanent coordination between all
actors - OIP, Coalition Provisional Authority, United
Nations agencies and the experts of the Committee -
and regular updates to members of the Council.
Regular informal meetings of the 661 Committee,
sometimes several times per week, several times
including representatives of the Coalition Provisional
Authority from Baghdad and always including the
various United Nations agencies and OIP, were
organized in order to achieve an optimal flow of
information. We hope that this has contributed to the
integrity of the transfer of responsibilities from OIP to
the Coalition Provisional Authority and to the
necessary continuity in the transitional period, thus
avoiding the disruption of the delivery pipeline and a
possible humanitarian emergency situation.

I should also mention that the 661 Committee,
after adoption of resolution 1483 (2003), likewise
fulfilled its additional new task pursuant to paragraphs
19 and 23 of that resolution. On 11 June, the
Committee adopted guidelines to identify individuals
and entities whose financial assets should be
transferred to the Development Fund for Iraq. On 26
June, a first list of respective individuals was adopted
by the Committee and on 21 November a list of
respective entities followed.

I would like to take this opportunity to express
my sincere gratitude to all members of the Committee
and in particular to OIP under its Executive Director,
Benon Sevan, and to the Secretariat's sanctions branch
for Iraq, headed by Mr. Wan, for their close and
amicable cooperation. Without their support and
commitment, we would not have been able to close this
chapter of United Nations activities in this manner.
While the importance of the oil-for-food programme
for the survival of the Iraqi people has been highlighted
repeatedly in the last few weeks, a final assessment of
the sanctions against the former Iraqi regime still needs
to be written. Such an assessment will have to weigh
the proportionality between duration and effects, and
between the effects of the imposed sanctions on the
Iraqi people and the political effects on the regime of
Saddam Hussein and the region.

Such an assessment could provide some answers
to questions of general importance relating to sanction
regimes, such as the regime imposed against Saddam
Hussein, but also others. The questions are: did the
sanctions achieve their goals and was it justified to
continue applying them over such a long period of
time, without principal reassessment by the Security
Council? I am convinced there would be merit in
examining such questions in order to keep the
instrument of sanctions sharp, efficient and justified
and an important tool in the arsenal of the Security
Council.

