Mr. Mufioz (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): I wish at
the outset to welcome Minister Delia Domingo Albert
and the initiative of the Philippines to hold this open
debate of the Security Council on the role of civil
society in post-conflict peace-building. We also
welcome the participation in the debate of Ambassador
Marjatta Rasi, President of the Economic and Social
Council, Mr. Denis Caillaux, Secretary-General of
CARE, and Mr. Ian Martin of the International Center
for Transitional Justice.

As we know, post-conflict situations are complex.
Their consequences include not only the obvious
military and security dimensions, but also particularly
political, economic, social and humanitarian aspects
that are essential to ensuring stability and that often not
only affect the society directly involved, but also
transcend national borders and increasingly assume
regional dimensions.

The statements we have heard this morning have
highlighted the enormous challenge inherent in post-
conflict peace-building for affected societies as well as
for the regions involved and the international
community as a whole, including, of course, the United
Nations. That is why, during its Council presidency last
January, Chile promoted a debate on post-conflict
national reconciliation. Therefore we attach great
importance to the topic presented by the Philippines,
which emphasizes what occurs in post-conflict
situations.

The nature of contemporary conflicts,
increasingly of intra-State origin, has changed the
manner of dealing with them, with regard to both
preventing them and resolving them. Post-conflict
peace-building requires multidisciplinary approaches
in which civil society and non-governmental
organizations have an important role to play.

As the report of former President Fernando
Henrique Cardoso on civil society (A/58/817) has
highlighted, "constructively engaging with civil society
is a necessity for the United Nations, not an option".
Civil society, composed of various non-State actors,
has played important roles in supporting conflict
prevention, and it therefore has no less an important
role to play in peace-building phases in order to make
peace sustainable.

Many civil society organizations are active in the
areas of protecting human rights and international
humanitarian law. They have played a key role in the
search for justice and in reconstructing judicial powers
in post-conflict situations in order to, among other
things, impede impunity when there have been mass
human rights violations.

Other organizations develop important activities
in more specific areas, such as those aimed at
preventing illicit trade in small arms and light weapons
and protecting civilians in armed conflict. They also
have had positive experience in promoting impartiality
among the media, in their capacity to mediate between
conflicting interests and in providing early warning of
imminent humanitarian crises and in raising public
awareness in that respect. Therefore, they are key
actors that must be present and contribute in a
coordinated manner with State actors and the United
Nations.

The Security Council must seek the active
participation of the broadest sectors of civil society. In
particular, it should try to ensure that the civil society
involved in these processes includes not only
international actors, but also local ones, including
women working in the field to build peace, in
accordance with Security Council resolution
1325 (2000), which reaffirms the important role of
women in the prevention and resolution of conflicts
and in peace-building.

Allow me to touch upon another specific aspect
to which members of civil society can contribute. I am
referring to action in the private sector. Businesses,
obviously different from non-governmental
organizations, are neither philanthropic entities nor
peacekeeping organizations. They are engines of
wealth production that pursue profit. However, because
of the nature of their activities they are endowed with a
certain sensitivity and conditions required to achieve
their goals, which can help anticipate the onset of
conflict and can help generate conflict prevention or
mitigation strategies. In the area of peace-building,
businesses can, with their local partners, mobilize the
will of broad economic and social sectors. Businesses
can offer financial support for productive quick-impact
projects, for example, through employment initiatives
for former combatants. Often it is precisely the lack of
employment of former combatants that causes conflicts
to re-emerge. That is an important aspect of sustainable
peace.

The possibility also exists to explore the idea of
matching funds - parallel contributions; that is, co-
financing of reconstruction projects in which a
business could contribute the same amount that a donor
Government does to finance disarmament,
demobilization or reconstruction projects. Of course, in
the case of the business sector, it is certain that it will
be advisable to develop a set of incentives to encourage
a country to be involved in the peace-building phase.
The United Nations can assist with that.

I wonder how many businesses now stand ready
to create employment in order to raise hope in Haiti
and to earn money in a country that is close to
important markets and has a highly skilled labour
force. This is a concrete challenge to civil society in
the post-conflict peace-building phase.

Finally, as the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs has indicated in its reports to the
Security Council, the post-conflict period is the most
important phase because funds must be made available
not only to provide humanitarian assistance to save
lives, but also to contribute to projects with a decisive
impact on ensuring sustainable peace. In many case, a
long-term commitment must be made.

We commend you once again, Madam, for having
convened the Security Council to address today's
important topic, which can have a tangible effect on its
work in addressing conflicts and their aftermath.

