Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Abou Moussa, for his briefing
today.

We agree with the worrying assessments voiced
here of the negative effects of the armed conflict in the
Central African Republic on the situation in Central
Africa in general. Among other destabilizing factors,
we would single out the increase in Boko Haram's
activities, the risks of terrorism and threats to marine
security in the Gulf of Guinea. The porous borders and
weak State institutions in the Sahel-Sahara zone merit
special mention, compounded as they are by specific
challenges emanating from Mali and Libya, many of
which have their origins in the events in Libya of three
years ago.

We support the efforts of countries in Central and
West Africa to combat these challenges and threats.
We take note of the work of the United Nations
Regional Office for Central Africa in promoting peace
and security, preventing conflicts and combating
the terrorist threats of piracy and armed robbery at
sea, which it carries out in cooperation with regional
players and United Nations bodies. We commend the
great personal contribution to collective efforts in these
areas by the Head of the Regional Office, Mr. Moussa,
and we wish his successor, Mr. Bathily, success in this
vital post.

We note with satisfaction the significant decline in
the threat posed by the Lord's Resistance Army (LRA).
This formerly large and menacing organized gang is
now reduced to a few small groups numbering no more
than 350 people, including women and children. We
note the drastic drop in the number of attacks, killings
and kidnappings, as well as in the numbers of those
fleeing the bandits or afraid to return to their homes.
Essentially, a handful of militants are now operating
in the Central African Republic and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo in survival mode, living mainly
off petty thievery. As a result of the joint efforts of
the countries of Africa themselves and of the African
Union's Regional Cooperative Initiative, with the
support of the international community, it seems that
this group's activities no longer pose a threat to peace
and security in the region.

Of course, the effectiveness of the operations
against the LRA is bound to be affected by the current
crises in the Central African Republic and South
Sudan and by the ongoing problems with contingents'
resources. Nevertheless, we firmly believe that in the
not-too-distant future we will see the day when the last
bandit will be neutralized, captured or handed over,
and that this criminal armed group will cease to exist.
The regional players themselves must play a decisive
role in this. Among the challenges they have to deal
with, priorities are strengthening the coordination
of efforts to combat the group, including between
the African Union Regional Task Force and the
African Union peacekeeping contingent in the Central
African Republic. The problem cannot be solved by
military means alone, however. What is needed is a
comprehensive approach that includes security sector
reform, finding solutions to pressing socioeconomic and
humanitarian problems and strengthening government
institutions in the countries of the subregion.

