Mr. Zehnder (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
Switzerland thanks France for organizing today's open
debate. We would like to focus on three issues.

First, Switzerland welcomes the recent release of
the annual report of the Secretary-General on children
and armed conflict (S/2017/821) and the listing of
perpetrators based on credible evidence gathered,
reviewed and rigorously verified by the monitoring
and reporting mechanism. We note that this year
a distinction was introduced between those listed
parties that "have put in place measures aimed at
improving the protection of children" (S/2017/821, annex I) and those that have not. We ask the Secretary-
General to provide updates on those measures and the
progress made.

Secondly, and as highlighted by France, the
challenges posed by Violent extremism to the protection
of civilians, in particular children, are a major concern.
The majority of the parties listed in the annexes of
the annual report are armed groups. We do not know
enough about children's trajectories in and out of
non-State armed groups, including those listed as
terrorist and Violent extremist groups. This is why
Switzerland, together with UNICEF, the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations and Luxembourg, has lent its
support to a research initiative of the United Nations
University aimed at producing programmatic guidance
to prevent the recruitment and use of Children by armed
groups that employ extreme violence.

Switzerland also calls on Member States involved
in countering violent extremism to carry out their
measures in full compliance with international law,
in particular their rules of engagement must include
all the necessary preventive and protective measures.
Furthermore, children arrested and detained on
security-related charges in counter-terrorism operations
should be treated as victims of serious violations, rather
than as security threats and perpetrators.

Thirdly, despite financial pressures, ensuring
adequate resources for child protection within
peacekeeping and political missions is essential, as
they play a central role in establishing dialogue with
parties to conflict to end and prevent serious violations
against children, including through the signing and
implementation of actions plans.

In conclusion, Switzerland would like to
acknowledge that many positive steps have been taken
since the creation of the children and armed conflict
mandate. Among them are the more than 124,000
children formerly associated with armed forces and
armed groups who have been released since 2000.
Nevertheless, more needs to be done. Switzerland
reaffirms its support to the mandate and work of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict and her Office and calls
for her mandate to be extended in this year's child rights
resolution and sufficient resources to be allotted to her
so that she can fully carry out her mandate.

