Mr. Choi (Republic of Korea): Afghanistan has been
engulfed in internal armed conflict for more than 17
years. Those long years have exacted a heavy toll in
innocent civilian casualties and untold human suffering,
and have devastated the nation's physical infrastructure.
The conflict has been made worse by clashing religious
convictions, ethnic divisions and outside interference.
Despite strenuous diplomatic efforts, in particular by the
Secretary-General and his special representative,
Mr. Nobert H011, to broker a ceasefire and engage the
warring parties in a peace process, the fighting has been
raging unabated, with even greater intensity in recent
months. Peace in Afghanistan remains as elusive as ever.

The Republic of Korea deplores the continuing
bloodshed, and calls for an immediate end to the
hostilities. The dire humanitarian situation is a matter of
grave concern for all of us. We also share deep concern
over the ongoing human rights violations attributable to
the religious intolerance of the Taliban, including their
discrimination against women.

After almost two decades of armed conflict, the
Afghan parties must realize that a military solution to
their differences is impossible and that there is no
alternative to a negotiated political settlement. It is time
to spare the Afghan people the misery and suffering that
the fighting has brought upon them.

Having said that, my delegation wishes to outline
three principles upon which we believe a political
settlement of the Afghan conflict should be based.

First, any political settlement of the conflict should
involve an immediate ceasefire, the demilitarization of
Kabul and the establishment of a broad-based transitional
Government of national unity and reconciliation.
Secondly, the unity, territorial integrity and sovereignty of
Afghanistan, and the inviolability of its borders, should be
fully respected by all States. Outside interference,
including the open flow of arms to the parties,
undermines peace efforts and only adds to the complexity
and intractability of the conflict. We therefore believe that
an arms embargo is in order if the peace process is to
have any chance of success. Thirdly, the political and

 

military realities on the ground should be duly taken into
account in working out a comprehensive political settlement
by actively engaging the parties concerned.

We believe that the United Nations and the
international community as a whole can do several things
to facilitate a settlement on the basis that I have just
outlined. While international initiatives to achieve a political
settlement of the conflict should be welcomed, particular
importance should be attached to the central role and
responsibility of the United Nations in trying to achieve a
just and lasting settlement. Previous experience has shown
that the number of diplomatic initiatives and peace brokers
involved in a conflict is not necessarily proportionate to the
speed or chances of that conflict's resolution. This is
especially true if such additional efforts are not well
coordinated with those of the Secretary-General or his
special representative. In the case of Afghanistan,
impartiality and international credibility are the most badly
needed assets in brokering peace, and no other player can
compete with the United Nations on this score.

We also attach great importance to the coordination of
all activities of United Nations agencies in Afghanistan by
the United Nations Special Mission to Afghanistan.
Furthermore, the Afghan warring parties, in particular the
Taliban, must be reminded of the need to commit
themselves to preventing the areas under their control from
being used for the training and sheltering of terrorists. In
the same vein, they should also prevent drug trafficking in
the territories they control.

Finally, it must be emphasized that the international
community's efforts towards a lasting and comprehensive
political settlement can succeed only when the Afghan
parties themselves demonstrate the political will to resolve
their differences through dialogue. The ultimate
responsibility for the destiny of Afghanistan lies, after all,
in the hands of the Afghan people and their leaders. We
earnestly hope that this spring will truly breed lilacs out of
the dead land and not bring a new flash of gun barrels.

