Mr. Bessho (Japan): I would like to thank the
Assistant Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, Mr. Wane, the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Haysom, and the Chair of the
Joint Monitoring and Evaluation Commission (JMEC),
President Mogae, for their informative briefings.

Japan is deeply concerned about the continued
clashes, especially in Upper Nile, despite the unilateral
ceasefire declared by President Kiir. Large numbers
of people and humanitarian actors have fled due to
the Government forces' advance towards Pagak. The
Government of South Sudan must be fully aware that the
number of displaced people is increasing at a faster rate
in South Sudan than anywhere in the world, with one
in three citizens being either a refugee or an internally
displaced person. Children under 18, who represent the
country's future, account for approximately two thirds
of those refugees.

Japan is concerned that the number of humanitarian
access incidents in July, which included violence
against personnel and assets, were the highest since the
crisis began in December 2013. All parties must take
prompt and effective action. At the joint meeting in July
of the JMEC Humanitarian Working Committee and
the Humanitarian High-Level Oversight Committee
(HHLOC), it was agreed that the HHLOC would meet
quarterly and the Humanitarian Coordination Forum
(HCF) would meet monthly. We urge the Government
to take steps to ensure that the HHLOC and HCF
continue to meet regularly, and that their decisions are
faithfully implemented.

We welcome progress in the deployment of the
Regional Protection Force (RPF) vanguard units. We
thank all troop-contributing countries for their efforts,
and appreciate Kenya's agreement to deploy troops to
the RPF. Nevertheless, it is regrettable that violations
of the status of gorces agreement ccurred this month
with regard to flight clearances for personnel of the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS).
In a meeting this week with the diplomatic corps in
Juba, the Government again announced a policy of
cooperation on UNMISS activities, including the
deployment of the RPF. Concrete action must follow.
We strongly urge the Government's full cooperation
with UNMISS, including on the completion ofthe RPF's
deployment and its effective operation, as stipulated in
the unanimously adopted resolution 2327 (2016).

We welcome the progress in the various political
processes under way, including efforts by the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD)
to resolve the violence and revitalize the Agreement
on the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of
South Sudan, the national dialogue process and the
reintegration process of the Sudan People's Liberation
Movement. Constructive and continuous engagement
by all key parties in those processes is the only way
to ensure peace in South Sudan. The Council should
provide full support to IGAD Heads of State, the
African Union (AU) Commission Chairperson and AU
High Representative, the Secretary-General and the
JMEC Chair in order to ensure success.

To advance those processes with synergy
and complementarity, genuine inclusiveness and
transparency are key. In that regard, we welcome the
news of the recent release of political prisoners by
the Government. We urge continued steps to create
an environment conducive to the advancement of
an inclusive political process. Such steps include
the Government's full observance of the unilateral
ceasefire, the release of any remaining political
prisoners, the establishment of the hybrid court and
improved media freedom. A ceasefire and constructive
participation in the political process by the opposition
groups are also important.

The Council must be united in ensuring that all
parties are actively engaged in an inclusive political
process to achieve lasting peace in South Sudan.

