Mr. Mnatsakanyan (Armenia): Armenia expresses
its appreciation to the Spanish presidency ofthe Security
Council for initiating the present open debate and for
the outstanding concept note (see S/2016/1013, annex).
We also thank the Deputy Secretary-General and the
other briefers for substantively enriching this debate.
Armenia also welcomes the unanimous adoption of
resolution 2325 (2016), which it co-sponsored.

We are all witness to the growing risks of the
acquisition by non-State actors, such as terrorist and
other criminal groups, of weapons of mass destruction
(WMD), including nuclear weapons and related lethal
threats to global security. Non-State actors, such as
terrorist and other criminal groups, have been using
globalization to their advantage in their sinister pursuit
to obtain knowledge and skills in the areas of chemical,
biological, radiological and nuclear weapons. Several
existing groups may have generated financial resources
to achieve that end. While technical barriers may still
prevent them from producing the related sophisticated
means of delivery, nevertheless, given the deadly
nature of such weapons, even crude, low-level attacks
using toxic or radiological materials would have
deeply disturbing fatal consequences. It is imperative
to advance stronger national nuclear control and
counter-proliferation capacities coupled with enhanced
international cooperation to resolutely and effectively
address threats posed by non-State actors, such as
terrorist and other criminal groups.

Armenia attaches great importance to reinforcing
nuclear security both at the national and international
level through the ratification and implementation
of international legal instruments, as well as the
establishment of robust national legislation. It is
noteworthy that, in 2015, we adopted amendments to
the respective Government decrees on the approval of
the licensing procedure for the import and export of
radioactive materials, the rules forthe physical protection
for radioactive materials and the concept of the physical
protection and security of the Armenian nuclear power
plant and nuclear materials. Those measures are aimed
at complementing the implementation of the provisions
of the Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear
Material and its Amendment.

Armenia has fully implements its international
obligations under resolution 1540 (2004). The national
action plan of Armenia for the period 2015-2020
outlines a series of concrete steps, ranging from
reviewing national measures that have already been
implemented to the coordination of ongoing and
anticipated activities. We are also active in counter-
proliferation initiatives, such as the Global Initiative
to Combat Nuclear Terrorism and the Proliferation
Security Initiative. The Government of Armenia is
continuously working with its international partners at
bilateral and multilateral levels to further enhance its
national capabilities in countering nuclear smuggling.

In managing and addressing risks of the acquisition
and the use of radiological, biological, radiological or
nuclear weapons by non-State actors, such as terrorists
and other criminal groups, it is of vital importance to
acknowledge their dynamic, non- static nature. Rapid
technological progress may work to the advantage
of those pursuing sinister goals, while national and
international actors should take every effort against
acting slowly on the uptake in policymaking and
respective legal and practical risk resistance measures
against proliferation. Such concerns require further
study as part of the threat assessment on radiological,
biological, radiological and nuclear materials. All efforts
at national and international levels to address such
threats should take these realities into consideration.

