The President (spoke in Spanish): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Lebanon, in which she requests to
be invited to participate in the discussion of the item
on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
consideration of the item, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Ms. Ziade
(Lebanon) took a seat at the Council table.

The President (spoke in Spanish): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda.

Following consultations among the members of
the Security Council, I have been authorized to make
the following statement on behalf of the Council.

"The Security Council unequivocally
condemns the assassination in Beirut on
21 November 2006 of Industry Minister Pierre
Gemayel, a patriot who was a symbol of freedom
and of the political independence of Lebanon.
The Security Council expresses its deepest
sympathy and condolences to the family of the
victim and to the people and Government of
Lebanon.

"The Security Council condemns any
attempt to destabilize Lebanon through political
assassination or other terrorist acts. The Security
Council is gravely concerned by this
assassination and its possible impact on ongoing
the

efforts by the Government and people of Lebanon
to solidify democracy, extend the authority of the
Lebanese Government throughout its territory
and complete the reconstruction process.

"The Security Council calls upon all parties
in Lebanon and the region to show restraint and a
sense of responsibility with a view to preventing
any further deterioration of the situation in
Lebanon. The Security Council urges all States,
in accordance with its resolutions 1373 (2001),
1566 (2004) and 1624 (2005), to cooperate fully
in the fight against terrorism.

"The Security Council welcomes the
determination and commitment of the
Government of Lebanon to bring to justice the
perpetrators, organizers and sponsors of this and
other assassinations and underlines its
determination to support the Government of
Lebanon in its efforts to this end.

"The Security Council reaffirms its previous
calls upon all parties concerned to cooperate fully
and urgently with the Security Council for the
full implementation of all relevant resolutions
concerning the restoration of the territorial
integrity, full sovereignty and political
independence of Lebanon, in particular
resolutions 1559 (2004), 1595 (2005), 1664
(2006), 1680 (2006) and 1701 (2006).

"The Security Council requests the
Secretary-General to continue to follow closely
and report regularly to the Council on the
situation in Lebanon. The Security Council
underlines its readiness to continue to act in
support of the legitimate and democratically
elected Government of Lebanon."

This statement will be issued as a document of
Security Council under the symbol

S/PRST/2006/46.

The Security Council has thus concluded the

present stage of its consideration of the item on the
agenda.

The meeting rose at 4.25 p.m.
06-62526

