Mr. Trullols Yabra (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): We are grateful to the briefers for the
information presented today, and especially to Special
Envoy Kafando for his two and a half years of excellent
service in favour of peace and stability in Burundi.

We would like to begin by referring to the upcoming
electoral process, while underscoring the need for
the Government and all stakeholders in the country
to foster an environment conducive to the peaceful
holding of elections, avoiding any risk of the elections
taking place in a climate of tension or distrust.

But, above all, any possibility of human rights
violations must be avoided, in particular the limitation
of the right to freedom of expression. We therefore note
with concern the increase in acts ofviolence and political
intolerance during the reporting period, including
physical violence, arbitrary arrests and the intimidation
of militants from political parties and journalists,
among others. In that regard, we urge the Government
of Burundi to make greater efforts to assure all citizens
of their right to freedom of expression and association,
especially with regard to political participation, and
to reinforce physical security for those who wish to
exercise their rights in a free and safe way. We urge it
to secure a framework for cooperation with the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights in order to protect human rights in the country.

We note that the socioeconomic situation has yet
to experience tangible improvement, with increases in
both the rate of inflation and the State budget deficit.
We therefore echo the call to keep our attention
focused on the country's development, having as a
frame of reference the priorities identified in Burundi's
national development plan, with the support of the
international community.

The number ofmalaria cases recorded in the country
is especially alarming, with 6.5 million reported in the
first eight months of the year, representing a significant
increase compared to the same period in 2018. The
number of deaths caused by cholera is also alarming.
We applaud Burundi's efforts with respect to the
significant improvement in its preparedness levels to
mitigate possible outbreaks of the Ebola virus, as well
as the reduction of chronic malnutrition rates from
56 per cent to 54 per cent in less than two years.

With regard to the situation of refugees, and in line
with the Burundi regional refugee response plan of the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, we reiterate that all returns must be voluntary,
safe and dignified, While avoiding instances in which
refugees feel pressured or threatened. It is important
to highlight that the situation of Burundian refugees is
currently the least financed worldwide. We therefore
urge all stakeholders of the Tripartite Commission for
the Voluntary Repatriation of Burundian Refugees
to work arduously at its next meeting, to be held in
November, to promote initiatives that protect the rights
of both refugees and displaced persons.

We underscore the idea that all activities by
the United Nations and other regional entities and
international partners must reflect a clear understanding
of the challenges facing the people of Burundi and be
carried out in a way that strengthens the bonds of mutual
trust, respect and honest and transparent collaboration.
We stress the need to consolidate the considerable
progress achieved through the Arusha Agreement and
its centrality for stability in Burundi.

In conclusion, we would like to emphasize that
peaceful, transparent and credible dialogue is the key
element to achieving the political, social and economic
stability that will strengthen democracy and build
lasting peace in Burundi.

