Mr. Lamamra (Algeria) (interpretation from Arabic):
It gives me pleasure to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for
this month. We are confident that with your experience,
skill and wisdom and under your leadership the Council's
consideration of the question before us will have the
desired results.

It also gives me pleasure to congratulate your
predecessor the Permanent Representative of the Czech
Republic on his skilled conduct of the affairs of the
Council last month.

More than 18 months have passed since the mutual
recognition of the Palestine Liberation Organization
(PLO) and the Government of Israel and the signing of
the Declaration of Principles on Interim Self-Government
Arrangements which were the first steps towards the
establishment of peace in the Middle East.

Despite the broad hopes accompanying the positive
developments that the region witnessed as a result of the
declared commitment of both parties to continue
negotiations notwithstanding repeated acts of violence
aimed at frustrating the peace process, the international
community has always realized that the road to peace is
long and risky.

Today we are debating the situation in the occupied
Palestinian territories at the request of the Arab and
Islamic groups. The most serious of these obstacles are
those faced by holy Jerusalem as a result of the continued
settlement policy of Israel. The latest decision of the
Israeli Government to confiscate new Palestinian land in
east Jerusalem on which to build additional settlements,
a decision mainly aimed at uprooting the existence and
rights of Arabs and Palestinians in this holy city is a
flagrant violation of the relevant Security Council
resolutions and the norms of international law, especially
the Fourth Geneva Convention of 1949.

The decision also runs counter to the basis and
principles of the ongoing peace process. The decision
constitutes a grave threat to the peace process which has
so far overcome many obstacles.

The new decision again emphasizes the continued
expansionist intentions of Israel aimed at changing the
legal status, the geographical features and demographic
composition of the Holy City of Jerusalem.
Algeria strongly condemns this latest decision by the
Israeli Government and calls on the international
community represented in the Security Council and the

 

two sponsors of the peace process, to take all the necessary
measures based on Security Council resolution 478 (1980)
to force Israel to rescind this serious decision and stop all
practices that are aimed at changing the features and
characteristics of the Holy City.

Deeply concerned at these policies and practices of
Israeli settlement, Algeria wishes to reaffirm that a
settlement in the Middle East should be based on Security
Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973) and Israel's
withdrawal from occupied Palestinian and Arab territories,
including Jerusalem, and the exercise by the Palestinian
people of its inalienable national rights, especially its right
to self-determination.

Algeria also wishes to underline the continued
responsibility of the United Nations for the question of
Palestine until a comprehensive, lasting and just solution is
reached. That is why the Council is today called upon
firmly to reflect international legality through a clear text
that responds to the legitimate demands of the Arab and
Islamic groups.

