Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I am honoured by the
presence here today of Their Majesties King Carl XVI
Gustaf and Queen Silvia of Sweden. I would like to
start by thanking Special Coordinator Mladenov for
his briefing and welcome his strong engagement on the
issue, including in the recent efforts to prevent another
conflict in Gaza.

The vision of the international community remains
unchanged. It is one that sees Israel and Palestine, side
by side in peace and security, with Jerusalem as the
future capital of two States and home to three world
religions, in a two-State solution that resolves all final
status issues. Every month, however, we reflect on the
continuing deterioration of the situation on the ground,
which seriously hampers the hopes for a two-State
solution. Whether it is the continued Israeli occupation
and illegal settlement expansion; threats of demolitions
and evictions of villages such as Khan Al-Ahmar in
Area C; violence in and around Gaza, including the
recent firing of rockets, as well as incitement, hatred
and violence; or actions that shrink the space for civil
society, the parties have a responsibility to reverse
those negative trends.

Last week we witnessed another dangerous
outbreak of violence in and around Gaza. We condemn
the firing of rockets against Israel by Hamas and other
militant groups, and regret the loss of life on both
sides. While recognizing Israel's legitimate security
concerns, we underline that the Israeli response must be
proportionate. In the past seven months, approximately
200 Palestinians have been killed in Gaza and more
than 24,000 injured. We all know that another full-
fledged conflict would be an immense tragedy.

We commend Egypt for its mediation efforts.
But while calm has been restored for now, that is
only temporary relief. The situation for the people in
Gaza is untenable. It is a humanitarian catastrophe
affecting 2 million people without freedom to move
to or from Gaza. If we do not address the situation
there holistically, a new flare-up of violence will be
just around the corner. As we have repeatedly stated,
there is an urgent need for, first, concrete humanitarian
interventions with a quick, direct and immediate impact
on daily lives that can alleviate the suffering; secondly,
the easing of restrictions and improvement of access and
movement to and from Gaza, including for all donors,
with the aim of ending Gaza's closure; and lastly, steps
that can further Palestinian reconciliation and enable
the Palestinian Authority's return to Gaza. We support
the Egyptian-led efforts to achieve reconciliation, and
we call on all Palestinian factions to engage genuinely
to that end. Only reconciliation can lead to a united
Palestinian leadership and a reunification of Gaza and
the West Bank, including East Jerusalem. The Council
has a responsibility to actively contribute beyond these
regular meetings, and Sweden has made concrete
proposals to that effect.

We need to show the so-called post-Oslo generation
that there is an alternative to conflict, violence and a
constant deterioration on the ground, and the voices
of young Israelis and Palestinians must be heard and
listened to, in line with resolution 2419 (2018). Israel
and Palestine have a responsibility to build peaceful and
inclusive societies, particularly with the meaningful
participation of women and young people. The shrinking
space for civil society, along with the negative human
rights developments, is a source of great concern. On
the Palestinian side, laws are used to curtail freedom of
expression. On the Israeli side, representatives of civil-
society organizations are delegitimized, which limits
them in their efforts to do their important work. We call
on the Palestinian and Israeli leaderships to support
and respect members of civil society and allow them to
operate and express their views freely.

We cannot let the viability of a two-State solution
move out of reach. Action is urgently needed if we are
to avoid the risk of ending up not only in perpetual
occupation but in a one-State reality, which was the
reason for the Council's adoption almost two years
ago of resolution 2334 (2016). We look forward to the
Secretary-General's latest report next month, with
a View to having a more thorough examination of its
implementation. We must do everything in our power
to make sure that the hope of two States is kept alive
and that a just, lasting and comprehensive peace,
based on international law, the relevant United Nations
resolutions and previous agreements, is realized.

