The President (spoke in Russian): I thank the
Secretary-General for his briefing.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity
as the Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Russian Federation.

When we convened this meeting, we thought it
very important to come up with united approaches to
the problem of helping to resolve the crises quickly
settling the crises in the vast expanse of the Near and
Middle East and North Africa. We propose that together
we reflect on what can be done today to stop people's
suffering and avert other tragedies and shocks in one of
the most turbulent parts of the world. We firmly believe,
however, that any decisions we take will be effective
only if two conditions are met. First, they must be truly
collective, and secondly, they must be in keeping with
the norms and principles of international law. Both
analysis and experience have shown that lone attempts
to cut the Gordian knot ofthese conflicts are doomed to
failure. The flawed practice of unilateral action, when
one State Member of the United Nations declares the
Governments of other States Members to be pariahs,
pursuing a policy of undermining or removing regimes
it does not like, has not only not helped to resolve the
region's numerous problems, it has created new ones.
It is clear that if we are to reduce the potential for
crisis, we must unite international and regional efforts,
including in effective and inclusive formats and with
the United Nations and its Security Council playing a
central role - I repeat, with the United Nations and its
Security Council playing a leading role.

A genuine pooling of the efforts of all States to
counter regional threats requires an honest partnership
dialogue, and that dialogue must be founded on a
rejection of attempts to resolve conflicts through force
and on support for the good offices of the Secretary-
General, regional organizations and individual Member
States, without politicizing the humanitarian aspects
of the issue and in full respect for obligations under
international law and the Charter of the United Nations
above all.

The Russian Federation advocates developing a
positive and unifying agenda for the entire international
community with a view to resolving the situation in
the Near and Middle East and in North Africa, for
which respect for the sovereignty, independence and
territorial integrity of the countries of the region is a
crucial condition. It will be essential to work to present
a truly broad front against the terrorist threat that still
remains, despite the considerable successes we have
already seen in Iraq and Syria. We must also put an
end to use terrorist groups in the struggle for advantage
in the new balance of Powers in the region. While it is
important to work collectively to repel terrorism's use
of chemical weapons and weapons of mass destruction,
we should never play into the hands of such outlaws
in their provocations with chemical weapons by using
them as a pretext for acts of aggression.

It is unacceptable for anyone to exploit such
provocations by making accusations about Governments
they do not like, making it all the more difficult for
the experts to establish the real facts. Attempts to
introduce divisions in international organizations such
as the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons (OPCW) in no way contribute to the logic
of a collective search for solutions, and neither did
the unwillingness to support a Security Council draft
resolution on improving the methods of work of the
OPCW-United Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism
in Syria or the desire to assign functions to the
OPCW that are not considered under the Convention
on Chemical Weapons and that by their nature come
under the Council's purview. Unfortunately, at the
special session opening tomorrow of the Conference
of the States Parties to Review the Operation of the
Chemical Weapons Convention, we run the risk of
seeing attempts to turn a technical body into an arena
for political battles.

The keystone of ourjoint efforts in the region should
be creating conditions conducive to strengthening a
general climate of trust. This is crucial with regard to
relations between the Arab States, Israel and Iran. Let
us not forget that in its resolution 598 (1987), adopted
in 1987, the Security Council charged the Secretary-
General with working with regional stakeholders
on measures to strengthen the security and stability
of the region. This is obviously a complicated issue
that requires discreet, painstaking discussions and a
sensitive approach. But the work on it must begin, and
we are ready to give all the help in our power by talking
with our partners in Iran, Israel, Palestine, Syria, Saudi
Arabia, Yemen, the United Arab Emirates, Qatar,
Egypt, Turkey and other countries of the region.

The ultimate aim should be to establish a genuinely
inclusive regional security architecture that would
ensure the participation of every State in this part of the
world. The first step here could be to hold a conference
with the participation ofthe Gulf States to discuss issues
of regional security. Obviously, that would require
guarantees, above all from the permanent five members
of the Security Council. Eventually such a conference
could be expanded to other Middle Eastern countries.

It will also be important to take immediate steps
to disseminate a culture of peace on an inter-ethnic
and interreligious basis, which would help to prevent
further ethno-religious strife. Depicting the conflicts
in the region as religious clashes, including between
Sunni and Shia, is extremely dangerous. It is clear
that insisting on creating mono-religious societies
not only contradicts modern realities, it is a way
to ensure that the conflicts will drag on for years or
even decades. The Russian Federation has unique
experience in the area of the coexistence of ethnic
and religious groups, and we therefore support the
proposal of the Inter-Parliamentary Union to work with
the United Nations to organize a world conference on
interreligious and ethnic dialogue with the participation
of Heads of State, parliamentarians and representatives
of world religions. We would be prepared to host such a
conference in Russia in 2022.

We are convinced that sending Security Council
missions into conflict areas in the Middle East will help
strengthen the Council's unity. In those areas and all
others, Russia is ready to work together with interested
partners in an open and impartial manner and without
threats or negative pressure.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I give the floor to the members of the
Security Council.

