The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of Peru.

We thank Mr. Mark Lowcock for his important
briefing. We have taken note with deep concern of the
information provided on the humanitarian situation in
Raqqa and Rukban, the populations of which - like
those of eastern Ghouta, Idlib, Afrin and many other
locations in the Syrian territory - face the devastating
consequences of the conflict in that country on a daily
basis. We must condemn the indiscriminate planting of
anti-personnel mines and improvised explosive devices
by Da'esh. Those heinous crimes are contrary to
international humanitarian law, and have unfortunately
resulted in a large number of wounded and dead
in Raqqa.

We welcome the efforts being made by various
countries and organizations to clear those death
traps, and stress the sense of duty displayed by
the humanitarian demining professionals. We also
welcome the deployment of a mission of the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, which
delivered the first analysis of the current state of the
humanitarian situation in Raqqa and recommendations
for action to facilitate the safe return of its inhabitants
over the medium term.

The humanitarian situation in Rukban is also a
source of deep concern for Peru, given the difficult
living conditions to which thousands of people, mostly
women and children, are exposed. Peru recognizes the
legitimate right of every State to protect its borders.
However, we believe that the gravity of the situation
in that area requires an enormous effort to provide
unfettered access, as reflected in the adoption of actions
aimed at facilitating access to deliver the required
assistance, in line with international humanitarian law.

It is important that all humanitarian needs in Syria
be addressed consistently, wherever they arise, without
discrimination on the basis of political or military
interests. The politicization of humanitarian assistance
is unacceptable and blatantly contrary to resolution
2401 (2018), the provisions of which, we recall, must
be fully implemented throughout the Syrian territory. I
now resume my functions as President of the Council.
I now resume my functions as the President of
the Council.

I give the floor to the representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic.

