Mr. Akbaruddin (India): Ithank you, Mr. President,
for organizing this debate. I also thank Mr. Yamamoto,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Afghanistan and Head of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan, and Ms. Sima Samar,
Chairperson of the Afghanistan Independent Human
Rights Commission, for their briefings. I would also
like to express my appreciation to Ambassador Adela
Raz, Permanent Representative of Afghanistan, for
sharing her perspectives on the recent developments in
her country.

By all accounts, this is a crucial year for
Afghanistan. While Afghanistan gears up to have its
fourth presidential elections later this year, all of us
need to be mindful of the gains that the Afghan people
have made in the past 18 years. They have strengthened
democracy in their country, established a constitutional
order, uplifted the status of women, protected the status
of minorities and youth, built a strong army and sturdy
security forces, and created stronger regional links.
They have also excelled in the sporting arena and
are among the elite group of 10 teams that are vying
for the Cricket World Cup currently under way. The
Afghan people have done all of that while confronting
and warding off the threats posed every day by
terrorism. While there may be perceptions of threats
of transnational terrorism from Afghanistan, in reality
it is the Afghan people who have long been victims of
transnational terrorism.

Even while the violence in Afghanistan continues,
the gains of the Afghan people are visible and tangible.
Support for the preservation and consolidation of those
achievements is the only available option. Reversal
and roll-back are not options that can be considered.
The international community needs to continue to
support the painstakingly achieved institutional gains
in Afghanistan.

The concluding communique of the loya jirga
convened by President Ghani on 29 April called, among
other things, for a ceasefire, talks without preconditions,
a Taliban office to be opened in Afghanistan, a
responsible withdrawal of international forces, the
formation of an inclusive negotiating team, continued
support from the international community and the
preservation of human rights, particularly women's
rights. Those provisions, agreed by the Afghan people,
are long-standing and supported by several countries in
the region.

Opportunities created by recent international
efforts are welcome. However, we see that some may
be driven by a sense of urgency and have timelines that
are, perhaps, not intrinsic to the needs of the Afghan
people. We need to be cognizant that it is the Afghan
people who will have to implement and sustain these
agreements. The dignity and sustainability of the
gains made by the people of Afghanistan should be the
paramount factor in determining what outcome will best
suit the country and be implementable in a sustainable
and dignified manner. We support an Afghan-led,
Afghan-owned and Afghan-controlled inclusive peace

and reconciliation process that promotes and protects
the unity, sovereignty, democracy, inclusiveness and
prosperity of Afghanistan.
As the way forward is chalked out, we cannot ignore
the fact that groups enjoying support and safe havens
carry out violent and terrorist activities from across
borders. They cannot be allowed to negotiate from a
place of advantage. The sanctuaries and safe havens
provided to terror networks have to be addressed for
the sake of genuine and sustainable peace. The terrorist
activities of the Taliban, the Haqqani Network, Da'esh,
Al-Qaida and its proscribed affiliates, including
Lashkar-e-Tayyiba and Jaish-e-Mohammed, need to
end. Experience with the Hizb-e Islami shows that
a peace settlement within the rubric of the current
constitution is possible both politically and socially.

India has age-old historical, cultural, civilizational
and economic ties with Afghanistan. We are working
closely with our Afghan partners in implementing
development projects and will continue to do so.
Building reliable connectivity for land-locked
Afghanistan is a key component of our partnership.
We are mindful that all such projects must respect
State sovereignty and territorial integrity and be
based on universally recognized international norms,
transparency and principles of financial responsibility,
ecological and environmental protection and
preservation standards. It is in that spirit that we are
engaged in various connectivity projects in the region,
including the Chabahar Port project and the direct
India-Afghanistan air-freight corridor, which have been
successfully operationalized.

The people of Afghanistan have come very far
since 2001. India will continue to assist the Afghan
people in fulfilling their desire for a peaceful country
that can focus on development and build on the gains
in their journey towards greater prosperity and higher
achievements. The conduct of transparent, credible and
timely presidential elections during the year will assist
in that endeavour.

