Mr. Alimov (Tajikistan) (spoke in Russian): First
of all, allow me to associate myself with the warm
words of gratitude expressed today to the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for
Afghanistan, Ambassador Lakhdar Brahimi, for his
devotion to the cause of implementing the peace
process in Afghanistan and his wise and skilful
leadership of the United Nations Mission in that
country. In Tajikistan, which under the aegis of the
United Nations was in a short period of time able to
resolve an internal conflict, we understand very well
the important role that can be played by a Special
Representative of the Secretary-General in finding a
formula for peace and national reconciliation. Although
many complex tasks remain to be completed by the
Afghan people, with the assistance of the international
community, we commend Ambassador Brahimi and his
colleagues for achieving substantive results across the
board in all areas of the Mission he heads.

Today's meeting is further testimony of the extent
to which the Security Council - which under the
Charter of the United Nations bears the primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security - is interested in a peaceful, stable,
united, neutral and harmoniously developing
Afghanistan, a country whose valiant people are
gradually coming to life after many years of
governance under the anti-popular Taliban regime.

We in Tajikistan have also been following very
carefully the developments in neighbouring
Afghanistan. We have been earnestly hoping that the
fraternal people of Afghanistan would be able to
overcome the obstacles on the path towards national
reconciliation and unity. We are profoundly pleased
that, despite all the complexities of the recent past, the
Interim Administration and the Special Independent
Commission were able to convene the Emergency Loya
Jirga, which was a truly major event in the renaissance
of Afghan society.

What was of critical importance was that the
high-level assembly - which brought together full-
fledged delegates from all corners of war-torn
Afghanistan - was able to deal with the tasks before
it: to elect a head of State and to set up a broad-based
Transitional Authority. Many efforts led to the
successful convening of the Loya Jirga. Particularly
important was the contribution of the delegates - and
especially of the women among them - and the
atmosphere of trust and openness that prevailed. It is a
good thing that, despite the many differences in Afghan
society, its representatives recognize their
responsibility for the fate of the new post-Taliban
Afghanistan.

The lessons of the peace process in Tajikistan
have demonstrated that without an understanding of the
need to forget existing differences it is impossible to
attain national unity or to restore genuine peace and
stability in a country. The Government of Tajikistan is
optimistic about, and supportive of, the positive
processes that are gaining strength in Afghanistan. It
will continue to extend all possible assistance to the
Loya Jirga and the widely representative and multi-
ethnic Government headed by Hamid Karzai.

Every week, convoys carrying international
humanitarian assistance travel along the transport
corridors that have been opened across the Tajik border
to reach Afghan provinces. The Government of
Tajikistan will be increasing both its humanitarian
contributions and its rehabilitation efforts in
Afghanistan.

We are grateful to the Afghan President and
Administration for continuing to implement the Bonn
Agreement. We wish them every success in bringing all
Afghans together under a united national platform
guaranteeing peace and stability in all the provinces of
Afghanistan, as well as in restoring the economy and
achieving successes in the social sphere. That will
require maximum efforts, boldness and firmness.

The recent past has shown us that the
Government of Hamid Karzai is resolved to build a
viable new political system in Afghanistan in which
there is no place for international terrorists or narcotics
dealers. Tajikistan expresses the hope that, under the
continued leading role of the United Nations, the
efforts being made in the Afghanistan settlement will
be supported by the international community in order
to consolidate the positive trends that are gaining
momentum in Afghanistan.

