Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): I, too,
would like to thank Mr. Mauro Vieira, Ambassador of
Brazil; Mr. Taye-Brook Zerihoun, Assistant Secretary-
General for Political Affairs; and Mr. Yury Fedotov,
ExecutiveDirectoroftheUnitedNations Office onDrugs
and Crime (UNODC), for their insightful briefings on
the political and security situation in Guinea-Bissau.
France is very grateful for their respective activities,
which occurred alongside the resumption of dialogue
between the Guinea-Bissau parties following the
October 2016 Conakry Agreement. I would like to touch
on three points that have already been highlighted by
previous speakers.

First, I wish to reiterate France's full support for the
appointment by President Jose Mario Vaz of Aristides
Gomes as consensual Prime Minister. A year and a half
after the Conakry Agreement, this appointment attests
to the will of the parties to break out of the political
impasse. France also welcomes the formation by Prime
Minister Gomes of an inclusive Government, whose
main undertaking will be to create the political and
institutional conditions necessary for the holding of
parliamentary elections in November.

Secondly, those recent political developments,
which we had hoped for, reflect the coordinated
actions of the international community and regional
organizations to resolve the Guinea-Bissau crisis.
In that respect, I reiterate France's full support for
the initiatives of regional organizations, particularly
the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), whose role has been crucial. It was in the
aftermath of the extraordinary session of the Heads
of State and Government of ECOWAS on Guinea-
Bissau that President Vaz appointed Aristides Gomes
as Prime Minister. We are convinced that the solution
to the conflict will be given pride of place through
consultation and engagement with local actors. In
that respect, the group of five partners of Guinea-
Bissau, mentioned by Ambassador Vieira, constitutes
a propitious coordination platform that should be
maintained and supported.

Thirdly, it is crucial that the commitment of the
Security Council, the Peacebuilding Commission and
international donors support the efforts of the United
Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-
Bissau (UNIOGBIS), as well as those of UNODC,
whose role is essential in creating a healthy environment
that is conducive to lasting political stabilization. The
recent history ofthe country calls for subdued optimism
in the face ofrecent progress. It is therefore particularly
important that we collectively send the right message,
one of vigilance and continued commitment, following
the appointment ofa consensus Prime Minister.

The new UNIOGBIS mandate in resolution 2404
(2018) should help support the priority areas for the
resolution of the crisis in Guinea-Bissau, namely, the
implementation of the Conakry Agreement, adherence
to the expected time frame for the electoral cycle and
carrying out the process of reviewing the Constitution.
In that regard, I wish to express our best wishes to the
new Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and express our appreciation for his predecessor.

Finally, the inclusion of women in the crisis-
resolution process, specifically through the Network
of Women Mediators that has been set up, is also an
important element that will promote ongoing dialogue
among local parties. To find a lasting solution in
Guinea-Bissau, we need an inclusive process supported
by all. Failure would be destabilizing, and we cannot
permit that.

