At the outset, I am pleased, on behalf of the Group of Arab States, to congratulate you, Sir, on your accession to the presidency of the Security Council and to convey to you our appreciation for your efforts in managing the work of the Council and ensuring its continuity. I would also like to thank you for holding this open meeting, which is especially significant for the Arab Group. We also wish to thank the Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process for his briefing and efforts. The format for holding this quarterly meeting is unprecedented and reflects the far-reaching changes caused by the novel coronavirus (COVID-19) pandemic, which poses a threat to the entire world, including the Middle East. What has not changed in our region for decades is the unresolved question of Palestine. Indeed, Israel, the occupying Power, is taking advantage of the fact that the world is focusing its attention on confronting the global pandemic to pursue its policies and plans to annex parts of the Palestinian territories that were occupied in 1967, step up the pace of its colonial settlement-building in those territories and violate the rights of the Palestinian people. We therefore call on the international community and the United Nations, including the Security Council, to shoulder their responsibilities, to ensure compliance with international law and internationally recognized resolutions in the occupied Palestinian territory and to prevent the Israeli occupation Government from using this pandemic, which threatens the world and humankind as a whole, from carrying out its illegal policies in the territory of the State of Palestine, which has been under occupation since 1967. Everyone knows full well that moving forward with those annexation schemes will have serious implications for regional and global security, peace and stability, and that there is no alternative to a just, comprehensive and lasting settlement of this question in accordance with the provisions of the Charter of the United Nations, international law and the terms of reference of the peace process. And so today we turn once again to the Security Council, aware that this matter lies at the heart of its mandate under the Charter to maintain international peace and security and that the numerous Council resolutions on the Palestinian question must be put into effect. The Palestinian question is crucially important to the Arab States, and the Arab Group reiterates its firm stance in favour of peace as a strategic choice. It repeats its call for a settlement of the Palestinian question on the basis of a two-State solution leading to the establishment of a Palestinian State, with East Jerusalem as its capital, within the borders of 4 June 1967, and an agreement on the final-status issues, including those relating to borders, refugees and Jerusalem. To that end, we call for continued international efforts to relaunch serious and effective negotiations within a specific timetable with a view to reaching a settlement in accordance with the terms of reference of the peace process, internationally recognized resolutions and the Arab Peace Initiative, which the Arab States put forward in 2002 and by which they still stand. The success of such efforts in achieving that goal and reviving the peace process will depend on their being consistent with the principles of international law and the terms of reference of the peace process. Compliance with international law, the Charter of the United Nations and its resolutions calls for the rejection and condemnation of any measures or practices 87/99 88/99 carried out by Israel, the occupying Power, that violate them. Foremost among those measures are the continued occupation of Arab lands; illegal settlement activities in the occupied territory; attempts to annex land illegally; attempts to alter the character, legal status and demographic composition of the city of Jerusalem, encroaching on its Islamic and Christian holy places; and the blockade of the Gaza Strip. Apart from being blatant violations of international law and internationally recognized resolutions, those actions undermine the prospects for peace and stand in the way of a two-State solution. By continuing to carry them out, Israel is signalling its intransigence, its defiance of international law and Security Council resolutions, and its lack of sincerity in seeking peace. The role of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East in providing basic services to more than 5 million Palestinians is indispensable, and it is therefore necessary to support the Agency to ensure that its activities continue in accordance with its mandate. Lastly, the Arab Group supports the State of Palestine in its desire to obtain full membership of the United Nations. We take this opportunity to reaffirm the solidarity of all Arab States with the State of Palestine and our brothers, the Palestinian people, in its legitimate pursuit of an end to the historical injustice to which it has been subjected for many years and to its prolonged suffering, and as it strives to exercise all of its inalienable rights.
