Mr. Grauls (Belgium) (spoke in French): The
fight against piracy off the coasts of Somalia has been
the object of increasing mobilization on the part of the
international community over the past year. In addition
to various Council resolutions, several specific
initiatives have been taken to respond to a phenomenon
that is taking on extremely worrisome proportions in
terms of maritime security and the provision of
humanitarian aid.

Belgium strongly supports international action to
combat acts of piracy. As a member of the European
Union, our country participates in such action through
Operation Atalanta and has decided to participate
directly in the coming months by providing a warship.
Mr. President, Belgium welcomes the fact that your
country, Croatia, and mine plan to cooperate in the
Operation.

Today's meeting has led the Security Council to
take an another step in addition to resolution 1846
(2008). In fact, the resolution that we have just adopted
authorizes the international community to act not only
in the territorial waters of Somalia, but also on its soil.
That gives us another instrument to effectively combat
piracy.

However, Belgium would like to emphasize the
exceptional nature of this measure. The Council
certainly has the power to adopt exceptional measures,
as we have already done with resolutions 1816 (2008)
and 1846 (2008). But Belgium strongly believes that
the concern to suppress piracy must not undermine
certain very valuable principles of international law:
the law of the sea, freedom of navigation and the
sovereignty of States over their territories. That is why
it was essential that the exceptional measures just
adopted by the Council be time-bound, strictly
monitored and taken for only one specific purpose,
namely, combating piracy and only by countries
cooperating with the Somali authorities, in compliance
with humanitarian and human rights law.

It is obvious that, ultimately, eradicating piracy is
only one aspect of the problems posed by the situation
in Somalia. Combating piracy can in itself have
positive effects, as one can see from the recent report
of the Monitoring Group, which highlighted the links
between piracy and weapons trafficking. More
generally, the international community has an
obligation to continue to work to promote stabilization
of the country. However, we must resist the temptation
to lump together the responses given by the
international community.

Piracy is a particular phenomenon that requires
appropriate responses. Efforts to support peace and
efforts to combat piracy should be carried out in
parallel, each with its own requirements and means.
Linking them too closely together can only hamper
their effectiveness. Thus, the attention that we are
devoting to piracy problems today cannot conceal the
absolute need to make progress in the political process.
In the area of security, the Djibouti Agreement and the
first phases of its implementation have provided some
hope for progress. However, Belgium cannot fail to
note the internal disagreements within the institutions
of the Transitional Federal Government and the fact
that the security situation continues to deteriorate
despite that progress. Our efforts must be focused on
supporting the process under way and must be aimed at
persuading all parties in Somalia to unite in the
country's interest. The Intergovernmental Authority on
Development and the International Contact Group are
working to that end, and the international community
as a whole should contribute to that effort.

With regard to peacekeeping on the ground, my
delegation has reiterated several times that a United
Nations peacekeeping force is inconceivable without
sufficient political will on the part of Somali actors
themselves and at least the beginning of peace to
support.

As for the idea of a stabilization force, that
essentially depends on the willingness of certain States
to assume that responsibility, as the Secretary-General
just emphasized. The African Union has been very
courageous in assuming that burden by sending the
AMISOM. forces. It is urgent that AMISOM. be
strengthened and supported, as the Secretary-General
just suggested in his statement.

Aware that combating piracy is essential but that
it also involves broader interests, and aware of the
particular situation in Somalia, we believe that
important work remains to be accomplished first at the
political and security levels. With that in mind we
voted in favour of the resolution.

