Mrs. Le Fraper du Hellen (France) (spoke in French): I thank Mr. Simonovie for his presentation
of the fourth report of the human rights monitoring
mission in Ukraine, which remains an essential
source of information for us. I would like to take this
opportunity to express our full support for the work of
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights and all the staff of the mission, who
are working under very difficult conditions.

The security, humanitarian and human rights
situations in Donetsk and Luhansk continue to
deteriorate due to the armed separatist groups operating
there. In the east of the country, arbitrary arrests,
forced disappearances, summary executions, hate
speech f in a word, terror - are affecting all civilians.
Those who return after having been abducted report
having been tortured by armed groups. The separatists
are deliberately targeting public infrastructure to
restrict civilian access to water, electricity and medical
care, and thereby increase their humanitarian needs.
Fighting and acts of intimidation are causing civilian
casualties and displacement. The report presented to us
illustrates that situation.

In Crimea, discrimination is now common and
Tatars are victims of harassment and intimidation,
while the commission of inquiry, despite our repeated
requests, still has no access to the Crimea.

Displacement and destabilization in the east, where
the main industrial centres are located, have economic
consequences for the entire country.

The violence is fuelled and maintained from
outside. As Mr. Simonovic' has just reminded us, the
armed groups are increasingly more professional and
well armed. Their leadership is made up primarily of
people from the Russian Federation, who apparently
fought in Chechnya and Transnistria. We denounce
the presence of those foreign elements and call for an
immediate end to outside support. We join the appeal
launched by the Ukrainian Government for the flow of
arms and fighters from Russia to cease.

We reiterate our call for the fighting in eastern
Ukraine to stop and for armed groups there to lay
down their weapons and evacuate all public buildings
occupied illegally. The separatists must engage in a
process of political dialogue that allows them to express
their position legally and peacefully. The trilateral
contact group under the auspices of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe is playing a key
role in that regard so that the Ukrainian authorities and
those groups can constructively achieve a ceasefire.

Faced with this situation, the Ukrainian Government
has a responsibility to take appropriate and proportionate
measures, in accordance with international standards,
to fight armed groups, protect people and control of its
borders. It has already taken steps to provide assistance
to people forcibly expelled from their homes. Wherever
Kyiv has restored its authority, basic services to the
population are operating again and the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees has
noted the return of displaced persons. We encourage
the full cooperation of the Ukrainian Government with
the United Nations and other humanitarian agencies
to continue to meet the humanitarian needs. We also
welcome the solidarity of Ukrainian citizens in helping
those who have been displaced.
Everything must be done to encourage a return to
calm, which is a necessary precondition for launching
a political dialogue. That involves, first and foremost, I
repeat, control of the Russian/Ukrainian border so that
the flow of weapons and men is stopped.

The international community stands ready to
support Ukraine in its current efforts to regain its unity,
sovereignty and territorial integrity. We welcome the
organization by the European Union, at the beginning
of July, of a meeting of the contact group aimed at
coordinating economic assistance to Ukraine.

New measures against Russia have been
necessary - adopted by the European Union, the
United States, Canada, Japan and Switzerland.
They demonstrate the international community's
determination to push Russia to work towards a
peaceful settlement of the conflict.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate how much
we regret the fact that the investigators of the crash of
Flight MH-17 have still not been able to complete their
task in spite of the efforts of Australia, the Netherlands
and Malaysia, in full cooperation with the Ukrainian
authorities. As Ms. Pillay said, we could be talking
about a war crime here, and every effort should be
made to ensure that those responsible answer for their
actions. Generally speaking, every element that the
commission of inquiry collects should be able to be
used in judicial proceedings.

