Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
highly appreciates Kuwait's initiative in convening this
meeting. I also thank Secretary-General Guterres for
his briefing. I would like to thank in particular Their
Excellencies Ms. Mary Robinson and Mr. Ban Ki-moon
for their presence in the Council and for sharing
their perspectives on world issues. Their speeches
are inspirational.

Approximately two months ago, President Xi
Jinping met with Ms. Robinson and Mr. Ban Ki-moon
and other members of The Elders in Beijing. President
Xi Jinping had an in-depth exchange of views
with them on international issues. In the meetings,
President Xi Jinping reiterated China's firm support
for multilateralism and expressed China's appreciation
of the efforts of The Elders members in facilitating a
dialogue-based solution to conflicts.

Conflict prevention is predominantly about
prevention. The concept of prevention is deeply rooted
in traditional Chinese philosophy. Ancient Chinese
proverbs, such as "Prepare for a rainy day" and "Take
precautionary measures before disaster strikes"
all highlight the importance of prevention. China
supports the United Nations in strengthening conflict
prevention. We support the Secretary-General's reform
initiatives in the field of peace and security, including
increasing the United Nations commitment and input in
conflict prevention.

Conflict prevention must focus on tackling root
causes. Conflicts tend to have a variety of deep-
seated causes, such as extreme poverty, imbalanced
development, the lack of resources and ethnic and
tribal conflicts. Among them, the issue of development
is of paramount importance. Countries should make
development their first priority and persist in jointly
promoting the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development so as to enhance developing
countries' capacity to support indigenous development
and reduce or eliminate poverty on a global scale,
thereby laying the foundation for conflict prevention.
Conflict prevention must adhere to the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations. All
countries should abide by the basic norms governing
international relations, such as respect for sovereignty
and territorial integrity, non-interference in internal
affairs, non-aggression and the peaceful settlement
of disputes. It is imperative to fully respect the will
of the countries concerned, persist in carrying out
conflict prevention under their leadership, and provide
constructive assistance to them to advance their
political process and achieve national reconciliation.

Conflict prevention must emphasise the role of
mediation. Mediation is one ofthe tools for the peaceful
settlement of disputes and an important means for the
United Nations to carry out conflict prevention. It is
necessary to formulate and implement work programmes
for mediation in a targeted manner, make full use of
the unique influence of the Secretary-General and
the expertise of the Secretariat, and actively mediate
disputes through the Special Representatives and
Envoys ofthe Secretary-General. It is also necessary to
strengthen the ability of national envoys in mediating
conflicts and disputes.

Conflict prevention needs closer coordination
so as to generate synergy. As the most universal,
representative and authoritative intergovernmental
international organization, the United Nations
should play a central role in conflict prevention. All
departments of the Secretariat must abide by their
mandates and work in collaboration. Regional and
subregional organizations, such as the African Union
and the League ofArab States, enjoy unique advantages
in dealing with issues in their own regions and should
be further supported in exercising their irreplaceable
role in the prevention of regional conflicts.

As a builder and defender of world peace, China
is actively committed to promoting international peace
and stability and to pushing for the establishment of
a new type of international relations with cooperation
and mutual benefit at its core. This is seen in China's
active engagement in the mediation of international or
regional hotspot issues and the appointment of Special
Envoys on regional issues such as those of Asia, Africa
and the Middle East, to facilitate peace talks and
promote political solutions. That has already produced
positive results.

Our active support for the mediation work of the
United Nations also includes years of donations to
United Nations prevention efforts and to the China-
United Nations Peace and Development Fund, support
for the Secretary-General's High-level Advisory
Board on Mediation, the rapid-response system of the
Department of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs and
other United Nations mediation mechanisms.

China will join the rest of the international
community to jointly build a community with a shared
future for humankind so as to make greater contributions
to world peace, development and prosperity.

