Mr. Kohona (Sri Lanka): My delegation is
pleased to have this opportunity to address this Council
on this important issue at a crucial time for the Middle
East peace process. I also wish to extend our sincere
congratulations to Uganda on its assumption of the
presidency of the Council and for the work done by the
Ugandan delegation. We express our appreciation to
you, Sir, for convening this debate.

I thank the Assistant Secretary-General for
Political Affairs, Mr. Fernandez-Taranco, for his
informative briefing on the situation in the Middle
East. We associate ourselves with the statement
delivered by the representative of Egypt on behalf of
the Non-Aligned Movement.

The resumption of direct talks between the two
leaders of Israel and Palestine on 2 September in
Washington, D.C., with the facilitation of President
Obama, indeed brought new hope to many who
sincerely await a comprehensive resolution of the
question of Palestine in order to achieve sustainable
peace in the Middle East. However, unfortunately, the
stalemate continues despite the relentless efforts of
many, including regional leaders, thus prolonging the
plight of millions of innocent Palestinian civilians who
have waited far too long for justice and their
inalienable rights. Peace in the Middle East would be a
major contribution to world peace.

We strongly believe that the ending of the Israeli
occupation of Palestinian territory and settlement
activities remains central to finding a viable and just
solution to the question of Palestine. Forty-three years
of immeasurable hardship and disruption of normal
civilian life would be a disturbing situation in any
circumstance. We earnestly hope that the resolutions
adopted by this body and the General Assembly will be
respected and implemented without delay.

Hatred and violence only beget hatred and
violence. Therefore, the consistent call by many
concerned on all parties to the conflict to stop violence
and exercise restraint needs to be heeded. It is the only
way forward to ensure an environment conducive to
lasting peace in the region. It is the most pragmatic
way to build confidence and ease the suffering of the
Palestinian people.

Once more, Sri Lanka renews its call on both
Israel and Palestine to exploit all avenues in their quest
for a lasting solution in which both sides could live
side by side as neighbours within secure and
recognized borders and bring Israel greater acceptance,
both within the region and beyond.

We reiterate our support for the Government of
President Abbas and commend the decision of the
League of Arab States to keep the doors open for peace
talks, despite the present deadlock. The Arab League
has demonstrated moral leadership and political
maturity with this decision. We believe that Palestinian
unity should be restored through peaceful means for
the sake of a strong and stable Palestine State. It is
important that the national and democratic institutions
of the Palestinian Authority be protected and
maintained, as they will form the bedrock of a future
Palestinian State, independent and self-sustaining.

It is therefore the earnest desire and hope of the
Government of Sri Lanka that both Palestine and
Israel, together with the major stakeholders of the
Middle East peace process, will overcome the current
impasse in their negotiations, and do so without delay.
