Mr. Djedje (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): I
would like to thank Mr. Yamamoto, Mr. Fedotov and
Mr. Voronkov for their excellent briefings.

My delegation remains concerned about the
deteriorating security situation, marked by an increase
in the number of indiscriminate attacks against the
civilian population, resulting in the death of many
people and leaving thousands injured. My country
condemns the wave of violence and deadly attacks,
which has plunged Afghanistan into mourning, and
once again calls on the Security Council to pay greater
attention to the security situation in the country. My
delegation calls on the Taliban to grant the Afghan
President's request to extend the ceasefire and implores
it to be firmly committed to direct peace talks without
conditions, within the framework of the Kabul process,
to achieve a political settlement to the crisis and bring
about sustainable peace.

An inclusive political process should lead to
credible elections and remains the key to ending the
crisis in Afghanistan. In that regard, my delegation
welcomes the considerable progress made in the
dialogue among Afghan political stakeholders, which
helped to peaceably resolve the dispute between
President Ashraf Ghani Ahmadzai and the former
governor of Balkh province, Mr. Atta Mohammad
Noor. My delegation is also pleased to note President
Ghani's implementation of the peace agreement with
the leader of Hezb-i-Islami, Mr. Gulbuddin Hekmatyar,
which has enabled Mr. Hekmatyar to return to Kabul
after a 20-year absence, his supporters to be released
and members of his movement to assume provincial
governorships.

We encourage Afghan stakeholders to continue to
engage in dialogue in order to meet their aspirations
for peace and take ownership of their country through
inclusive and peaceful elections. However, attacks
on electoral infrastructure, the abduction of election
workers and the intimidation and harassment of
registered voters are acts that could disrupt the electoral
process and that demand action from the Council.
Furthermore, my country commends the Government
on its efforts to provide Afghan women with the means
to consolidate their place in society and to promote their
participation in regional and international initiatives to
bring about peace, while protecting their fundamental
rights.

The humanitarian situation also remains a source
of concern owing to the ongoing drought and low
levels of rainfall, which could lead to famine in the
country and to the forced displacement of people.
According to the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2018/539) of 6 June, more than 2 million people
across two thirds of the country will be affected by
drought and 1.4 million will be severely affected and
require emergency food and water assistance in order to
survive. My delegation deplores the very limited access
of humanitarian agencies to vulnerable people and the
attacks on humanitarian workers, which constitute a
breach of international humanitarian law. We therefore
call on the international community to respond to the
emergency appeal launched by the United Nations
aimed at meeting the basic needs of those affected
by the drought. My country commends the Afghan
Government, the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan and donor countries on their efforts to
organize the ministerial conference on Afghanistan to
be held in Geneva on 28 November.

The presence of Islamic State-affiliated terrorist
groups in Afghanistan could destabilize the country
and the entire region. Cote d'Ivoire reaffirms its
support for the efforts of the Afghan authorities to
combat terrorism and calls for enhanced regional and
international cooperation in that area. My country
welcomes the signing of the Afghanistan-Pakistan
Action Plan for Peace and Solidarity, which is an
innovative partnership for regional cooperation in the
areas of counter-terrorism, violence reduction, refugee
repatriation and economic development. In addition,
the international community should encourage greater
coordination between the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime and the Afghan Government in order
to cut off the sources of funding for armed groups
and terrorists in Afghanistan by providing alternative
livelihoods to those living in rural areas who depend
on poppy cultivation.

In conclusion, my delegation would like to reiterate
its support for the efforts of the Afghan Government to
bring about lasting peace and stability in Afghanistan,
as well as its gratitude for the work conducted by the
Special Representative to the Secretary-General for
Afghanistan and Head of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan, through his good offices in
the framework of the political dialogue. We encourage
him to continue his efforts to restore lasting peace and
stability to the country.

