Mr. Alimov (Tajikistan) (interpretation from Russian):
The Republic of Tajikistan has actively supported the idea
of the adoption of a special resolution of the Security
Council on Afghanistan and is one of the co-sponsors of
the draft. We welcome the Council's readiness to discuss
the dangerous development of the situation in Afghanistan
and possible steps to redress it.

It is by no means a matter of indifference to Tajikistan
as to the kind of situation that has existed recently in
neighbouring Afghanistan in connection with the approach
of hostilities directly to our border.

Our concern derives from an analysis of the real facts.
The leadership of the Taliban movement has been banking
on a military solution to the Afghan problem with the direct
and massive support from outside, and this cannot fail to be
a source of apprehension regarding possible armed actions
by the Taliban on the Tajik-Afghan border. We are
profoundly concerned over the reports from Afghanistan
regarding new, glaring violations of human rights and
international law there, including international humanitarian
law. We do not exclude the possibility of an uncontrollable
surge of Afghan refugees into our country. We are seriously
concerned by the genuine transformation of Afghanistan
into an exporter of terrorism and drugs.

We are convinced that the recent events in the north
of Afghanistan confirm the timeliness of the decision to
establish a Russia-Tajikistan-Uzbekistan "troika" to
counteract religious extremism. Support from the territory
of the Islamic State of Afghanistan of various types of
extremist forces in Tajikistan can have a highly negative
effect on the peace process in our country.

The Government of Tajikistan, based on the fact that
the external threat must not undermine the process of
national reconciliation, has undertaken measures to
strengthen the Tajik-Afghan border in those areas in
particular danger. In cooperation with partners from the
Commonwealth of Independent States, we are doing
everything in our power to protect our common interests
and security.

We agree with many of the assessments of the
present situation in Afghanistan. For our part, we would
like to emphasize that the recent events in Afghanistan
have time and again clearly highlighted the impossibility
of resolving the Afghan conflict by force. No matter how
impressive military victories of one or another of the
parties to the conflict may seem, they can only lead to a
new, more dangerous and even harsher spiral of armed
confrontation and make even more remote the prospects
for the establishment of peace and stability in
Afghanistan.

We believe that in the present situation, the United
Nations must, in fact, reaffirm its leading role in efforts
to settle the Afghan crisis. There is a need for urgent,
practical steps on the part of the United Nations aimed at
stepping up assistance for a peaceful settlement in
Afghanistan.

Tajikistan, as a member of the group of neighbours
and friends of Afghanistan, the Six plus Two group, is
ready to support those efforts and to do everything in its
power to see that the Afghan groups immediately reach
agreement on a ceasefire and engage in serious
negotiations under the aegis of the United Nations on
ways to achieve a peaceful settlement to the conflict on
the basis of the decisions of the Security Council and the
General Assembly.

In our view, there is now a need to hold in the
region high-level meetings of representatives of States
members of the Six plus Two group, at which it will be
possible to consider a concrete plan for a settlement to the
conflict. Tajikistan could render the necessary assistance
in holding such a meeting.

In our View, the resolution being adopted today by
the Security Council contains a powerful political
momentum which should exert the appropriate impact on
all of the Afghan parties and on the States on which it
has a bearing. We hope that the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi, and the United
Nations Special Mission to Afghanistan, with the support

 

of interested States, will convey this message to those to
whom it is addressed so that the peace process at last will
replace the endless round of wars and conflicts on the land
of the brotherly Afghan people.

