Mr. Konfourou (Mali) (spoke in French): I would
like to begin by adding the voice of the countries of the
Group of Five for the Sahel (G-S Sahel) to the Council's
condemnation today of the cowardly and barbaric
attack on the Blue Helmets serving the cause of peace
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We offer our
heartfelt condolences to the brotherly Governments of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Tanzania
and wish the wounded a speedy recovery.

On behalf of the Ambassadors of the member
States of the G-5 Sahel who are here today, I would first
like to express our gratitude to you, Mr. President, for
giving us the opportunity to participate in this meeting
devoted to the Council's second adoption, in less than
six months, of a resolution (resolution 2391 (2017)) on
the G-5 Sahel Joint Force, and which I should recall is
endorsed by the African Union. The member States of
the G-5 Sahel would also like to congratulate you, Sir,
on your beautiful country of Japan's assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month. We
also take this opportunity to commend the remarkable
work done by our dear friend Ambassador Sebastiano
Cardi and his delegation during Italy's presidency last
month. Before going any further, I would also like to
take this opportunity to extend our sincere thanks to
the non-permanent members of the Council whose term
ends at the end of this month. They should be proud
of the enormous contributions that their countries have
made to international peace and security.

I would once again like to convey to Council
members the thanks of Mr. Ibrahim Boubacar Keita,
President ofthe Republic ofMali and President-in-Office
of the G-5 Sahel, on behalf of his peers from Burkina
Faso, Mauritania, the Niger and Chad, for the important
unanimous decision the Council has just made. We
welcome the adoption of resolution 2391 (2017), which
is firmly in keeping with the good momentum in the
gradual strengthening of international support for
the G-5 Sahel Joint Force, though it is true that we
would have liked to have seen a much more robust
mandate, and one that was established under Chapter
VII of the Charter of the United Nations, as well as
much more extensive United Nations support for the
Force in terms of logistics, means of communication,
equipment and infrastructure. We would also liked to
have seen increased support from the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali for all the deployment sectors of the Joint Force
in the east, west and centre of the country, as well as to
have received predictable and sustainable funding for
the Joint Force, including through the United Nations.

However, we have not lost hope. We are very
grateful to every member of the Council for the progress
that has already been achieved and we have signed on to
this positive dynamic, in the hope that our expectations
will be gradually met within the framework of the
review and periodic assessment clauses provided for
in resolution 2391 (2017). Here I would like to thank
the French delegation, under the leadership of our dear
friend Ambassador Francois Delattre, for initiating
and leading the negotiations on the resolution that the
Council has just adopted.

On behalf of our leaders and our people, I would
also like to express our infinite gratitude to the partner
countries and international partner organizations that
have already pledged contributions to the Joint Force.
I refer in particular to Saudi Arabia, the United States
of America, the European Union, France, Germany
and Denmark. I also appeal to our other bilateral and
multilateral partners to mobilize to assist in the effective
and rapid operationalization of the Joint Force.

