Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein): We thank you,
Madam President, for organizing this debate as well as
for producing a concept paper. This debate comes at an
opportune moment. The demand for peacekeeping has
reached an unprecedented scale and it is certainly
timely for the United Nations membership to take a
look at the activities it undertakes after conflicts have
ended. The increase in costs for peacekeeping
operations certainly entails the risk that the resources
necessary for post-conflict peacebuilding may not be
made available.

Today we are not, of course, discussing a new
topic - quite the opposite. The presidency's concept
paper illustrates this. It quotes from the Brahimi report
published in the year 2000 (S/2000/809), and it is quite
appropriate that Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi was invited to
address the Council today. We very much appreciated
his presentation this morning, which focused strongly
on very practical aspects of post-conflict peacebuilding
and, of course, on his first-hand experience. His
comments deserve particular attention, especially on
the need to create national and local ownership, and to
rely, therefore, to the fullest extent possible, on human
resources in those countries where peacebuilding
activities are undertaken.

The fact that some parts of the Brahimi report
have still not been implemented after all these years
illustrates the fact that progress in this area has been
slow. Nevertheless, it has been steady, and it has
received an important boost through the establishment
of the Peacebuilding Commission, which has turned
out to be one of the most important results of the 2005
World Summit. The work that the Commission has
carried out so far has clearly had positive effects, and
we hope that its potential can be fully explored in the
future. In particular, it should be able to consider
situations immediately after a conflict has ended and a
ceasefire or peace accord has entered into force. In
addition, it must be understood that post-conflict
peacebuilding is always also a tool for conflict
prevention and there should be an exchange of best
practices from both fields.

One feature of the work of the Peacebuilding
Commission that merits increased attention and further
consideration is its practice of considering situations in
various configurations in order to ensure optimal
inclusion of the stakeholders. That is a very interesting
formula that could perhaps also be successfully applied
to the work of the Security Council itself.

The rule of law plays a central role in the
stabilization of countries and societies in post-conflict
situations. It is our hope that the Rule of Law Unit,
whose establishment required much more time than we
had expected, will play a positive role in that respect.
Efforts by the United Nations to secure the rule of law
over the long term can be successful only if they tap
extensively into local and national capacities and if
they expand expertise in all relevant areas.

In addition, increased attention must be given to
transitional justice needs, if and where they exist. The
international community has accumulated extensive
experience and expertise on that issue in recent years
and has developed various models and modalities to
satisfy transitional justice needs. The International
Criminal Court can play a particular role in that regard,
and we hope that it will be given the required political
support, including by the Security Council. In
particular, the Council has to recognize that the
principles of peace and justice are complementary,
mutually reinforcing and, in combination, form an
indispensable ingredient of post-conflict peacebuilding.

The presidency's concept paper identifies rapid
and flexible funding as a major challenge. At a time of
rapidly increasing costs for peacekeeping, that
challenge is likely to be exacerbated in the near future.
Since peacebuilding is a form of conflict prevention, it
can in principle be very cost-effective. However,
experience - such as the examples given in the
concept paper - has shown that little or no money
may be available during the initial phase after a
conflict, when it is most needed and when the direction
for the future process is set. Even though the activities
are very different in nature, it would appear that there
is some similarity, in terms of the funding dynamic, to
the humanitarian work of the Organization. Therefore,
funding mechanisms designed following the example
of the Central Emergency Response Fund - which has
served the purposes of humanitarian assistance quite
well - seem to be worth exploring.

