Mr. Akbaruddin (India): I would like to thank
you, Mr. President, for organizing today's debate on
the situation in Afghanistan. We also appreciate the
briefing by Special Representative Yamamoto and the
statement by Ambassador Mahmoud Saikal, Permanent
Representative of Afghanistan, which have added to
our understanding of the current crises in Afghanistan.

The recent flurry of terrorist attacks in Afghanistan,
including the massive Kabul bomb attack, have left
many of us horror-struck. Clearly, in Afghanistan the
international community is dealing with an adversary
not averse to flagrantly violating international
humanitarian law and human rights laws - an adversary
flush with resources, weapons and operational support;
an adversary with access to sanctuaries outside the
sovereignty of Afghanistan and operational command
of the international forces deployed there; an adversary
that sees no reason or incentive to give up violence
and participate in creation of a democratic, united,
stable, secure and prosperous State. Unfortunately, the
multiple crises that have been inflicted on this war-
torn country have once again made Afghan territory
attractive to criminal and terrorist groups that now
appear to be well connected to international terror
and crime networks that in turn prey on Afghanistan's
resources. The situation is affecting security in South
Asia, Central Asia and regions beyond.

More often than not, a crisis can be seen as a
catalyst for real change and genuine solutions. However,
for that to happen, our perceptions must be straight
and forthright. After all, we cannot change what we
cannot see, or what we are unwilling to see. For a long
time, we believe, that has been the conundrum facing
the international community in Afghanistan - that
the international community's collective inability and
unwillingness to see the problem for what it is has
inflicted huge costs on the people of Afghanistan.

While no two conflicts are identical, one wonders
why, despite the fact that we have witnessed the worst
possible violence in Afghanistan, the Council does not
think it appropriate to meet more often than in routine
quarterly debates on the situation there. At times it has
even shied away from condemning some of the terrorist
attacks in Afghanistan. Is it that there are far too many
to keep track of? Is it because there is a threshold below
which human lives lost to terrorism are not required to
be addressed?

We see a growing tendency to treat the violence
in Afghanistan as routine. Brutality committed by
terrorist and criminal networks are ignored, labelled as
a product of anti-Government elements or the inevitable
consequence of a civil and political conflict. In doing
so we seem to be failing to ask some crucial questions.
For example, where are those anti-Government
elements getting their weapons, explosives, training
and funding? Where do they find safe havens and
sanctuary? How is it that they have resisted one of the
biggest collective military efforts in the world? How is
it that they collaborate with the world's most dreadful
terrorists in killing and brutalizing Afghans? How is
it that the phenomenal increase in opium production,
accompanied by a rise in global narcotic prices, has
been totally ignored by the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1988 (2011)? Why is the 1988
sanctions regime still maintained when there is no effort
to use its leverage for progress in the peace process?
Why do we hear nothing about the stalled peace
process from those involved, or about the activities of
the Quadrilateral Coordination Group? Why are we not
hearing discussions in the Security Council about ideas
and plans of action for a conflict that has left many
Afghan lives shattered and brutalized?

In the past few months, the attacks on hospitals,
schools, funerals, international development agencies
and diplomatic missions seem to have been designed to
send a message to a nation trying to stand on its feet. We
salute the Afghan national security forces, which are
doing their best to combat the forces of terrorism and
extremism as they continue to strike, one after another.
India remains committed to standing with Afghanistan
and to supporting and strengthening its capabilities, not
just for fighting terrorism and violence but also to assist
it with development and nation-building. Our efforts to
that end will be improved by the opening of a direct
air corridor between our two countries, as agreed on
between our two Heads of State in December. The first
cargoes of goods arrived in both countries a few days
ago, overcoming the obstructions that we have faced in
connecting and trading directly with each other.

While we welcome the efforts to renew the United
Nations approach to dealing with Afghanistan through
the upcoming strategic review of UNAMA, such
efforts should be guided by the needs and priorities of
Afghanistan, its people and its Government. We would
appreciate broader and more informal discussions on
the matter with all important stakeholders.

In this regard, we must not differentiate between
good and bad terrorists or play one group against the
other. The Taliban, the Haggani Network, Al-Qaida,
Da'esh, Lashkar-e-Tayyiba, Jaish-e-Mohammed and
others of their ilk are all terror organizations, many
of them proscribed by the United Nations. They
should be treated like terrorist organizations, with no
justifications offered for their activities.

India, for its part, will continue to stand, in the
words of our Prime Minister, not behind but shoulder to
shoulder with the democratically elected Government
of Afghanistan as it battles terror and the multiple
crises inflicted on it. We hope that the Council,
which is tasked with the responsibility of maintaining
international peace and security, will also play its role
in restoring peace in Afghanistan.

