Mr. Cardi (Italy): I wish to thank the Polish
presidency of the Security Council for organizing this
briefing, as well as the briefers, namely, Secretary-
General Antonio Guterres; Mr. Yves Daccord, Director-
General of the International Committee of the Red Cross;
and Ms. Hanaa Edwar, as civil-society representative.

Italy aligns itself with the statement delivered by
the observer of the European Union and with those to
be delivered by the representative of Switzerland, on
behalf of the Group of Friends on the Protection of
Civilians in Armed Conflict, and by the representative
of Qatar, on behalf of the Group of Friends on the
Responsibility to Protect, which we co-chair. We wish
to add the following remarks in our national capacity.

Civilians suffer enormous consequences from
armed conflicts and insecurity in a wide array of
circumstances, including targeted attacks, indirect
consequences of internal conflicts and urban warfare,
mass displacement and the use of starvation as a
method of war. For those reasons, we strongly believe
that the protection of civilians - in particular women,
children and persons with disabilities - must be at the
core of the agenda of the United Nations system and
of all its activities. We also believe that the protection
of civilians is a fundamental duty and obligation that
each Member State and the international community as
a whole must entirely fulfil.

Essential preconditions to ensure the protection of
civilians must comply fully in all circumstances with
the cardinal principles of international humanitarian
law, in particular the 1949 Geneva Conventions and
their Additional Protocols, human rights law and
refugee law. In that regard, a strong link between
accountability and prevention must be achieved.

On the one hand, serious violations of international
humanitarian law and of the relevant Security Council
resolutions must be thoroughly investigated and
perpetrators brought to justice, including, where
applicable, through referrals to the International
Criminal Court or other international tribunals.
On the other hand, early-warning and early-action
mechanisms for prevention are instrumental in raising
awareness and adopting an atrocity-prevention lens
in possible conflict situations. We fully support
the long-term holistic approach to the protection of
civilians outlined by the Secretary-General in his
latest report (S/2018/462), which consists of addressing
the root causes of conflicts, advocating for respect of
international humanitarian law, including by non-State
armed groups, and ensuring full accountability.

In that context, we recall the landmark resolution
2286 (2016), on the protection of humanitarian and
health-care facilities and personnel. Two years after
its consensual adoption, we still need to see its urgent
and full implementation, as attacks on hospitals and
humanitarian convoys continue unabated. We urge not
only that health-care facilities and personnel not be
targeted in the context of conflicts, but also that safe
and unimpeded humanitarian passage be guaranteed to
them as a critical condition for the effective and timely
provision of humanitarian assistance.

Against a backdrop of increasing indiscriminate
attacks against civilians, we are particularly alarmed
by those affecting children, who suffer the most
devastating effects of conflict. Italy condemns, in
the strongest possible terms, attacks directed against
schools, as well as any military use of schools, while
recalling in that regard the Safe Schools Declaration, to
which we urge more Member States to subscribe.

In line with our strong commitment to the
Call to Action on Protection from Gender-based
Violence in Emergencies, Italy believes that a gender-
oriented approach is key to prevent and respond to
emergency situations.

Finally, peacekeeping missions should effectively
and proactively implement their protection-of-
civilians mandate in line with the Kigali Principles
on the Protection of Civilians, to which Italy has
fully subscribed.

