Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are pleased to see you in the President’s seat, Sir, and we wish your country a successful presidency of the Security Council for the month of January. We also welcome all the colleagues who have joined us in the new year. We welcome their participation and stand ready to cooperate closely and constructively with them. We also thank our American colleagues, whose presidency in December was very successful and effective. Talso would like to thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel, Mr. Mohamed Ibn Chambas, for his briefing. We share the concerns voiced by Mr. Chambas with regard to the further deterioration of the security situation in that part of the continent. We are especially concerned that, in the Sahel, the geographical area of terrorist activity, drug trafficking and organized crime is expanding. Extremist ideology is, regrettably, winning over an increasing number of adherents. Almost weekly, we receive tragic reports about the deaths of dozens of military personnel and civilians at the hands of criminal gangs in various countries of the region. During the latest reporting period, Mali, Burkina Faso and the Niger were especially negatively affected. We reaffirm our full support for those countries in the fight against terrorism and express our condolences with regard to the latest terrorist attacks, in particular in the Niger. At the same time, it is important to remember that the States of the Gulf of Guinea are also at risk of destabilization. Who is to blame for these unfortunate developments? As we can see from today’s discussion, opinions differ with regard to that question. Naturally, we do not dispute the fact that the region faces fundamental problems, such as weak State governance, intercommunal and interethnic tensions, inadequate protection of human rights and climate change. They all need to be addressed. However, were we to look back not just one or two years, but over recent decades, it is clear that those phenomena are hardly new and that, overall, the local authorities have been able to mitigate them. We are convinced that the real trigger that set off the current unprecedented crisis was the reckless actions of those who unleashed chaos in Libya through the use of military force to overthrow the legitimate authorities there. As many stakeholders of the region have pointed out, it will hardly be possible to achieve peace and stability in the Sahel without stabilizing the situation in that country. Eradicating terrorism is one of the top priorities for African countries. In that regard, the efforts of States of the region to counter increasing threats are extremely timely. They are particularly important at a time when terrorist groups are, increasingly, actively coordinating their actions. We support the pledges made by the States members of the Economic Community of West African States at the recent summits in Niamey and Abuja to raise funds to combat jihadists. We share the view that the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel and the Multinational Joint Task Force established to counter Boko Haram require additional international support. For our part, we are providing assistance to African States through bilateral channels. At the same time, it is clear that terrorism cannot be eradicated by military means alone. It is necessary to effectively counter the expansion of extremist ideology, begin addressing acute socioeconomic problems and strengthen State institutions and foster a culture of respect for human rights. In that regard, we attach great importance to the implementation of the United Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel, as well as the activities of the United Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel. We hope that the parliamentary and presidential elections scheduled for 2020 in many countries of the region will take place in an environment of law and order. We welcome the successful conclusion of the second round of presidential elections in Guinea- Bissau. We hope that they will turn a new page in the history of the country, thereby making instability and political turbulence a thing of the past. In conclusion, we once again assure Mr. Chambas of Russia’s continued support for his personal efforts and the activities of his Office in addressing regional crises and issues involving political mediation, helping to improve State institutions and finding ways to foster economic development and counter extremism and terrorism. The scope and results of his work deserve the highest praise.
