Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): I am pleased to see you,
Mr. President, presiding over this very important
meeting. I want also to thank you for providing an
excellent concept paper (S/2015/845, annex).

We express our condolences to France, Russia,
Lebanon, Iraq and all those that have been affected
by the recent heinous terrorist attacks. But there is
one question that cries out for an answer. What is it
that the international community can do to ensure
greater cooperation that matches the challenge
we face - cooperation that surpasses the level of
cooperation and coordination that we know exists
within the terrorist camp? That is the question.

When our leaders adopted the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development (General Assembly resolution 70/1), they fully recognized that the
ambitious Sustainable Development Goals, which
are universal in nature, could be attained without
peace and security. They were also convinced that,
without ensuring sustainable development, it would
not be possible to address the root causes of conflicts
and achieve durable peace and stability. This strong
political message is reinforced by the outcome of the
review on peace operations, the report on the review of
the peacebuilding architecture (see S/2015/490) and the
global study on the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000). All these reviews agree on a number of issues,
among which is the need to address the problems
created by institutional fragmentation.

The nexus between security and development is no
longer a matter of theoretical debate; it is a practical
issue that we need to seriously consider if we are to
achieve lasting peace and prosperity. That is why it is
absolutely necessary to build synergy and coherence
among all stakeholders - the entire United Nations
system, regional and subregional organizations,
Member States and others - in the effort to build a
peaceful and inclusive world. Of course, we all know
this and have been saying so for quite some time, but
what has been lacking is concrete action to change
the way we do things so as to better respond to the
challenges.

We believe that there are things that the Council can
and indeed should do within its purview without unduly
infringing upon the competencies of other organs
and bodies within the United Nations system. The
prevention, management and resolution of conflicts, as
well as peacebuilding and post-conflict reconstruction,
cannot be effectively addressed without understanding
the linkages between security and development.
Reduced preoccupation with jurisdiction and turf and
greater emphasis on enlightened self-interest might do
the trick. In this regard, I could not agree more with
the remark made by the Chair of the Peacebuilding
Commission this morning:

"By overcoming short-sighted turf wars, we would
not only increase the efficacy of the Organization
but, even more important, provide more effective
support for the societies that it was set up to help."

The implication for the Council is very clear. Its

deliberations and decisions should be informed by a
thorough analysis of the security-development nexus
and its actions through the range of tools at its disposal
to prevent, manage and resolve conflicts should reflect
this important dynamic. That is what I believe will
make the difference in translating our words into action
and effectively address the multifaceted challenges that
we are facing today.

