Mr. Hidayat (Indonesia): Let me begin by
extending to you, Madame, and to your delegation my
sincere gratitude for convening this public discussion.
My delegation is certainly greatly honoured by your
presence among us as we discuss this very important
subject.

I would also like to welcome the report of the
Secretary-General and to take note of the developments
since his last report was issued in March 2001. We note
the efforts of the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) of the Secretariat and
the benefits of the closer cooperation between that
Office and the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations. Of great interest to my delegation in this
respect are the six workshops being coordinated by
OCHA in response to resolution 2002/32 of the
Economic and Social Council, which called upon
Member States to participate actively in workshops on
the protection of civilians in order to share knowledge
and experience and to improve practice.

Before I continue, I would also like to
acknowledge the aide-memoire developed by OCHA
and adopted by the Security Council in March 2002 as
a practical tool for improved analysis and diagnosis of
key civilian protection issues that arise out of conflict.

It is astounding to consider that, in the last decade
alone, more than 2.5 million people have died directly
as a result of conflict and that, of that number, civilians
constitute the greater number of the casualties. No less
tragic is that about 31 million more people have been
displaced and uprooted by conflict also within the same
period. We share the view of the Secretary-General that
this represents human suffering on an immense, indeed
intolerable scale, but a scale that may yet worsen with
the threat of global terrorism.

The report before us contains a number of
suggestions for improving response to such issues as
access to vulnerable populations, separation of
civilians and armed elements, and rule of law, justice
and reconciliation. In view of the national experience
of Indonesia and the time limitation in this debate, I
would like to make a few general remarks on the third
element, which is the rule of law, justice and
reconciliation.

In the post-conflict scenario, we share the view
that the restoration of the rule of law is fundamental to
a country's capacity to emerge into a sustainable peace
on the basis of the assured protection of civilians and
the return of order. In a society emerging from conflict,
there will always be - and indeed ought to be - a
demand for justice and accountability. That is human
and it is understandable. The lesson and, perhaps, the
contribution to political thought is that such demands
are on a surer footing when they take a holistic view of
history and when they recognize that, in the interest of
stability and progress, such demands must make
conscious choices that stress stability and progress.

Having said this, we acknowledge that every
conflict carries its own dynamics and its singular
character. To that end, every post-conflict situation
requires a unique response. My point is that, while
there are differences in situations, the political attitudes
that determine the response and the strategies may
learn from successful conflict settlements, such as
those in Sierra Leone, Angola and Afghanistan, as
referred to in the report.

Finally, the Secretary-General identifies in the
report three global issues that have emerged since the
previous report that will seriously challenge the
capacity of Member States to protect civilians. The
first is an increased focus on gender-based violence in
humanitarian crisis and conflict situations. The second
is the commercial exploitation of conflict, whereby
individuals and companies take advantage of a conflict
to plunder the natural resources and enrich themselves
at the expense of civilian populations. The third
development identified by the Secretary-General is the
rise of terrorism and the involvement of terrorist
organizations in armed conflicts.

These are, no doubt, serious developments. While
we throw our weight behind the practical measures
suggested by the Secretary-General, my delegation
would like to add that States Members of the United
Nations should come up with similar ideas and
approaches at the national, regional and multilateral
levels that will generate a massive wave of response to
these issues. At the national level and with a view to
instituting the necessary legal framework on the
subject of terrorism, my Government last October
completed a draft anti-terrorism bill that had been on
the drafting board since 1999 for presentation to the
House of Representatives. Pending the adoption of the
said bill, two Government regulations in lieu of law
were signed on 18 October to back up Indonesia's
efforts against terrorism.

Finally, it is our belief that these issues, as
identified by the Secretary-General, dovetail into
others that are already being dealt with within the
Organization and its agencies, such as issues relating to
women and children, small arms and counter-terrorism.
We trust that, in working together, adopting the same
principles and standards and regularly keeping other
members of the team abreast of what is happening, our
multilateral system will conquer these problems.

