Sir Emyr Jones Parry (United Kingdom): On
14 October, the Council unanimously adopted a
Chapter VII resolution condemning the provocative,
irresponsible behaviour of the People's Democratic
Republic of Korea and in particular the nuclear test of
9 October. Resolution 1718 (2006), taken with our
earlier resolution 1695 (2006), underlines powerfully
to North Korea why this issue is important and why the
international community cares deeply about it and why
it has condemned those actions. Since then, the North
Korean regime has failed to take the necessary steps to
comply with the legal obligations upon it, set out in
resolution 1718 (2006).

The Six-Party Talks may remain the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea's best opportunity to
resolve the issue diplomatically. But let me stress one
point: the requirements of both of these resolutions are
clear and they are non-negotiable, and North Korea,
like all States concerned - that is to say, all of us, the
Members of the United Nations - have a legal
obligation to comply with the provisions of binding
Security Council resolutions.

Resolution 1718 (2006) calls upon all Member
States to submit reports to the Council on the steps that
they have taken with a view to demonstrating that they
are effectively implementing what is set out in the
resolution. The United Kingdom put forward its report
on 13 November. I understand that 45 other countries
have now done likewise. What is necessary - and, I
think, what the Council should call for - is that the
remaining 146 Member States of the United Nations
also promptly submit their reports.

Finally, like others, I should like to thank
Ambassador Burian for an outstanding job done in
guiding the work of the Committee, setting up the
Committee and making sure that it was operational and
that it functioned in the first three months of its
existence. We are fortunate to have had his leadership
and experience in setting up the Committee, as we are
with regard to the many other things that he does. We
are very grateful to him.

