Mr. Heusgen (Germany): I thank you very much,
Mr. President, for including Germany in today's
meeting. I appreciate that all colleagues have stayed
until the end of the debate. I also thank the Secretary
of State of the United States for having stayed for
more than two hours. In return, I promise to be brief.
Indeed, I can be brief because I basically align myself
with what was said earlier by my colleagues from the
European Union - the representatives of France, the
United Kingdom, Sweden, Poland and the Netherlands.

I would like to start by thanking Under-Secretary-
General Rosemary DiCarlo for presenting the report of
the Secretary-General (S/2018/1089). We believe that
it is a very good report - thorough, well-evidenced
and balanced. We believe also that its current scope and
methodology, with a focus on annex B, is appropriate. I
would like to take this occasion to reject the criticisms
ofthe report that have been voiced. I believe that, having
been tasked with reporting on the implementation of
resolution 2231 (2015), the Secretary-General must do
so robustly and use the sources at his disposal.

I would also like to thank Ambassador Van
Oosterom for his work as Facilitator. I must also say
that I am very happy that my Belgian colleague Marc
Pecsteen de Buytswerve was selected to follow him in
carrying out the Facilitator's difficult task.

With regard to the Joint Comprehensive Plan of
Action (J CPOA), let me repeat what my Dutch colleague
said about the JCPOA being a major diplomatic
accomplishment and what my Swedish colleague said
about it being a successful multilateral agreement.
I totally share those views. I also commend Federica
Mogherini and the Secretary General of the European
External Action Service, Helga Schmidt, for doing a
fantastic job in stitching together the agreement and
trying everything to keep it alive, which we consider
essential.

Resolution 2231 (2015) endorsed the JCPOA, which
strengthens the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons. We believe that the JCPOA is a very
important contribution to the global non-proliferation
architecture. It is an important asset for the security
of the region and for the security of Europe, which is
our key interest. Preserving the JCPOA is therefore
very important to us. Our position remains unchanged.
Along with our European partners, Germany will
remain committed to the JCPOA as long as Iran is in
full compliance with it. So long as it is, along with our
partners France and Britain and the remaining JCPOA
partners, we will commit to taking the necessary steps
to ensure that Iran continues to receive economic
benefits from sanctions relief.

The full and effective implementation of annex B
in all its aspects is equally important for regional and
international stability. We heard the Secretary of State
eloquently underline the breaches of annex B regarding
arms transfers and ballistic-missile activity. Therefore,
the findings ofthe Secretary-General give rise to serious
concern. Iran's programme to develop ballistic missiles
continues to be inconsistent with paragraph 3 of annex
B to resolution 2231 (2015). I would like to give a couple
of examples: the Iranian testing of a medium-range
ballistic missile in December and the Iranian missile
strikes on targets in Syria on 1 October. Furthermore,
we strongly condemn the messages written on the
missiles fired on 1 October, as reported in the Iranian
and international media, which threatened the United
States, Israel and Saudi Arabia severely. Such aggressive
rhetoric is unacceptable, and Germany condemns Iran's
continued questioning of Israel's right of existence. We
call on Iran not to conduct any further ballistic-missile
launches and to refrain from such unacceptable rhetoric
and any transfers to the Houthis, or anybody else, of
ballistic missiles, components or technologies, as well
transfers of any other weapons or related material from
Iran, and to fully respect resolution 2231 (2015).

Lastly, let me come to the most important issue.
Germany agrees with the Secretary-General that the
issues not directly related to the nuclear deal should
be addressed without prejudice to preserving the
agreement. We believe that the American position
is akin to throwing out the baby with the bathwater.
Secretary Pompeo quoted President Obama, who said
that, ideally, Iran would behave in the region when it
comes to missile technology. As Germans, we know all
about idealism, which comes from German philosophy
and Immanuel Kant's categorical imperative. If that
were observed by everybody, we would not need the
Security Council. Nonetheless, we have to live with
a non-ideal situation, which calls for the JCPOA to
continue to be observed because it is in our security
interests.

The meeting rose at 12.40p.m.
