Mr. Kiing (International Committee of the Red Cross): We truly appreciate being able to take part in this
important debate, and we wish to thank you, Mr. President,
and the other members of the Security Council for offering
us this opportunity today.

As the members of the Council are aware, the role of
the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) is to
protect and assist, without discrimination, the victims of
armed conflict and internal disturbances. These victims are
primarily members of the civilian population, which
includes persons displaced within their own countries and
refugees. The internally displaced are certainly among the
"others" mentioned in the title of today's debate. Their
plight and the suffering they endure do not receive, in our
view, sufficient attention, despite the international efforts
deployed on their behalf, as the spotlight is generally
focused more on the genuine refugees.

The ICRC has a particular responsibility with regard
to international humanitarian law, which, as the Council
may recall, prohibits the forced displacement of civilians.
Many of its rules are all too often ignored and violated on
a large scale, and such violations often cause entire
populations to flee. As a result, large groups of people find
themselves without any means of survival. They are in need
not only of assistance, but also of protection.

Today the fundamental right to humanitarian assistance
is all too often denied. There are many reasons for this.
Access is refused by the parties involved, who tend to
invoke spurious arguments relating to security, and relief
workers are themselves becoming the target of deliberate
attacks. Humanitarian action is also made more difficult by
the presence of armed elements among the civilian
population, in particular in refugee camps.

The lives and safety of vast numbers of people are at
stake, and humanitarian organizations are looking for
remedies in order to be able to exercise their respective
mandates. Within the United Nations system they have
often worked with armed escorts. The ICRC has chosen
another approach and has often had the opportunity to
make public statements about its policy. It is of the
opinion that humanitarian organizations need to preserve
the strictly non-political and impartial character of their
work. We feel that armed escorts could jeopardize their
impartial status because the direct involvement of military
forces in humanitarian action can easily be associated, in
the minds of local authorities and of the population, with
political or military objectives which go well beyond
humanitarian concerns. The importance of this perception,
in our view, cannot be overestimated.

We strongly believe not only that humanitarian aid
and political action must be dissociated from each other,
but also that they must be perceived as truly separate.
Armed intervention should be aimed at securing the
environment for humanitarian action. Furthermore, the
provision of humanitarian assistance should not be linked
to progress in political negotiations - as has repeatedly
been the case in the past - or to political objectives. It
should take place in parallel with a political process
aimed at addressing the underlying causes of the conflict
and achieving a political settlement. Humanitarian
assistance should not become a tool designed to mask the
absence of resolve to take appropriate political action or
to compensate for the inadequacy of such political action.
In our view, there is no substitute for the political will to
find a political solution.

There is a shared responsibility in this regard.
Whereas the role of humanitarian organizations is to
deliver assistance according to the needs of the victims
and to promote their protection, the community of States
must help ensure a secure environment for the work of
those organizations. In other words, it should create the
necessary humanitarian space.

First of all, all those bearing weapons in refugee
camps must be disarmed and interned. We know how
difficult it can be to separate genuine refugees from
combatants, but making this distinction is essential for
efficient assistance and protection. Only prompt action
can safeguard the civilian and humanitarian nature of
refugee camps and create the proper conditions for truly
humanitarian assistance and protection. States are
therefore called upon to assist in this difficult but crucial
endeavour, as in these circumstances political action is
what is needed - that is, an operation of a police or
military nature.

 

Considering the urgency of such situations, the
possibility for immediate humanitarian action must be
safeguarded. However, given the complex character of these
problems, close consultation is essential between
humanitarian agencies and the international community,
including the Security Council. Humanitarian organizations
must confer closely with peacekeeping forces at every stage
and at every level in a spirit of complementarity.
Fortunately, this dialogue has become a well-established
practice. Experience has shown that consultations should
begin at the preparatory stage of any peacekeeping mission
which may affect humanitarian activities. This helps
enhance the mutual respect and understanding of their
respective missions and constraints. We hope that our
participation in today's debate will make a useful
contribution in this regard.

In conclusion, allow me to add that coordination
among humanitarian players is more important than ever.
The ICRC actively cooperates with the United Nations
Emergency Relief Coordinator and it is at present engaged
in an ongoing operational dialogue with the major United
Nations humanitarian agencies, particularly the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR), the United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF)
and the World Food Programme. In this process, however,
the ICRC's concern is always to keep its activities in line
with its principles of independence, neutrality and
impartiality.

