Mr. Gahutu (Burundi) (spoke in French): It is a
pleasure and great honour for me to take the floor
before the Council for a discussion on the report of the
Secretary-General on peacebuilding after a conflict
(S/2009/304). I wish the President of the Council every
success. I also welcome and congratulate the Secretary-
3
General and thank him for the relevant, wise and
diverse advice given in his report.

Given that my country is emerging from a
conflict that lasted more than decade, our Government
fully supports the guiding principles set out in the
report. Although all these principles are closely linked
and interdependent, my delegation stresses the
importance of some in particular, beginning with the
principle of national ownership.

Peacebuilding efforts belong essentially to the
countries concerned. The United Nations and the
international community should play a catalytic
support role in that respect, and contribute to
strengthening national capacity as soon as a ceasefire
agreement has been signed.

With respect to leadership, we endorse the
Secretary-General's proposal to create a high-level
mechanism to ensure good United Nations leadership
on the ground and to support country teams.

With respect to coherence, restoring, keeping and
building peace and post-conflict reconstruction should
go hand in hand. That will require the participation of
all entities of the United Nations system.

Following a conflict, challenges are always
immense and varied. Each situation has its own
specific features, and the means for establishing peace
are very different in each instance and each area. This
debate is taking place at a time when the peacebuilding
process in Burundi has seen significant progress in
most areas, which is likely to stabilize the country once
and for all. We note, for instance, the establishment of
the Independent National Electoral Commission; the
comprehensive implementation of the political
agreements between the Government and the former
rebel movement Parti pour la liberation du peuple
Hutu-forces nationales de liberation, which is now a
political party; the commitment of the Government of
Burundi to a policy to demobilize and reintegrate
repatriated persons; and other examples.

In the area of good governance, the culture of
dialogue between national partners is being promoted
through sessions and workshops throughout the
country.

In the area of security, the professionalization of
the defence and security forces and the disarmament of
civilians continue.
The regional dimension of security has not been
neglected. The ministers of defence of the countries of
the Economic Community of the Great Lakes
Countries recently reaffirmed their determination to
fight the negative forces at work in the subregion and
to guarantee the security of our common borders.

With respect to the rule of law and the fight
against impunity, my delegation is pleased to announce
that consultations with a view to implementing
transitional justice began on 14 July. The settlement of
land disputes continues, and the Government has
adopted a national land policy and a new land code
adapted to the current situation.

In the light of the challenges ahead, the
peacebuilding process in Burundi requires additional
inputs with respect to our priority peacebuilding plan.
Many imponderables, including the world financial,
energy and food crises, have called all our initial
financial forecasts into question. The Government of
the Republic of Burundi is still awaiting the
implementation of the "Marshall plan" for Burundi
proposed by the Peacebuilding Commission last year,
requests once again the disbursement of funds pledged
by its partners at the roundtable of May 2007, and
thanks those that have already honoured their
commitments.

The Strategic Framework for Peacebuilding in
Burundi is under way, uniting the Government, the
Peacebuilding Commission and national and
international partners around a set of common
peacebuilding objectives. In general, current trends,
achievements and commitments reveal that sound
progress has been made in all areas related to
peacebuilding. Burundi once again thanks the
Secretary-General for his report and his ongoing
support for the peacebuilding process in my country.

