Mr. Barbalie (Bosnia and Herzegovina): I would
like to express our gratitude to you and your
delegation, Mr. President, for initiating this important
discussion. I also thank Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Abou Moussa for his informative
briefing. I also express our thanks for the briefings by
Mr. Tete Antonio, Permanent Observer of the African
Union to the United Nations, and Mr. Louis Sylvain-
Goma, Secretary-General of the Economic Community
of Central African States. We also welcome the
presence of the representatives of South Sudan and the
Central African Republic at this meeting.

Bosnia and Herzegovina fully supports the
activities of the United Nations Regional Office for
Central Africa (UNOCA). We welcome UNOCA's
initial steps in facilitating regional initiatives and
coordinating the conflict prevention and peacebuilding
activities of United Nations entities in the Central
African region. UNOCA has an important role to play
in assisting the countries of the region to address some
of the major challenges to peace and security in that
part of Africa and in supporting their efforts to
consolidate peace and prevent conflict, as well as to
deal with cross-border challenges such as the flow of
illicit arms, drug trafficking and organized crime.

We praise the determination of UNOCA to work
closely with the United Nations Office for West Africa
(UNOWA) in tackling serious security challenges in
the two subregions. Joint UNOCA and UNOWA efforts
will be indispensable in addressing the negative
consequences of the Libyan conflict on West and
Central Africa.

We are encouraged by the readiness of countries
of the region and regional intergovernmental
organizations to work with UNOCA in resolving
common threats to peace and security, as well as
outstanding issues among countries of the region. It is
essential that the broader international community
continues to support UNOCA to fulfil its mandate and
bring peace, security and stability to the Central
African region.

UNOCA will play a pivotal role in promoting
cooperation among countries of the region on cross-
cutting issues, among others, in addressing the issue of
the Lord's Resistance Army (LRA). In that regard, it is
Vital that UNOCA, as the United Nations regional focal
point for the LRA, coordinates United Nations
activities with the affected countries at the political
level.

We are deeply concerned about the continuing
criminal activities of the LRA and its devastating
effects on civilian populations in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, the Republic of South Sudan
and the Central African Republic. We fully support
initiatives and activities undertaken by the United
Nations and the African Union to protect civilians and
facilitate regional action against the Lord's Resistance
Army. We welcome the steps taken by the African
Union and affected countries to strengthen cooperation
and develop a regional strategy on the LRA.

The establishment of a regional intervention force
on the LRA and of centres for sharing information, as
well as the appointment of the African Union special
envoy on LRA-affected areas, will be important
instruments in the process of eliminating that
organization and the threats it poses. The
implementation of those proposed measures is a matter
of urgency. It is vital that the United Nations continues
to support the African Union in that regard.

It is important to underline that effective national
security forces are an essential element for addressing
existing security challenges, including the LRA. The
Governments of the affected countries must continue to

build their defence and security force capacities in
order to provide security and protection for their
civilian populations. We welcome international efforts
to enhance the military capacities of the countries
affected by the LRA. In that context, we commend the
United States Government's decision to deploy 100
military personnel to the Central African region in
order to assist regional forces.

Finally, due consideration must be given to
effective disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration (DDR) programmes for those associated
with the LRA. We believe that efforts aimed at
strengthening the capacities and reach of State
authorities, alongside proactive DDR programmes
combined with other non-military means, can
contribute significantly to effectively combating the
LRA.

