Mr. Nitzan (Israel): Throughout the course of
today, a number of Member States have used their time
before the Security Council to criticize Israel. In truth,
they deserve the criticism. They sit in this Chamber
and pour out their rage and grief, when in fact many
of those same nations are responsible for much of the
conflict inflaming the Middle East.

I am glad to see that the representative of Lebanon
has shown such an interest in Palestinian rights.
However, before speaking about Israel in this Chamber,
might I suggest that she take a look at the refugee camps
throughout Lebanon, where Palestinians are kept in
some of the worst conditions in the region? They are
constantly subject to Violence, extreme discrimination
and economic and social oppression.

Earlier today, we heard from the odd couple of the
United Nations - Iran and Saudi Arabia. Back home
they are fighting a proxy war in Syria, responsible for
the killing of 150,000 Syrians, but here at the United
Nations they could not be closer. They have one thing in
common - both are cradles of terrorism and radicalism
in the Middle East, one created Hizbullah and the other
created Al-Qaida.

Iran and Qatar have also teamed up to arm and
finance Hamas. Every rocket flying out into Israel
could bear the imprint "Courtesy of Tehran", while
every terror tunnel could have a sign that reads "Made
possible through a kind donation from the Amir of
Qatar".

If it were not enough that they enabled the building
of an underground terror network, those nations sit
here in the Council and deliver remarks that have no
grounding in reality. In his remarks, the representative
of Iran actually used the term "compliance" and called
for the implementation of United Nations resolutions.
Given that it is the world's primary sponsor of terrorism,
that it now has six nuclear weapons in clear violation of
Security Council resolutions, and that it is smuggling
arms into Gaza in clear violation of Security Council
resolutions, I was not aware that Iran was actually
familiar with the term "compliance".

Finally, in that list of Member States, Egypt
also had a lot to say about human rights. Given that
it sentenced 683 Egyptians to death in a single day,
instead of calling for divestments Egypt's time would
be better spent making investments in its own people.
Come to think of it, the same goes for all repressive
Arab nations and the countries of the Non-Aligned
Movement here in this Chamber - Cuba, the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela - great democracies - the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea - that brutally
and mercilessly suppress the rights of their people. It is
time to end the hypocrisy.

Once again, this war in Gaza is not one we chose. It
was our last resort. It was imposed on us by Hamas, by
its brutal attacks on our civilians. Israel did not want this
war, and three times - three different times - Israel
agreed to accept a ceasefire, and every single time
Hamas refused and launched even more rockets. Each
of those rockets sends a clear, loud message - Hamas
is determined to wage war.

As we have said before, Israel has no interest in
being in Gaza. We are fighting in Gaza, but we are not
fighting the people of Gaza. The equation, once again,
is very simple. When it is quiet in Israel, it will be quiet
in Gaza. The goal of our operation is to eliminate the
rockets, shut down the terror tunnels and demilitarize
Gaza in order to restore sustained quiet for the people
of Israel and the people of Gaza.

