Mr. Cunningham (United States): I would like to
thank Swiss Ambassador Staehelin, German
Ambassador Kastrup and Swedish State Secretary
Dahlgren for their informative and very valuable
briefings the other day and for the important work on
sanctions in which their respective Governments have
been engaged. This work is very useful to the Council
and to the international community more broadly, and
we commend them for making the effort.

The United States wants to make sanctions a
more effective policy tool. We have all accomplished a
lot already in that regard in the last year or so, and as
Ambassador Dahlgren noted the other day, present
circumstances demand that we refine and further
improve our use of multilateral sanctions to address
threats to international peace and security.

We all agree that sanctions must remain a viable
policy option, and while we can make improvements,
in point of fact, past sanctions regimes have been and
continue to be effective, as noted in a number of
studies that we have discussed in the Council and in
various working groups over the past couple of months.
They have been a vital policy instrument to modify the
behaviour of a State or entity that poses a threat to
international peace or that has committed an act of
aggression. Sanctions provide us with an approach
greater than persuasion, but less than the use of force,
to employ the collective will of the international
community.

Of course, some countries will try to avoid
compliance. There will always be violation of
sanctions. That is to be expected, but that does not
mean that the regime itself is ineffective. We have
ample instances of where sanctions regimes have
influenced behaviour. But, of course, we want to and
we will continue to make improvements.

American representatives actively participated in
the Interlaken, Bonn and Berlin discussions, and we
look forward to engaging in the Stockholm process
when the Swedish Government hosts the next round of
meetings to discuss sanctions verification and
implementation. These discussions help support our
work in the Council to reinforce sanctions as an
effective policy tool, including through the increased
use of better targeted sanctions, and to do our best to
ensure that sanctions are both effective and humane.
We want to do the best job possible to see that
sanctions imposed by the Security Council pose the
minimum risk to civilian populations.

In that regard, I cannot help but observe that there
is some irony underlying the Council's efforts to
develop and impose effective sanctions. Despite our
best attempts, what can we do when a dictatorial
regime itself holds its own people hostage? What are
we to think when a State or Government denies its own
people food, medicine and shelter, items the
international community is willing to provide to those
most challenged?

We see that situation, unfortunately, now in Iraq,
Afghanistan and elsewhere. On Iraq, we endorsed a
new approach to sanctions this past spring but have
been blocked in our persistent attempts to improve the
oil-for-food programme and the Iraq sanctions regime.
This should be done, and we will continue to seek
agreement on this most pressing issue.

While the United States recognizes the
importance of minimizing the humanitarian impact of
sanctions, members of the international community
must also reflect on the humanitarian impact of not
imposing sanctions. Such a decision also has
consequences. This is a heavy responsibility for
Security Council members and one that we all should
take most seriously.

Much has already been done at this point to
improve sanctions as a policy tool, both inside and
outside the Council. We will continue to support efforts
to improve the effectiveness of sanctions while
minimizing their unintended consequences. We also
will join with other interested parties in exploring how
to make sanctions monitoring and implementation as
effective and consistent as possible.

