Mr. Garcia Moritan (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, I wish to thank Peru for having
invited us to participate in this debate and extend
our congratulations to the Peruvian presidency on
its excellent job in steering the work of the Security
Council this month.

The Palestinian-Israeli peace process is undergoing
its most difficult period since the Oslo Accords in
1993. Not only have there been serious difficulties in
resuming a peace process that would allow for progress
to be made towards the two-State solution based on the
1967 borders and in resolving all final-status issues
identified in those agreements, but at the same time
there has been an escalation of violence and a rapid
deterioration of the humanitarian situation.

Argentina wishes to express its support for the work
of the Special Coordinator of the Middle East Peace
Process, Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, and acknowledge the
important contribution of the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
in preventing a further deterioration of the humanitarian
situation in the occupied Palestinian territories. In that
context, the truce on the Gaza border is a positive first
step towards de-escalating tensions. The recurring
episodes of violence renew the urgent need to carry out
a genuine peace process leading to a just and lasting
solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, based on the
1967 borders and agreements reached by the parties
during the negotiation process, in accordance with the
relevant resolutions of the General Assembly and the
Security Council, the Quartet road map and the Arab
Peace Initiative.

Argentina reaffirms its support for the inalienable
right of the Palestinian people to self-determination
and to establish an independent and viable State that
is recognized by all nations, as well as the right of
the State of Israel to live in peace with its neighbours
within secure and internationally recognized borders.
Argentina reiterates its concern about the growth of
illegal Israeli settlements in the occupied Palestinian
territories and urges Israel to cease its expansionist
activities, in line with the Council's resolution 2334
(2016).

Argentina also condemns the indiscriminate
launching of missiles from Gaza against civilians in
Israel, as well as the violent actions of Hamas. It is
necessary for Palestinian leaders to address Israeli
security concerns in earnest. In that context, we
recognize Israel's right to exercise legitimate self-
defence, emphasizing the importance for Israeli actions
to be compatible with international humanitarian law
and taking into account, in particular, the principles of
distinction and proportionality.

Argentina reaffirms the special status of Jerusalem,
in accordance with the relevant resolutions of the
United Nations, including resolution 478 (1980), and
rejects any unilateral attempt to modify that special
status. Argentina therefore considers Jerusalem to be
one of the issues whose final status must be defined by
the parties through bilateral negotiations.

Turning to the situation in the Syrian Golan,
Argentina maintains a principled position with regard
to the illegality of the acquisition of territory by force
and respect for the territorial integrity of States. We
firmly believe in the principle of the peaceful settlement
of disputes, which is why we feel that it is important
to seek a negotiated solution to the Syrian-Israeli
conflict with a view to ending the occupation of the
Golan Heights as soon as possible, in accordance with
resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973) and the principle
of land for peace.

In respect of the situation in the Syrian Arab
Republic, Argentina supports a political solution
achieved through dialogue and diplomacy, in line
with international law and respecting the sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity of Syria.
Argentina attaches special importance to the Geneva
talks held under the auspices of the United Nations.
We appreciate the work of the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for Syria, Mr. Geir Pedersen, and
strongly support his efforts to achieve a peaceful
solution to the conflict in line with the provisions of
resolution 2254 (2015). In the same vein, we recognize
the contribution of the Astana agreements and other
ceasefire agreements to de-escalating violence and
alleviating the humanitarian situation on the ground
with a View to creating the conditions conducive to
moving towards a definitive, inclusive and long-term
settlement of the crisis. We call on the guarantors of
those agreements to redouble their efforts in order to
ensure their full and uninterrupted implementation.

With regard to the situation in Yemen, Argentina
reiterates its support for the constructive involvement
of the Organization through the United Nations
Mission to Support the Hodeidah Agreement, with
the goal of supporting its implementation in the city
of Al-Hudaydah and in the ports of Al-Hudaydah,
Saleef and Ras Issa, as established in the Stockholm
Agreement. We believe that the full and comprehensive
implementation of the commitments assumed by the
relevant parties is essential in order to make progress
towards a peaceful and definitive settlement of the
internal conflict in Yemen, which will make it possible
to reverse the very grave humanitarian crisis facing the
civilian population.

Finally, the Government of Argentina reiterates
its concern over and condemnation of the attacks in
the territory of Saudi Arabia and against oil tankers
operating under various flags near the Emirati port of
Fujairah and in the Gulf of Oman, which took place in
May and June. Argentina believes that such actions put
civilians at serious risk and negatively affect maritime
safety and the freedom of navigation and international
trade. We call on the international community to join
forces and work together to prevent any situation that
may threaten the stability of the region.

