Mr. Weisleder (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to convey Costa Rica's condolences to the
people of China and Myanmar for the catastrophes that
they are living through.

I would like to thank the United Kingdom
presidency for its initiative in organizing this session in
order to examine challenges related to peacebuilding in
the post-conflict period. In turn, I would like to thank
the Secretary-General for his statement made earlier
today.

We have frequently said that we cannot have
security without development, nor development
without security. These are two inseparable elements in
attaining peace and in peacebuilding. Experience has
shown that achieving a sustainable peace - the end
aim and the benchmark for the success of any
peacekeeping operation - largely depends on the
appropriate joining of these components.

For the people affected by armed conflict, the
hope for a better future derives from the peace
agreements that has been reached. It only becomes a
reality, however, once basic economic and social needs
have been met. Addressing these needs strengthens
leaders who have turned away from violence and
makes peace agreements sustainable.

Costa Rica believes that all United Nations
actions in the area of peacekeeping should be
undertaken in parallel in order to build peacebuilding.
This idea is part of the recipe for success, and is,
moreover, the best possible exit strategy. To that end,
we agree with the proposal issued earlier by Prime
Minister Gordon Brown that, when peacekeeping
missions are authorized, the entire United Nations
system should be able to authorize measures for
stabilization and rebuilding.

For that reason, peacekeeping operations should
be conceived from the very outset as integrated
missions in which all of the United Nations
institutional efforts dovetail effectively.

We should build on and develop to the maximum
the potential of the young but ambitious architecture
for peacebuilding with which we have equipped the
United Nations. As a result, it would be wise, when
creating or renewing peacekeeping missions, for the
Council to request the Peacebuilding Commission to
issue specific recommendations in order to insert an
appropriate peacebuilding component in each and
every one of these missions.

Moreover, we are aware that none of the possible
recommendations issued by this Commission can lead
to effective results, unless the necessary resources are
made available to do so. As a result, this issue must be
addressed expeditiously by the General Assembly. The
General Assembly must take the necessary measures to
ensure that the Peacebuilding Fund is available from
the outset. We do not believe that there is any need to
establish a new fund. To the contrary, we believe it
would be best to make use of the tools available to us
in the current structure, making the necessary
adjustments.

A further tool that should be used to the full to
make peace sustainable is the Peacebuilding Support
Office. Costa Rica believes that the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations and the Department of
Political Affairs need a mechanism for efficient
interaction and coordination with the Peacebuilding
Support Office in order to maximize synergies, share
lessons learned and prevent gaps and overlap. An
integrated, coherent and systemic approach to
peacekeeping and peacebuilding will be developed
only if we strike the right balance between authority
and responsibility. Therefore, we must pay particular
attention to the selection of the Special Representatives
of the Secretary-General. These high-ranking officials
are the repository of the authority of the United
Nations, coordinating all the institutional efforts on the
ground. Both the Secretary-General and the Security
Council must provide proper follow-up for every
mission, not only to remain informed, but also to take
remedial action. There is nothing more volatile or
difficult to manage than a post-conflict situation.
Therefore, leaders must be able to draw on the
necessary support and monitoring.

The civilian component of peacekeeping and
peacebuilding operations, which Costa Rica believes
are two sides of the same coin in most cases, should be
enhanced. We therefore deem it necessary to prioritize
the creation and strengthening of rapidly deployable
civilian units within the member States. In this regard,
we welcome the initiatives, such as that announced by
Great Britain in April, on the establishment of a
civilian standby force that would be able to respond
rapidly to the call of the United Nations in order to
contribute towards the stabilization and rebuilding of a
country emerging from conflict. Costa Rica hopes that
the report that we shall be requesting from the
Secretary-General in the draft presidential statement
we hope to adopt at the end of this debate will include
an inventory of national capacities within Member
States and will identify institutional possibilities to
support the creation and strengthening of such
capacities.

Finally, we would once again like to thank Great
Britain for its leadership in this area, which has
enabled us to reflect on the need to promote a systemic
approach to ensure the best possible fulfilment of the
mandates of each of the principle organs of the
Organization. My country is of the view that the
Council should expeditiously review the manner in
which it considers the contributions made during these
debates that are open to the broader membership. Costa
Rica feels that the draft statement - and, in general,
all statements issued by the Council as a result of open
debates - would be enriched if we designed
mechanisms enabling us to effectively take up the
concerns expressed by Member States, on whose behalf
we are acting.

