Ms. Bensouda: I welcome the opportunity to
engage with the Security Council once again as Ipresent
my eighteenth report on the situation in Libya, pursuant
to resolution 1970 (2011). Before I begin, I would like
to congratulate the United Kingdom on assuming the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
November. I wish the presidency and the wider Council
success in the important work before them.

At the outset, I must observe with serious concern
that there was an escalation of violence in Libya during
the reporting period. Reports indicate that there have
been a high number of civilian deaths, thousands of
persons internally displaced and a sharp increase in
abductions, disappearances and arbitrary arrests across
the country. As recently highlighted by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General in Libya,
Mr. Ghassan Salame, without the unequivocal support
of the Council and the broader international community
for an immediate end to the Libyan conflict, Libya will
be at risk ofbeing embroiled in persistent and protracted
conflict and continued fratricide (see S/PV.86ll).

The implosion of Libya must carry a heavy burden
on the conscience of the international community
and galvanize meaningful action to assist the Libyan
authorities in bringing stability to the country and an
end to the cycle of violence, atrocities and impunity.
Impunity serves as both an obstacle and a threat to
stability and must be checked through the force of
law. My Office continues to strive to do its part to
ensure justice for victims and hold accountable those
alleged to be responsible for committing Rome Statute
crimes in Libya. I am pleased to inform the Council
that my Office has made further progress in its existing
investigations and is continuing to work on applications
for new warrants of arrest.

Regarding recent developments in the case
against the suspect Mr. Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi, the
Council will recall that Mr. Al-Qadhafi's challenge to
the admissibility of his case was rejected earlier this
year. Mr. Al-Qadhafi had filed an appeal against this
decision. The Appeals Chamber recently ordered that a
hearing be scheduled before it on 11 and 12 November to
hear submissions and observations in Mr. Al-Qadhafi's
appeal. The Appeals Chamber has invited the State of
Libya to submit observations on issues arising from
the appeal by tomorrow, 7 November. The Appeals
Chamber had previously also invited the Council to
submit observations on the appeal by 24 October. The
Council did not elect to do so. Nonetheless, both the
State of Libya and the Council are invited to attend
the scheduled hearing next week in The Hague. Let
me stress that irrespective of the current admissibility
proceedings, Libya remains under an obligation to
arrest and surrender Mr. Al-Qadhafi to the International
Criminal Court (ICC).

The failure to execute warrants of arrest is not
limited to Mr. Al-Qadhafi's case. The ICC arrest warrant
against Mr. Al-Tuhamy Mohamed Khaled has remained
outstanding for more than six years. Furthermore, the
two arrest warrants against Mr. Mahmoud Mustafa
Busayf Al-Werfalli have remained unexecuted for
more than two years since the first warrant was issued.
The three cited ICC fugitives stand accused of grave
international crimes. These crimes include the war
crimes of murder, torture, cruel treatment and outrages
upon personal dignity, and the crimes against humanity
of persecution, imprisonment, torture and other
inhumane acts. My Office has reliable information
on the current whereabouts of all three suspects. Yet,
Mr. Al-Qadhafi, Mr. Al-Tuhamy and Mr. Al-Werfalli
remain at large, and justice remains elusive for the
victims of their alleged crimes.

First, Mr. Al-Qadhafi is believed to be in Zintan,
Libya. Secondly, when the warrant for Mr. Al-Tuhamy's
arrest was issued, he was believed to be residing in

Cairo, Egypt. This was reflected in the arrest warrant
itself, which was unsealed on 24 April 2017. The
information currently available to my Office indicates
that Mr. Al-Tuhamy still resides in Cairo. Thirdly,
Mr. Al-Werfalli - a suspect we allege to be individually
criminally responsible for war crimes under the
Rome Statute - continues to enjoy his liberty in the
Benghazi area.

Furthermore, credible reports investigated by my
Office indicate that the General Command of the Libyan
National Army recently - on 8 July - promoted
Mr. Al-Werfalli from the rank of Major to Lieutenant
Colonel. This promotion sends a clear message that
General Khalifa Haftar, Commander of the Libyan
National Army, has no intention to genuinely prosecute
Mr. Al-Werfalli for the crimes alleged against him
in the ICC arrest warrants. On the contrary, it seems
that Mr. Al-Werfalli continues to be rewarded for his
behaviour. In this respect, I note that this is the second
time that the General Command of the Libyan National
Army has promoted Mr. Al-Werfalli. The first promotion
took place on 25 May 2017, after Videos depicting the
first four unlawful executions allegedly perpetrated by
Mr. Al-Werfalli had already been posted online.

During the reporting period, my Office also
continued to investigate allegations against other
perpetrators with a view to potential applications for
additional warrants of arrest. The effective power to
arrest and surrender ICC suspects rests solely with
States. However, my Office is working to increase
opportunities for outstanding arrest warrants to be
executed. To this end, in line with its strategic goals,
my Office is developing, in coordination with States,
enhanced strategies and methodologies to track and
arrest suspects. In accordance with resolution 1970
(2011), I urge all States, including Libya and Egypt,
to facilitate the immediate arrest and surrender of the
Libyan fugitives to the Court.

The situation in Libya continues to be grave. I am
deeply alarmed by reports indicating that, since early
April, more than 100 civilians have been killed, 300
have been injured and 120,000 have been displaced as
a result of the armed conflict. As detailed in my report,
several events of particular concern have occurred
over the past six months. I strongly condemn the car
bomb attack in Benghazi on 10 August that killed five
people, including three United Nations staff members,
and injured multiple other civilians. I also note reports
of the indiscriminate shelling of the Mitiga airport in

Tripoli and the multiple attacks perpetrated against
health workers and medical facilities. On 2 July, air
strikes on a migrant detention centre in Tajoura, east
of Tripoli, reportedly killed 53 people and injured
130. In addition, there have been reports of an alleged
summary execution of Libyan National Army-affiliated
fighters and some civilians at Gharyan Hospital.

My Office is also following events in southern
Libya, where violent clashes and air strikes in Murzuq
have reportedly claimed many lives. I reiterate my
previous calls to all parties to the armed conflict to
heed the rules of international humanitarian law. My
team continues to examine allegations against all
parties to the conflict in order to assess whether they
bear criminal responsibility under the Rome Statute. I
condemn all unlawful violence in Libya resulting in the
loss of life and injury. My Office remains seized of the
situation in Libya, and if the actions of any party amount
to war crimes or crimes against humanity and all the
required elements of the Rome Statute are satisfied,
they may be liable to prosecution. Let me be clear. I will
not hesitate to bring new applications for warrants of
arrest against those most responsible for alleged crimes
that fall under the jurisdiction of the ICC.

With regard to alleged crimes committed against
migrants in Libya, the Council will recall that my Office
has adopted a two-pronged approach aimed at closing
the impunity gap. My team continues to collect and
analyse documentary, digital and testimonial evidence
relating to alleged crimes committed in detention
centres. We are assessing the viability ofbringing cases
before the ICC in relation to migrant-related crimes
in Libya, based on that evidence-driven process. It is
worth recalling that the ICC is a court of last resort,
in accordance with the principle of complementarity. It
acts only when States do not genuinely investigate and
prosecute serious international crimes or are unable
to do so. Consistent with that principle, my Office is
concentrating its efforts on positive complementarity.
Pursuant to goal 6 ofmy Office's strategic plan, my team
is actively assisting States that are investigating and
prosecuting individuals who have allegedly committed
crimes against migrants in Libya. My Office's
collaborative efforts with national law-enforcement
authorities have helped to identify which of the judicial
actors are best placed to investigate and prosecute
migrant-related crimes in Libya, and I am pleased to
inform the Council that this strategy of cooperation has
borne fruit. My Office has provided key evidence and

information to national authorities that has facilitated
progress in a number of investigations and prosecutions
related to crimes against migrants in Libya.

I would be remiss ifI did not recognize the ongoing
cooperation of the Office of Libya's Prosecutor-
General. I commend the Libyan authorities for their
continued commitment to implementing the November
2013 memorandum of understanding concluded
between the Government of Libya and my Office. I also
greatly appreciate the support offered by many States,
including Italy, the Netherlands, Tunisia, the United
Kingdom, Lithuania, Ireland, Spain and France. I note
the extension of the mandate of the United Nations
Support Mission in Libya and look forward to our
continued valuable collaboration.

The perpetrators of serious international crimes
are emboldened when they believe they will never face
justice. The cycle of impunity has provided a breeding
ground for the committing of atrocities in Libya.
Breaking that cycle requires a concerted international
effort in order to ensure accountability for atrocity
crimes. Through the arrest and surrender of ICC
fugitives, the international community can begin to
bring justice to the Victims in Libya and help prevent
future crimes and victimization. I reiterate my call to
General Haftar and those working with him to facilitate
the arrest and surrender to the ICC of Mr. Al-Werfalli
without further delay, so that he can answer for his
crimes in a court of law and in order for the truth to
be established.

I call on all States to do everything in their power
to ensure the surrender to the Court of all three Libyan
fugitives. I also call on all parties to immediately cease
all indiscriminate attacks and to comply with their
duties under international humanitarian law. Libya
will continue to be a priority situation for my Office
in 2020. I remain committed to fulfilling my mandate
with the aim of holding to account those responsible
for the most serious crimes of international concern.
The Council, as well as State and non-State parties,
is once again urged to provide full support to the ICC
with a view to achieving its mandate in Libya and in
order to break the cycle of impunity. It will soon be a
decade since the Council referred the situation in Libya
to my Office. The people of Libya deserve peace and
stability. Bringing to justice those responsible for war
crimes and crimes against humanity facilitates that
coveted outcome.

