The President (interpretation from Spanish): I should
like to inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Angola in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the discussion of the item on the
Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, I
propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite that
representative to participate in the discussion, without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of
the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Van Dunem
"Mbinda" (Angola) took a seat at the Council table.

The President (interpretation from Spanish): The
Security Council will now begin its consideration of the
item on its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance
with the understanding reached in its prior consultations.
Members of the Council have before themthe report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Observer Mission
in Angola, document S/ 1999/49.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

(spoke in English)

"The Security Council expresses its alarm at the
serious deterioration in the political and military
situation in Angola. It reaffirms its belief that lasting
peace and national reconciliation cannot be achieved
through military means, and urges the Government of
Angola and especially the Uniao Nacional para a
Independencia Total de Angola (UNITA) to resume a
constructive dialogue on the basis of the "Acordos de
Paz" (5/22609, annex), the Lusaka Protocol
(8/1994/1441, annex) and relevant Security Council

resolutions in order to seek a peaceful resolution of
the conflict and spare the Angolan people further
war and suffering. In this context, it reaffirms that
the primary cause of the crisis in Angola is the
refusal by UNITA to comply with the basic
provisions of the Lusaka Protocol and reiterates its
demand that UNITA comply with its obligations to
demilitarize and to permit the extension of State
administration to territories it controls.

"The Security Council shares the assessment
and judgments of the Secretary-General on the
political and military situation in Angola contained
in his report of 17 January 1999 (S/1999/49). It
underscores the contribution of the United Nations
to the past four years of relative peace in Angola. It
expresses its deep regret that the present political
and security situation in the country and the lack of
cooperation, especially by UNITA, with the United
Nations Observer Mission in Angola (MONUA)
have prevented MONUA from fully carrying out its
mandated role.

"The Security Council underlines the great
importance it attaches to a continued
multidisciplinary presence of the United Nations
under the direction of a Representative of the
Secretary-General in Angola. It recognizes that such
a continued presence depends on the safety of
United Nations personnel and requires the agreement
of the Government of Angola and the cooperation of
all concerned. In this context, it appeals to the
Government of Angola to provide such agreement
and to UNITA to cooperate fully. It welcomes the
intention of the Secretary-General to consult urgently
with the Government of Angola on such a United
Nations presence and to report to the Council in this
regard.

"The Security Council again calls upon
Member States to support the peace process in
Angola through full and immediate implementation
of the measures against UNITA contained in
resolutions 864 (1993) of 15 September 1993, 1127
(1997) of 28 August 1997 and 1173 (1998) of 12
June 1998, and reiterates its readiness to take steps
to reinforce the implementation of these measures on
the basis of the recommendations contained in
section IV of the report of the Secretary-General of
17 January 1999.
 

"The Security Council expresses its profound
concern at the humanitarian impact of the conflict on
the Angolan people. It urges the international
community to support the Government of Angola in
fulfilling its primary responsibility for the
humanitarian needs of the Angolan people and, in this
regard, urges Member States to fund generously the
1999 Consolidated Humanitarian Appeal for Angola.
It calls upon all concerned to concur and cooperate
with United Nations humanitarian assistance activities
on the basis of the principles of neutrality and
non-discrimination, to guarantee the security and
freedom of movement of humanitarian personnel, and
to ensure necessary, adequate and safe access and
logistics by land and air. It urges all concerned to
cooperate with the human rights activities of the
United Nations, which help to lay a basis for lasting
peace and national reconciliation.

"The Security Council will remain actively
seized of the matter."

(spoke in Spanish)

This statement will be issued as a document of the

Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/1999/3.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present

stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The Security Council will remain seized of the

matter.

The meeting rose at 1.55 pm.

