Mr. Kolby (Norway): The situation in the Middle
East gives reason for great concern. The achievements
made over the last decade are in jeopardy. The tragic
and appalling events of 11 September have made
progress in the Israeli-Palestinian conflict even more
urgent. The vicious cycle of violence and terror must
be stopped. We can not allow the Middle East conflict
to get out of hand. The consequences would be
disastrous for the Israelis as well as for the
Palestinians, not to mention the region as a whole.

Norway welcomes the United States commitment
to intensify its engagement in the Middle East peace
process as outlined by President George W. Bush
before the General Assembly and by Secretary of State
Colin Powell in his statement in Kentucky. Norway
strongly supports the efforts by the special envoys of
the United States, the United Nations, the European
Union and Russia.

Violence, terrorism and military responses have
once again proved ineffective as a means of solving the
Middle East conflict. Terrorism can never be justified.
Terrorism must be fought; it must be eliminated. In line
with international efforts, Norway urges President
Arafat and the Palestinian Authority to make a 100 per
cent effort in fighting terrorism. Known terrorists must
be arrested and brought to justice, and more must be
done to prevent new attacks.

The Palestinian Authority must renew its
commitment to the ceasefire announced on
26 September and ensure full enforcement of
Palestinian Authority orders regarding the ceasefire.
Israel and the Palestinian Authority must resume full
security cooperation under United States auspices.

At the same time, Norway urges Israel to stop its
military actions against the Palestinians and to show
restraint. Targeting the Palestinian police and the
Palestinian administration seriously undermines the
authority and the effectiveness of these same
administrations. This will also negatively affect
security in the long term.

President Arafat and the Palestinian Authority
leaders are the elected leaders of the Palestinians. Their
existence and ability to function is essential for the
resumption of the peace process. Without a clear
interlocutor on the Palestinian side, it is hard to see any
resumption of the peace process in the foreseeable
future.

Much has been said about the implementation of
the recommendations of the Mitchell report and the
Tenet ceasefire understandings. Still, they are the most
relevant tools for de-escalating the situation. Their
recommendations must now be fully implemented. No
further delays can be accepted. The Mitchell
recommendations were devised as a package and must
be regarded as such. To ensure success, any operational
plan for implementation must address key security and
political recommendations simultaneously.

In our view, the implementation of the Mitchell
recommendations and the Tenet understandings could
be facilitated if the parties were provided with support
in the form of a monitoring mechanism. Norway stands
ready to participate in a possible future monitoring
mission should the parties agree to it.

The objectives of any new attempts to resuscitate
the peace process must be made clear from the outset.
Norway calls on the parties to recognize the following
objectives for the final status negotiations: for the
Palestinians, an end to the occupation of their
territories and the establishment of a Viable and
democratic State in accordance with Security Council
resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973); for the Israelis,
the right to live in peace and security within
internationally recognized borders. Only when both
parties accept these goals explicitly will a resumption
of final status negotiations have a chance of
succeeding. The Palestinian economy is in a severe
recession after more than a year of intifada and the
subsequent closures of the Palestinian territory. The
effects have been devastating.

In these very difficult circumstances, Norway
remains committed to its role as chairman of the Ad
Hoc Liaison Committee for the Coordination of
International Assistance to Palestinians. We will work
together with the rest of the international community
and will continue to raise funds for the Palestinian
people and for the Palestinian Authority. We are, of
course, also committed to continuing our bilateral
programme of economic assistance to the Palestinian
people.

The destiny of the Israelis and the Palestinians is
indivisible. Security for the Israelis depends on
security for the Palestinians, and vice versa. Peace can
be achieved only through mutual compromise. The
parties must recognize that the path to peace will be
hard and painful but that, at the end of the tunnel, there
will be an end to conflict.

The time has come for Middle East leaders to
embark once again on the road to peace. Terror must
end. A ceasefire must be implemented. Final status
negotiations must be prepared for.

We are of the opinion that the Security Council
should not be silent on the situation in the Middle East.
However, in order for the Council to be able to
contribute effectively to resolving the ongoing crisis,
the Council should speak with one voice. We must look
for ways to be supportive of the efforts on the ground
by international actors to bring the peace process back
on track. Norway will abstain in the vote on the draft
resolution because it does not adequately respond to
the need of the Council to speak with one voice in this
most serious situation in the Middle East.

