Mr. Al Omoush (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, we would like to thank Poland for having
organized this open debate on children and armed
conflict. We also commend the efforts of Peru at the
helm of the Council last month. We wish you, Madam
President, every success for your presidency this
month. We also thank the various briefers whom we
heard this morning.

It has been 10 years since the adoption of
resolution 1888 (2009). We continue to see increased
numbers of violations being committed systematically
against children in armed conflict. The first victim
is humankind. The report of the Secretary General
(S/2019/509) cites a series of record numbers of
violations committed as a result of conflicts around
the world. According to the report, there were 24,000
cases involve children and 12,000 cases of killing and
maiming in 2018.

In a number of resolutions, in particular resolution
2472 (2018), the Security Council has stressed the
need to protect civilians in regions affected by armed
conflict, especially the most vulnerable, namely,
women, children and persons with disabilities. We also
have resolution 2475 (2019), but major impediments
still exist to noble efforts to uphold justice and peace
throughout the world. We must therefore work tirelessly
to end the wars by addressing their root causes and the
negative impacts of such crimes.

We are convinced that there is a need to promote
legislative and legal reforms and develop policies that
will allow us to address violence against children during
armed conflict. We also believe in the importance of
accountability and of ending impunity in order to stop
such crimes and deter perpetrators, and in the need to

establish protection and reintegration mechanisms for
child victims of violations of all kinds. Like all other
peace-loving countries, Jordan has endorsed a number
of international instruments on the rights of the child,
such as the Vancouver Principles and the Safe Schools
Declaration. Those texts reaffirm that our priority is
protecting children and upholding relevant principles
in United Nations peacekeeping operations, while also
seeking to end the recruitment of children and to protect
children during wars and conflicts.

When participating in peacekeeping operations,
my country is committed to protecting the most
vulnerable, in particular children 4 boys and girls
alike. It is also committed to helping them reintegrate
into society. The role of a peacekeeping operation is no
longer merely to stabilize the situation in conflict areas,
but now also includes protection and reintegration,
as well as psychosocial and health-care services,
provided through various educational programmes and
income-generating activities that protect children from
recruitment and exploitation.

My country hosts approximately 1.3 million
refugees from Syria; of those, 226,000 are children
between the ages of 5 and 17. In spite of the challenges
related to refugee flows and the negative impact of the
situation on our national economy and infrastructure
due to the scarcity of natural and economic resources,
we in the Kingdom of Jordan have been able to turn that
challenge into an opportunity thanks to collaboration
among State institutions, on the one hand, and through
international and regional partnerships, on the other. It is
all part ofa plan to respond to the Syrian refugee crisis.

My country has established and strengthened
mechanisms and measures to accommodate the refugees,
while also ensuring that they can live in dignity by
assuring them shelter and basic services, such as health
care and education. We also have mechanisms offering
support and protection for women and children, in
particular girls. My country has also launched various
training and rehabilitation programmes in cooperation
with our regional and international partners, United
Nations agencies and civil society organizations to
ensure that refugees can pursue their education, build
on their skills and integrate into society.

The key to our organization is its vision, which
is translated into several initiatives. A summit will
be convened next month, on the sidelines of the
seventy-fourth session of the General Assembly,
to review progress in the implementation of the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and the
Sustainable Development Goals. We hope that it will
be an opportunity to redouble our efforts to achieve our
objective of open, modern societies with adequate and
effective institutions, anchored by international and
regional partnerships, that empower women, protect
children, assist young people, build on the principles
of peace and reject radicalization, hate speech and
terrorism in all its forms.

We must reinforce relevant international
instruments that protect children and ban their
recruitment by armed forces or armed groups. They
must be reintegrated into civilian life so that they are
immune to the forces of evil in the world. In that regard,
I applaud the ACT to Protect campaign launched by the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict, which will enable us
to focus on ending the violations perpetrated against
children in armed conflict.

This year we commemorate the thirtieth anniversary
of the Convention on the Rights of the Child. Bloody
conflicts continue to claim child victims in Syria,
Palestine and elsewhere, in various regions affected by
war and conflict. We must invest in their little bodies.
We hope that children's hands will be used to build up,
never to tear down. As has been said, we, as individuals
and Governments, should prioritize humankind.

