Mr. Urbina (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to begin by thanking Mr. Ould Abdallah for
his briefing, and I thank the Commissioner for Peace
and Security of the African Union, Mr. Lamamra, for
his statement. I also welcome the statement made by
the Somali Foreign Minister.

This Council has of late been reviewing the
situation in Somalia and the challenges facing the
Transitional Federal Government and the international
community there. We voice our concern at the
resurgence of violence in Somalia and the consequent
worsening of the humanitarian situation, the growing
numbers of refugees and internally displaced persons
and the climate of instability in the region. This urgent
situation demands the strengthening of Somalia's
security institutions and of the African Union Mission
in Somalia (AMISOM), which are essential
components in the stabilization of the country.

The international community must fulfil the
commitments made at the Brussels donors conference
and contribute to the United Nations trust fund set up
for this purpose. Indifference on the part of the
international community will only strengthen the
position of the rebel groups, which, as the report of the
Monitoring Group states, are already benefiting from
arms flows and financial support from other countries,
including countries of the region, which are seeking to
undermine international peace and security.

We understand that the situation in Somalia can
only be improved on the basis of action by the Somalis
themselves. We reaffirm our support for the
Transitional Federal Government and for its efforts to
promote national reconciliation through inclusive
negotiations within the Djibouti peace process. We also
salute Special Representative Ould Abdallah for his
determined endeavours to move the political process
forward.

We also welcome the recent decision of the
African Union to bring the military and police
components of the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) up to the mandated number of personnel.
We acknowledge the contributions of the Governments
of Burundi and Uganda to the Mission and welcome
the pledges of additional battalions from Sierra Leone
and Malawi.

The worsening humanitarian situation in Somalia
is a cause of great concern to my delegation. We
condemn the attacks on civilian populations, as well as
the obstacles placed in the way of free access to
humanitarian assistance for the more than 3 million
people who depend on it. An area of special concern
for Costa Rica is the situation of the thousands of
children who are victims of forcible recruitment by
opposition rebel groups, as well as the killings and acts
of mutilation and sexual and gender-based violence.
The Security Council must remain vigilant with regard
to these atrocious acts against the most defenceless
populations in violation of international humanitarian
law and human rights law.

My delegation has noted the progress made in
combating piracy off the Somali coast, and we
particularly welcome the impact of this progress on
access to humanitarian assistance. We are, however,
concerned by reports that the pirates are using
increasingly sophisticated strategies in their attacks on
vessels. It is therefore essential to work immediately to
resolve problems of logistics and of bringing to justice
the pirates that are still operating, while we work to
strengthen the Somali State and thus to eliminate the
causes that fuel piracy.

Finally, Costa Rica reaffirms its support for the
Secretary-General's political strategy for Somalia, with
its three-stage approach to attain the goals needed to
achieve security in the country. We look forward to
seeing soon the results of the assistance provided by
the United Nations Political Office for Somalia to the
Transitional Federal Government, especially in the
development of a national security strategy.

