Mr. Woldegerima (Ethiopia): We thank Assistant
Secretary-General Taye-Brook Zerihoun for his
briefing on the latest developments in Guinea-Bissau.
We are also grateful to Executive Director Fedotov
for his remarks via video-teleconference, and we
commend the work that the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime is doing in the fight against
drug trafficking and transnational organized crime.
We also appreciate the briefing by the Chair of the
configuration for Guinea-Bissau of the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC), including on the outcome of its
latest meeting. We commend the configuration's active
and continued engagement in support of peacebuilding
and sustaining peace in Guinea-Bissau. We note the
Chair's intention to visit the country and look forward
to hearing his impressions when he returns. We also
join others in welcoming the appointment of Mr. Jose
Vegas Filho of Brazil as the new Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Guinea-Bissau and
Head of the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding
Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS), and we thank
former Special Representative Modibo Toure for his
dedicated service.

As indicated in the briefings we have just heard,
there have been positive developments in Guinea-
Bissau, and we would like to echo the words of our
African colleagues from Cote d'Ivoire and Equatorial
Guinea. After the institutional paralysis of the past
three years, President Jose Mario Vaz's appointment
of Aristide Gomes as a consensus Prime Minister,
following consultations with political stakeholders and
civil society, is indeed a step in the right direction.
The decision regarding the holding of parliamentary
elections, the reopening of Parliament and the
swearing-in of the new Cabinet are also encouraging.
Those and other positive developments have certainly
rekindled a sense of hope and optimism, and we very
much welcome them. We would like to congratulate the
Government of Guinea-Bissau and the political actors
for their constructive engagement, which has led to
this breakthrough.

The role played by the Economic Commission
of West African States (ECOWAS) in resolving the
institutional paralysis is indeed commendable, and it is
testament to the significant contribution that regional
and subregional organizations can make in resolving
conflict and crisis situations in their immediate
neighbourhood, in close coordination with other
international stakeholders. Of course, we cannot lose
sight of the challenges that remain, and we hope that the
positive momentum we are seeing will be maintained.

The centrality of the Conakry Agreement to
sustaining peace, security and development in Guinea-
Bissau cannot be overemphasized, and we hope all
stakeholders in the country will respect and comply
with the Agreement in addressing their differences
and the challenges facing their country. The sustained
engagement of the international community will
unquestionably be vital to creating an environment
conducive to holding peaceful and credible elections,
as well as filling in the country's financial gaps.
The continued support of UNIOGBIS and the PBC
configuration will also be very important in that regard.

Finally, we believe that concerted efforts on the part
of ECOWAS, the African Union, the United Nations,
the Community of Portuguese-Speaking Countries and
other relevant partners will continue to be essential to
realizing a lasting solution in Guinea-Bissau.

