Mr. Ibrahim (Malaysia): I thank you, Madam
President, for convening today's meeting in an open
format, to accord the issue the attention that it deserves.
My delegation is appreciative of the insightful briefings
by the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
Yemen, Mr. Ismail Ould Cheikh Ahmed; the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights,
Prince Zeid Ra'ad Al Hussein; and the Assistant
Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Deputy Emergency Relief Coordinator, Ms. Kyung-
wha Kang. Listening to the briefers, Malaysia is deeply
concerned about the protracted conflict in Yemen and
the humanitarian disaster that it has triggered.

We take note ofthe progress made by the conflicting
parties in Switzerland last week in the talks brokered
by Special Envoy Ahmed. The fact that the conflicting
parties had come together to engage in face-to-face
negotiations for the first time since the escalation of
the conflict is by no means a small feat. However,
we regret the lack of commitment on the part of the
conflicting parties to engage in good faith and to adhere
to the ceasefire agreed prior to the talks. Clearly, the
conflicting parties seem to think that they can still win
the war militarily.

Malaysia reiterates our position that a political
solution remains the only legitimate path towards a
democratic, stable and inclusive Yemen. Prolonging the
military conflict will only benefit terrorist groups such
as Al-Qaeda and Daesh. In the past months, we have
seen how these terrorist groups and their affiliates have
sowed sectarian discord and expanded their influence
in Yemen, taking full advantage of the lack of effective
Government and ongoing insecurity in the country.

The protracted conflict has exacerbated the

humanitarian crisis at the expense ofthe Yemeni people,
particularly children. Since March, over 600 children
have been killed in the conflict. The staggering figure of
10 million children are in urgent need of humanitarian
assistance, while over 500,000 children under the age of
five are at risk of severe acute malnutrition. In addition,
half of Yemen's school-aged children are out of school.
Over 1,000 schools are unable to resume lessons since
they are destroyed, damaged or being used as temporary
shelters for internally displaced persons.

In that regard, we reiterate the urgent need for an
immediate ceasefire or, at the very least, ample periods
of humanitarian pauses to allow humanitarian aid
and personnel to reach those in need. As repeatedly
expressed by the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, Malaysia emphasizes that
humanitarian aid cannot and should not be expected
to take over the role of commercial shipments to
the country. We therefore remain concerned about
the continuing blockade of commercial shipments
and allegations of corruption on the part of certain
parties who are trying to benefit from the blockade
at the expense of the welfare of the people. Malaysia
urges all parties to respect international humanitarian
and human rights law, ensure humanitarian access,
minimize harm to civilians and refrain from damaging
civilian infrastructure. We wish to see independent
investigations into various incidences that seriously
violated international humanitarian and human rights
law, including targeted attacks on civilians, schools and
medical facilities.

In concluding, Malaysia reaffirms our strong
support for the efforts of Special Envoy Ahmed
to identify and implement confidence-building
measures towards achieving a durable ceasefire and a
comprehensive settlement. We look forward to the next
round oftalks, which we hope will take place in January.
The success of the talks depends on the political will of
the conflicting parties themselves. We therefore urge
all parties to extend their full cooperation in the peace
process and demonstrate their sincerity in ending the
conflict and returning the country to its democratic
transition path, based on the relevant Security
Council resolutions, the Gulf Cooperation Council
Initiative and its implementing mechanisms, and the
National Dialogue outcomes. We echo the view of the
international community that this remains the only
legitimate path in the long run, and we will continue to

support Yemen towards that endeavour.

