Mr. Gokool (Mauritius): We extend a warm
welcome to Mr. She Okitundu, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and
thank him for his important statement.

I thank you, Mr. President, for convening this
meeting, which gives the Council and the general
membership an opportunity to discuss the next steps in
the Democratic Republic ofthe Congo.

We also welcome the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Ngongi, for the first time to
this Chamber. We are grateful to him for his briefing
and for presenting the ninth report of the Secretary-
General on the United Nations Organization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC). We
also wish him all the best in his assignment.

We greatly value the presence of the Secretary-
General at this meeting.

We note with satisfaction that, since 8 June 2001,
the general situation in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo has remained relatively calm. The respect of the
ceasefire by the parties concerned; the completion of
the disengagement of forces and the deployment to new
defensive positions in progress; and the withdrawal of
foreign forces are encouraging signs for the peace
process.

We commend the Secretary-General for meeting
with Presidents Kabila and Kagame, the leader of the
Rassemblement congolais pour la democratic (RCD)
and other stakeholders in the conflict in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo during his trip to the region in
early September in a bid to get their full commitment
to the peace process.

Notwithstanding the overall positive
developments, my delegation remains concerned by the
continuing fighting in the eastern Democratic Republic
of the Congo, particularly in Kivu, between armed
groups and the RCD. The status quo in Kisangani is yet
another matter of serious concern to my delegation.
The significant rise in the number of alleged ceasefire
violations in the East must prompt the Council to take
immediate action to increase the presence in that
region.

Mauritius has, on several previous occasions,
called for the third phase of MONUC's deployment. In
this context, my delegation welcomes the Secretary-
General's proposal to move to phase III of MONUC.
We take note of the step-by-step approach of phase III,
as proposed by the Secretary-General. We hope that the
establishment of the mixed civilian and military
presence, as well as the forward support based in
Kindu, will not be delayed. We are aware of the
political and security risks that phase III faces at this
point in time; however, the Council has to make a
choice of whether to move ahead or to allow the
situation to deteriorate and reach a point of no return.
By approving phase III of MONUC, the Council must
also send a very clear message to the parties concerned
that the further deployment of MONUC will directly
depend upon their cooperation.

We need to place great emphasis on continued
adherence to the ceasefire, the cessation of military
assistance to the armed groups and the free movement
of MONUC personnel, among other things. The
Council must also demand that the parties to the
conflict submit all the required information in
order to allow further deployment to take place in
respect of disarmament, demobilization, reintegration,
repatriation or resettlement.

We hope that all these issues will be adequately
addressed during the meeting early next month
between the Security Council and the members of the
Political Committee established by the Lusaka
Ceasefire Agreement. That meeting will be an
opportunity for the members of the Political Committee
to recommit themselves to the advancement of the
peace process. While requesting the cooperation of all
parties concerned, the Council must also express its
readiness to expand its strength once MONUC starts
receiving positive responses.

It should be stressed that one of the most
important objectives of the third phase of MONUC
should be to encourage and facilitate early
disarmament and demobilization. It is encouraging to
note that the Governments of both the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and Rwanda have set up
national mechanisms for disarmament and
demobilization. However, we share the view that
greater political commitment will be required by those
two countries in the disarmament to reintegration
process through the establishment of a joint
coordination mechanism. This can be possible only
through dialogue between leaders of the two countries.
The Council must therefore encourage the two leaders
to meet more frequently.

There can be no advancement in the peace
process without progress in the inter-Congolese
dialogue. Notwithstanding the difficulties encountered
at the meeting of the inter-Congolese dialogue in Addis
Ababa, my delegation expresses its full support for the
facilitator and his team in their efforts to reconvene in
South Africa shortly. We thank the Government of
South Africa for providing logistical support and for
hosting the next round of talks. We would like once
again to stress the need to ensure the all-inclusive
nature of the conference with the participation of all
the components of society. We also request the
international community to fully support the dialogue,
both politically and financially.

My delegation also looks forward to the report of
the Panel of Experts on the Illegal Exploitation of
Natural Resources and Other Forms of Wealth of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. There is no doubt
about the linkage that exists between the illegal
exploitation of the natural resources of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the continuation of the
conflict. A comprehensive solution to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo conflict must address the illegal
exploitation of natural resources.

On the humanitarian situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, my delegation expresses its
concern about the prevailing grave situation,
exacerbated by the recent influx of refugees from the
Central African Republic. We commend the United
Nations Children's Fund, the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and other
agencies for their efforts in trying to alleviate the
sufferings of the people of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. We call on the international community to
enhance its assistance to the people in need.

As regards the human rights situation, we
welcome the steps taken by the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to establish human
rights norms and standards. Nevertheless, it is
disturbing that human rights abuses continue to take
place. We call upon parties to the conflict to
demonstrate greater commitment to respecting human
rights.

Finally, we once again express our support for
MONUC's entering phase III of its deployment in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. I cannot end
without commending MONUC personnel for the
excellent work they are doing in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.

