Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): I would
like to say how pleased I am that my delegation was
given the honour and the privilege of sponsoring
resolution 2267 (2016), which the Security Council
has just adopted unanimously. On behalf of the entire
Senegalese delegation, I should like to thank all the
members of the Council and to express our gratitude for
members' cooperation and constructive contributions
in the course of the negotiations that led to this
resolution. I would especially like to thank the experts,
who displayed a spirit of consensus and determination
during the negotiations.

The resolution we have just adopted takes note of
the report (S/20l6/l4l) of the Secretary-General on
Guinea-Bissau dated 12 February. It also expresses the
Council's full support for the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, whose mandate has been
extended, as well as that of the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau until
28 February 2017.

More specifically, the Council once again expresses
its concerns about the ongoing political and institutional
tensions among the President, the Prime Minister, the
Speaker of Parliament and political leaders, which has
significantly slowed the reforms under way. In that
context, the resolution emphasizes the need to respect
democratic principles, the separation of powers and
the rule of law, as well as the importance of national
reconciliation, an inclusive dialogue, good governance,
justice and the fight against impunity.

Through the resolution, we welcome the
non-interference by the defence and security forces in
the political arena, as well as the peaceful behaviour
of the population of Guinea-Bissau. The Council also
welcomes the steps taken by the President of Senegal
in his capacity as the Chairman of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS), the
Guinean President, the ECOWAS Mediator for Guinea-
Bissau, and the Special Envoy ofthe Nigerian President
and all other interlocutors in the search for a peaceful
solution to the impasse in the country. The resolution
also welcomes the efforts ofECOWAS to achieve peace,
security and sustainable development, in particular
through the efforts of the ECOWAS Mission in Guinea-
Bissau (ECOMIB).

The resolution also launches an appeal - which I
should like to repeat here - to bilateral, regional and
international partners to provide support to ECOWAS
in order to renew the mandate of ECOMIB, above all
in order to finance it. I should solemnly like to call
on the Security Council and all bilateral partners to
facilitate and support the mobilization of assistance to
Guinea-Biassau at this crucial time in its history, first The meeting rose at 10.10 am,
and foremost in the interests ofthe civilian population.
