Mr. Laro (Nigeria): I, too, thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Moussa for his
briefing. My comments will focus on the fight against
the Lord's Resistance Army (LRA).

The report of the Secretary-General (S/2014/319)
indicates that, while some successes have been recorded
in that regard, considerable challenges remain. In terms

of successes, we take positive note of the fact that there
have been no reports of recent premeditated mass
atrocities by the Lord's Resistance Army (LRA). Also
significant are the decrease in the number of reported
deaths in the first quarter of 2014 relative to 2012 and
2013; the decline in the number of abductions compared
to the fourth quarter of 2013; and the decrease in the
number of displaced persons in the LRA-affected
areas of the Central African Republic, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and South Sudan. That success
in reducing the number of displaced persons has
been attributed, in part, to the improved security
being enjoyed by communities around the Garamba
National Park following operations against LRA bases
in the Park by the African Union (AU) Regional Task
Force. We commend the Force for its achievements
and acknowledge with appreciation the support of the
United States and other international partners in that
regard.

Another success story is the lack of LRA attacks in
South Sudan during the period under review.

Challenges nevertheless remain in the Central
African Republic and the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. In the Central African Republic, there was
an upward trend in LRA activity in the first quarter
of 2014, with more attacks and abductions. That is
reported to be concentrated in communities in eastern
Central African Republic. While the attention of the
international community has been focused on the
sectarian conflict in other parts of the country, we are
concerned that the LRA leadership is taking advantage
of the current instability and lack of State control over
the national territory to regroup in the north-eastern
part of the Central African Republic. The suspected
collusion of some ex-Seleka fighters with the LRA is
also a matter of concern to us, as they may be providing
the LRA with information about the operations of the
Regional Task Force. That represents a grave threat to
the conduct of anti-LRA operations, and we would hope
that the Regional Task Force is taking the necessary
measures against that threat.

We take positive note of the biannual meeting
of the LRA focal points that took place in Entebbe,
Uganda, on 13 and 14 February, and the fact that
it was co-chaired by Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Moussa and the African Union's
Special Envoy for the Lord's Resistance Army issue,
Francisco Madeira. That kind of coordination between
the AU and the United Nations is crucial in forging a
common understanding on the way forward in the fight
against the LRA. We look forward to the planned AU
consultative workshop on the long-term stability of the
LRA-affected countries, which is expected to build on a
preliminary assessment conducted by the World Bank.

The full implementation of the United Nations
regional strategy to address the threat and impact of
the activities of the LRA is crucial if the threat posed
by the group is to be neutralized. That would depend
on providing resources in a timely and adequate
manner and on building the requisite capacities of
judicial and Government systems and the military
capabilities of the countries affected by the LRA. The
international community is required to provide the
necessary political, technical and financial support for
the successful implementation of that initiative, in line
with the priorities identified by the African Union and
the principle of national ownership.

Political stability and strong national security
institutions in the region will help to consolidate the
gains made in the fight against the LRA. The plight of
persons displaced by LRA attacks and the long-term
development needs of LRA-affected areas must be
addressed in tandem and remain an integral part of the
comprehensive approach.

We express our support for the draft presidential
statement to be adopted after this meeting. We also
pay tribute to Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Moussa for his achievements as Special
Representative. We wish him well in his future
endeavours and look forward to working with his
successor.

