Mr. Huang Chi Trung (Viet Nam): My
delegation too wishes to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council for this
month. We also congratulate Ambassador Kafando of
Burkina Faso and his team for their excellent work
during their presidency of the Council last month.

We wish to thank Under-Secretary-General
Pascoe for his briefing. We commend the efforts of the
United Nations Peacebuilding Support Office and the
United Nations country team under challenging
circumstances. We also thank Ambassador Viotti of
Brazil, Chair of the Guinea-Bissau configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission, for her statement.

My delegation notes with satisfaction that
preparations for the legislative elections scheduled for
16 November 2008 in Guinea-Bissau have been on
track and that the voter registration exercise has been
successful. We welcome the ongoing engagement of
the Peacebuilding Commission and the Peacebuilding
Fund, exemplified by the adoption of the Strategic
Framework for Peacebuilding in the country and the
ongoing implementation of the emergency post-conflict
assistance programme with the International Monetary
Fund. All that demonstrates the continued commitment
of the international community to support Guinea-
Bissau's peacebuilding efforts.

However, we are deeply concerned about the
volatile security and political situation and the general
deterioration of living conditions in Guinea-Bissau,
especially against the backdrop of upcoming elections
and rising food and fuel prices. While recognizing the
vital importance of poverty reduction, fiscal
management, food security, health care and education
promotion, disarmament and humanitarian assistance,
we share the Secretary-General's appeal for enhanced
support and training for Guinea-Bissau's law
enforcement and criminal justice system within the
wider framework of security sector reform and the
fight against organized crime, drug trafficking and
terrorism. We call on all national stakeholders to
exercise restraint, renounce violence and strengthen
political dialogue and reconciliation, thus contributing
to the steady consolidation of peace and creating an
environment conducive to socio-economic
reconstruction and ensuring the peaceful and timely
organization of the polls.

While reaffirming that peace, reconciliation and
stability in Guinea-Bissau are critical for peace and
security in the West African subregion, we recognize
the role being played by the Peacebuilding
Commission, the United Nations agencies, regional
organizations and the international community in
facilitating the peacebuilding process in Guinea-
Bissau. It is our expectation that the Government of
that country will effectively galvanize bilateral and
multilateral assistance and achieve further concrete
progress in the course of achieving durable peace and
sustainable development.

Finally, we thank the delegation of Burkina Faso
for the draft presidential statement, which we are
prepared to support. We hope the Council will be able
to adopt it promptly.

