Mr. Alcalay (Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation would like to congratulate Guinea on its
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of March. We hope that your energetic
leadership, Sir, will inspire the members of the
Security Council in the search for a solid, firm and
constructive resolution that will make it possible to
find real solutions and responses to the anguish that the
world community is feeling at this difficult time.
Indeed, we need to achieve a compromise; failing to do
so may have disastrous implications for the United
Nations.

Venezuela associates itself with the position
adopted by the Non-Aligned Movement, which reflects
the views of the developing world. We would like to
convey our appreciation to Malaysia for requesting, on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement, this open
debate, which is of great importance.

As for Venezuela's position, I would like to
highlight three points. First, I would like to underscore
our full adherence to international law. Venezuela
shares with the international community its profound
concern about the current situation in Iraq, and we
therefore stress our firm attachment to strict
compliance with international law.

Secondly, we would like to highlight our respect
for the decisions of the Security Council. This means
not merely unreserved and full compliance with all the
Council resolutions with regard to Iraq, in particular
resolution 1441 (2002), but respect for the decision that
the Council is going to take. That is why we associate
ourselves with the statements made by Mexico and
Chile, as members from our region in the Council,
stressing in particular the comments made in the
Council by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Chile.
She expressed the hope that, just as consensus was
achieved on resolution 1441 (2002), a similar effort
will be made to arrive at a resolution that can receive
the unanimous support of the members, thus
responding to the expectations of all the peoples of the
world.

Thirdly, we state once again that Venezuela
believes that efforts must be directed towards finding a
solution through diplomatic means. We espouse peace
as a supreme universal value, and we express our
profound conviction that that must continue to be the
priority purpose of the Organization. For that reason,
we support the statements made by the Secretary-
General in the search for a solution that will enable us
to advance the message of faith, hope and peace, which
is the very basis for the existence of the United
Nations.
Those three elements - adherence to
international law, respect for the decisions of the
Security Council and support for a diplomatic
solution - are the aspects that my country, Venezuela,
wishes to emphasize to this open debate.

