Mr. Moraes Cabral (Portugal): Like you, Sir, I
wish to warmly His Excellency the President of the
Republic of Nauru to the Council. His presence does
indeed illustrate the seriousness of the challenges
facing his country and other small island developing
States (SIDS).

I thank the German presidency and you yourself,
Mr. President, for having organized this debate on the
security implications of climate change, an issue to
which Portugal has been strongly attached for many
years. I thank the Secretary-General for his important
statement, and I also wish to thank Mr. Steiner for his
very useful presentation. These are indeed serious
threats to some regions of our planet, as Mr. Steiner
eloquently illustrated.

As I have repeatedly stated, Portugal does not see
the Security Council as the forum for climate change
negotiations or even for discussions on measures to
mitigate and adapt to environmental vulnerabilities.
These issues belong to other contexts that have the
legitimacy and the appropriate tools to address them. It
is, however, the Council's role to recognize and deal
with new challenges and to ensure that such challenges
do not lead to tensions and ultimately to conflict.
Therefore, there is, in our view, an added value in the
Security Council discussing the impact that certain
consequences of climate change may have for
international stability, peace and security.For the same
reason, Portugal hopes that we may still be able to find
a consensus on an outcome for our discussions today.

We strongly believe that we should be able to
develop concrete strategies for coherent, integrated and
comprehensive responses of United Nations
institutions, including the Security Council, to address
these risks. The case for such an approach is
particularly relevant when it is called for by those

Members of the United Nations particularly affected by
climate change and whose very existence is at risk. I
would like to mention again the particular case of the
Pacific SIDS, for which the negative effects of climate
change are no longer a possible scenario but a very
concrete reality. Sea-level rise may, in time, lead to the
loss of entire territories, but those island States may
become uninhabitable long before that.

When that occurs, there are a number of issues
that need to be answered and that have clear
international implications. How do we deal with
populations that need to be resettled? Where do they
go? How do they get there? How does one manage and
defuse the tensions that resettlement entails? How do
we address the legal consequences of the loss of
territory, such as the definition of borders, economic
zones and continental shelf rights? Our failure to deal
collectively with such questions may lead not only to
humanitarian disaster but also to a surge of serious
tensions in a vast region, threatening peace. I am sure
that President Marcus Stephen will give us a very vivid
analysis of those problems in all their complexity.

Desertification and its effects on food production
and water availability should also merit our attention in
this debate, since its consequences are often felt across
national borders. Let us remember that 47 per cent of
all land area falls within international river basins and
that over 200 river basins are multinational. As water
demands increase, tensions or even conflict over water
resources will also increase.

Desertification and increasing food scarcity as an
effect of climate change are also reasons for the
involuntary displacement of populations, a link
recently recognized by the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, Mr. Antonio Guterres, in
his report on climate change, natural disasters and
human displacement. This is first and foremost a
humanitarian and development issue but, as we are all
aware, the strongest impact of desertification is felt in
countries with social and economic vulnerabilities,
some of them emerging from long periods of conflict
and instability. If the movement of populations due to
desertification has a cross-border or even a regional
dimension, then it is very likely that its security
implications will go beyond the borders of a particular
State and may derail progress in post-conflict
stabilization and peacebuilding efforts.
If properly addressed, the security challenges
whose effects are amplified by climate change do not
necessarily lead to conflict. As with many other issues
that the Security Council discusses on a regular basis,
we believe that in this domain we should likewise give
priority to a preventive approach and to the
development of early-warning mechanisms. We should
also actively discuss the security impact of climate
change with other international organizations that are
already addressing the issue from a security
perspective, including the European Union and the
African Union. We must consider how our actions may
complement and reinforce each other for a more
effective response. In that context, Portugal, as a
member of the European Union, naturally shares the
position that will be later expressed by Ambassador
Pedro Serrano on these issues. Indeed, global problems
call for collective responses, and this is particularly
important when resources are scarce.

In conclusion, the effects of climate change are
likely to increase in the near future. What we are
discussing here today as possible security implications
will likely become increasingly evident. That is why
we believe that today's debate should not be a one-off
event, but rather a step towards a consistent and regular
consideration of the issue by the Security Council,
based on reliable information on specific situations
where climate-related phenomena are negatively
affecting peace and security. That would allow us to
have a more complete understanding of the complex
links between climate, development and security, and
therefore strengthen our capacity to prevent conflict
and promote international cooperation.

