Ms. Bensouda: I thank you, Sir, for the opportunity
to once again engage with the Council on the occasion of
my Office's twenty-third report on the Darfur situation.

It has been more than a decade since the Security
Council, through resolution 1593 (2005), referred the
situation in Darfur to my Office. Resolution 1593
(2005) served as a message of hope for the victims
of Darfur subjected to grave crimes under the Rome
Statute that they would finally see accountability and
justice for their suffering.

Today, those victims" quest forjustice is as far from
being realized as it was 11 years ago. More worrying
still, grave crimes continue to be committed in Darfur,
resulting in further victimization and suffering. This
reality is to be lamented by all people ofgood conscience.
Over the years since the adoption of resolution 1593
(2005), my Office's message to this body regarding the
Sudan's flagrant disregard of the Council's resolutions
has been principled, consistent and clear. Sadly, my
Office's countless appeals to the Council for action to
address the persistent failure of the Sudan to comply
with its international obligations have not been heeded.
I respectfully note that, regrettably, the Council has
been equally consistent in its conspicuous silence over
the Sudan's non-compliance with its own resolutions.

This inaction on the part of the Council has had
adverse consequences. First, it has emboldened
Mr. Al-Bashir to continue travelling across international
borders, despite the fact that two arrest warrants have
been issued against him by the Court. Secondly, the
Council's failure to act in response to 11 findings of
non-compliance issued by International Criminal Court
(ICC) judges has equally emboldened States, parties as
well ascertain non-parties to the Rome Statute, not only
to facilitate Mr. Al-Bashir's travels to their territories
but to invite and host him. A reasonable observer
cannot be faulted for asking how many more such
findings must be rendered by the Court to spur this
Council into action. The Victims' groups with which
I will be meeting later today will surely and, indeed,
rightly, have such questions on their minds.

This evolving trend risks setting an ominous
precedent that, unless it sees redirection, will not bode
well for similar genuine efforts aimed at bringing
those responsible for mass atrocities to justice. What
message are we sending to would-be perpetrators if
those against whom international warrants have been
issued for the world's most egregious crimes can
travel freely, and without any repercussions for those
who facilitate or, worse, keep suspects of atrocity
crimes as company. Above all, such non-feasance has
emboldened some States to publicly express pride
in disregarding the Council's authority. This trend
of non-compliance with resolutions under Chapter
VII of the Charter of the United Nations continues
to exacerbate victims' frustrations and should be a
matter of great concern to us all. It should therefore be
particularly concerning that violations ofa Chapter VII
resolution have become routine without any resulting
condemnation or appropriate action by the Council.
With your indulgence, Sir, I would like to place the
accent on several important observations in this regard.

First, it is imperative for the Council to fully
appreciate and embrace its inter-institutional
relationship with the International Criminal Court
within the framework of the Rome Statute, and in
full respect for the respective independence of these
important institutions. More specifically, the Council
must recognize that once a ruling of non-compliance
has been referred to it pursuant to article 87.7 of
the Rome Statute, it is dutybound to act to give due
consideration to the judicial ruling and to take decisive
action as appropriate. To do otherwise would not only
deprive article 87.7 of the Statute of its object and
purpose and frustrate the ends ofjustice, but also erode
public confidence in the Council. The Council cannot
and must not remain silent and non-responsive on such
judicial findings, which are, after all, inherently linked
to the resolution referring the situation of Darfur to
my Office.
I invite and encourage Council members to
give due consideration to the constructive proposal
submitted by New Zealand, calling for a structured
approach in dealing with the Court's findings of
State non-compliance. A formula that has in the past
proved useful for meaningful exchange of ideas is the
informal interactive dialogue between my Office and
the Council. To be sure, increased interaction between
my Office and the Council will enable us to jointly
reflect and generate proposals on strengthening our
existing inter-institutional relationship in a manner that
results in more effective outcomes. This is the least we
can do to reassure the victims of Darfur that they have
not been forgotten, and that both the Council and my
Office are fully engaged in and committed to finding
solutions that will ultimately ensure accountability and
by extension bring peace and stability to Darfur.

My second broad observation relates to the
obligations of states and cooperation. Quoting from
the International Court of Justice's advisory opinion
on Namibia, the Pre-Trial Chamber of the ICC noted
in an instance of non-compliance with Mr. Al-Bashir's
arrest that

"[w]hen the Security Council adopts a decision
under article 25 in accordance with the Charter, it
is for member States to comply with that decision
To hold otherwise would be to deprive this principal
organ of its essential functions and powers under
the Charter."

The Pre-Trial Chamber in the same decision further
emphasized the critical role of the Council in enforcing
compliance with resolutions adopted under Chapter VII
of the Charter of the United Nations. To be clear, the
Sudan's failure to cooperate with the Court amounts to
non-compliance - not least, it is in breach of resolution
1593 (2005). That resolution has in effect brought the
Sudan under the full breadth and ambit of the Rome
Statute legal framework.

Regarding non-State parties, when they fail to
cooperate in the arrest and surrender of suspects
against whom warrants of arrest have been issued by the
Court in the Darfur situation, they do so with complete
disregard for resolution 1593 (2005), which urges them
to do the contrary - that is, to fully cooperate with
the Court. As it concerns Rome Statute States parties,
a failure to arrest and surrender would constitute not
only a violation of resolution 1593 (2005), but a breach
of their Rome Statute obligations - indeed, their treaty
obligations. In either case, these breaches undermine
the cause of international criminal justice and are a
direct attack on the credibility of the Council, which
referred the situation in Darfur to my Office.

Despite these challenges, my Office is continuing
its investigations with a View to delivering justice to
the victims of grave crimes under the Rome Statute
in Darfur. A list of obstacles complicates our work. A
lack of access to the territory of the Sudan, resource
constraints and non-execution of the long-outstanding
arrest warrants have all contributed to the slow progress
in investigations.

Nevertheless, my Office's strong belief that justice
and accountability are key to lasting peace in Darfur
continues to motivate us to exert every effort within
the means and abilities at our disposal to advance the
investigations as effectively as possible. Leads that have
the potential to yield additional evidence continue to be
followed even as the modest Darfur team of my Office
divides its time and energies between the Darfur dossier
and other cases that are equally demanding. Despite
these difficulties, we will not falter. Our commitment
to the victims of the crimes under the Rome Statute in
Darfur and elsewhere is what inspires us and propels
my Office forward to overcome challenges and to
ultimately obtain the desired results. We are unbending
in this commitment.

My Office shares the Council's expression of deep
concern in its resolution 2265 (2016) at the increased
violence and insecurity in Darfur, the significant
increase in the number of persons who have been
internally displaced since 2014, and the restriction of
humanitarian access to conflict areas where vulnerable
civilian populations reside. I am concerned about a
significant increase in aerial bombardments and ground
attacks, resulting in over 400 civilian deaths and up to
200 Villages destroyed as reported. In addition, 107
incidents ofsexual crimes against women were reported,
resulting in 225 victims. Seventy per cent of these
alleged incidents involved gang-rape, and 19 per cent
involved girls under the age of 18 years. Troops aligned
with the Government of the Sudan and unidentified
assailants are the main alleged perpetrators.

Over 129,000 people have been displaced from
Jebel Marra since mid-January. There might be
thousands more displaced, hidden in the mountains of
Jebel Marra, but as the Council is undoubtedly aware,
the United Nations and humanitarian organizations
have no access to those areas. There were five reported
incidents of attacks on humanitarian aid workers and
peacekeepers, with one peacekeeper killed, in this
reporting period.

In relation to allegations of ongoing crimes, my
Office is concerned over reports of the activities
of the Government of the Sudan's Rapid Support
Forces (RSF). The RSF were allegedly again involved
in the commission of crimes during the reporting
period. In one such attack in Central Darfur between
30 December 2015 and 1 January 2016, the Sudanese
Armed Forces, RSF and Janjaweed attacked Villages
in East Jebel Marra. The attack was supported by air
raids and artillery fire. Between four and six civilians,
including two children, were allegedly killed during
the ground attack. In another attack on 21 January,
aerial bombardments reportedly killed 48 women and
destroyed six houses.

As mentioned in my latest report, my Office notes
that the modus operandi of the attacks employed by the
Government of the Sudan is similar to the manner in
which the attacks were carried out in 2003 and 2004.
The continuation of the Government of the Sudan's
military attacks in Darfur in that manner must be
halted. In our assessment, the arrest and surrender of
Mr. Al-Bashir and other accused in the situation in
Darfur may assist in stopping those crimes.

In conclusion, the Security Council must no longer
tolerate the continuing deteriorating humanitarian
situation in Darfur, the continuing non-cooperation
of the Government of the Sudan and, in particular, the
refusal of the Sudan to arrest and surrender suspects
within its territory to the custody of the Court. It is
within the powers of the Council to reverse those
trends through concrete action and resolve. Meaningful
follow-up in response to the Court's findings of
non-compliance is one concrete step that the Council can
take to project its commitment to the victims of Darfur
and to accountability as indispensable and indivisible
component of peace and security. Again, I urge the
Council to give serious consideration to the proposal
made by New Zealand for a structured approach to
dealing with the Court's findings of non-compliance
referred to the Council.

To be sure, without stronger and committed action
by the Council and State parties, the situation in the
Sudan is unlikely to improve, the alleged perpetrators
of serious crimes against the civilian population
will not be brought to justice and the prospects for a
lingering conflict will become more acute. Justice and
accountability for the grave crimes under the Rome
Statute must not be sacrificed at the altar of political
expediency. The maintenance of international peace
and security and the cause of international criminal
justice are intrinsically linked. Indeed, the former is in
many ways contingent upon the latter.

