Mr. Vamos-Goldman (Canada): I thank Mr. Annabi
for his briefing.

The United Nations Mission in Bosnia and
Herzegovina (UNMIBH) continues to make a significant
contribution to stability in Bosnia and Herzegovina and will
remain a critical component in the international effort to
restore peace and stability to the entire Balkan region. The
International Police Task Force (IPTF), in particular, has
made an important contribution to police reform and to the
return of the rule of law.

We are nevertheless concerned that UNMIBH has
faced obstruction in a number of crucial areas. As
Mr. Annabi noted, there are continued problems with the
establishment of the State Border Service, following the
imposition of the State Border Service Law by the High
Representative. In addition, the obstruction by Croat
authorities in Mostar, cited in the Secretary-General's
report, causes us serious concern.

The return of refugees and displaced persons to their
pre-war homes is another key priority. We encourage
Bosnian authorities to implement fully measures likely to
foster returns, such as the property law, and to cease
obstructing legal evictions. Progress on this front is
critical in measuring the real commitment of Bosnia's
authorities to a lasting peace within the Dayton
framework.

The flawed judicial system in Bosnia is a significant
obstacle to the development of a modern democratic
State. We note that the parliaments of Bosnia and
Herzegovina are considering legislation that will provide
for a review of the qualifications, performance and
appointments of some 800 prosecutors and judges. We
also commend the initiatives undertaken within the
framework of the judicial system assessment programme,
and we agree with Ambassador Greenstock on its
importance.

We are encouraged that progress is being made in
changing the composition of police forces, although we
note and are disappointed with ongoing shortcomings in
the Republika Srpska. In addition, the progress made in
screening for the Law Enforcement Personnel Registry
and the establishment of the inter-entity Ministerial
Consultative Meeting on Police Matters are encouraging
developments which bode well for the implementation of
the Dayton Agreement as a whole.

Finally, we also support UNMIBH's cooperation
with the United Nations Development Programme and the
United Nations Children's Fund in demining programmes,
another crucial initiative to ensure that the return of
refugees and internally displaced persons takes place in a
secure environment. The increase in joint activities
between UNMIBH, the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees and other actors in the field
is particularly positive, as is UNMIBH's work to develop
an updated human rights training curriculum for the IPTF.

