Ms. Wronecka (Poland): I would like to thank
Under-Secretary-General Lacroix for his very
informative briefing, and I welcome the presence of the
Ambassador of the Sudan here today.

At the outset, I would like to commend the
Sudanese transitional authorities' ongoing efforts and
commitment to addressing the multiple challenges
facing the country. We continue to believe that the
political changes in the Sudan provide a unique and
historic opportunity to implement a real and inclusive
transition under a civilian leadership and to address the
Sudanese people's aspirations to peace and prosperity.
We see that the new political dynamic in the Sudan is
already bringing momentum back to the peace process in
Darfur. In that context, we welcomed the signing of the
Juba Declaration for Confidence-building Procedures
and the Preparation for Negotiation, which creates the
necessary framework for addressing the remaining
drivers of conflict in Darfur, and we commend the
leadership role that the transitional authorities have
taken in reaching out to all the armed groups. We
call on all the Darfuri armed opposition groups and
movements to engage in the negotiations with the new
Sudanese authorities and seize the opportunity to take
part in bringing positive change and comprehensive
peace to Darfur.
Despite those positive developments, many
challenges still remain in Darfur. The humanitarian and
human rights situations continue to be of concern with
regard to the obstruction of the delivery of humanitarian
assistance to internally displaced persons and the
persistence of violence against civilians, including
sexual violence. The security situation remains stable
yet vulnerable, with incidents between the security
forces, armed movements and civilians, intercommunal
tensions and rising levels of criminality. Due to the lack
of effective State institutions and good governance, the
perpetrators of crimes and violations enjoy impunity.
The situation in Darfur is closely linked to the ongoing
political process in the Sudan. For that reason, as we
approach the renewal of the mandate of the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID), it is imperative that in our reflections on
the mission's future we take into account developments
in the nationwide political process as well as the peace
process in Darfur.

Poland looks forward to discussions on the new
draft resolution. We are willing to consider the options
on UNAMID's way forward suggested in the latest
special report of the Chairperson of the African Union
Commission and the Secretary-General of the United
Nations (S/2019/816), while making sure that the new
mandate will allow the mission to support the peace
process and the implementation of the peace agreement
that is expected to be signed by the end of the year.

