Mr. Lisuchenko (Ukraine): At the outset, I would
like to join others in congratulating Egypt on its
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of July. I thank the delegation of Egypt for
convening today's meeting and also thank the briefers
for their insightful inputs for our discussion.

So far this year we have witnessed a rather effective
international campaign aimed at dismantling the core
of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant in the Middle
East and at weakening its presence in other parts of
the world, mainly through resolute military efforts
on the ground. However, that could not have been
achieved without depriving terrorists of their sources of
financing and especially weapons supplies. Significant
progress on that track has been made in Iraq, Syria and
in certain parts of Africa.

Today, the persistence of the terrorist threat makes
it imperative to strengthen existing mechanisms for the
sake of prohibiting the acquisition, production, storage,
transfer and use of weapons by terrorist groups. In that
context, we consider today's resolution 2370 (2017),
which introduces a multifaceted approach linking
two dimensions, namely, counter-terrorism and arms
control, to be an important step in that direction.

Although today's resolution focuses mainly on
small arms and light weapons as a primary tool used by
terrorists in various regions of the world, there are also
alarming signs that even more sophisticated weapons
are within the reach of determined terrorist groups.
To prevent them from acquiring such weapons, strict
measures must be implemented at the national level
to strengthen export and border controls, in particular
regulations on the transfer of weapons and other
sensitive military equipment or materiel, and to bolster
financial intelligence cooperation.

That relates, inter alia, to ensuring the protection
and security of national stockpiles; addressing illicit
brokering activities; the thorough checking of end-
users' backgrounds; tracing trade routes for weapons
and identifying countries known as transshipment
points for terrorist organizations; enhancing border
security; and tracking suspicious money transfers.

In that regard, we consider the United Nations
Programme of Action on Small Arms and Light
Weapons, the International Tracing Instrument and
the Arms Trade Treaty as important tools that can
significantly contribute to that process and pave the
way for resolving the problem of illicit trafficking in
weapons in all its aspects, reduce the scale of terrorist
violence and subsequently end the spread of this
scourge worldwide.

The international regime that seeks to curb arms
supplies to terrorists runs into a problem when States
that are supposed to uphold that regime turn out to
be in breach of their international obligations and
commitments in that regard. One of the most telling
cases of our times is the continuing flooding of the
occupied territories in eastern Ukraine with all kinds
of weapon systems, all coming from the neighbouring
State. Over 400 battle tanks, 840 armoured personnel
vehicles, 200 multiple-launch rocket systems, 730
artillery systems and 400 air-defence units have been
provided to terrorist organizations operating there.

Those deadly supplies have been used to conduct
devastating terrorist attacks, including, for example,
the downing of Malaysian Airlines flight MH-l7.
The rhetorical question is, how did the terrorist
organizations in Ukraine get weapons that surpass the
armament stocks of many European States, or why do
the terrorists not run out of munitions?

Today, we adopted a document that clearly
defines the scope of States' obligations with regard
to eliminating the supply of weapons to terrorists.
Having unanimously backed today's Security Council
resolution, all countries around this table undertook
to respect the obligation not to support and supply
terrorists with weapons. We expect that all countries,
first and foremost, those that voted for today's
resolution, will remain faithful to both the letter and
spirit of the relevant norms of international law.

In conclusion, I would like to emphasize the
importance of bringing to justice those who knowingly
engage in providing terrorists with weapons, funds and
other types of assets. The suppliers of weapons and
other sponsors and masterminds of terrorist activities
should bear no lesser responsibility than those who
perpetrate crimes on the ground.

