Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic):
Mr. President, at the outset I would like to commend
the presidency of your brotherly country, Egypt, of the
Security Council for this month. I also thank you, Sir,
for the initiative to hold this important open debate on
a topic that is at the core of the goals of the Charter
of the United Nations, and also for circulating the
concept note (S/2017/692, annex ). I commend your
predecessor, the Permanent Representative of China,
for his presidency of the Council during the previous
month. And I thank Deputy Secretary-General
Amina Mohamed for her valuable briefing, as well as
Mr. Mahmoud and Mr. Rosenthal. The State of Kuwait
stands behind the Secretary-General in his efforts to
support peacekeeping operations and to develop those
operations in line with the purposes and principles of
the United Nations.

We align ourselves with the statement delivered
by the representative of the Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela on behalf of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries.

In that regard, I would like to build on what
has been said today regarding how peacekeeping
operations can contribute to the maintenance of
international peace and security. That requres, first,
considering innovative preventive diplomacy practices
in line with resolution 2086 (2013), which stresses the
importance of monitoring and defining functions and
challenges facing peacebuilding during the inception
of the mission. That is important because we must also
mobilize all support from our national and regional
institutions and from all social segments, including
women and children, in order to start building peace
without postponing it until the post-conflict phase.

As such, and guided by resolution 2282 (2016),
which provides a great number of tools to sustain
peace, supporting the work of the Peacebuilding
Commission will bridge the gap between the end of
peacekeeping operations and the start of planning for
peacebuilding through a smooth transition that ensures
the sustainability of peace and better cooperation with
national institutions in the concerned States. Such
an approach should also help us reduce the cost of
peacekeeping operations.

Establishing peacekeeping operations in line with
concepts and on the basis of resolutions 2086 (2013) and
2282 (2016) would allow the United Nations achieve a
more comprehensive assessessment of missions and to
define the challenges they face. Therefore, this could
enable us to come up with innovative solutions that
improve the performance of missions and their financial
efficiency, without prejudice to their ability to confront
all challenges facing their mandates. Continued
cooperation and consultation with relevant States
and focusing on their needs and wishes would help
inevitably lead to greater efficiency in the performance
of peacekeeping operations, whether in peacebuilding
or peacekeeping.

Taking into consideration the needs of host
countries in a way that corresponds to their challenges
and the realities on the ground effectively contributes

to adapting the mandates ofpeacekeeping operations to
those developments and enhances the ability of relevant
States to design and devise mission mandates and exit
strategies. After that, the international community,
the international financial institutions and donor
countries will be able to play their role in supporting
reconstruction and development efforts.

I would be remiss if I failed to commend the
partnership between the United Nations and the
African Union in support of peacekeeping operations
on the continent while enhancing and the national role
and responsibility of the African States in their region.
The growing cooperation between the United Nations
and the African Union is an example to follow when
considering other forms of cooperation with other
regional organizations.

In that regard, I recall that my country took part
in the United Nations Operation in Somalia 11. But
our most extensive experience, which lasted for more
than 12 years, was hosting the United Nations Iraq-
Kuwait Observation Mission, where the State of Kuwait
cooperated with the Mission and the Organization in
order to achieve its goals and its mandate until we
managed, in consultation with Iraq, the Mission and
troop-contributing countries, in 2003, to agree on
withdrawing the Mission after it achieved its mandate,
as part of a process that included the host country,
troop-contributing countries and the Security Council.

The State of Kuwait looks forward to taking part
in constructive deliberations in the Council regarding
peacekeeping operations and their reform this year,
as well as over the next two years as a member of
the Council.

