Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I would like to thank you, Sir, for having
organized today's ministerial-level discussion of the
challenges confronting the Middle East and the
opportunities being offered to its peoples to live in
dignity, peace, stability, and respect for human rights
and the rule of law. We also welcome the attendance
and participation of Secretary-General Mr. Ban
Ki-moon in today's meeting.

The changes that the Arab region has seen
recently have launched a new era in which the peoples
of the region have regained their ability to control their
destiny, influence political decision-making and
contribute to building their present and their future.
The changes have been diverse in scope, depth and

methodology. They have engendered many advantages
and gains, the most important of which is the birth of
genuine hope that the past has been overcome and that
a future awaits in which all sectors and strata of society
shall participate in the building of institutions that
respect the will of people and involve them in the
founding of democracy.

No one should underestimate the challenges
facing the Middle East. In discussing those challenges,
we cannot fail to tackle the crisis that has cast a dark
shadow across the entire region and has dangerously
escalated in recent days. The greatest and most
dangerous threat to the stability and security of the
Middle East is embodied in the policy of occupation
and settlement that Israel continues to espouse, in
violation of international legitimacy, signed
agreements and the founding principles of the peace
process.

The dead end reached in the Palestinian-Israeli
negotiations, despite repeated international efforts, and
Israel's continued acceleration of its settlement
activities, especially in Jerusalem, the construction of
the wall and the siege of the Gaza Strip have bred
frustration and despair that threaten the security and
stability of the entire region. The immediate and urgent
challenge facing the Security Council is the creation of
openings to resume negotiations and moving them
towards a just and comprehensive solution, which it
must seek to achieve as soon as possible.

The international community, and particularly
influential States thereof, has a big and decisive role to
play in influencing the parties and activating the two-
State solution in the context of a just, comprehensive
and full peace that would guarantee the emergence of a
viable Palestinian State, with East Jerusalem as its
capital, and the entrenchment of peace and security for
peoples throughout the region, without exception.

In the Arab Maghreb region, a new dawn has
broken over sisterly Tunisia and the wheel of change
has turned towards democracy and a State of legal
institutions, with the participation of all sectors of
society. Tunisia has become a new and active
participant in building the Arab Maghreb coalition that
we all desire.
As for sisterly Libya, and regardless of the
difficulties and challenges facing its Arab Maghreb
people in their transition, no one can deny that the
Libyan people are now much better off than they have
been at any time during the past 40 years. They are
now endowed with the resolve, resources and skills
that will allow Libya to turn a new leaf in its modern
history and build a democratic State that is unified and
consolidated. The Libyan people have emerged
victorious and liberated, thanks not only to the courage
and resolve they displayed in trying times, but also to
the unwavering and timely support of the international
community, and especially the League of Arab States
and the Security Council.

It is with great optimism and determination to
overcome all obstacles that the brotherly Egyptian
people are moving forward through a series of
transformations endorsed by their national forces. We
trust that the genius and history of that people will
enable them to resolve all difficulties and to achieve
their aspirations to liberty, democracy and social
justice.

In that regard, we welcome the peaceful approach
adopted by sisterly Yemen in order to ensure the
organized transfer of power pursuant to the successful
implementation of the initiative of the Arab Gulf
countries, with United Nations assistance.

At the same time, we regret the tragedy endured
by the brotherly Syrian people over the past year,
which threatens to erupt into a civil war with
unwelcome consequences. Morocco welcomes the
appointment of Mr. Kofi Annan as Joint Special Envoy
of the United Nations and the Arab League. We hope
that his efforts will contribute to halting the violence,
facilitating humanitarian access, and laying the
necessary groundwork for launching a national
dialogue with a view to implementing the Arab
resolutions and guaranteeing the territorial integrity
and unity of sisterly Syria. Morocco reiterates that the
Council must speak with one voice in addressing the
situation by implementing the relevant resolutions of
the Arab League.

The reforms launched in Morocco more than
10 years ago under the leadership of His Majesty
Mohammed VI have given historic momentum to the
drive towards democracy and the democratic progress
that the Kingdom has already achieved. They have also
contributed to creating more individual and collective
freedoms. On the basis of strictly internal dynamics
born of national political resolve, Morocco has adopted
important measures, including profound constitutional
reforms, and held transparent elections leading to the

formation of a new Government committed to
combating corruption, reforming the judiciary and
focusing on the enhancement of women's role in all
fields. We are ready to continue sharing our experience
with our brethren in all fields of endeavour, including
political pluralism, the role of civil society and
capacity-building in the service of a State of law and
order.

Whatever its internal capacities, no State of our
region can stand along against the challenges of
terrorism, secession and development, or guarantee
openness and democracy. Any national effort and
outcome will therefore be limited if not complemented
and nourished by regional cooperation based on shared
history, current needs, and aspirations to a common
future. Such cooperation would strengthen the people
of the region, enabling them to achieve economic
integration to the benefit of all States. That is what we
hope to accomplish in the Arab Maghreb region, which
has seen positive and unprecedented movement in
recent months that is cause for optimism. We will work
tirelessly to maintain these dynamics in order to
confront many of the challenges we continue to face
and the dangerous threats to our security and territorial
integrity. We hope that these efforts will enjoy the
active support of all countries of the region.

In closing, no one can underestimate the
difficulties and obstacles to be surmounted in
achieving the objectives of democratic transition.
Similarly, no one should underestimate the energy of
the Arab peoples or their ability to overcome these
challenges, each according to its own specificities,
historical assets, and particular experience. The road
towards strengthening and building democracy is long
and wearisome and calls for wisdom and foresight in
entrenching the foundations of stability, without which
true democratic institutions and structures cannot be
established. The international community has a great
responsibility and role to play in guaranteeing the
success of these efforts and in offering support and
encouragement of all kinds throughout every stage of
democratic transition. We hope that the international
community will not disappoint the peoples who are
waiting for and aspiring to that transition.
