Mr. Sandoval (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to thank your delegation, Mr. President, for
convening this debate, and Ms. Sandra Honore for the
comprehensive briefing she has given us.

Mexico welcomes the fact that the situation in
Haiti has shown some progress in the areas of security,
strengthening the rule of law and training the Haitian
National Police. However, we are concerned that once
again the country was unable to hold its elections
as expected. We therefore renew our call to Haiti's
political forces, civil society and the private sector to
put collective interests first and, through constructive,
dialogue ensure that the elections will be held in 2015.

The fact that the pre-election period coincided
with the absence of a functional Parliament and the
resurgence of outbreaks of violence presents particular
challenges that could derail the progress made over the
past 11 years. Those events are a reminder ofthe inherent
links between security, development and the protection
and promotion of human rights that constitute a central
tenet of the mandate of the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH).

In the context of the necessary reconfiguration of
the Mission pursuant to resolution 2180 (2014), Mexico
joins the appeals of the Secretary-General, the Haitian
Government and the Force Commander to guarantee
a stable security environment in order to bring the
pending political and institutional processes to a
successful conclusion. We must take advantage of the
multidimensional character of the Mission in the face
of the prevailing situations in which the Government
and the people of Haiti clearly need MINUSTAH's
contribution, both in terms of security and the
strengthening of State institutions.

The visit to Haiti made by members of the Council
last January at the request of Chile and the United States
is a clear demonstration of the commitment of this
organ to directly consider the situation on the ground,
obtain at first hand more ample and better information

about the difficulties the Caribbean country still faces
and determine the next steps in a more calibrated
manner. The appeal by the Haitian Head of State to
the Secretary-General to maintain a visible and robust
presence in the military and civilian components of
MINUSTAH and the request for a pause in the process
of reducing it should be heard and analysed in their
proper perspective and from the point of view of the
electoral situation in motion.

Mexico believes that the reduction and eventual
withdrawal of MINUSTAH should be progressive
but careful and must be based on a transition plan
coordinated among the Mission, the States Members
of the United Nations, particularly the troop- and
police-contributing countries, and especially the
Haitian Government. Preconceived schedules are
sometimes counterproductive, and the Haitian case is no
exception. The abrupt withdrawal of the Mission could
further complicate the political instability, with risks
of incalculable consequences. We are confident that
in considering the future of MINUSTAH, the Council
will make decisions without compromising security
and allow Haitians and the international community as
a whole to consolidate the gains made in order to make
Haiti another success story.

In conclusion, I would like to take this opportunity
to inform the Council that, following the announcement
that Mexico would gradually resume its participation in
United Nations peacekeeping operations, we will make
a contribution of personnel in the near future - namely,
a lieutenant commander/communications specialist and
an infantry major from the military command staff,
who will play an advisory and operations planning role
at MINUSTAH headquarters.

