Mrs. Byaje (spoke in French): At the outset,
Mr. President, I would like to congratulate your
brotherly country, the Republic of South Africa, on
your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of October. I want to commend
your choice oftopics for the Council's consideration this
month, which are ofparticular interest to our subregion.
I also thank all the members of the Security Council
and the briefers for their constructive contributions to
this debate.

While the world today is facing multiple
humanitarian crises arising from various natural and
environmental disasters, it is fair to say that those
in Central Africa are the result not only of such
disasters but also of armed conflicts fuelled by the
disproportionate proliferation of weapons throughout
the region. That is why the theme of this debate, which
is part of the Silencing the Guns in Africa by 2020
initiative, is timely, because it is one of the top priorities
of the Heads of State and Government of our subregion.
The commitment to ending all conflict by 2020 is not
only emphasized in the African Union's Agenda 2063
but, most importantly, is prioritized in its first Ten-
Year Implementation Plan. On behalf of the Economic
Community ofCentral African States (ECCAS), I would
therefore like to make a modest contribution to this
debate under the umbrella topic of peace and security
in Africa, specifically by focusing on mobilizing youth
towards the specific goal of silencing the guns by 2020.

Despite the efforts that have been made to prevent
conflicts, Central Africa is unfortunately seeing
the expansion of many armed groups committing
unspeakable crimes and continuing to make the
ECCAS region a theatre for destabilizing conflicts
that result from numerous underlying causes and
paralyse socioeconomic development. Their common
denominator takes many forms, such as marginalization
and exclusion on a basis of ethnicity, religion,
socioeconomic status or region.

When the African Union adopted the Silencing
the Guns initiative in 2013, it was in the wake of the
2010 adoption by the Heads of State of Central Africa
of the Central African Convention for the Control of
Small Arms and Light Weapons, Their Ammunition
and All Parts and Components That Can Be Used for
Their Manufacture, Repair and Assembly, known as
the Kinshasa Convention. The Convention, which
entered into force on 8 March 2017, is aimed at helping
States to effectively combat flows of illicit, devastating
and destabilizing weapons, and contains provisions for
the tracing and marking, transfer, possession, record-
keeping and stockpile management of small arms.

Against that frame of reference, I want to explain
my proposal for including youth mobilization in the
implementation of the Kinshasa Convention, together
with the cooperation of our strategic partners,
particularly the United Nations and the African Union, in
the fight against arms proliferation. The joint framework
within which those two institutions work with regional
communities, including ECCAS, to consolidate peace
and security by promoting synergistic efforts as part of
the Silencing the Guns by 2020 initiative deserves to be
encouraged for many reasons.

In that context, the twelfth annual United Nations-
African Union joint consultative meeting on the
prevention, management and resolution of conflicts
took place on 11 and 12 March, with a special focus
on the Silencing the Guns in Africa by 2020 initiative.
I cannot fail to mention the African Union high-level
meeting that took place on 11 and 12 October 2018,
bringing together regional economic communities
under the theme "Silencing the Guns in Africa by
2020: actions for an accelerated response", with special
emphasis on the gradual march towards peace through
democratic transitions in certain countries.

In that context, the General Secretariat of ECCAS
has established very close collaboration with the United
Nations Regional Centre for Peace and Disarmament in
Africa (UNREC) in implementing a project to support
African States as part of the vision of "Silencing the
guns in Africa by 2020: capacity-building in Central
Africa". However, achieving lasting peace first requires
the elimination of the root causes of the conflicts that
are plaguing the subregion, affecting first and foremost
the lives of members of the community, especially those
children and young people caught up in the vicious
circle of violence being perpetrated by armed groups.
Worse still, these destabilizing agents - driven by
the desire to control of natural resources - commit
unspeakable crimes, sow terror in their wake and strip
and rob innocent citizens of their property, their rights
and their dignity. Young people are paying a particularly
heavy price as a result of rising unemployment and
school drop-out rates, making them easy targets for the
instigators of terrorism.

ECCAS' preferred solutions for promoting peace
from a regional perspective include, inter alia, conflict
prevention and crisis management by addressing
the proliferation of small arms and light weapons,
pursuant to the Kinshasa Convention. With regard to
today's theme, young people should play a lead role in
peacebuilding by contributing more to activities planned
under the Kinshasa Convention and strengthening
prevention and early warning and response systems.

I would be remiss ifI did not mention other possible
solutions to optimizing the important potential of our
youth in the structural transformation of Africa and the
subregion, especially those aimed at counteracting the
risks incurred by the marginalization of unemployed
young people, who are insufficiently equipped to enter
the labour market. That challenge requires ECCAS,
above all and especially in view of the increasingly
young population and the growing number of young
people in the labour market, to do the following.

We must develop the skills and competences
of young people by giving them access to quality
education and vocational training in order to prepare
them for the new demands of the employment sector.
We must invest in productive sectors with high growth
potential so as to generate decent jobs areas, such as
industrialization or agriculture. We should implement
the instruments adopted by the African Union for
young people as an effective and sustainable means
of economic transformation. We must seek financial
support for our efforts to implement projects for the
empowerment of and job creation for young people.
As part of its goal to establish a regional framework
for monitoring the implementation of regional plans,
ECCAS should, among other things, ensure that young
people participate as key partners in decision-making
in all matters that may affect them. We should assist
ECCAS in its efforts to create a framework for ongoing
dialogue among young people in the subregion,
particularly with regard to regional integration, aimed
at sharing experiences, good practices and lessons
learned in creating jobs through entrepreneurship.

We must support the countries of the subregion in
developing reliable statistics to ensure that all young
people are counted. We must seek support in organizing
training workshops and exchange programmes for
young champions and leaders in the field of peace and
security, and sending them to train other young people
in their own countries. The private sector and civil
society must be engaged in the training and recruitment
of young people and go further by putting young people
first as private sector stakeholders able to create stable
jobs in the modernization of agriculture. We should
improve access to land for young people and modernize
the agricultural sector so that the work is less arduous
and more attractive. We should provide microcredit
financing to young people and support them in their
initial steps in becoming productive agents.

Finally, we must continue to urgently address the
scourges that are drawing in young people, such as
terrorism, the narcotics trade and the sale of illicit
weapons, in order to create a climate of security
and stability that is favourable to investment and
development. ECCAS will continue to involve all actors,
including civil society, women's groups, young people
and other regional communities with a View to building
interregional security cooperation. Lastly, the building
and restoring of lasting peace would also benefit from
the solidarity and support of bilateral and multilateral
partners in capacity-building initiatives that are aimed
at conflict resolution and mediation.

We undoubtedly still face major challenges, but it is
important to recognize that with the continued support
of strong leadership and sustained political will on the
part of the Heads of State of the subregion, as well as
community ownership in confronting the challenges
and a better sharing and exchange of information
and best practices in the field of security, ECCAS is
confident that Central Africa will be able to tackle
its security challenges and guarantee a lasting peace
that favours sustainable development efforts in the
subregion. In that regard, ECCAS will continue to
encourage exchanges among its members at the highest
level and among young people in order to ensure the
regular monitoring and assessment of the progress
being made in joint projects and important issues on
peace and security.

Finally, ECCAS counts on the support of all
its partners in the implementation of the Kinshasa
Convention so that we may eradicate arms trafficking in
the subregion, devoting ourselves fully to development
efforts and giving a decent and promising future to our
young people.

The meeting rose at 12.55 pm.
