Ms. Guadey (Ethiopia): We express our
appreciation to the Chinese presidency for organizing
this briefing meeting on the activities of United Nations
police forces in peacekeeping operations. We thank
Assistant Secretary-General Alexandre Zouev for his
briefing. We are also grateful to all the three Police
Commissioners -from the United Nations Mission
in South Sudan, the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and the United Nations Mission for Justice
Support in Haiti - for sharing their field experiences,
as well as Ms. Reitano for her briefing.

Ethiopia recognizes the important role that United
Nations police plays in promoting stability and long-
term development in countries affected by conflict.
The landscape where United Nations peacekeepers
are deployed today has changed dramatically. The
significance of United Nations police has never been
so critical, in the light of the corresponding change in
conflict dynamics, the transformation in the scope and
complexity of peacekeeping mandates and the evolving
trend towards multidimensional peacekeeping.

United Nations policing has become a vital
component of peacekeeping, particularly in carrying
out mandated tasks related to supporting the capacity
of host State law enforcement institutions. The role that
United Nations police components play in facilitating
transitions from peacekeeping to development
and peacebuilding is also crucial. Past and recent
experiences, such as in Liberia, among other places,
are examples of the demonstrable success of United
Nations police in peacebuilding and sustaining peace.
In particular, United Nations policing functions
in supporting host States through monitoring and
restructuring local police forces, training and advising
other law enforcement institutions, restoring and
promoting public safety and safeguarding the rule of
law have been indispensable.

We believe that national ownership should be
the guiding principle for United Nations police when
supporting host States in building and developing the
capacity of local police forces. Host State national
capacity gaps should also inform the composition of
United Nations police components, particularly during
planning and recruitment and in the provision of
guidance and training.

Where mandated, the managing of civilian tasks
that United Nations police undertake in the context
of conflict and post-conflict situations, including in
preventing and addressing violence against women
and children, also remains vital. In that regard, the
deployment of women police officers will have a
practical and positive impact in winning the trust oflocal
communities. That is why increasing the participation
of women in United Nations peacekeeping is very
important. It is a source of pride to us that Ethiopia is
one of the leading contributors in that regard.

Peacekeeping mandates related to police activities
need to be clear and achievable. Police-contributing
countries should also ensure that the forces they
deploy - whether individual police officers, formed
police units or specialized police teams in the field - are
well-trained and equipped in order to implement their
mandates. Furthermore, the Secretariat has a key role
to play, including through enhancing the effectiveness
of the strategic generation of police personnel with
better planning, appropriate expertise, language skills
and operational readiness.

Strengthening the operational and policy coherence
on United Nations police within the United Nations
system therefore remains very important. In that regard,
we believe that the triangular cooperation among
the Security Council, troop- and police-contributing
countries and the Secretariat in policing is key to
strengthening the effectiveness of United Nations
police in peacekeeping.

Ethiopia has made a very modest contribution
of police personnel to United Nations peacekeeping
and is exerting every possible effort to enhance its
participation, including through the deployment of
formed police units.

I want to conclude by reaffirming Ethiopia's
commitment to enhancing its participation and
contribution to United Nations Police in the years ahead.

