Miss Durrant (Jamaica): Mr. President, let me
thank you, first of all, for convening this open debate
on the situation in West Africa. Your country, Mali, has
over the past two years ensured that the Council's
focus on the situation in West Africa has been
addressed within a regional context. We now have the
opportunity, weeks before the Mano River Union
meets, to assess just how much tangible progress has
been made in alleviating the suffering of the people of
the subregion and in determining how to promote peace
and development.

We must recall that, under the leadership of
President Konare, the Security Council summit in
September last year pledged, in part III of resolution
1318 (2000), to promote durable and sustainable
development in Africa and urged the United Nations
system to develop

"comprehensive and integrated strategies to
address the root causes of conflicts, including
their economic and social dimensions".

It is in this context that Jamaica welcomes the
report on the follow-up to the inter-agency mission to
West Africa, led by Assistant Secretary-General
Ibrahima Fall, whom we thank very much for the
comprehensive briefing that we received this morning.
His report complements the general thrust of the
Secretary-General's implementation of the
recommendations of his report on the causes of conflict
and the promotion of durable peace and sustainable
development in Africa.

Today's briefing once again underscores the need
for an integrated, holistic strategy involving the
Governments and the peoples of the States concerned,
the United Nations system and the regional and
subregional organizations to help to prevent the further
emergence of conflicts, restore peace and security and
promote economic and social development.

The Security Council's mission to Sierra Leone
and other countries in West Africa in October last year
concluded that no lasting progress can be made in
Sierra Leone without comprehensive action to tackle
the current instability in the West African region, in
particular in the Mano River Union member countries.

It also concluded that the international
community as a whole must be prepared to act in
urgent support, both through material assistance for
regional security initiatives and by exerting pressure on
those most responsible for fomenting instability for
selfish advantage.

Assistant Secretary-General Fall has outlined the
challenges to be addressed if sustainable peace and
development are to be established in West Africa.
These include the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration of ex-combatants; stemming the
circulation of illegal arms; children and armed conflict;
peace, justice and national reconciliation; the
humanitarian situation; human rights; and support for
the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) and the Mano River Union.

We agree with Assistant Secretary-General Fall
that action by the Security Council must take place
within the wider initiative developed by African
leaders and endorsed by the Organization of African
Unity in July 2001. We also note that the Open-ended
Working Group established by the General Assembly
on the causes of conflict and the promotion of durable
peace and sustainable development in Africa
recommended, inter alia, that ensuring greater
cooperation in issues of conflict prevention and peace-
building, particularly in Africa, should be a priority
and focus on the consultations between the Presidents
of the General Assembly, the Security Council and the
Economic and Social Council. This, my delegation
believes, will complement the innovative approach
taken by the Secretary-General through the inter-
agency mission led by Assistant Secretary-General
Fall.

The Open-ended Working Group also called for a
renewed impetus to the need for concerted action on
the education of children, especially girls, as well as
addressing the issue of child soldiers and the
reintegration of demobilized child soldiers into
educational, technical and vocational training
institutions and income-generating activities. It called
for greater support for the demobilization, disarmament
and reintegration programmes. My delegation fully
supports the Working Group's proposal for the funding
of such programmes through the regular budget of
peacekeeping operations as a permanent and effective
solution to the shortfall in resources.

The group also called upon the international
community to provide assistance to United Nations
offices in Africa; to assist African countries to build
capacity to integrate peace-building activities into their
planning and budgetary processes; to support efforts of
civil society, including women's groups, to work for
peace; to seek more effective mechanisms to address
the issue of the illicit trade in natural resources and
arms; and to support efforts to provide assistance in
post-conflict rehabilitation, including the
reconstruction of infrastructure, restoring social
services, promoting good governance including support
for an independent judiciary and a professional police
force, strengthening human-resource and institutional
capacity and the setting up of public services, and
support for the promotion of good governance at the
international level and of transparency in financial,
monetary and trading systems.

It is in that context that my delegation welcomes
the fact that the United Nations has begun
implementing the recommendations of the inter-agency
report. The most significant is the proposed
establishment of the Office of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for West
Africa, which Jamaica fully supports. The
establishment of that Office will no doubt send a
positive signal that the United Nations is serious about
enhancing its capacity and collaboration in the
subregion. The enhanced linkages in the work of the
United Nations and other partners in the subregion
through promoting an integrated subregional approach
and facilitating coordination and information exchange
will augur well for the region.

There is also considerable benefit to be gained
from the establishment of a formalized mechanism of
consultation among the States members of the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), the Mano River Union countries, other
regional and subregional partners and the United
Nations in order to define and harmonize national and
subregional activities and to develop cohesive
strategies within the region. In that regard, we welcome
the communique issued after the 16 November meeting
held here at the United Nations with the Secretary-
General.

My delegation has noted the improvement in the
conflict situation in Sierra Leone. We note that tangible
progress has been made in the deployment of the
United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone throughout the
country, in the demobilization and disarmament
process, in the release of child combatants, in the
training and deployment of the Sierra Leone army and
in the transformation of the Revolutionary United Front
into a political party. While sustainable peace is not yet
a reality, we must build on the momentum for peace;
we trust that we will achieve the desired goal. As
Sierra Leone enters a peace-building phase and is
preparing for elections in 2002, the Security Council
must define an effective exit strategy which involves
measured and transitional disengagement from the
country so as to prevent a recurrence of conflict.

The sustained commitment and assistance of the
international community beyond the conduct of
elections is therefore critical, and, as other post-
conflict situations have shown, elections should not be
considered as an end in themselves, but as a step
towards the re-establishment of durable peace.

We also note that there have been some
improvements in the relations among countries of the
Mano River Union, and we welcome the continued
dialogue among the leaders of those countries. That is
encouraging, and every effort must be made at this
juncture to ensure that the gains made so far are not
reversed.

Civil society must be commended for its role in
conflict prevention and peace-building in the Mano
River basin. The Mano River Union Women's Peace
Network has played an instrumental and constructive
role in the peace process, particularly in facilitating
dialogue among the leaders and in empowering local
community groups to engage in peacekeeping and
peacemaking activities. We applaud those efforts, and
we welcome plans by various United Nations
organizations to assist those groups as they further the
cause of peace.

The situation in Liberia, however, remains of
critical concern. The deteriorating humanitarian crisis
has the potential to affect the peace process in Sierra
Leone and in the region as a whole. During this year,
Jamaica has pointed to the need for the international
community to remain engaged with Liberia through
increased humanitarian aid to that country. We urge
international donors to increase funding to the
consolidated appeal for West Africa in order to address
the crippling humanitarian situation in the countries
concerned.

The continuing humanitarian crisis in the border
areas of Sierra Leone, Guinea and Liberia, involving
thousands of internally displaced persons and refugees,
also needs to be resolved. The flow of refugees across
the borders of those three countries has fuelled one of
the worst of humanitarian catastrophes. Jamaica
supported, in principle, the need for an interposition
force along the shared borders of Liberia, Guinea and
Sierra Leone, but we regret that this is still far from
being a reality owing to the lack of requisite funding
for ECOWAS to undertake that venture.

With regard to Guinea-Bissau, my delegation
notes with regret that what had appeared to be a
success story of the United Nations in effective
peacekeeping now borders on collapse and despair. We
have noted the problems related to governance and the
lack of administrative structures to sustain economic
growth and development, among other things. If due
attention is not paid to those underlying factors, the
situation in Guinea-Bissau could return to violence. We
appreciate the efforts of the United Nations Peace-
building Support Office in Guinea-Bissau, and we
believe that there need to be more post-conflict peace-
building support structures, which create the conditions
for reconstruction and development.

In terms of the future steps that could be taken by
the Security Council and by the United Nations to
enhance a regional approach, I wish to underscore
some of the points that were highlighted by the
Secretary-General in his implementation report on the
causes of conflict in Africa.

First, the United Nations system and other
partners could assist African countries in examining
ways in which regional and subregional integration
could be used to support economic discipline and
sound economic policy and to facilitate the
establishment of solid institutional and confidence-
building links between neighbouring States.

The second point relates to the need to strengthen
the capacity for an integrated subregional approach to
conflict prevention and peace-building. Here, it is
important that our conflict prevention strategies be
aimed at strengthening the capacity of ECOWAS for
conflict prevention, management and resolution and for
ensuring security. The need to develop the early
warning capacity of ECOWAS is also of importance.

Over the past two years we have been gratified to
see that African issues on the Council's agenda have
been discussed frequently. But on the other hand, we
believe that more tangible progress must be made in
conflict prevention, conflict resolution and post-
conflict peace-building efforts if sustained economic
growth and sustainable development are to be achieved
within the framework of sustainable peace.

