Mr. Sarkowicz (Poland): I would like to begin,
Mr. President, by thanking you and the delegation
of the United States for your initiative in organizing
this important debate on the safety of journalists.
Poland fully aligns itself with the statement made by
the observer of the European Union on behalf of its
member States.

Let me add just a few remarks. Freedom of
expression is a cornerstone of democratic societies.
It is crucial to the promotion of the rule of law,
democracy and good governance. Although affirmed
in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights,
it is being violated as we speak, often because the
safety of journalists, who seek, receive and transmit
information, is in danger.
Press and media coverage is beneficial to all.
Journalists play a key role in the democratic process;
they are the eyes and voices of civil society. They
are a check on Governments and monitor those
Governments' deliverables. Citizen journalism has
contributed greatly to the political changes in Tunisia
and Libya. Journalism still gives hope to people who
struggle under undemocratic regimes, and it alerts the
international community.

The protection of journalists should cover all
news providers, professional and non-professional,
as well as journalists' sources, and should exist in
time of peace as well as conflict. Recognizing the
importance of freedom of expression for the process of
democratization and journalists' key role in it, Poland
has consistently raised the issue ofjournalists' safety
on the international stage. We support activities that
promote freedom of expression and raise awareness
of the significance of a free media environment. In an
effort to share our experience from our own transition
period, we organize lessons-learned workshops on
democracy for journalists, one of which was held in
Myanmar last year. Since 2011, we have organized, with
Poland's Reporters Foundation, the Eastern Partnership
Journalism Prize contest, which sends a clear signal
that journalists' work is appreciated and noticed.

We are happy that 2012 bore so much fruit in the
form of commitments aimed at strengthening the safety
of journalists. The United Nations Plan of Action on
the Safety of Journalists and the Issue of Impunity, the
guidebook on the subject issued by the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and,
lastly, the Human Rights Council's resolution 21/12 on
the safety ofjournalists have been very useful.

Poland continues to work on international standards
and on further improving guarantees of reporters'
safety. In April of this year the Polish Ministry of
Foreign Affairs, in cooperation with the embassies of
Austria and Switzerland, organized an international
conference in Warsaw on the safety of journalists.
Among the participants were representatives of
the State, the OSCE, the Council of Europe and
UNESCO, along with journalists and representatives of
non-governmental organizations. Participants discussed
specific recommendations and exchanged views on the
legal framework for the protection of journalists, the
security of investigative journalists and best practices.
The recommendations were subsequently submitted to
the Human Rights Council, UNESCO, and the OSCE
and yesterday were also sent to every United Nations
mission in New York.
The challenge here is to further promote and
enhance respect for international standards in this area.
Journalists should be protected from threats to their
security. More must be done to address the root causes
of violence against them. Preventive mechanisms must
be discussed and formulated. We should not hesitate
to ask questions about the most serious threats to the
safety of journalists, the existence of common threat
patterns, successful solutions and how we can ensure
respect for international obligations. And we should do
our utmost to find the answers.

