Mr. Grauls (Belgium) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank the Special Envoys, Mr. Salim and
Mr. Eliasson, for their presentations. I would like to
thank them also for their tireless efforts over the past
18 months. We would like them to know that Belgium
has very much appreciated their commitment.

The briefings that we have just heard confirmed
once again how much the political process in Darfur is
deadlocked and how tragic the humanitarian situation
remains. I would like to focus my statement on a few
points.

The parties' lack of political will to engage a
negotiating process shows that the international
community must review its overall strategy for the
region. Even more so than in the past, the international
community must in the future provide its political
support to the mediation efforts and bring influence to
bear on the parties to get them to change their
behaviour.
In that context, it seems to us that the idea of a
high-level meeting to be convened by the Secretary-
General and the African Union presidency should
undoubtedly be reactivated, and I think the two Envoys

were quite right to offer this proposal. That meeting
should obviously be very well prepared, but in our
opinion it could make a difference.

The Security Council has remained - let us be
honest about this - silent for far too long with regard
to the absence of progress. It is time for us to call
clearly on the parties to act responsibly. We also need
to think seriously about adopting new measures against
those who are standing in the way of peace, and to see
how we can positively influence the parties who are
showing goodwill.

We also welcome the imminent appointment of a
joint mediator. We need to find a mechanism to give
that mediator the necessary support and political
direction.

I wish to express Belgium's extreme concern with
regard to the recent deadlock in relations between the
Sudan and Chad, a deadlock to which Mr. Eliasson and
Mr. Salim alluded. We very much regret the cross-
support to rebel movement on both sides of the border.
We call upon the Sudan and Chad to respect both the
spirit and the letter of the Dakar Agreement. They must
work with countries of the region and international
partners that are part of the contact group in order to
normalize their bilateral relations as soon as possible.

The Council has mandated a hybrid mission that
is expensive and complex in order to protect civilians
in Darfur. This international commitment makes it even
more inadmissible that the parties to the Darfur conflict
continue the violence, leading to an increase in the
number of displaced persons and other victims. As the
Secretary-General has said, no matter how many troops
or how much equipment a peacekeeping mission has, it
cannot truly exercise its mandate in the midst of open
hostilities directed against the civilians it is supposed
to protect.

Given the impasse in the political process, I
would like to recall the importance of the
implementation of the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement (CPA). It is the basis for any solution to the
situation in Darfur. In that context, we welcome the
road map concluded between the CPA parties on 8 June
to finally resolve the problem of Abyei, and we call
upon the parties to implement the road map forthwith.

I would not want to conclude without once again
stressing a major priority of my delegation: the fight
against impunity in Darfur. The Sudan has a dual
obligation in this respect - to cooperate with the
International Criminal Court (ICC) in accordance with
resolution 1593 (2005) and to work to implement the
sanctions imposed by the Security Council. Last week,
the Council adopted a presidential statement
(S/PRST/2008/2l) reminding the Sudan of its
obligation to cooperate with the International Criminal
Court, including with respect to the arrest warrants
with regard to two individuals, one of whom is now a
Minister in the Government of the Sudan. It is essential
that the Security Council persevere in this approach
and that, whenever necessary, it remind the Sudan of
its obligations under that resolution.

