The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received letters from the representatives of
Australia, Indonesia, New Zealand and Portugal, in which
they request to be invited to participate in the discussion of
the item on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the
usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council,
to invite those representatives to participate in the
discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance with the
relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Wibisono
(Indonesia) and Mr. Brito (Portugal) took seats at the
Council table; Ms. Wensley (Australia) and
Mr. Powles (New Zealand) took the seats reserved for
them at the side of the Council Chamber.

The President: The Security Council will now begin
its consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached in its
prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the report
of the Secretary-General on the question of East Timor,
document 8/1999/595. Members of the Council also have
before them document S/1999/666, which contains the text
of a draft resolution prepared in the course of the Council's
prior consultations.

I should like to draw the attention of the members of
the Council to the following documents: 8/1999/547, letter
dated 11 May 1999 from the Permanent Representative of
Germany to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-
General; S/1999/612, letter dated 27 May 1999 from the
Permanent Representative of Indonesia to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council;
and S/l999/652, letter dated 7 June 1999 from the
Charge d'affaires ad interim of the Permanent Mission of
Portugal addressed to the Secretary-General and to the
President of the Security Council.

It is my understanding that the Security Council is
ready to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution
(S/1999/666) before it. If I hear no objection, I shall put
the draft resolution to the vote now.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
A vote was taken by show of hands.

In favour:
Argentina, Bahrain, Brazil, Canada, China, France,
Gabon, Gambia, Malaysia, Namibia, Netherlands,
Russian Federation, Slovenia, United Kingdom of

Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of
America


The President: There were 15 votes in favour. The
draft resolution has been adopted unanimously as

resolution 1246 (1999).

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The meeting rose at 12.20 pm.

