Mr. Kumalo (South Africa): Thank you,
Mr. President, for being generous enough to give me
the floor. I just wanted to make a clarification. I thank
the Prosecutor, Mr. Moreno-Ocampo, very much for
his clarification.

The only issue I wanted to make clear is that we
are the Security Council. We are not lawyers. We are
not prosecutors. We sit here, having to make decisions,
and we look at the entire Rome Statute. The Rome
Statute makes a provision for this article to be used,
and the Security Council will, at the time when it takes
this issue up, balance the two things: the maintenance
of international peace and security, and the fight
against impunity. The Security Council must be for
fighting impunity, but there is also the other side to it.

My question was intended to make it clear that
people who are not in the Council should not see us
debating this issue and then interpret it as if we are
condoning all these horrible things that we have
spoken of. We in no way condone them, and we regret
that they take place, but we also have the responsibility
to look at the entire matter.

Now, whether the Security Council eventually
agrees with that or not, that is precisely what makes it
fun, because all 15 of us will have to decide if we
agree or not. I was just concerned that when we ask
these tough questions about how to balance all these
awful things we are hearing about and the maintenance
of peace in Sudan, those who are sitting here watching

this must not get the impression that, just because we
are asking the question, we therefore have taken one
side or the other. We have not, and we are delighted
that we have the Court, which can go in and search for
all this information.

I hope Mr. Moreno-Ocampo never gives up in his
work and that he continues as his mandate allows him
to. But we also have the other mandate here, and at
some point we will have to look at and balance the
two. I think some of my colleagues pointed out that, at
some point, we need to step back and not wear
prosecutor's caps, saying that we want to jail so-and-
so. But rather but we need to look back at all the
evidence and say: how do we then carry out our
mandate? I think Mr. Moreno-Ocampo's clarification
has really helped.

