Mr. Tiirk: At the last briefing, on 15 December
2003, I informed the Council that the Bougainville
Revolutionary Army and the Bougainville Resistance
Force agreed on the destruction of all contained
weapons. I am pleased to inform the Council today that
at the meeting of the Peace Process Consultative
Committee held on 17 December 2003, that agreement
was transformed into a binding resolution.

At the same briefing of 15 December, the Council
supported the Secretary-General's recommendation to
downsize the United Nations Political Office in
Bougainville and to name its successor the United
Nations Observer Mission in Bougainville (UNOMB).
UNOMB has been given a mandate to monitor, among
other things, weapons destruction and the Bougainville
constitutional process. The Mission is also expected, in
accordance with its mandate and the amended Papua
New Guinea Constitution, to verify and to certify that
the level of security is conducive to holding elections.

Before I update the Council on this and other
recent developments, I would like to express our
satisfaction that the new Mission - the United Nations
Observer Mission in Bougainville, headed since
1 March 2004 by Mr. Tor Stenbock - is working in
close cooperation and consultation with the national
Government of Papua New Guinea and the
Bougainville leaders. I would also like to use this
opportunity today to commend the excellent work done
in the position of Head of the Mission by the former
Director, Mr. Noel Sinclair.

I would like to proceed to the update on weapons
disposal. The stage III decision on the final fate of the
weapons contained a provision that allowed ex-
combatants, unit commanders and communities
themselves to decide on the exact date and method of
destruction. The United Nations Observer Mission in
Bougainville made full use of that flexibility by
decentralizing the process of weapons destruction. As a
result, the Mission has succeeded in greatly expediting
weapons destruction. In its publicized messages to the
communities of Bougainville, UNOMB emphasized the
full implementation of the Peace Agreement as the way
to autonomy and lasting peace in Bougainville.
To date, 1,588 pieces of contained weapons - 81
per cent of the arsenals of the Bougainville
Revolutionary Army and the Bougainville Resistance
Force - have been destroyed. UNOMB has already
certified that five of ten Bougainville districts have
completed the weapons disposal programme. The
destruction of the weapons has been accompanied by
ceremonies that have been used as opportunities to
promote awareness of the peace process across the
island. We would like to note that the actual
destruction of weapons has been carried out by the
Bougainvilleans under UNOMB supervision.

The implementation of the weapons disposal
programme represents significant progress for the
people of Bougainville, who have suffered enormously
as a consequence of the fighting, which ended several
years ago. Their decision to make Bougainville
weapons-free is a courageous act that deserves our
highest praise and support, as are the specific steps
taken recently that gave full meaning to that decision.

That also provides additional incentive for
progress in the area of constitution-making. I would
like to make a few references to the constitutional
process.

At the Peace Process Consultative Committee
meeting held on 25 February 2004, the Papua New
Guinea Government provided the Bougainvillean
leaders with its comments on the second draft of the
Bougainville constitution. The Bougainville
Constitutional Commission is working on
incorporating those comments into the third and final
draft of the constitution, which is expected to be
produced by the end of this month. The draft would
then be submitted for approval by the Bougainville
Constituent Assembly in June 2004. Following its
adoption by the Constituent Assembly, it would be
submitted to the national Government for endorsement,
which is expected to take place by the end of July. The
earliest possible time frame for the elections would
then be the end of November or the beginning of
December 2004.

Following the completion of all constitutional
phases, UNOMB will continue to consult closely with
the Government of Papua New Guinea and with the
parties in Bougainville regarding their intention to
proceed to elections as soon as practicable. The
Secretariat will come back to the Security Council to
report on that matter and on progress made during the
next briefing, in June 2004, prior to the expiration of
UNOMB's mandate.
The Bougainville Interim Provincial Government
has also begun to make preparations for the next steps
in the electoral process by determining a timetable for
the completion of the constitution and for elections for
the autonomous Bougainville Government. The
Provincial Government recently took another step
towards autonomy by establishing a ministry for peace
and autonomy. The new ministry will act as the
Bougainville counterpart to the national Government's
Bougainville Peace and Restoration Office. The
ministry is also expected to ensure awareness of the
peace process throughout Bougainville and to facilitate
reconciliation ceremonies on the island.

I shall now say a few words about the
Bougainville police. The National Executive Council
delegated police powers and functions to the
Bougainville Interim Provincial Government on 17
December 2003. In a further step towards autonomy,
the Governor appointed the former leader of the
Bougainville Resistance Force as Bougainville's first
Minister of Police. In addition to the delegation of
police powers, the law and justice programmes of
Australia and New Zealand have further strengthened
Bougainville's policing and judicial institutions. It is
hoped that the programmes will, over time, help to
build capacity for Bougainville's police, justice and
correctional institutions. Furthermore, the Australian
Federal Police plans to deploy 19 officers to
Bougainville as part of an enhanced cooperation
package with the Government of Papua New Guinea.
So there has been significant progress in that domain as
well.

There has also been some progress, however
incremental, concerning the involvement of Francis
Ona and his supporters in the peace process. On the
positive side, the so-called "A" company - the
dominant force in Mr. Ona's Me'ekamui Defence
Force - has joined the peace process, and in April
2004 it completed destruction of its weapons. The "A"
company has also been very active in conducting peace
awareness meetings in the so-called no-go zone.

However, other elements of the Me'ekamui
Defence Force have not contained their weapons.
UNOMB has been informed that the zone's inhabitants
are dissatisfied with restrictions on the freedom of their
movement caused by the continued manning of the
roadblocks, which inhibits access and the free flow of
services and goods to the no-go zone. Regrettably,
Francis Ona continues to avoid engaging in dialogue
with the Bougainvillean leaders and with the national
Government on this matter.
In its communications with Mr. Ona, the United
Nations Observer Mission has been informing him of
the most recent developments in the peace process and
has been expressing its readiness to resume regular
contacts with him. On the whole, we believe that
progress with regard to Francis Ona has been
significant and that his influence continues to be
reduced.

Before concluding, I would like to say a few
words about the coordination between the United
Nations Observer Mission and United Nations agencies
with regard to Bougainville. The Mission has
continued to work in close cooperation with the United
Nations Development Programme (UNDP), UNICEF
and other United Nations organizations on the practical
aspects of peace-building in Bougainville. The Mission
has facilitated the expansion of UNICEF's programme
on Bougainville by providing political, administrative
and logistical support to that agency. A delegation from
UNICEF recently visited Bougainville for 10 days of
workshops and meetings. UNICEF is expected to
establish an office in Arawa and to employ a locally
hired programme manager.

The UNDP has nearly completed preparations for
the implementation of its second-phase rehabilitation
programme for Bougainville, which would include
assistance in agriculture, capacity-building and other
areas. The UNDP is scheduled to begin recruitment of
an international programme manager, who would direct
the implementation of the second phase of its
Bougainville programme. The cooperation between
UNDP and UNOMB in consolidating their offices in
Buka has led to a reduction of their operational costs.

In conclusion, I would like to commend the
parties for their commitment to the steady
implementation of the Bougainville Peace Agreement
and for increasingly assuming ownership of that
process. It has already become a success story - a
triumph of cooperative actions on the part of the
successive Governments of Papa New Guinea, of the
people of Bougainville, of regional partners and of a
very small - but also very efficient - United Nations
Mission. We call on the parties to maintain the
momentum, and we urge them to redouble their efforts
to finalize the Bougainville constitutional process,
opening the way for the election of an autonomous
Bougainville Government as soon as practicable this
year. UNOMB will continue to assist them in that
endeavour in every possible way.

