Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, I would like to congratulate
Ambassador Karen Pierce and the delegation of the
United Kingdom for their very successful presidency
of the Security Council in August. We also wish you,
Madam President, and your delegation success during
your presidency, and we guarantee you all the necessary
support from the delegation of Equatorial Guinea.

Allow me to welcome to this meeting His Excellency
Mr. Denis Moncada Colindres, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Nicaragua. I also thank Mr. Gonzalo Koncke,
Chief of Staff to the Secretary General of the Organization
of American States, and the representative of civil
society, Mr. Felix Maradiaga, for their comprehensive
briefings, which have provided a very timely and detailed
explanation of the situation in Nicaragua.

Over the past decade, we have witnessed numerous
situations that have resulted in death, injury and other
atrocities as a result of civil war and acts of terrorism,
where the devastating effects of weapons have become a
reality, leaving victims in many parts of the world.

In accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations, we, the Member States, entrust to the Security
Council the primary responsibility for the maintenance
of international peace and security, and we agree that, in
carrying out its functions under that responsibility, the
Council act on our behalf. Such a task, in spite of all the
difficulties, continues to be vigorously undertaken.

In view of the continuing threats to international
peace and security, the action of the Security Council,
although notable in many areas, needs to substantially
and significantly improve, envisaging what is set out
in Chapter VIII of the Charter, which defines the
mechanisms and means necessary for interaction among
the Security Council and regional and subregional
organizations, in order to strenthen the prevention,
management and peaceful settlement of conflicts. Our
Government recognizes, appreciates and greatly values
the concern of both the Security Council and regional
and subregional organizations in the face of any threat to
international peace and security.

In Nicaragua's case, our Government expresses its
great concern about the political crisis that began in
the country in April and the popular uprisings that are
taking place in several cities of the country, which are
led by students and supported by workers, professionals
and entrepreneurs. Such events have claimed hundreds of
lives and led to numerous injuries, considerably affecting
the socioeconomic situation of the country, as illustrated
in the briefings we have just heard.

The Government of the Republic of Equatorial
Guinea recognizes the right of citizens to demonstrate,
which is also recognized by the Nicaraguan legal system.
Such demonstrations must be peaceful expressions of
the population and their convening, development and
conclusion must be regulated by the law, while also
respecting the rights of those who do not support them.

We are convinced that any differences must be
resolved through an ongoing quest for a peaceful solution,
through consultation and dialogue, always in accordance
with the principles of international law and in accordance
with absolute respect for human rights. We therefore urge
the parties to continue the national dialogue and, to that
end, seek the support of international organizations to
act as mediators.

I should like to conclude my statement by, on the one
hand, encouraging the international community - in
particular the Organization of American States and
the Catholic Church - to continue its constructive
mediation role so as to establish the necessary external
conditions to facilitate consultations, dialogue and
agreement to avert a deterioration of the situation and
help the parties find a negotiated solution and, on the
other hand, by calling on the Government of Nicaragua
to open up to the international community and facilitate
the putting in place of the mechanisms needed for a
resolution of the serious political crisis the country
is experiencing. That is how we truly believe we can
address the situation in Nicaragua, and not by including
it on the programme of work of the Security Council.

