Mr. Dorani (Djibouti) (interpretation from French):
I should like first of all, Sir, to congratulate you on your
accession to the presidency of the Security Council for the
month of May. Having worked with you and your
delegation during the last two years in the Council, we
know you to be a skilled and experienced diplomat whose
upstanding nature, loyalty and human warmth will ensure
the Council's success. I should also like to thank your
predecessor, Ambassador Kovanda, for the outstanding way
in which he guided the work of the Council last month.

I should like to say that my brief statement is intended
to be frank and direct and will in no way try to shock
anyone's sensibilities. That said, yet again the Council has
before it the question of Palestine, which shows how
serious the matter is. For the peace that is so ardently
desired in that part of the world has unfortunately just been
cast back into the balance by the regrettable behaviour of
one party, namely, Israel, the occupying Power.

Forty-seven years ago, the General Assembly took a
decision through its resolution 181 (II) to establish two
States in Palestine under British mandate: the State of Israel
and the Arab State of Palestine. The Jews living under that
mandate accepted the resolution and established their own
State on 14 May 1948. However, the descendants of the
Canaanites, who had inhabited that land for thousands of
years, namely, the indigenous populations of those
regions - the Palestinians - supported by other Arab
States, rejected the resolution, and rightly so: they felt
wronged and usurped, and therefore refused to be content
with a part of the territory. We know what happened next:
destruction and misery for all the peoples of the region,
in particular for the Palestinian people who, with the
signing in Washington of the Declaration of Principles to
some extent went back on their original decision by
accepting the division of their country, which would
beyond doubt enable them, sooner or later, to establish at
last their own independent and democratic State, with
East Jerusalem as its capital.

It is now Israel's turn to wake up to existing facts
and realities - facts and realities that can never now be
got around. It is now Israel's turn to think hard about all
the lessons of the past by formally and unambiguously
accepting the division that it accepted in 1948 - to
accept that same division, in other words, to accept, to the
east of its own 1967 frontiers, its future neighbouring
State, the State of Palestine.

One has the impression that today we are reliving
the same scenario as 47 years ago, but with the important
difference that there has been a kind of switch or role
reversal. On the one hand, we have a people that is
utterly exhausted, that has not yet come to the end of a
long and painful road punctuated with destruction and
massacres such as those of Deir Yassin and Sabra and
Shatila, to cite but two examples; a people that, even
before it had created its own State, had already
recognized the State that was occupying it, and the
principles of peaceful coexistence and good-
neighbourliness, by accepting resolution 242 (1967); a
people whose only fault, if I may so describe it, is that it
aspires to live in peace in its own independent State, that
is to be.

On the other hand, we have the Israeli
Government - although we are sometimes told that it is
not the Government but rather a very powerful and
influential part of the Israeli political class - and not the
people of Israel, because, fortunately, certainly not the
whole population of Israel shares the points of view of its
Government on problems such as expropriation and
annexation, and therefore on expansion.

To judge by the facts, it would seem today that the
Government of Israel has gone back on its acceptance of
General Assembly resolution 181 (II), and by so doing it
denies the Palestinian people the right to live in peace
within its future boundaries, implicitly recognized in that
resolution. The historical irony is that this principle,
contained in resolution 242 (1967) and still cherished by
Israel until a short time ago, has recently been rejected by

 

that country, to the detriment of the Palestinians living in
the West Bank and in Gaza.

On Sunday the Israeli Cabinet decided not to
confiscate any more Arab land. In this respect I should like
to cite the statement made to the Council by the
Ambassador of Israel, Mr. Yaacobi, on 28 February 1995.
On the subject of settlements, he stated,

"Immediately after the present Government of Israel
was formed in July 1992, it substantially changed
Israel's settlement policy The Government stopped
allocating public resources to support the extension of
existing settlements. No land has been or will be
confiscated to establish new settlements." (S/PV.3505,  p- 8)

I leave it to the Council to judge what happened afterwards.

Israel cannot have it both ways, both peace and land.
The pursuit of the establishment of new settlements and
acts of confiscation and expropriation of Arab land,
especially in East Jerusalem and its environs, can only
serve to block the peace process. Such a policy and such
actions contravene international law, the resolutions of the
General Assembly and the Security Council, the Fourth
Geneva Convention, of 1949, and the Declaration of
Principles signed in Washington.

Members of the Council are aware that a widespread,
generalized feeling of disenchantment, disapproval and
condemnation has come over the Islamic Arab and
Christian Arab world. The Council must not ignore that
feeling and must respond appropriately. The Council has
before it a moderate and balanced draft resolution that will
no doubt contribute to calming nerves and relaunching
negotiations - but this time in a spirit of sincerity.
Djibouti expects that at the end of this debate the Council
will adopt that draft resolution.

I should like to conclude my statement with the
following very sincere remarks directed to the Ambassador
of Israel.

The sons of Ishmael - one may sometimes lose sight
of the fact that they are your cousins - genuinely want
peace, but not just any kind of peace. They want a just and
lasting peace - the peace of the brave, as General de
Gaulle called it. I am sure that the sons of Isaac also want
peace. To judge by facts, the Palestinian leaders - first
and foremost, Chairman Arafat - unlike the Israeli
leadership, have a burning desire for that peace, as they
have demonstrated on many occasions.

To be sure, the people of Palestine is today weak,
but it has held out its hand to the people of Israel, which
is very strong and powerful. To be sure, Mr. Ambassador,
you have won almost all the wars. To be sure, you are a
regional Power. To be sure, you are a great force on the
international stage. But allow me to remind you of what
has become of peoples just as strong and civilizations just
as powerful in the past. We do not know what the future
might hold for us. How many weak peoples later became
powerful - and vice versa?

In saying this, I should like to be perfectly clear: I
wish no ill to anyone - in this case, the people of Israel.
I should simply like to say that Israel must take advantage
of its enormous power and not put it at the service of a
policy based on expropriation, annexation and
humiliation, but, rather, use it for tolerance, acceptance
and good-neighbourliness. When one is strong and, above
all, when one considers the future, one must comfort,
assist and share with one's neighbour. The example of
Europe after the Second World War is a good lesson. The
prophets of Israel also taught us that lesson, and let us
recall that they are our own prophets as well.

Finally, the Government of Israel must recognize
one thing: without a just and lasting peace with the
Palestinian people and its leadership, there will never be
peace in the Middle East.

