Mr. Seger (Switzerland) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset, I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for
convening this very timely debate.

(spoke in French)

The role of the Security Council in maintaining
international peace and security and the mandate of the
International Criminal Court to fight impunity go hand
in hand. We must therefore do our utmost to maximize
the synergies between the two bodies. In my statement,
I will focus on the powers of the Security Council to
refer situations to the Court in order to highlight two
points.

First, the decision to refer a situation to the Court
should be reasoned and consistent, as nearly all previous
speakers have stated. In order to ensure a significant
deterrent effect and to uphold the credibility of the Court
and the United Nations in their fight against impunity,
there can be no double standards. When a State fails
to assume its primary responsibility, namely, to protect
its population, on the one hand, and to investigate
mass atrocities and prosecute their perpetrators, on the
other, the International Criminal Court must be tasked
to intervene as a measure of last resort. The Security
Council must ensure that there is justice for all victims
of the worst crimes, not only for some.

In that context, the situation in Syria, where
heinous crimes are being committed daily, is of
particular concern. We deplore the fact that, to date,
the Syrian Arab Republic has not responded to the
repeated calls of the international community for it to
establish a credible, fair and independent mechanism
to ensure accountability for the perpetrators of those
crimes. Switzerland therefore calls on the Security
Council to refer the situation in Syria to the Court
so that all allegations of grave crimes, irrespective
of who committed them, can be investigated. It falls
to the Council to find a political solution that brings
lasting peace and reconciliation for the Syrian people.
The imperative of accountability is, for us, a necessary
precondition of such a solution.

At the very least, the Security Council should send
a clear warning to all parties to the conflict, urging
them to fully respect international human rights and
humanitarian law in the ongoing conflict. It should
also declare its intention to refer the situation to the
International Criminal Court unless a credible, fair and
independent mechanism is rapidly implemented in order
to try and to punish the perpetrators of the violations.
We note that an increasing number of Member States
support our appeal. We encourage all other States to
join our initiative for a letter on Syria to be addressed
to the Security Council.

Our second point that we wish to underscore is the
need for referrals to be made in a strong and coherent
manner. In the past, the Security Council advanced
international criminal justice like no other institution,
by establishing two ad hoc tribunals that were
financed by the United Nations. It would only seem
consistent that the United Nations contribute to the
costs of referrals to the International Criminal Court.
Likewise, deferrals should not provide for exemptions
for nationals of non-State parties. Furthermore, it is
necessary that the Security Council determinedly
follows up on referral resolutions. As shown by the high
number of outstanding arrest warrants, cooperation
from States is one of the most significant challenges
faced by the Court, particularly in deferred situations.
Referrals should not be the end of the Security Council's
commitment to end impunity; rather, they should be the
beginning.

In order to establish a stable and just world order
for all, we need to strive unremittingly for peace and
justice. Peace cannot be sustainable where injustice
persists and, conversely, justice is an illusion when war
drags on. From time to time, there may be situations
where efforts for peace seem to jeopardize efforts for
justice, in the short term at least. However, such a
situation should not lead us to play peace off against
justice, but to work harder on reconciling both goals
in the long term. It is true that it is a great challenge,
but we are convinced that we can and will meet it with
success.

