Mr. Harrison (United Kingdom): I would like
through you, Sir, to thank Mr. Guehenno for his useful
briefing on recent developments in Kosovo. The
Ambassador of Sweden will address the Council later
on behalf of the European Union. My delegation,
naturally, endorses the comments he will make. I would
like to highlight just four points.

First, the recent violence in Mitrovica and the
security incidents in southern Serbia outlined by Mr.
Guehenno this morning are being committed by
extremists. These extremists are working against peace
and against the wishes of their wider communities.
Their actions are unacceptable. My Government
condemns the actions of the perpetrators of these
incidents unreservedly. The only long-term solution to
the problems of Kosovo, including those thrown up by
the events in Mitrovica and southern Serbia, is through
dialogue and ethnic reconciliation. In this regard, we
fully support the efforts of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) and the
Kosovo Force to resolve the situation in Mitrovica.

Secondly, more needs to be done to address and
improve the law and order situation throughout
Kosovo. We welcome the high priority that has been
given to this issue by Mr. Haekkerup and we welcome
the fact that Mr. Guehenno gave considerable attention
to the issue in his briefing. We would welcome
Mr. Guehenno's views on what more can be done. For
example, does UNMIK have sufficient international
judges and prosecutors for its needs and, if not, is there
scope for increasing the number of judges and
prosecutors, perhaps on a temporary basis?

Thirdly, the United Kingdom welcomes the plan
put forward by the federal and Serbian republican
Governments for southern Serbia, which was formally
announced last week. We are studying it carefully. It is
encouraging that both sides appear to be willing to find
a peaceful, political solution to these problems.

Fourthly and finally, last month my delegation,
like many others, welcomed the draft amnesty bill on
political prisoners that had been adopted by the
Government of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. We
now need to see concrete steps. We call on the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia and the Serb Governments to
release all Kosovo Albanian prisoners held without
charge or on political grounds. This would be a major
confidence-building measure between Belgrade and
Kosovo and it would probably bring about a qualitative
improvement in the security situation in Kosovo.

