Mr. Matjila (South Africa): On behalf of the
three elected African members of the Security
Council - Cote d'Ivoire, Equatorial Guinea and South
Africa - I would like to start by thanking Mr. James
Swan, Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Somalia (AMISOM); Mr. Francisco Caetano Jose
Madeira, Special Representative of the Chairperson
of the African Union (AU) Commission for Somalia
and Head of the African Union Mission in Somalia;
Ms. Halima Ismail Ibrahim, Chair of the National
Independent Electoral Commission of Somalia; and
Mr. Osman Moallim, Executive Director of Somalia
Youth Development Network, for their briefings. The
African members of the Security Council also welcome
our colleague the Permanent Representative of Somalia
to this meeting concerning his homeland.

We also join other colleagues in offering our
condolences to the family of Ms. Almaas Elman, who
was killed in Somalia yesterday.

The African members of the Council are pleased
to note that Somalia is making progress on the road
to political, security, economic and social recovery,
despite enormous challenges. That progress is a result
of Somalia's continued focus on national priorities
that are guided by the Somali transition plan and the
National Development Plan framework. The African
Union, through AMISOM, continues to support the
efforts of the Federal Government to ensure inclusive
and enhanced relations with the federal member states.

However, Somalia needs the support of all its
partners to harness and sustain ongoing efforts towards
effective stabilization and assistance in preparing for
post-conflict reconstruction and development across
the country. In that regard, critical questions remain
with regard to prospects for credible and timely
one-person-one-vote elections in 2020 and 2021.

As the focus shifts to elections, there is the
potential for increased political tensions. The federal
member states' agreement on the electoral law, security
planning and funding will be crucial. The international
community should push for accelerated electoral
preparations, including the legal framework, as well as
security and logistics.

The African members of the Security Council call
on the Council to support the work of the National
Independent Electoral Commission on the finalization
of the preparations for the upcoming elections,
such as public outreach and pre-voter registration
preparations, including the identification of voter
registration locations that can be secured and supported
by AMISOM. The completion of the constitutional
review process is a critical milestone for Somalia as it
forges ahead in laying the foundations for lasting and
sustainable peace and security in the country.

In that regard, improved collaboration and
cooperation between the Federal Government and its
federal member states are crucial to advancing security,
including the integration and generation of forces to
fight side by side with AMISOM, the implementation
of the transition plan, deepening federalism and
completing the constitutional review process.

The three African members of the Security
Council also want to emphasize the important role of
women. Through continued engagement and advocacy,
notably of women in AMISOM. and the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Somalia (UNSOM), together with
Government officials, Somali women's participation in
the political process, including in the electoral process,
is increasing. Prior to the 2016-2017 elections, the aim
was to secure and achieve 30 per cent representation in
Parliament. Women secured 24 per cent of the seats in
the current Parliament.

It is also important to create the conditions for
the political mobilization of youth and enable them to
participate fully and responsibly in the future elections
in Somalia. In that regard, it is important to commend
the work ofUNSOM. to help better identify the obstacles
to youth participation and to call on the Somali
authorities, national civil society and the international
community to strengthen their actions in that regard.

The African members of the Security Council
commend the progress made in the security sector in
Somalia with the support of AMISOM. The process
that led to the capture from A1-Shabaab and continued
holding of the bridge towns of Sabiid, Bariire and
Awdheegle in Lower Shabelle is the most telling
example in that regard. However, Al-Shabaab retains
its operational capabilities, as evidenced by consistent
counter-attacks and systematic attacks against security
forces, civilians, AMISOM, the United Nations and
international actors.

In that regard, the three African Security Council
members strongly condemn the mortar attack on
the United Nations and AMISOM. compounds on
13 October. We extend our wishes for a speedy and
full recovery to the injured personnel and call for the
enhancement of international efforts to counter the
threat of terrorism and violent extremism in Somalia.

In addition, the pace of generating Somali security
capacities and force transition from AMISOM. have
been slow and well short of expected timelines. It is
therefore crucial to find ways of supporting the force
generation of Somali security forces to ensure that they
undertake joint operations with AMISOM, hold newly
liberated territories, protect civilian centres and secure
the main supply routes.

The three African Security Council members
encourage the AU, AMISOM, the United Nations
and the Federal Government of Somalia to undertake
a joint threat assessment of the situation in Somalia,
pursuant to resolution 2472 (2019) and the communique
of the AU Peace and Security Council, in order to
prepare for the upcoming AMISOM. troop reduction
of 1,000 by 28 February 2020. It will be recalled
that in the fulfilment of its mandate, as stipulated in
the relevant Security Council resolutions and AU
Peace and Security Council communique's, AMISOM
has already reconfigured and drawn down its force
strength by 2,000 troops. By February 2020, another
1,000 effectives are expected to be withdrawn from the
Mission's theatre of operations.

The African Security Council members urge the
Council to ensure that any AMISOM. drawdown or
reconfiguration, as well as the transition, is conditioned
and guided by the actual situation on the ground. That
should also be based on the capacity and capability of
the Somali security forces to guarantee security and
stability for the country's people.

The deterioration of the humanitarian situation,
in particular owing to drought, food insecurity and
the increase in the number of internally displaced
persons, is a cause of serious concern for the African
members of the Security Council. The situation, in
fact, increases the need to help and protect those
populations in distress. It is therefore urgent that the
international partners continue to redouble their efforts
to provide the funds that are lacking in the financing of
the 2019 humanitarian response plan and support the
humanitarian response in 2020 in order to address the
food-security crisis faced by more than 2 million people.

In conclusion, the three African member States
on the Security Council reaffirm their support and
appreciation for AMISOM, UNSOM, the United
Nations Support Office in Somalia and all other
international partners for their important contributions
to the restoration of peace and stability in Somalia. We
also pay tribute to and salute the gallant peacekeepers
who paid the ultimate sacrifice in assisting Somalia in
its struggle to ensure the peace and safety of its people.

