Mr. Matulay (Slovakia): At the outset, allow me,
like previous speakers, to thank Mr. Tom Koenigs, the
Secretary-General's Special Representative for
Afghanistan, for his comprehensive briefing this
morning. We also commend his dedication and efforts
to accomplish the tasks entrusted to him. Our voice of
appreciation extends as well to the staff members of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA).

My delegation aligns itself to the statement to be
delivered later by the Portuguese delegation on behalf
of the European Union presidency.

It has now been almost six years since the end of
the rule of the previous regime in Afghanistan. The
country has made significant steps towards political,
economic and social development. The role of the
United Nations has undoubtedly been instrumental in
those strides, as has been that of the international
community.

However, in spite of all these efforts, the situation
continues to deteriorate, as noted throughout the
Secretary-General's report. Opium production has
increased so that Afghanistan is almost the world's sole
producer. The return of the Taliban is strong in some
provinces, posing challenges to the authority of the
Government.

We used to note that the situation in Afghanistan
is complex and that many factors need to be addressed
at the same time for Afghanistan to be able to fulfil its
priorities in the strategies adopted for the country.
However, it is only security and positive economic
outlooks that matter at the end of the day.

Under these conditions, the deterioration of the
situation security situation must be addressed as a
matter of priority to ensure that the country does not
return to overall instability. More needs to be done to
increase the manpower of the Afghan National Army
and even more to address widespread corruption in the
Afghan National Police and the Ministry of the
Interior, as all these institutions compose the
cornerstone of the public trust and of the confidence
invested in the Government.

Security sector reform strategies have to be
combined in a more coherent manner with plans for
development. The role and the impact of the decisions
of the Joint Coordinating and Monitoring Board should
be significantly strengthened, as too many actors are
currently managing and implementing various pieces
of the Afghan National Development Strategy.
Fragmentation of foreign aid has been noted many
times by Afghan representatives, and that issue has to
be seriously addressed.

We would like to support more creative and
incentive-based measures by the Afghan Government,
such as, for example, the establishment of a well-
endowed good performance fund to benefit the
provincial administrations that eradicate the poppy.
Rewarding compliance with the law has many positive
effects on behaviour and on the responsiveness of local
actors to the security and development goals of the
central Government.

A national reconciliation process has the potential
to strongly impact the understanding and cooperation
of various groups and communities within Afghanistan
with the central Government. It would facilitate
regional stabilization, so this process and its results
should be supported by the international community in
all forums, including the 1267 sanctions Committee. In
this sense, we agree with the Belgian Ambassador that
that is an important and powerful instrument. We also
note the first listing in the Taliban section of the 1267
consolidated lists after almost six years of no activity.

UNAMA has played an indispensable role in
contributing to an atmosphere conducive to the
establishment of stability and economic development
and to cooperation of various stakeholders currently in
the field. At this stage, UNAMA will continue to take a
central role in promoting international commitment to
support the Afghanistan Compact, coordinate
humanitarian assistance, contribute to the protection of
human rights and support regional cooperation. We
continue to encourage UNAMA to promote its
presence in the provinces and to strengthen its
partnership with local authorities.

Slovakia supports international efforts in
Afghanistan through its bilateral, in kind and military
contributions. At the same time, it is looking for all
other possible ways to assist the Afghan Administration
throughout this difficult period of time.

