Archbishop Auza (Holy See): My delegation
congratulates you, Madam President, on the Argentine
Republic's assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of October. On behalf of
Pope Francis, who has been duly informed of today's
meeting and follows it with interest, I commend you
highly for convening this timely open debate on the
situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian
question. The Holy See has always followed the
situation in the Middle East with great interest and
concern. It has always pleaded for negotiations and
dialogue among the parties involved. It has always tried
to do all it could to help the victims of violence.

Given the rapidly deteriorating situation in the
region during these past months, Pope Francis has
intensified his efforts to push for negotiations and to call
on all parties to respect international humanitarian law
and fundamental human rights. During the first week
of the current month, the Pope convoked in the Vatican
the Papal Ambassadors to the Middle East countries,
including Egypt and Turkey, the permanent observers
of international organizations and high-ranking Vatican
officials to discuss the Middle East situation. Just
yesterday, 20 October, the Pope held a meeting with the
Cardinals and Bishops from the Middle East to discuss
the same issue. Following those meetings, the Holy See
reiterates its conviction that peace in the Middle East
can be sought only through negotiated settlements and
not through unilateral choices imposed by the use of
force.

With regard to the Israeli-Palestinian question,
the Holy See reiterates its support for a solution based
on two States, Israel and Palestine. With the vigorous
support of the competent organs of the United Nations
and the entire international community, we must work
towards the final objective, which is the realization of
the Palestinians' right to have their own State, sovereign
and independent, and of the right of the Israelis to
peace and security. Pope Francis reaffirmed this in
a statement to the Palestinian authorities on 25 May,
when he visited Bethlehem, where he said:

"The time has come for everyone to find the
courage to forge a peace which rests on the
acknowledgment by all of the right of two States
to exist and to live in peace and security within
internationally recognized borders."

With regard to the horrific situation in Syria,
the Holy See urgently calls on all parties to stop the
massive violations of international humanitarian law
and fundamental human rights, and on the international
community to help the parties find a solution. There is
no other way to alleviate and put an end to the untold
sufferings of the entire nation, half of whose population
needs humanitarian assistance and around one third has
been displaced.

Turning to Lebanon, the Holy See calls for
international solidarity at a time when the country is
gravely affected by the Syrian crisis and by the massive
presence of refugees. It exhorts Lebanon itself to find
a solution as soon as possible to the vacancy of the
presidency of the republic. The Holy See reaffirms its
support for a sovereign and free Lebanon. For the Holy
See, Lebanon is a message and a sign full of hope for
the coexistence of the various groups that form it.

As to the grave violations and abuses committed
by the so-called Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham,
the competent organs of the United Nations must act
to prevent possible new genocides and to assist the
increasing number ofrefugees. The Holy See appeals in
particular for the protection of the ethnic and religious
groups, including the Christian communities, who are
specifically targeted and victimized simply because of
their ethnic origins and religious beliefs. The Holy See
insists on respect for the right of those communities
and all displaced persons to return to their homes and
to live in dignity and safety.

The Holy See hopes that the United Nations will take
the escalating, ruthless phenomenon of international
terrorism as an occasion to urgently re-enforce the
international juridical framework of a multilateral
application of the responsibility to protect people from
genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing, crimes against
humanity and all forms of unjust aggression. With
lessons learned from our failure to stop recent horrors
of genocide, and presently confronted with blatant,
massive violations of fundamental human rights and
international humanitarian law, now is the time for
courageous decisions.

Finally, the Holy See reiterates its call on all
religious leaders in the Middle East and everywhere
else in the world to play a leading role in promoting
interreligious and intercultural dialogue, in promptly
denouncing every use of religion to justify violence and
in educating all in reciprocal understanding and mutual
respect.

I wish to end by citing a passage from the words
of Pope Francis during his meeting yesterday with the
Cardinals:

"This unfair situation [in the Middle East]
requires an adequate response by the international
community, as well as and in addition to our
constant prayer".

