Ms. Del Ponte: It is an honour to be given the
opportunity to report once more to the Council.
Appearing before the Council is an important duty and
a good opportunity to report on the completion
strategy.

This time, however, I believe it is essential to
also seek fresh guidance on fundamental issues of the
completion strategy - namely, a strong message is
needed from the Council in relation to the fugitives,
especially Karadzic and Mladic. And that message
should be that their trial can begin in The Hague at any
time until 2010, and a mechanism will be established
for them to be tried in The Hague after that date.

Since my last assessment, in June, my Office has
been working productively with the Chambers to speed
up trials, while trying to maintain the highest standards
of fair trial and due process. The transfer of cases to
domestic jurisdiction has also continued to progress
well. In accordance with Security Council resolution
1503 (2003), my Office proposed to the Chambers the
referral of all cases involving mid- and lower-level
accused. In one case, Dragomir Milosevic, the referral
bench denied the prosecution's motion on the ground
that the accused was too senior to fit in that category.

Therefore, I believe that we have reached the
limits in this matter and, unless the Security Council
modifies the seniority conditions under which an
accused can be transferred to local courts, there is no
legal possibility to transfer more cases. The remaining
cases all involve the most senior leaders responsible
for the most serious crimes.
Following my initiative to join cases involving
similar crimes, two further multiple-accused cases
opened in The Hague in July. One case concerns the
Srebrenica genocide, with seven accused, all former
senior aides to Ratko Mladic. It is very unfortunate that
Mladic himself could not be tried with his close
associates. The other case involves six top political and
military leaders from Serbia for their role in the crimes
committed in Kosovo. A seventh accused, Vlastimir
Djordjevic, should also be present at that trial. His last
known whereabouts were in Russia. In total, we have
24 individuals on trial at present, the largest number of
accused on trial at any one time in the Tribunal's
history.

More written evidence has been admitted in
trials. As a consequence, we have been able to limit the
time allocated to the examination-in-chief of
prosecution witnesses to a minimum. In a large-scale
trial of six accused, for instance, the prosecution has
used an average of roughly two court hours per
witness, but less than half an hour for crime-base
witnesses, which is extremely efficient by any
standard. In several trials, the Chambers have also
accepted via judicial notice a higher number of facts
established in previous trials. Those facts, therefore, do
not need to be proven again.

When directed by the Trial Chambers, I have
acted in a cooperative spirit to select the counts on
which to proceed, for instance in the Perisic and
Dragomir Milosevic cases. My Office has also reacted
in a helpful way to the directions by the Chambers on
time limits set for the presentation of the prosecution
case. As long as the measures taken to increase the
efficiency of trials do not undermine the prosecution
case or the rights of the victims, I will be willing to go
along with them.

I wish nevertheless to draw the attention of the
Council to some negative reactions from victims'
groups in Bosnia and Herzegovina. I forwarded to the
presidency of the Council a letter from the association
Women Victims of War from Sarajevo. I have received
more such letters in the meantime. On 30 November, I
met victims' groups in Sarajevo. Many of them are
bitter about the completion strategy because they
believe that all high-level cases, including of course
Karadzic and Mladic, must be tried in The Hague.
Furthermore, they do not understand why some crimes
should be removed from indictments. They see the
Tribunal as a promise of justice and as a concrete sign
that the international community cares about their
suffering. They find it profoundly unjust to envisage
closing the Tribunal before it has successfully
completed its task. Of course, Karadzic and Mladic are,
in their minds, the two individuals most responsible for
genocide, war crimes and crimes against humanity
committed in Bosnia and Herzegovina. There is no
place other than The Hague to try them.

While the judicial authorities in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Croatia and Serbia have stepped up their
efforts to try war crimes, the political bodies in Bosnia
and Herzegovina and in Serbia have not shown the
political will necessary to arrest the remaining
fugitives. I have explained to the Council in previous
presentations the reasons why, in my assessment, six
accused are still at large. I will come back to that issue
more extensively in the course of my next assessment,
which will also be my last.

Over the past six months, Serbia has been busy
working out a so-called action plan to capture the
remaining fugitives. That initiative has thus far proven
to be just another smokescreen. Since I took office in
1999, I have been confronted with the same reality -
none of the successive Serbian Governments has been
truly willing to arrest Ratko Mladic and Radovan
Karadzic. It has now come to light that most of the
detailed information I was passing to the highest
Serbian officials back in 2001 and 2002 was accurate,
but those officials - some of whom still hold key
positions today - were simply pretending that my
information was wrong. However, history now shows
that my information was indeed correct. In 2002, the
then President himself signed the decision on the
retirement of General Mladic. Therefore, despite his
denials at the time, he knew perfectly well that Mladic
was being sheltered by the army, just as I was telling
him. My assessment remains that the Serbian
Government could easily arrest Ratko Mladic should
the authorities want to do it. It is simply a question of
political will.

There are many reasons why democratically
elected leaders pretending to show the utmost respect
for the rule of law have been protecting persons
indicted for genocide for so long. I will not elaborate
on this further at this stage, but the wilful failure of
Serbia to cooperate with my Office, and in particular to
arrest and transfer Mladic and Karadzic, is a
demonstration of utmost disrespect towards thousands
and thousands of mainly Muslim, but also Croat and
other non-Serb victims in Bosnia and Herzegovina, that
is likely to impact on the relations between the various
communities within the region for decades. The only
way to remove that stain would be for Serbia to arrest
and transfer Karadzic and Mladic immediately.

The situation is not much more favourable in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. There, the central institutions
are not working efficiently and the authorities of the
Serb entity, despite some recent improvements, have
not shown so far a robust willingness to arrest Radovan
Karadzic and Stojan Zupljanin. Those are the fugitives
who are most likely to be in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Both at the central and at the entity level, key
institutions remain stuffed with individuals who used
to be and maybe still are closely connected to Karadzic
and his network. As long as Serbia and Bosnia and
Herzegovina do not cooperate fully with my Office and
with each other, the most important indictees will
continue to escape justice, thus affecting the
completion strategy.

Within the limits set by the interests of justice,
my Office is doing its utmost to meet the objectives of
the completion strategy. However, unless the Security
Council allows the transfer of more accused, we will
not be able to achieve the target date of 2008.
Furthermore, we have already missed the opportunity
to try Karadzic and Mladic with other accused. Strong
incentives must remain in place for Serbia and Bosnia
and Herzegovina to fully cooperate with my Office.

The European Union has been a key partner over
the past years. Nineteen out of the 24 accused currently
on trial were transferred to The Hague as a direct result
of the European Union's policy of conditionality. I
trust that the European Union will remain a reliable
supporter of the ICTY. Despite its clear failure to
capture Karadzic and Mladic, NATO over the years has
provided useful political support to the Tribunal. The
recent decision of NATO to allow Bosnia and
Herzegovina and Serbia into the Partnership for Peace,
however, is a powerful signal that international support
for the Tribunal is decreasing.

Therefore, I wish to request the Security Council
to say whether, as some permanent members have
stated in the past, it considers that the ICTY should
stay open until Karadzic and Mladic are tried in The
Hague. That is very important for the tens of thousands
of victims who have placed their hope in the justice
provided by the United Nations. They have the right to
know whether they can still count on the promises
made by the Security Council when it created the
Tribunal 13 years ago. As we are all aware, many
victims have the perception that the United Nations
abandoned the so-called safe areas to the troops of
Karadzic and Mladic. Let us not, by our actions, give
them further reason to feel that the United Nations and
the Security Council did not do everything in their
power to ensure that the accused most responsible were
brought to justice.

Those are not easy words, and there are not easy
times ahead of us. But there are steps that can be taken.
First, as indicated, the Council must consider changing
the conditions under which an accused can be
transferred, so that, if necessary, the Tribunal can meet
its objectives in time. Secondly, the political will to
arrest remaining fugitives must be strengthened.
Thirdly, the Council must confirm that there remains
the possibility for the Tribunal to continue its mandate
until such a time as fugitives such as Karadzic and
Mladic are brought to trial.

The full and forceful support of the Security
Council for the Tribunal needs to be expressed now.
Strong messages must be passed to Serbia and Bosnia
and Herzegovina so that they finally deliver the
fugitives from justice, especially Karadzic and Mladic.
Clear guidance must be provided to us so that we can
complete our mandate in a dignified and successful
manner.

