Mr. Mantovani (Italy): Italy fully aligns itself
with the statement to be given by the Permanent
Representative of France on behalf of the European
Union. I wish to make only a few comments on the
challenges that we are facing at this juncture.

At the outset, I wish to warmly thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Eide and
Under-Secretary-General Holmes for their clear and
comprehensive briefings on the situation in
Afghanistan. We are pleased to note that the new
leadership of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) is living up to the high
expectations placed on it by this Council and the
international community at large.

Unfortunately, the report of the Secretary-General
describes a difficult situation on the ground, with
increasing terrorist activities relying on asymmetric
tactics, which result in high levels of civilian
casualties, as illustrated by Mr. Holmes and by the
heinous suicide attack against the Indian embassy in
Kabul two days ago. In that regard, we express our
most sincere condolences to the people and
Governments of Afghanistan and India. The continued
use of civilians as human shields and of other, similar
indiscriminate techniques by the insurgents is well
documented and raises serious concerns. This stands in
contrast to the clear commitment and efforts of the
Afghan and international military forces to avoid
collateral damage in their operations.

Against that challenging background, it is
undeniable that the Paris Conference has generated a
new positive momentum for the mutual efforts of the
Afghan Government and the international community
in a spirit of strength and partnership. The generous
pledges made in support of the Afghan National
Development Strategy were matched by renewed
Afghan commitments to pursue political and economic
reform and to fight corruption. We cannot defeat the
enemies of Afghanistan without mutual trust and
understanding.

For its part, Italy is further stepping up its
longstanding commitment through new financial
pledges, additional assets and enhanced flexibility for
its troops.

As indicated in the Secretary-General's report,
the Paris Conference was much more than a pledging
event. For instance, the Afghanistan Compact review
presented by the Joint Coordination and Monitoring
Board co-chairs served as an excellent tool to analyse
in depth the Compact's implementation without
jeopardizing the authority and integrity of the
document. Furthermore, the Paris Declaration contains
a number of key elements that coincide almost
perfectly with the priorities identified by resolution
1806 (2008). That broad identity of views is the best
recipe for success. Now it is time to translate our best
intentions into tangible actions.

In that regard, allow me to recall the key areas
within the mandate of UNAMA that are highlighted in
resolution 1806 (2008): enhanced coordination and
leadership of international efforts; strengthened
cooperation with the International Security Assistance
Force; political outreach; national reconciliation;
governance; humanitarian assistance; promotion of
human rights; elections; and regional cooperation. The
list covers a range of daunting challenges for the
Mission, which now must be provided with substantial
additional resources.

On that key point, we fully share Mr. Eide's
views. We cannot afford to assign such an ambitious
task to a United Nations mission without empowering
it accordingly. In that context the role of the Security
Council must be one of full support for the
recommendations contained in the report before us and
eloquently illustrated this afternoon by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General. In that spirit,
we propose to clearly express such support through a
presidential statement, the draft of which we will
discuss very soon with the other Security Council
members, with a view to an early adoption.

On the specific issue of regional cooperation, I
would add our voice to the expressions of support for
the efforts already put in place by the Special
Representative. We strongly encourage him to make
further progress in that crucial area with the support of
all relevant stakeholders. For their part, the Foreign
Ministers of the G-8 expressed their intention to work
closely with UNAMA and interested Governments in
order to further develop the G-8, Afghanistan and
Pakistan initiative that was launched last year. In that
respect, we welcome the constructive dialogue pursued
this morning by the Foreign Ministers of Afghanistan
and Pakistan.
I will conclude by reiterating once again the basic
idea that we cannot ask the United Nations to do more
in terms of coordination without a genuine
commitment by every single international actor to
comply with the United Nations coordination role. We
are fully aware of the need to develop a culture of
coordination. At the same time, the essential role of the
United Nations must continue to go hand-in-hand with
the continuous reinforcement of Afghan ownership and
leadership in all sectors, ranging from security to the
provision of services to the population.

