Mr. Elmajerbi (Libya) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I should like to congratulate you, Sir, on
assuming the presidency ofthe Security Council for this
month. I would also like to thank Mr. Martin Kobler,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, for his
briefing. I reaffirm the full support of the Government
of National Accord for the efforts undertaken by the
United Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL)
to assist the Libyan parties in reaching a full consensus
on the various issues of contention, with a view to
putting an end to the crisis and bloodshed in Libya and
relieving the Libyan people of their suffering.

It would be remiss of me not to commend
neighbouring Arab countries for their central role and
effotrs to settle the Libyan crisis. I recall in that regard
the ministerial meeting held on 21 January in Cairo,
which was presided over by the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Egypt. That meeting, which resulted in
positive outcomes aimed at returning stability to Libya
and maintaining its unity and the social cohesion of its
people, was held in addition to various bilateral meetings
convened by Egypt with various Libyan parties, such
as the President of the House of Representatives and
the Head of the Presidency Council of the Government
of National Accord. We also commend the final
communique of the meeting of the African Union
High-level Committee on Libya, held in Brazzaville on
27 January. The communique called upon the Libyan
parties to reach consensus on amending - if need
be - the Libyan Political Agreement. It also reaffirmed
the support ofthose countries to the Presidency Council,
the House of Representatives and the State Council.

The suffering of the Libyan people continues to
escalate by the day on all fronts. The deteriorating
security situation and political fragmentation have
affected the economy, security and status of health.
Moreover, differing political viewpoints among
stakeholders have led to prolonged instability and
hindered the ability of the Government to carry out its
tasks, in particular with regard to the livelihoods of our
citizens. We hope that regional and international efforts
to reach a political consensus among the Libyan parties
that will restore stability and security to the country and
enable the Government of National Accord to undertake
its tasks to the best of its ability will continue.

Despite what has been said, there are some positive
indicators on the economic front, exemplified by
increased petroleum exports, which have reached
700,000 barrels per day. In addition, the sums pledged in
the London meeting, which will enable the Government
of National Accord to address the stifling problems
currently facing citizens, have been disbursed.

In conclusion, we would like to stress that the
success of the Government of National Accord depends
on the implementation of the terms of the Political
Agreement, starting with the security measures,
including protection for Government buildings Via
the Presidential Guard, which is under formation.
The measures include unifying the regular army and
police, which are subject to military law under the
command-and-control principle, securing Libyan cities
and borders, providing all capabilities to those entities
facing such challenges as terrorism, illegal migration
and smuggling, and protecting the oil fields and the
power stations. To ensure the appropriate undertaking
of those tasks, such entities must be exempt from
the embargo imposed by the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya, so
that they can be supplied with weapons and necessary
equipment.

