Mr. Bishnoi (India): At the outset, Mr. President and
Minister for Foreign Affairs, I would like to welcome
you and to express India's appreciation for scheduling
this discussion on a subject of great significance for us,
our region and the world. I also would like thank the
Deputy Secretary-General, Mr. Jan Eliasson, for his
comprehensive briefing on the subject.

India has an unwavering commitment to international
efforts to prevent non-State actors and terrorists from
acquiring weapons of mass destruction (WMDs) and
their means of delivery. We fully support all efforts of
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1540 (2004) to implement its mandate.
We are conscious of the dangers that transfers of such
WMDs to non-State actors could entail. Given the
evolving complex challenges emanating from non-State
actors to international peace and security, such risks
and our responses need to be tailored appropriately, and
the 1540 Committee can play its role in that regard.

The international community must join hands to
eliminate the risks relating to sensitive materials and
technologies falling into the hands of terrorists and
non-State actors. The international response to the
threat needs to be national as well as multilateral and
global. India believes that meeting new proliferation
challenges requires reinvigorated approaches in a
variety of multilateral and global forums. The focus
on non-State actors must not take attention away from
national responsibility to curb proliferation.

India supported the general objectives of resolution
1540 (2004). That resolution is in line with the General
Assembly resolution entitled "Measures to prevent
terrorists from acquiring weapons of mass destruction",
adopted by consensus every year since it was first
introduced in 2002, and now sponsored by more
than 70 member States. As a member of the Security
Council, India supported resolution 1977 (2011),
which extended the mandate of the 1540 Committee
for a period of 10 years. Following a commitment
announced at the Nuclear Security Summit in Seoul,
India, in cooperation with the United Nations Office of
Disarmament Affairs, organized a 1540 workshop on
the theme "Building new synergies on nuclear security"
in New Delhi on 30 November and 1 December 2012.
Discussions at the workshop were substantive and
focused on building new synergies for nuclear security.

India has always expressed its readiness to offer
assistance to other countries in capacity- building and in
fulfilling their obligations under resolution 1540 (2004).
Nationally, India has enacted a number of effective
laws and regulations and put in place institutions and
administrative mechanisms to prohibit WMD access to
terrorists and non-State actors. After the adoption of
resolution 1540 (2004), India took additional steps to
further strengthen its existing legislative and regulatory
mechanism for exercising control over WMDs and
their means of delivery. The WMD Act enacted in
June 2005 provides for an integrated and over-arching
legislation on prohibiting unlawful activities in relation
to WMDs, their delivery systems and related materials.
Amendments to the 1992 Foreign Trade Act passed in
2010 further strengthened our national export control
system.
India has never been a source of proliferation of
sensitive materials or technologies. We are proud of our
record in nuclear security and nuclear non-proliferation,
but we are not complacent. India is committed to
upholding and strengthening the physical security of
nuclear facilities and materials. India is committed
to maintaining effective national export controls
consistent with the highest international standards, and
is prepared to make its contribution as a full member of
the respective multilateral export control regimes.

Resolution 1540 (2004) has contributed to greater
awareness among Member States on the need for
effective measures at the national level to prevent
terrorists and non-State actors from gaining access
to sensitive materials and technologies. Reporting by
States of their implementation measures facilitates the
overview of implementation by the 1540 Committee.
Measures for the implementation of the resolution
should be undertaken by States based on their national
practices and processes. Assistance to and cooperation
with States requesting such assistance are key elements
of the implementation process. Such assistance
programmes should be suited to specific national or
regional requirements.

In conclusion, let me state that the 1540 Committee
has also established cooperative relations with several
international organizations. Consistent with their
respective mandates, the International Atomic Energy
Agency and the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons can contribute to the objectives of
resolution 1540 (2004). We commend Ambassador Oh
Joon for his stewardship of the 1540 Committee, and
for the professionalism with which the Committee has
been implementing its mandate.

