Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): Peru
welcomes the convening of this meeting. We are also
grateful for the enlightening briefing delivered by
Secretary-General Antenio Guterres, and we welcome
to New York former Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon,
whom we thank for his very valuable presentation. In
particular, we welcome the presence of Sheikh Sabah
Al-Ahmad Al-Jaber Al-Sabah, Deputy Prime Minister
and Minister for Foreign Affairs of Kuwait, and other
senior officials.

In view of the growing complexity of the
global challenges we face today, Peru believes that
strengthening multilateralism and rejuvenating the
Organization to make it more coherent and efficient
in supporting the maintenance of peace is of the
utmost importance. We therefore support the reforms
promoted by the Secretary-General, and we encourage
him to persevere in that regard. Moreover, we believe
that this is a highly opportune moment to reflect on the
validity of the purposes and principles enshrined in the
Charter of the United Nations in the maintenance of
international peace and security.

On this occasion, we will focus on the importance
of the principle of the pacific settlement of disputes
and on a more active Organization in the promotion
of the peaceful means listed in Chapter VI of the
Charter: negotiation, enquiry, mediation, conciliation,
arbitration, judicial settlement and resort to regional
bodies and arrangements.

We welcome the Secretary-General's initiatives
in that area, more specifically his mediation and the
provision of his good offices in numerous countries,
with a view to preventing conflicts and their
escalation. We eagerly await the establishment of a
high-level consultative council on mediation and the
Security Council.

In line with that initiative, Peru encourages
the Council to play a more active role in its work to
promote and recommend that Member States resort to
the peaceful means I have just mentioned, which we
are convinced would constitute a major contribution
to international peace and security. That conviction
is based on our own experience. In its recent history,
Peru has resorted to the International Court of
Justice, arbitration and negotiations supported by
friendly countries to resolve sensitive and complex
border disputes with its neighbours - neighbours
with whom, now such disputes have been peacefully
resolved, we enjoy the best of relations concerning trust
and cooperation.

Peru is committed to international law and its
progressive development, which is why we are concerned
by the unsystematic manner in which the Charter of the
United Nations is often interpreted. Such interpretation
attributes absolute qualities to certain principles, to
the detriment of others. On the one hand, there is often
conflict among the principles of sovereignty, territorial
integrity and non-interference; and on the other, among
those ofjustice and the fulfilment of the obligations of
States in accordance with the Charter itself, including
responsibilities in the area ofhuman rights. That usually
results in an impasse, which unfortunately hampers the
cooperation that is required for the collective security
system to develop effective preventive diplomacy in
favour of international peace and security.

Given this situation, we must bear in mind that the
principles listed in Article 2 of the Charter are geared
towards collective action, and that, in that sense, they
are complementary. The Charter requires all Member
States to cooperate, while respecting their respective
areas of sovereignty, to carry out the purposes listed in
Article 1.

In that respect and to conclude, we wish to recall
that the first purpose enshrined in the Charter is to
specifically maintain international peace and security.
To that end, the Charter expressly requires us to take
effective and collective measures to prevent and
eliminate threats to peace.

As was mentioned, this month we commemorate

the liberation of your country, Mr. President, which was
possible thanks to the Council's response to a flagrant
act of aggression, in its implementation of Chapter VII
ofthe Charter 27 years ago. On that occasion, Secretary-
General Javier Perez de Cuellar drew some important
conclusions from the historic episode and presented
them in his annual report. In View of their relevance
to a more effective application of Chapter VI of the
Charter, I would like to mention some of them here:

"The hostilities in the Gulf have made it
agonizingly clear that the devastation of two States,
with untold loss of innocent lives damage to the
environment and immense suffering of millions,
represented a startling failure of collective
diplomacy. In the aftermath of these hostilities,
therefore, a renewed emphasis is rightly being
placed on the need for preventive diplomacy
Preventive diplomacy presupposes early warning
capacity, which, in turn, implies a reliable and
independently acquired database. There is a
complementarity between the Secretary-General
being fully equipped with the means presupposed
in Article 99 of the Charter and the Security
Council (in conformity with the spirit of Article 34) maintaining a peace agenda not confined to
items formally inserted." (A/46/1, p. 3)

More than a quarter of a century later, the challenges
and threats to peace and security are perhaps more
complex, but it is clear that the principles and purposes
enshrined in the Charter remain valid and relevant.

