Mr. Almunayekh (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I would like to thank Mr. Ghassan Salame,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of the United Nations Support Mission in
Libya (UNSMIL), for his valuable briefing. I would
also like to thank the Permanent Representative of
the Kingdom of Sweden, in his capacity as Chair of
the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1970 (2011) concerning Libya, for his briefing on
the Committee's work. My statement will focus on
two main issues - developments on the security and
political fronts, and economic developments.

First, with regard to security and politically related
developments, the unfortunate recent escalation of
the security situation in the capital has had negative
repercussions for the regional and international efforts
aimed at establishing norms governing security
and stability in Libya. We are concerned about the
escalation of military operations, including shelling
and indiscriminate firing in populated areas, which
have led to dozens of deaths, including of women and
children, as well as many injuries. We call on all Libyan
parties to halt the fighting immediately, commit to the
ceasefire agreement mediated by UNSMIL, engage
seriously and constructively in a dialogue to stop
the escalating violence in Tripoli and its suburbs and
thereby prevent further human losses. That will give
the United Nations and other regional and international
actors a sufficient opportunity to reach a lasting and
comprehensive political agreement to the benefit of our
brother people of Libya.

The Libyan situation on the ground is suffering
from instability and a lack of security, and it is therefore
incumbent on the international community and the
Security Council to step up efforts to permanently end
the proliferation of armed groups, which can be done
by supporting the establishment of unified, legitimate
security institutions under the control and supervision
of the State. That will help to promote the transitional
and political processes based on the United Nations
action plan and ensure that terrorist hotspots - such
as those connected to Da'esh, which is exploiting the
political and security vacuum to carry out its destructive
schemes - are not increasing.
Turning to the United Nations action plan in
Libya, we commend the role played by UNSMIL in
organizing the National Conference, which brought
together approximately 7,000 Libyan men and women
from various parts of the country. They reached a
consensus on the need to end the transitional period
and unify various Government institutions by holding
elections. We look forward to seeing the House of
Representatives and the High Council of State conclude
their discussions on the necessary amendments to
the Libyan Political Agreement so as to address the
concerns and aspirations of the Libyan people in their
efforts to rebuild their State.

Secondly, with regard to economic issues, it is
clear that the security problems in Libya in the second
half of this year have been detrimental to the country's
economic situation, with oil production declineing
from 1 million to 315,000 barrels a day, owing to the
armed confrontations in the oil crescent region. That in
turn has affected the State's budget for 2018, adopted
after an agreement between the Presidency Council and
the Central Bank of Libya.

It is important to make every effort to bring
about economic stability and development in Libya
through the commitment of all the Libyan authorities
to instituting fair economic reforms that can bring
long-term gains, in line with the agreements reached
by the Libyan parties participating in the eighth round
of economic dialogues, held in Tunisia in June, which
would empower the country's economic institutions
to provide general services to the Libyan people. In
that regard, we stress the importance of ensuring
accountability on the part of Libya's financial and
economic institutions in order to preserve the people's
wealth. We commend Mr. Salame's rapid response to
the Security Council's request on the need to submit
proposals aimed at unifying financial institutions in
Libya in line with the United Nations action plan. That
comes in the light of the letter to the Security Council
from the Head of the Presidency Council, Mr. Faiez
Serraj, on reviewing the state of the internationally
recognized Central Bank of Libya in Tripoli and the
Central Bank in eastern Libya.

In conclusion, we reiterate our support to
Mr. Salame's efforts to facilitate a comprehensive
Libyan political process pursuant to the United Nations
action plan. We urge all Libyan parties to work for a
peaceful settlement through serious and constructive
engagement at the technical, legislative, political
and security levels needed to ensure the holding of
transparent, comprehensive and peaceful elections,
with a view to building a unified and stable Libya.

