I thank Judge Carmel Agius, President of the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals, and Prosecutor Serge Brammertz for the detailed progress reports submitted to the Security Council and for the informative briefings provided today. Estonia commends the work of the Mechanism and welcomes the continuation of its mandate, which was established by the Council 10 years ago as a small, temporary and efficient structure. We welcome the reappointment of Mr. Serge Brammertz as Prosecutor of the Mechanism, as well as the reappointment of 25 judges and of Judge Carmel Agius as the Mechanism's President, along with the appointment of Abubacarr Tambadou as Registrar. Estonia notes with appreciation the continuation of the Mechanism's judicial activities and the significant progress made, despite the current extraordinary circumstances, to advance the caseload during the reporting period, both in The Hague and Arusha, while minimizing the possible exposure of personnel and other individuals to the coronavirus disease (COVID-19). We note that the in-court proceedings previously postponed due to COVID-19 restrictions have resumed in the Prosecutor v. Ratko Mladic, Prosecutor v. Stanisie and Simatovic and Prosecutor v. Turinabo et al. cases. We also note the transfer of Felicien Kabuga to the Mechanism's custody and the subsequent commencement of the new pre-trial proceedings in his case. Estonia would like to commend the President of the Mechanism for the steps taken to ensure its supervisory responsibility with regard to detained persons, including requiring regular updates from enforcement States on convicted persons and detention facilities in Arusha and The Hague. We welcome the continued efforts of the Office of the Prosecutor of the Mechanism to build the capacity of national judiciaries for prosecuting war crimes and its continued cooperation with the International Committee of the Red Cross, pursuant to the memorandum of understanding. We also welcome the launch of the new court database that houses all public judicial documents related to the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia, the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda and the Mechanism, and appreciate that it has been made available in several languages. International criminal justice and the fight against impunity rely on collective efforts. While welcoming the arrest of Felicien Kabuga in May of this year, Estonia remains concerned about the challenges that the Office of the Prosecutor of the Mechanism continues to face in relation to cooperation with national authorities in apprehending the remaining fugitives. The success of the Mechanism depends on the cooperation of Member States, who bear that ultimate responsibility and have a legal obligation to cooperate fully with the Mechanism in its effort to track and arrest the fugitives. Therefore, Estonia strongly urges Member States, especially States where fugitives are suspected of being at large, to intensify their cooperation with the Mechanism and to arrest and surrender all of the remaining fugitives.
