Mr. Cazeau (Haiti) (spoke in French): On behalf
of my Government and the people of Haiti, whom I
have the distinct honour of representing, allow me to
begin by reiterating our warmest congratulations to
you, Mr. President, on your leadership of the Security
Council this month, which is full of various events and
expectations. We also wish to express our confidence
in the Council, which remains dedicated to making the
contributions to international peace and security that
are so essential for ensuring harmony between people
and development.

I would like to personally thank Mr. Mariano
Fernandez Amunategui, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) and
congratulate him on his masterly briefing. I reiterate
the full support of the Government and people of Haiti
for his most difficult and noble task.

On 20 January (see S/PV.6471), on behalf of the
Republic of Haiti, I expressed appreciation for the
cooperation of the United Nations and emphasized the
importance of the United Nations Stabilization Mission
in Haiti (MINUSTAH). The Mission's presence on the
ground has significantly helped to supplement the low
numbers of Haitian National Police and contributed to
its professionalization. As we consider the report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (S/2011/540) of 25 August, those
feelings continue and will stay with us as we move
forward.

At the same time, we are aware that various
unspeakable acts have aroused suspicions regarding
some Mission staff, and that many Haitians have
voiced their criticism. Happily, those issues have been
rapidly addressed by the Secretary-General, who
swiftly deployed a fact-finding mission on the ground
to work with the Haitian authorities and MINUSTAH
so as to determine the truth. In that regard, we can only
commend Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for taking
swift action. Here, I should like to underscore the
words of Mr. Gerard Gourgues, a great Haitian jurist
and statesman who represented a defendant in a
historic and highly publicized trial: "If the truth is to be
found at the bottom of a well, then we must go to the
bottom of that well to find the truth".

The report before us today shows that the
situation has progressed somewhat. I need not recall
that since 14 May Haiti has had a new President, His
Excellency Mr. Michel Joseph Martelly, elected on
20 March. Unfortunately, the country has yet to
establish a new Government, in spite of the efforts
being made across the board. This is understandable, as
the President does not enjoy a comfortable majority in
Parliament, and it demonstrates how democracy is
taking root in my country and that each of the three
branches of power is playing its role under the
Constitution and laws of the country. A third candidate
for Prime Minister has been nominated, and formalities
in the houses are proceeding apace, which augurs well
for the future.

The security problem is not entirely resolved in
my country, as we must not forget that many prisons
were destroyed in the earthquake of 12 January 2010
and that many detainees escaped to resume their
criminal activities. Fortunately, the Haitian National
Police, helped by MINUSTAH and community police,
have made praiseworthy efforts to apprehend the
escapees. We also stress the importance of cooperation
with various regional police agencies, which has
allowed for the apprehension and repatriation of many
of those individuals, who had fled abroad in the hope
of evading the long arm of the law.

We note with satisfaction the work of
MINUSTAH in areas other than that of support to the
police. The Mission participates actively in the creation
of jobs for young people, making them less vulnerable
to the aggressive temptations of organized crime.
Furthermore, its support for various ministries and
State institutions, including through its commitment to
the rule of law, has been invaluable and we are grateful
for it. Certainly, we should like to see the Mission
more committed to development, but that is not in the
mandate assigned to it under Chapter VII of the
Charter. Perhaps Chapter VI would be another option.

With respect to the social realm, significant
efforts are under way. Some 20 million people lived in
tents following the earthquake; that number has now
slightly more than 600,000. This decrease can be
attributed to various local representatives who have
made temporary and permanent housing available
thanks to the support of the Government and the
international community. Life is returning to normal,
and people are returning to work. It is true, however,
that unemployment persists, and that is why the
establishment of a Government, with the approval and
support of Parliament, is more critical than ever.

The return to school usually happens every year
in September, but this year it has been delayed to the
first week of October in order to implement a project
allowing classroom access for more than 500,000
children who have never attended school. This project
is ambitious, of course, but achievable, and will be
financed in part by a minimal tax on telephone calls
and money transfers. Launched in June, this innovative
source of financing has been welcomed by members of
the diaspora and the local population, and has already
added $4 million to the State coffers. The President's
goal of ensuring that all school-age children return to
school is important because, if young people are to be
the future of the country, they must first be educated
and trained so as to compete and produce.

Haiti is at a crossroads that is most interesting
and crucial to its existence. At this crossroads, young
people are vigorously claiming their right to participate
in the country's public life and reconstruction, and
where the needs that have arisen since 12 January 2010
oblige us to support them and to work for them and
with them to ensure that their future is better equipped
for the transition. However, we cannot do so without
peace, security, the protection of lives and property,
political and social stability, the rule of law and good
governance.

In that regard, MINUSTAH's assistance is
indispensable, given its commitments on the ground.
We understand that the Mission must one day come to
an end and that Haiti must begin preparing itself to
shoulder its republican prerogatives and
responsibilities. We also understand that a progressive
drawdown of MINUSTAH is already desired and
envisaged. We believe, however, than an abrupt
withdrawal would be counterproductive and create an
unprecedented vacuum, particularly given the fact that
conditions conducive to the hoped-for large-scale
investment and sustainable development are not yet
entirely established.

In conclusion, I reiterate my thanks to Secretary-
General Ban Ki-moon for his unwavering commitment
to countries in difficulty, including my own. The
people and Government of Haiti wish him every
happiness and success during his second term in office.
I thank all members of the Security Council for their
concern for my country, Haiti.

