Mr. Corman (Turkey): Allow me to begin by
commending you, Mr. President, for organizing this
meeting on United Nations support to African Union
peacekeeping operations. This issue has been on our
agenda for some time now, and today's meeting
provides us with a very timely opportunity to review
the steps taken so far and to chart the course of our
future work.

In that regard, I would like to pay a special
tribute to the Secretary-General for his leadership on
this issue and for his dedicated efforts to further
strengthen the partnership between the United Nations
and the African Union (AU). His most recent report
(S/2009/470), in particular, contains valuable
assessments and proposals for the way forward on this
issue.
I thank Under-Secretary-General Alain Le Roy
for his briefing and for focusing our debate on the right
issues, and Under-Secretary-General Susana Malcorra
for her presence in the Council Chamber today.

I would also like to thank His Excellency
Mr. Romano Prodi for his briefing today, but even
more for his most valuable contributions to the
considerations of this issue. Indeed, it was his
leadership of the United Nations-African Union panel
last year and the ideas put forth in its report (see S/2008/813) that paved the way for United Nations
action on this important matter.

Last but not least I would like to express our
thanks to Mr. Tete Antonio, Acting Permanent
Observer of the African Union, for his participation in
today's meeting and for the very comprehensive
briefing he has just given us. What we are discussing
today is indeed a partnership of vital importance for
both organizations, and we are pleased to see the
African Union approaching that issue with the
professionalism and commitment it deserves.

Over the past year or so, a lively debate has been
going on in several forums, with the participation of all
interested parties, on issues related to the United
Nations peacekeeping system. Indeed, we have been
putting our heads together with a view to finding the
right ways and means to streamline the United Nations
peacekeeping mechanism, which still stands as an
indispensable tool for the maintenance of international
peace and security.

One common point that emerged from all those
debates was the strong emphasis placed on the
necessity of an enhanced strategic dialogue among all
stakeholders, in particular between the United Nations
and regional and subregional organizations. It has been
stressed over and over again that the increasing
demand for peacekeeping around the globe can be met
only by forging new and strategic partnerships between
the United Nations and regional organizations.

That was also one of the main tenants of the
recent "New Horizon" paper prepared by the
Secretariat. In fact, it is a long-standing commitment
we have collectively undertaken under Chapter VIII of
the Charter of the United Nations and in paragraph 170
of the 2005 World Summit Outcome Document
(General Assembly resolution 60/1), as well as in
various other Security Council resolutions and
statements. After all, there is no doubt that the role
played by regional organizations in peace and security
is indispensable and is complementary to the work of
the United Nations, in particular that of the Security
Council.

In this regard, the African Union is a particularly
important regional actor whose contribution to the
settlement of conflicts on the African continent is of
key significance in the overall efforts to maintain
international peace and security. Indeed, given the time
and energy we spend in the Council to help resolve the
various conflicts in Africa, it is clear that the African
Union provides most needed added value in areas of
critical importance.

It is for this reason that since the adoption of
resolution 1809 (2008), in particular, the Council has
been working very hard to develop a more effective
partnership with the African Union, a partnership
which mutually strengthens the capabilities of each
organization and which creates a synergy of efforts
towards peace and stability. Our point of departure has
been, and still is, that the more efficient and valuable
the African Union becomes in its peacekeeping
operations, the stronger the United Nations and the
entire international community become in their ability
to maintain peace and security.

Within this framework, the joint African Union-
United Nations panel has put forward many useful
recommendations which were first addressed in the
presidential statement adopted in March of this year
under Libya's presidency (S/PRST/2009/3). There we
not only took note of those new ideas, but also called
for further joint efforts in this direction, focusing on
issues of mutual interest. We also called on the
Secretariat to develop, in coordination with the AU
Commission, a list of recommendations on ways to
help the African Union further develop its military,
technical, logistic, administrative and financial
capabilities.

That is precisely what the Secretary-General's
report does. It further elaborates on those
recommendations and proposes practical ways in which
the United Nations can assist the African Union to
enhance its effectiveness in the deployment and
management of peacekeeping operations.

As we see it, there are three main areas in which
we can, and should, make further progress in order to
realize the objectives we have collectively set out for
ourselves. Those are: developing a strategic partnership
between the two organizations at both the political and
operational levels, supporting the institutional
capacity-building of the African Union, and enhancing
the predictability, sustainability and flexibility of

financing for African Union-led peacekeeping
operations under a United Nations mandate. To put it
simply, we support the recommendations of the
Secretary-General in all three areas. We believe that
the time has come to translate them into practice.
Indeed, we have spoken long enough. Now is the time
for action.

In that regard, we particularly share the
Secretary-General's views concerning the need for the
establishment of a predictable, sustainable and flexible
funding system for AU-led peace support operations, as
well as for developing a broad road map for capacity-
building with a set of short- to long-term initiatives.
Likewise, we very much welcome the idea of
establishing a joint task force between the United
Nations and the African Union to review immediate
and long-term strategic and operational issues, as well
as to conduct a lessons learned exercise on the basis of
our joint endeavours in Somalia and Darfur.

As I mentioned at the beginning of my remarks,
today's meeting provides us a valuable opportunity to
underscore our commitment to forge a strategic
partnership with the African Union and to chart the
course of our future work. Our deliberations today
therefore have even more practical importance in the
light of the statement issued on 15 October by the
African Union Peace and Security Council, which also
called for an increased strategic partnership on
peacekeeping issues between the United Nations and
the African Union. The draft presidential statement to
be adopted at the end of today's meeting will therefore
be the response of the Security Council to that call, as
well as a testament of the Council's intention with
regard to furthering our strategic cooperation.

In our opinion, the comparative strengths of both
organizations and the complementary nature of their
objectives leave no doubt about the value of an
increased strategic relationship between the two
bodies. That is why we fully support the draft
presidential statement before us, which clearly
underscores that point. We would like especially to
thank the Mission of Uganda for its leadership, acting
on behalf of the African Union, in the preparation of
that text.
Investing in Africa's peacekeeping capacity
means investing in the security, stability and future of
that great continent, as well as of the entire world. It is
a sound investment that will surely pay off as the
African continent fully develops its own capabilities
and realizes its potential. We have already come a long
way in that direction. Now is the time to further
increase momentum and redouble our efforts towards
our shared objectives.

Turkey is ready and willing to do its fair share in
that regard. The rapidly developing relations between
Turkey and African countries, as evidenced by the
African Union's declaration of Turkey as one its three
strategic partners, provides us ample ground on which
to build. We are committed to doing so.

