Mr. Carneiro (Angola) (spoke in Portuguese; English text furnished by the delegation): Allow me to
begin by congratulating you, Sir, on behalf of the
Government of the Republic of Angola and my delegation
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for this month.

I would also like to congratulate your predecessor,
Ambassador Juan Somavia, for the positive work he
accomplished during his tenure.

For five years now, with the help of the United
Nations, my Government has been trying to end a war
that has devastated my country for almost 30 years. This
war is now moving towards an end, but the special
attention of the international community is still necessary
to help our common efforts to bring lasting peace to
Angola. When this goal is met, we are also counting on
the international community's help in an even larger
effort to reconstruct our country.

The Government of Angola wishes to reiterate on
this occasion its full and unconditional commitment to
peace and reconciliation and its support for the United
Nations Angola Verification Mission (UNAVEM. III) and
the Lusaka Protocol. Although the peace process outlined
in the Lusaka agreement has moved too slowly, I believe
that the parameters for peace and national reconciliation
have been established.

What we seek now is to begin to differentiate clearly
between rhetoric and concrete action. Only the latter will
permit the full implementation of the Lusaka Protocol and
of the understandings reached in Libreville between the
President of the Republic of Angola and Mr. Jonas
Savimbi, the leader of UNITA.

On this occasion, I would have liked to be able to
announce that my Government is pleased with the way
the peace process is being implemented. Unfortunately,
this is not the case. The expectations created by the
Security Council meeting of 8 February and during the
meeting in Libreville on 1 March this year have not yet
been translated into reality. We were convinced in
February that, once three months had passed, a more
positive review could be made of the implementation of
the Lusaka Protocol and that we would be able to
announce here the completion of the quartering and
disarming of UNITA troops. At the current pace, and if
no additional measures are taken to convince UNITA to
accelerate the demobilization, quartering will not be
completed on schedule. This would be regrettable,

 

primarily because the endurance of the Angolan people and
the patience of the international community are reaching
their limits.

At all costs, the Government wants to preserve the
hope for a positive outcome of the peace process. That is
why we now come to the United Nations, and to the
Security Council in particular, to request that diplomatic
measures be taken to persuade UNITA to live up to its
commitments so that we may jointly move towards peace,
progress, democracy and the well-being of all Angolans.

We are convinced that UNITA can do much more than
it has done so far. A clear demonstration of this is that, on
the eve of each Security Council meeting, within just 8 or
10 days UNITA quarters about 10 times more men than it
has in months before. From this very fact we can infer that,
if it is confronted by a more forceful demand by the
Security Council in the coming 60 days, UN ITA will at last
complete the quartering of all its forces, as prescribed in the
Lusaka agreement and at the meetings in Libreville. Thus
will all the basic conditions be established for pursuing all
the political objectives - national reconciliation and
national unity - prescribed in the Lusaka Protocol.

As the Council's members are aware, the Government
of Angola has fulfilled the monthly tasks established by the
Joint Commission. The Government of Angola has
completed many essential tasks and has also accomplished
others on its own initiative with the aim of creating an
environment of confidence in order to fulfil the obligations
that should rightly fall to UNITA. We have pulled back our
military personnel from the areas close to the quartering
sites of UNITA forces. We are completing the quartering of
the rapid reaction police. We have suspended weapons
acquisitions and have made it clear that we are willing to
cooperate with UNAVEM. III in the verification of this
matter.

We have released all prisoners of war.

We have rescinded all contracts with the "Executive
Outcomes", and repatriated their personnel. The Joint
Commission was invited to verify this action.

The Government of Angola, together with UNITA, has
produced a revised text of the law of amnesty. I have the
honour to announce today that the national Parliament has
approved this law of general amnesty and that it has been
promulgated by the President.

We continue to provide logistic and material support
to the United Nations Angola Verification Mission
(UNAVEM. III).

Even though UNITA has not met the deadlines or
troop-level goals for demobilization, we are ready to
move forward with the immediate integration of UNITA
troops into the Angolan armed forces (FAA).

We have undertaken joint military missions with
UNAVEM. III and with UNITA personnel to verify that
FAA forces have not occupied areas vacated by UNITA.

We have found solutions to the concerns expressed
by UNITA related to its presence in the Lundas, the
country's diamond region.

We have reiterated our invitation to Dr. Jonas
Savimbi to join the Government as a Vice-President. We
understood from the talks in Libreville on 1 March that
Dr. Savimbi would accept a post as Vice-President, but
we very much look forward to receiving an official
response from him in order to send a clear and
unambiguous signal of support for reconciliation.

The Government of Angola has announced its full
support for the initiative promoted by the United States
and 30 additional Governments with a view to banning
the use of land mines. Our support for this initiative was
demonstrated in a practical way in a ceremony on 7 May
in Huambo, when we destroyed a number of mines and
other explosive devices. This was the beginning of a
wider operation to destroy stockpiles of landmines.

These steps demonstrate the Government of
Angola's commitment to peace and national
reconciliation. This commitment was restated by President
dos Santos in his most recent letter to the members of the
Security Council.

If there is any doubt about our commitment to the
peace process, we are willing to work with UNAVEM. III
with a View to clearing up any questions, issues or events
that may appear less than fully transparent. The Security
Council's verification of our full compliance will
contribute to maintaining its trust in our peaceful
intentions and further encourage it to maintain the
invaluable support that it is providing to the Angolan
people in our search for peace and prosperity.

The Government of Angola believes that UNITA
must be persuaded to understand that we are at a crucial

 

moment in the peace process. The Government of Angola
does not want to return to war. The Government of Angola
will not- I repeat: will not- be the cause of a
breakdown in the peace process. While some would suggest
that only military pressure will succeed in convincing
UNITA to accelerate the demobilization and
demilitarization process, we believe that there are other
options which must be considered, and, if necessary,
implemented. We refer specifically to the measures
contained in Security Council resolution 864 (1993).

The draft resolution to be approved will meet the
minimum requirements for speeding up the peace process
if its provisions are implemented in a responsible manner.
It will lead to the development of the peace process. The
Government commends the efforts of the Security Council
and the good work of its members.

With regard to a time-limit, we urge the Security
Council to agree that if UNITA has not met the targets for
the conclusion of the national armed forces and the
demobilization of UNITA, the timing and numbers for
which have been established by the draft resolution, the
United Nations should move quickly to review the situation,
to meet directly with Dr. Savimbi, to emphasize the
urgency of the situation, and to implement the measures
contained in resolution 864 (1993).

The peace process is not dead in the water, but it is
moving too slowly. The existing momentum must not be
lost; nor can we afford to lose the goodwill that has been
developing between our Government and UNITA through
negotiations in recent months. The Government of Angola
cannot, however, continue to sit idly by, meeting its own
commitments unilaterally and making individual
concessions, without the other party's making any
significant attempt to implement the Lusaka Protocol.

At this crucial stage of the peace process, it is
important to underline the need for UNAVEM. III to make
every effort to guarantee security and safety in all areas
given up by UN ITA in order to ensure a smooth extension
of State administration and to avoid any pretext that could
endanger the peace process.

We cannot fail to express our deep sorrow over the
tragic deaths of the observers and the Oxfam worker in the
Catengue region.

Further, we want to thank the international community
for the support it has given to the peace process. We
specifically thank the Secretary-General, Mr. Boutros
Boutros-Ghali, his Special Representative in Angola and
the Troika of observer nations.

Finally, we thank the United Nations for the
humanitarian assistance demining aid we have been
provided with. Both are essential in stabilizing Angola.

