Mr. Belinga-Eboutou (Cameroon) (spoke in French): Mr. President, let me at the outset
congratulate you for taking the initiative to include on
the agenda of the Security Council for October the
theme that is the subject of the current debate. This is a
very important theme that brings us to the very essence
of the United Nations, since it has to do with justice
and law and therefore peace.

Let me commend in this respect the presence of
the Secretary-General at the beginning of our
deliberations. I welcome his important introductory
statement, which, as has been pointed out, identifies
several interesting avenues by which, at long last,
justice and the rule of law can become realities through
robust action by the United Nations.
I said that the theme that we are debating today
brings us to the very inception of the United Nations
and the concerns that motivated the founding fathers of
the Organization. At the end of the Second World War
those founding fathers, motivated by the unspeakable
atrocities that had occurred, asked themselves how to
ensure that the world did not ever again go through
such a situation, how to bring about a world of peace.

The answer is clear. A world of peace assumes
nothing more than justice, respect for obligations
arising from treaties and the establishment of freedom
and better living conditions for all. The United Nations
was given the onerous task of ensuring that that
became a reality. The United Nations was, in effect,
given the mission of maintaining international peace
and security and of carrying out international
cooperation in order to ensure development and respect
for human rights and basic freedoms. This means that
at the very origin of the United Nations the dialectic
relationship between justice, law, peace and
development - or, as some would put it, the
consubstantial link between these concepts, which in
themselves are genuine programmes - was reaffirmed.

The merit of this discussion is specifically in
reminding us of this basic truth at a time in intrastate
and international relations when, despite our
professions of faith, the need for justice, development
and the rule of law does not seem to be commonly
shared, at least not in deeds and in truth. In other
words, how are we to explain today this proliferation of
deadly conflicts with many consequences for peace and
security? How are we to understand mankind's
persistence in atrocities of untold cruelty which one
compels one's peers to undergo? Unfortunately, man
continues to prey on man. How are we to admit that in
this day and age, despite our declarations of
commitment, justice and equity are not yet sufficiently
present in the relations between countries and between
peoples? The Ambassador of Angola has spoken
abundantly on this aspect of the matter.

In his report on the causes of conflict in Africa
(A/52/87l-S/l998/318), the Secretary-General studied
the conditions that need to be met for sustainable peace
and development on that continent. Those conditions
include good governance, transparency, administrative
accountability and robust democracy. It is clear that
those conditions are also summed up in the topic of our
current discussion. They serve to give the United
Nations a wide-open field in which to operate.

Among the objectives that our Organization is
expected to meet in that framework, three seem to us to
be priorities. First, the United Nations is expected to
play a principal role in the establishment of peace
based on law andjustice, the only way to build a secure
and democratic society. The United Nations must also
give priority to providing security to peoples in the
greatest need of it, to ensuring compliance with
agreements, assuring State reform and preventing the
breakdown of the State and laying down the bases for
the establishment of a modern State. In short, the
United Nations is expected to work for the
reconstruction of the State, as understood under
Articles 2 and 4 of the Charter.

Secondly, the United Nations must work for the
rule of law in relations between States and the peaceful
settlements of disputes. More specifically, it must
support and stand by any initiative undertaken by
States themselves to that end. Similarly, as experience
has shown, the United Nations must contribute to
training an efficient police force to establish order and
security, and do so in keeping with human rights. It
must work towards restoring the justice system to
enforce and indeed ensure respect for law in relations
among citizens and between citizens and the State. Of
course, such measures will be incomplete if our
Organization does not assist in strengthening all those
conditions by holding free and transparent elections
that uphold the rule of law.

As has been said at length around this table,
conflicts often lead to gross violations of rights, which
compels the United Nations to establish institutions
before which the perpetrators of serious violations
must appear. With the International Criminal Court, the
international community has established permanent
jurisdiction, whose very presence, according to
Antoine Garapon, weakens all the Powers of the world,
both autocratic and democratic, by notifying them that
they shall never be immune, and also troubles human
rights activists by assigning a destination without
providing a map. This therefore constitutes the end of
impunity.

Finally, the issue of protecting civilians in armed
conflicts must be at the heart of the United Nations.
While it endeavours to carry out campaigns to protect
civilians and implement Security Council resolution
1325 (2000) on women, peace and security, the Council
must also urgently think about the need for an early-
warning and rapid intervention machinery to swiftly
intervene as soon as the rights of civilians are
threatened.
Human history has shown that no entity can be
viable or survive in the long term if it is not based on
justice and law. That is why, beyond preventive
diplomacy, there is need for a comprehensive peace-
building machinery that makes it possible to tackle the
very causes of conflicts. We need a post-conflict code
of conduct.

To conclude, I would like to commend the
striking convergence of views that has been evident
around this table with respect to the need for the United
Nations to assume its due role in post-conflict
situations - in which justice and the rule of law are
increasingly jeopardized. May our meeting lead to the
realization of the need to strengthen our Organization
by making the human, legal and other necessary
resources available to it so that it can live up to the role
expected of it.

