Mr. Kachi (spoke in Arabic): My name is Kachi,
a Yazidi from Sinjar, Iraq. I am one of the survivors of
the killings and mass graves in the in the devastated
village of Kojo.

On 3 August 2014, the terrorist gangs of Da'esh
took control over Sinjar and its villages, causing tens
of thousands of the Yazidi population to flee to Sinjar
Mountain. About 7,000 Yazidi women, children and
men were killed and captured that day.

After that, the village of Kojo * my village * was
besieged by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL) for 12 days. It remained under siege until
15 August 2014. On that date a large numbers of ISIL
terrorist elements besieged the village of Kojo. They
assembled us inside the village school. We were around
1,250 persons, including women and children. As we
entered the school, we were searched by ISIL members
and our belongings were confiscated. They separated
men from women. They took the men - around 400 of
us - in groups to different locations on the outskirts of
the village, towards the orchards and farms. Later, they
began shooting at us, shouting Allahu Akbar - "God is
the greatest" - while carrying Da'esh flags.

After they were done with killing our group, the
ISIL members left for another place. I found myself
under a pile of dead bodies. I was not dead, but I had
minor injuries. When I opened my eyes, I saw three
of my brothers next to me, but they were dead. My
nephews and my cousins had also been killed. There
were about 50 to 60 men in this group. I managed to run
away for fear of being killed by ISIL, leaving behind
the remains of my brothers and their children in that
mass grave. I survived by God's will, to be a witness
for the hideous crimes committed by the ISIL terrorist
group against the defenceless Yazidis, After all the men
were killed, members of ISIL kidnapped around 850 of
the women, girls and children. They took them to the
area of Solagh, to the east of the city Sinjar. The ISIL
members separated some 77 elderly women, including
my 90-year-old step-mother, from the rest of the group.
The ISIL members killed the elderly women or buried
them alive in a mass grave in Solagh area. They then
took other women, girls and children, including my
wife and daughters - Yara, Sara and Lara - to be sold
in slave markets in Iraq and Syria.

I speak before the Council today as someone who
lost some 75 members of my family and my brothers'
families, all of whom were killed on that day at the
hands of ISIL. The terrorist group exterminated the
village of Kojo, which had 1,250 people. Only 19 people

survived those mass graves, including myself. I am one
of those survivors. I continue, however, to suffer from
the psychological aftermath to this day. Despite the fact
that five years have passed, I still remember the remains
of my brothers and nephews, and I can still hear them
calling me. More than five years have passed, but I still
hear my wife and daughters screaming as the members
of ISIL kidnapped them. I still hear the crying of my
daughter Lara, who was three-months-old when she
passed away in captivity, owing to thirst and hunger.
My life continues to be extremely hard.

I thank the Security Council today for establishing
the United Nations Investigative Team to Promote
Accountability for Crimes Committed by Da'esh/
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant. The Investigative
Team was established upon the request made by
the Yazidi and other communities in Iraq, as well as
by the Iraqi Government, to investigate and collect
evidence related to the crimes committed by ISIL
against the innocent people of the Yazidi and other
communities in Iraq, hold accountable and prosecute
those who committed these crimes. The ongoing work
of the Investigative Team to achieve accountability and
justice is therefore very important to me and to the
entire Yazidi community and other communities.

Today, for the Yazidi community, it is not enough
to hold those responsible accountable for their crimes
and prosecute them. The international community
must acknowledge that the crimes committed against
the Yazidi community amount to genocide. I also hope
that the Security Council will continue to support the
Investigative Team in establishing a fair accountability
mechanism to prevent similar crimes and genocide in
the future.

I would like to thank the Investigative Team and
Mr. Karim Khan for their efforts in overseeing the
exhumation process ofthe mass graves, including in the
village ofKojo, with participation ofand in the presence
of survivors, the victims' families, Yazidi clerics, the
Iraqi Yazidi Spiritual Council, national authorities
and others. I ask the Investigative Team to continue to
listen to the personal account of the survivors and the
families of Victims.

Lastly, I believe that international recognition
of the conduct of fair trials, based on irrefutable
evidence, is a crucial principle to help us move forward.
The importance of that is not limited to the Yazidi
community, but extends to all components of Iraqi
society that have been affected by ISIL crimes.

