Mr. Sahovie (Yugoslavia): I would like to
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council for this month. We are
grateful to the Secretary-General for his report and to
Under-Secretary-General Guehenno for his detailed
briefing and analysis.

My delegation appreciates the fact that we are
discussing the issue of Kosovo and Metohija again
after two months. It has been a dynamic period, marked
by the local elections on 26 October. A Security
Council mission was scheduled to visit the province
during the elections. This, regrettably, did not take
place. It is our sincere hope that a representative and
high-level mission of the Council will be carried out in
the near future in order to obtain first-hand knowledge
of the situation on the ground, which, unfortunately, is
not satisfactory.

Allow me first to make a few brief comments on
the report before us, specifically on the chapter entitled
"Creating conditions for sustainable returns and
reintegration". It is a well-known fact that
approximately a quarter of a million internally
displaced persons belonging to minority communities
are still unable to return to their homes, even after a
three-year international presence in Kosovo and
Metohija. While recognizing and respecting the need to
deal with such problems as the forced repatriation of
Kosovo Albanians - an issue that is highlighted in the
introduction of the chapter on returns - we strongly
feel that creating conditions for the return of internally
displaced persons must be given priority in any serious
attempt to achieve stability, democracy and multi-
ethnicity in the province. Unless energetic and concrete
measures to speed up the return process are taken, the
number of those willing to attempt returns will
certainly not increase. The data provided in the report,
to the effect that 1,698 persons from minority
communities have returned so far this year to Kosovo
and Metohija, is telling proof of the absence of
progress in the return process.

I would also like to add that activities aimed at
promoting inter-ethnic dialogue at a grass-roots level,
such as football and boxing events, no doubt represent
positive initiatives. However, the continuing lack of
returns is a problem that stems from far more basic
concerns, such as the lack of security and of the
freedom of movement.

The level of both was amply demonstrated a few
weeks ago by a mob attack on a group of elderly Serbs
who had attempted to enter a bank in Pee to collect
their pensions. Moreover, according to the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK), the Kosovo Albanians also hurled rocks and
Molotov cocktails at the United Nations police officers
called in to restore order. We appreciate that Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Steiner
promptly condemned this incident. Nevertheless, there
are no guarantees that similar attacks will not reoccur
in the future.

This brings us to the issue of the recent municipal
elections. Against the background of the precarious
situation on the ground, the highest authorities of my
country have taken the difficult decision to call upon
the Serb minority to take part in the elections.
However, voting is not only an obligation; it is a right
as well, which citizens are willing to exercise as long
as they believe that it will improve their living
conditions.

Minorities, including Serbs, did participate in the
elections in the hope that the international community
will more energetically seek to create conditions in
which their human rights will be respected and their
overall situation will get better. Despite the fact that
their participation received different evaluations, it is
our view that a larger turnout was not realistically
possible.

Northern Mitrovica was the only municipality
where the Serbs did not vote. I would not call that a
boycott. My Government believes that they took this
decision out of sincere fear for their survival in the
city. The Federal Republic of Yugoslavia remains fully
committed to achieving multi-ethnicity throughout
Kosovo and Metohija, including Mitrovica. This can be
done only in close cooperation among all those
involved, while avoiding any steps that might
exacerbate the situation. We stand ready to contribute
fully to normalizing conditions in the city, including
through Mr. Steiner's efforts to adjust the seven-point
plan to the post-electoral situation in Mitrovica, which
Mr. Guehenno mentioned.
More generally in this context, the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia supports Mr. Steiner's decision
to continue discussions on the decentralization of
Kosovo and Metohija in accordance with resolution
1244 (1999) and the responsibilities of UNMIK. We
also welcome the decision, resulting from Mr. Steiner's
recent meeting with Serbs and Albanians alike, to
invite representatives of the Council of Europe to visit
the province and to discuss decentralization models
with all national communities. We would like to stress
the need for firm and unequivocal guarantees from the
international community for decentralization. This
would pave the way for the establishment of stable
democratic local institutions and restore faith in the
common future of all communities in Kosovo and
Metohija.

Only in such changed circumstances will it be
possible to achieve the prosperity of all citizens in the
province. Furthermore, the economic goals addressed
at the donor coordination meeting yesterday in Brussels
will be attainable, again, only if such faith in a
common future exists.

Allow me to briefly touch upon a few issues
which are also of grave concern to us. As I said in my
letter to the President of the Security Council last
month, two border crossings were opened on 16
October this year between the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia and the Republic of Albania in a manner
inconsistent with resolution 1244 (1999), notably with
the provisions related to the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Yugoslavia.

Only a few days later, Prime Minister Bajram
Rexhepi and other members of the provisional
institutions of self-government paid a visit to New
York that was organized in a manner contrary to the
provisions of the same Security Council resolution, as
well as to the Constitutional Framework. This is
unacceptable to my Government, as both documents
clearly define that international cooperation with
respect to Kosovo and Metohija falls within the
exclusive competence of UNMIK.

We expect the Security Council to prevent such
departures from the established framework of
competences of the provisional institutions of self-
government, bearing in mind that the current status of
Kosovo and Metohija has been defined clearly and
solely in resolution 1244 (1999). Therefore, my
Government once again calls upon the Security

Council to ensure full implementation of resolution
1244 (1999).
In conclusion, I would like to point out once
again that, in the period ahead, serious efforts are
needed constructively to address two problems: the
return of internally displaced persons and the
decentralization of Kosovo and Metohija. My
Government is ready to contribute fully to these
efforts. Unless visible progress is achieved on these
two interrelated issues soon, we will, in a few months
time, be further away than we are now from our
common objective - the creation of a multi-ethnic
tolerant society in Kosovo and Metohija.

