Mr. Lagos Pizzati (El Salvador) (spoke in Spanish): I wish to begin my statement by
congratulating you, Sir, on behalf of my delegation for
the way in which you are presiding over this very
important United Nations organ this month, at a
momentous time for the future of international
relations and, in particular, for the Organization, the
highest expression of multilateralism.

We also congratulate Ambassador Greenstock on
his presentation in his capacity as Chairman of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee. We commend him for
all that he has achieved.

While we reaffirm our full support for the
statement made by the representative of Peru on behalf
of the Rio Group, of which we are a member, we wish
to take this opportunity to offer some additional
comments on an issue of great interest to each and
every member of the international community by virtue
of its implications and grave consequences for stability,
democratic institutionality and development, as well as
for our peoples' effective enjoyment of human rights
and fundamental freedoms.

Terrorism in all its forms and manifestations
represents a global threat, the characteristics of which
are so unique that they can be only addressed jointly by
means of concerted and united efforts and close
cooperation, which we believe should continue to be
principally coordinated by the Counter-Terrorism
Committee, pursuant to the mandate embodied in
resolution 1373 (2001).

We wish to reaffirm that, since the adoption of
that resolution, along with those subsequently adopted
by the Security Council on this issue, the Government
of El Salvador has taken the necessary provisions and
steps at the national and subregional levels to fulfil its
obligations and responsibilities under those resolutions,
offering its cooperation and support at all times to the
Counter-Terrorism Committee in the execution of its
mandate.

In this respect, on 20 December 2001, the
Government of El Salvador, pursuant to resolution
1373 (2001), presented its first report on measures
adopted or to be adopted to combat international
terrorism. The report was followed by the submission
of two supplementary reports, one presented in
June 2002 and another to be sent today to the Chairman
of the Committee. Each contains responses to the
comments of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
regarding the first reports.

Accordingly, we reaffirm once again the
readiness of the Government of El Salvador to make
the necessary efforts to cooperate with the Counter-
Terrorism Committee in implementing resolution
1373 (2001). I would note that, in order to achieve
better results to that end, we are awaiting an
opportunity to meet with a member of the Committee
to determine the kind of assistance that El Salvador
requires to supplement and increase its capacity to
combat terrorism.

El Salvador has demonstrated its commitment to
the struggle against terrorism at the regional level by
serving as the Chairman of the Inter-American
Committee Against Terrorism, which held its third
regular session in San Salvador from 22 to 24 January
2003. On that occasion, the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of El Salvador, Ms. Maria Eugenia Brizuela de
Avila, reaffirmed that

"El Salvador is absolutely ready to continue to
join in efforts aimed at the common objective of
preventing terrorism from afflicting our
civilization and way of life".

At that meeting, the Committee adopted the
Declaration of San Salvador on strengthening
cooperation in the fight against terrorism. The
Declaration urges the States of the inter-American
system that have not yet done so to accede to the
United Nations conventions and protocols on terrorism
and other related international instruments. It also
reaffirmed our commitment to bolstering cooperation
among States and regional and world organizations.

I wish to inform the Council that the Legislative
Assembly of El Salvador last week ratified the Inter-
American Convention against Terrorism, the
International Convention for the Suppression of
Terrorist Bombings, the International Convention for
the Suppression of the Financing of Terrorism and the
International Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime, together with the additional
protocols. The corresponding instruments of
ratification will be deposited in the next few days. Our
accession to these important instruments has closed
gaps in our legislation, providing us with a legal
framework that will further advance national
endeavours to combat that scourge to all mankind.

In conclusion, I express our appreciation to the
Counter-Terrorism Committee for its work and to the
Security Council for convening this open debate, which
has enabled us to exchange Views on the issue of
combating international terrorism.

