Mrs. Nincie (Serbia and Montenegro): Allow me,
Sir, to congratulate you on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
April and to thank you for convening this meeting on
the implementation of Security Council resolution 1244
(1999). I would also like to sincerely thank Under-
Secretary-General Guehenno for his briefing.

Efforts to transform the western Balkans into a
region of stability and progress suffered a serious
setback with the outbreak of orchestrated violence,
intimidation and ethnic cleansing that Kosovo Albanian
extremists and terrorists committed in Kosovo and
Metohija from 17 to 20 March, in the presence of the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) and KFOR.

According to resolution 1244 (1999), the
international security presence is mandated to establish
a secure environment where refugees and displaced
persons can return home in safety. By the same
resolution, the international civil presence is mandated
to maintain civil law and order, protect and promote
human rights and assure the safe and unimpeded return
of all refugees and displaced persons to their homes.
Both have failed to fulfil those obligations.

My Government takes note of Mr. Holkeri's
announcement that UNMIK is determined to bring to
justice all persons whose involvement in the latest
violence can be evidenced. We will welcome the
commencement of trials against perpetrators of those
crimes. There was ample opportunity in the five years
of international administration of Kosovo and Metohija
to demonstrate that a culture of impunity for ethnically
motivated violence would not be tolerated. This may be
one of the last opportunities to prevent impunity
leading to a mono-ethnic society.

Serbia and Montenegro also appreciates pledges
to rebuild devastated homes, churches and villages.
Only if those assurances speedily become reality will
there be room for assessments that the extremists who
caused the violence did not win.

The March violence in Kosovo and Metohija has
been widely condemned. However, we feel it necessary
to point out that this bloodshed was not an abstract
phenomenon requiring only general expressions of
censure. My Government expects the next report of the
Secretary-General to assess the political background of
this pre-planned violence. Disregarding the causes of
an organized wave of attacks leaving many civilians
dead, hundreds wounded, thousands expelled from
destroyed and burning homes and dozens of Orthodox
churches and monasteries devastated will not lead to
safety, stability and reconciliation.

Since June 1999, the Serb community and other
ethnic communities have been exposed to daily attacks
and intimidation by extremists among the majority
population of Kosovo Albanians. After the tragic
events of last month, it is clear that what is at stake in
Kosovo and Metohija is not safeguarding the rights of
the members of the Serb community, but ensuring that
community's very physical survival.

In such circumstances, it is difficult to envisage
the smooth and rapid implementation of the concept of
a democratic, multi-ethnic and prosperous society
advanced in the "Standards for Kosovo" and Kosovo
Standards Implementation Plan documents. Those
documents quite simply fail to provide sufficient
guarantees for the survival of the Serb population in
the province, let alone for returns. The failure to
establish such guarantees would signify an end to the
possibility of a multi-ethnic Kosovo - in the very
presence of the international community, which would
share responsibility for that outcome.

Therefore, we need to have real security and
reliable institutional guarantees for the Serb and other
ethnic communities in Kosovo and Metohija. It is
essential that the particularly vulnerable ethnic
communities enjoy meaningful autonomy in Kosovo
and Metohija in order for them to be able to protect
their lives and property, to ensure freedom of
movement and employment opportunities and to
gradually build possibilities for coexistence with the
majority population. Proceeding from that reality, both
the Government of Serbia and all relevant political
factors in the Republic consider that the survival,
return and peaceful life of Serbs can be guaranteed
only if they are granted self-government in Kosovo and
Metohija in the form of territorial autonomy, which is a
long-established mechanism for the protection of the
rights of ethnic, cultural and linguistic communities in
Europe.

Such a proposal has been developed by the
Government of Serbia and will soon be presented to all
domestic and international actors. The proposal deals
with ways to improve the conditions of the Serb
community in Kosovo and Metohija and to enable its
members to administer affairs of vital importance to
their livelihood. It does not raise or prejudge in any
way the issue of the future status of Kosovo and
Metohija as envisaged by Security Council resolution
1244 (1999). It is violence and the repeated calls for
independence by Kosovo Albanian leaders that seek to
prejudge final status.

The Government of Serbia and Montenegro and
the Government of Serbia oppose changes of borders in
the Balkans, well aware of the consequences these have
had over the past decade and of the consequences they
may have in the future. Both Governments are looking
to a future marked by a process of integration rather
than of disintegration.

My Government therefore expects the Security
Council to support proposals aimed at providing the
non-majority ethnic communities of Kosovo and
Metohija with institutional guarantees to ensure their
survival, their return, their rights and their cultural and
religious heritage. We also believe it is necessary to
resume the Belgrade-Pristina dialogue on practical
issues. We look forward to evidence of similar
commitment from the Provisional Institutions of Self-
Government - which has been so consistently elusive
in the past.

