Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I would like to congratulate you, Madam
President, on your assumption of the presidency of
the Security Council and to wish you every success.
Through you, we would also like to thank the delegation
of Sweden for its outstanding presidency of the Council
last month.

Of course, we thank Mr. Martin Griffiths,
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Yemen,
and Mr. John Ging for their valuable and important
briefings on the political, security and humanitarian
developments in Yemen. In my statement, I will focus
on the political and security developments, in addition
to the humanitarian situation and the responsibility
shouldered by the Security Council.

With regard to the security and political
developments, we listened earlier to Mr. Griffiths
yalk about the outcome of his recent rounds of talks
and meetings following the efforts made to restore
order in the port city of Al-Hudaydah. His meetings
included those with the Yemeni parties, as well as a
number of visits to the countries of the region, the
most recent of which was to the State of Kuwait, in
addition to the initiative that he proposed to the Yemeni
parties to hold the next round of talks in Geneva. We
would like to emphasize our support for his efforts and
those of the United Nations in resolving the conflict in
Yemen peacefully.
The State of Kuwait underscores that there is no
military solution to the crisis in Yemen. There is only
a political settlement, which is underpinned by the
three political terms of reference: the Gulf Cooperation
Council initiative and its implementation mechanism,
the outcome of the National Dialogue Conference, and
the relevant Security Council resolutions, including
resolution 2216 (2015). Any peace plan that is not
supported by those pillars complicates and prolongs the
crisis, with repercussions for regional and international
security and stability.

On the security level, despite the coalition's
announcement that it will halt its military operations
to restore the port city Al-Hudaydah and bring it under
the control of the legitimate Yemeni Government so as
to ensure the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
to Yemen a better opportunity to find a peaceful
solution, the Houthis have continued to deliberately
target civilian sites and inhabited areas in the Kingdom
of Saudi Arabia, using ballistic missiles. To date, they
have launched a total of 163 missiles, in addition to
more than 66,000 explosive devices targeting civilian
properties and resulting in humanitarian and material
losses. The Houthi militias now employ new threats and
challenge the resolve of the international community
by targeting the security of international maritime
navigation in Bab Al-Mandab and the Red Sea - either
by planting maritime mines or by targeting commercial
ships and oil tankers, the most recent of which was the
targeting of two Saudi ships last week using anti-ship
missiles. We were on the brink of an environmental
catastrophe in the region as a result of the abuse by
the Houthis of Al-Hudaydah port as a launchpad for
such attacks.

The State of Kuwait reaffirms its condemnation in
the strongest terms of those ballistic missile attacks by
the Houthi militias on the territories of the Kingdom
of Saudi Arabia and the neighbouring countries. They
also threaten the safety of international maritime
navigation in Bab Al-Mandab and the Red Sea. That
is a clear threat to international and regional peace and
security. In that regard, we support the Kingdom of
Saudi Arabia and all measures undertaken to maintain
its security and stability. We commend the decision of
the Kingdom to issue 25,000 visas to Yemeni pilgrims
from all the Yemeni directorates and governorates,
without exception or discrimination.

Turning to the humanitarian situation, the donor
conference on the humanitarian situation in Yemen,
which was held in Geneva in April under the auspices
of the United Nations, Switzerland and Sweden and led
to approximately $2 billion in pledges, had a positive
impact, reflecting the interest of the international
community in preventing the humanitarian situation in
Yemen from deteriorating further, particularly in the
areas under the control of the Houthis. However, the
Houthis' control over the city and port of Al-Hudaydah
and over the delivery of humanitarian assistance could
undermine the purposes of the donor conference and
only lead to further humanitarian suffering in Yemen.
In this regard, I am pleased to announce that the
pledges we made in April have been fully honoured.
We have handed over a total of $250 million to various
organizations, agencies and international funds in order
to alleviate the suffering of all the Yemeni people.

In relation to the responsibility shouldered by
the Security Council, it must maintain its united and
firm position with regard to the Yemeni situation.
The Council's message to the Yemeni parties, in
particular the Houthis, must clearly emphasize the
following points.

First, it is unacceptable to continue ignoring the
relevant Security Council resolutions, in particular
resolution 2216 (2015), and to maintain such
intransigence by not committing to constructively
engaging in the political process, in addition to
favouring personal interests over the general interests
of the Yemeni people.

Secondly, we cannot accept the continuing ballistic
missile attacks on neighbouring countries or threats
to international maritime routes, which will have an
impact on regional and international peace and security.

Thirdly, using civilians as human shields,
exploiting civilian facilities as bases for launching
military operations and continuing to recruit children
all amount to war crimes, which are punishable under
international law.

Fourthly, it is important to cooperate with the
United Nations in order to ensure safe delivery and full
distribution of the humanitarian assistance throughout
Yemen, and to not subject its field staff to any harm.

Today, Thursday, 2 August, is the twenty-eighth
anniversary of the Iraqi occupation of the State of
Kuwait. The way the Security Council dealt with that
situation was a historic landmark and demonstrated the
ability of the United Nations to maintain international
peace and security. The full implementation of the
relevant Security Council resolutions had a great
impact on lessening the duration of that crisis and the
time frame for the restoration of Kuwait's legitimate
sovereignty over its territories. The Iraqi invasion of the
State of Kuwait sent a clear message to the international
community that if a State loses its sovereignty over
its territories that would have serious repercussions
and a catastrophic impact on international peace and
security. It would be remiss on our part not to reiterate
our utmost appreciation to the sisterly and friendly
States, in particular the international Coalition of
the 33 countries that supported our right, defended
international legitimacy and made substantial sacrifices
in order to liberate the State of Kuwait.

In this regard, we reiterate that it is important for the
efforts aimed at ending the Yemeni crisis to be based on
a political solution under the three terms of reference
that I cited earlier in order to ensure the sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity of Yemen, as
well as non-interference in its internal affairs.

