Mr. Inchauste Jordan (Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish):
We thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Mr. Zahir Tanin, for his informative briefing.
We also thank Mr. Ivica Dacie, First Deputy Prime
Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia,
and Ms. Vlora Citaku for their statements.

The latest report (S/2018/76) on the activities of

the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) reveals problems that arise from the
historical baggage of a still-latent conflict. Resolution
1244 (1999) therefore continues to be fully applicable
and the supervision of the international community to
be necessary. In that understanding, Bolivia once again
calls for compliance with the resolution, including full
respect for the sovereignty, territorial integrity and
independence of the Republic of Serbia. Any attempt
to turn the Kosovo security forces into an armed force
would therefore run counter to resolution 1244 (1999),
which provides for the establishment ofa force based on
a Council mandate. Bolivia is also concerned about the
attempt to pass a law revoking the Kosovo Specialist
Chambers. We believe that the rule of law and its
impartial application is Vital to combating impunity.
Those responsible for the commission of war crimes
must answer for their actions, regardless of who they
are or where they come from. We stress that the victims
deserve justice.

We also condemn the assassination of the political
leader Oliver Ivanovic'. We want to highlight the words
of Mr. Tanin when he said that this act raises concerns
about the possibility of a new wave of political instability.
We trust that the authorities and international agencies
on the ground will work quickly to apprehend those
responsible. We call on political leaders to cooperate
and avoid escalating tensions.

Bolivia believes it important to ensure that
the parties honour the commitments made in the
negotiations sponsored by the European Union. In
that connection, we urge them to work for a peaceful
solution through dialogue and in line with the
obligation to negotiate in accordance with international
law. In that regard, Bolivia has called on the parties
on several occasions to comply with the provisions of
the Brussels Agreement, reached more than four years
ago. Unfortunately, the establishment of an association/
community of Serb-majority municipalities has yet to
take place. Its implementation is key to ensuring the
security and human rights of Serbs in Kosovo and
Metohija and essential to achieving a peaceful long-
term settlement. We hope that the next report will note
progress in this area.

We appreciate the efforts of the European Union
and the mediation of the High Representative of the
European Union for Foreign Affairs and Security
Policy with a view to advancing the implementation
of the existing agreements. In that regard, we call on
the parties to set start dates for a round of technical
dialogue. We believe that these rounds of negotiations
are ideal for building mutual trust between the parties.
We also note the efforts of the parties to finalize the
implementation of the agreement on the judiciary in
northern Kosovo.

Bolivia appreciates the work that UNMIK has done
in accordance with its mandate. We encourage it to
continue working to build trust between the parties, use
its good offices to mitigate tensions, employ peaceful
means to seek consensus solutions and promote political
dialogue and respect for human rights, with a view
to safeguarding peace as enshrined in the Charter of
the United Nations. We commend its continuing work
through its joint efforts with the municipal authorities
and representatives of the province of Kosovo to protect
the rights of communities, promote intercommunal
reconciliation and inter-ethnic cooperation, facilitate
the return of internally displaced persons, highlight
the importance of gender equality and provide
certification services.

We echo the concerns expressed by the
international community about the mandate of the
truth and reconciliation commission to be established
by the Kosovo authorities. We believe that it should be
inclusive and meet the minimum standards that it needs
to function.

Finally, we call on the international community to
contribute to the trust fund created by the Secretary-
General to carry out community assistance projects to
benefit the communities of the Roma, Egyptian and
Ashkali minorities.

