Mr. Andjaba (Namibia): Mr. Minister, we welcome
you to our midst and wish to commend you and
Ambassador Turk for taking the initiative to convene this
very important meeting.

Like those who spoke before, we pay tribute to the
victims of the air crash in Kosovo and express our heartfelt
condolences to their families.

We would also like to welcome and thank their
Excellencies for their invaluable and informative briefing on
the current status of the implementation of the Dayton
Peace Accords in Bosnia and Herzegovina. In this regard,
may I quote the report of the High Representative

"that the work of the Presidency has constructive
elements and the rotation of the function is working
smoothly and the Presidency quickly reached
agreement on a number of important areas, including
reorganization of the Diplomatic and Consular services
appointment of new Ambassadors, a commitment to
establishing the State border service, and a reduction
of a military budget". (S/I999/1115, annex, para. IQ  These are indeed positive elements in the sphere of
institution-building, and we therefore encourage the
Presidency to persevere in the great task of rebuilding their
nation.

We note also the improvement in the rate of return of
refugees and internally displaced persons to their original
homes. In this context, my delegation hopes that their
Excellencies will encourage Parliament to consider
favourably and expeditiously the draft electoral law and
private property legislation due in Parliament in order to
speed up the return of the internally displaced persons to
their homes.

Overall, my delegation notes with appreciation the
progress that has been achieved thus far with respect to the
implementation of the Peace Agreement, especially the
ongoing efforts to establish common institutions.
Furthermore, my delegation warmly welcomes the New
York Declaration by the Joint Presidency of Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

Finally, it remains essential for the international
community to continue providing the people of Bosnia and
Herzegovina with the necessary resources and logistical
assistance needed to build the basic foundation for a
multi-ethnic, multi-cultural and peaceful country.

