Mr. Egeland: I have just concluded my fourth
and final mission as Emergency Relief Coordinator to
Darfur. I return with a plea from the beleaguered
Darfurians for immediate action to finally stop the
atrocities against them. For more than a thousand days
and a thousand nights, the defenceless civilians of
Darfur have been living in fear for their lives and the
lives of their children. The Government's failure to
protect its own citizens, even in areas Where there are
no rebels, has been shameful, and it continues. So does
our own failure, more than a year after world leaders,
meeting in this very building, pledged their own
responsibility to protect civilians where Governments
manifestly fail to do so.

When I went to Darfur on my first visit, in late
June 2004, accompanying the Secretary-General, we
saw a civilian population under attack, prompting the
displacement of 1 million people. When I returned to
Darfur last week, 4 million people - two-thirds of
2

Darfur's population - were in need of emergency
assistance. The number of internally displaced persons
has risen to an unprecedented 2 million. Attacks on
villages and the displacement of tens of thousands of
civilians continue and have reached the horrific levels
of early 2004.

Over the past three years the world has responded
generously with emergency relief in Darfur. The
achievements of the 14,000 Sudanese and international
aid workers in Darfur, the world's largest humanitarian
operation, have been nothing less than heroic. Against
all odds, we have until recently been able to deliver
relief to most of the affected. As a comprehensive
survey showed in August, global malnutrition had been
reduced by half since the height of the crisis in mid-
2004, and mortality rates had fallen to 0.36 per 10,000
per day, well below the emergency thresholds.
Seventy-three per cent of all Darfurians had access to
safe drinking water. Moreover, 550,000 tons of food
will be delivered this year alone.

But all of this is now at risk. Militia attacks and
banditry have rendered more than 95 per cent of all
roads in West Darfur no-go areas for the United
Nations and non-governmental organizations (NGOs).
As a result, an increasing number of camps are cut off
from adequate and reliable assistance; in some
instances, all basic humanitarian services have had to
be shut down. Large new militias are being armed as
we speak, while none are being disarmed, despite the
demands and measures put in place by the Security
Council in 2004 and 2005.

As the women from displaced-persons camps told
me in El Geneina, the youngest and most reckless
receive weapons and are recruited into militias.
Government forces, militias, a plethora of rebel groups
and an increasing number of Chadian armed opposition
groups roam around freely inside and outside the
camps, spreading terror and fear. New displacement is
also fuelled by cross-border raids by armed groups
which receive arms and safe haven on both sides of the
Chad-Sudan border, thereby rapidly pushing the
conflict towards a regional escalation.

All of this is happening with total impunity.
Large parts of Darfur are seeing a meltdown of law and
order. The traditional leaders whom I met have lost
their influence on young men and armed groups, and
they complained openly that the Government armed the
new militias as the rebels got new arms from abroad.
06-62675

All of this leaves the situation in West Darfur,

and in Darfur at large, closer to the abyss than I have

witnessed since my first visit in 2004. The following
areas need to be addressed with the utmost urgency.

First, we need an immediate stop to all attacks,
the cessation of hostilities and respect for the ceasefire
by all parties.

Villages, camps and communities outside the
urban centres of Darfur are again being burned and
looted. Women and children are abused, raped and
killed with impunity. Just 10 days ago the village of
Sirba saw three attacks by Government forces and Arab
militia that resulted in innocent civilians, mainly
women and children, being killed and injured. I met
some of the victims in the hospital of El Geneina. A
mother told me how she held her two-year-old daughter
in her arms as the child was wilfully shot in the neck
by an armed man despite her repeated begging to spare
her daughter. The wounded child did, as I could see,
miraculously survive and is now recovering in the good
care of local Sudanese doctors. Neither the
Government nor the African Union was able or willing
to show presence or deploy proactively in Sirba before
the massacre, despite repeated warnings by villagers
and aid workers of the impending attacks.

Just as I left the Sudan on Saturday, two massive
military operations started in the Jebel Marra and
Birmaza areas in North Darfur. A dozen villages were
attacked and looted, driving more than 8,000 more
innocent men, women and children from their homes
and leaving many killed and injured. In the Birmaza
area, huge amounts of livestock were stolen and houses
were burned, deliberately depriving the population of
their means of survival. In Jebel Marra, where up in the
mountains the nights are freezing at this time of year,
the attackers systematically looted food, clothing and
blankets. This means that babies and small children
who survived the attacks might now freeze to death.
Let us be clear: these acts are crimes of the most
despicable kind. They are an affront to humanity.

Secondly, we need the immediate and lasting
implementation of all freedom of movement guarantees
afforded by the Government of Sudan in the July 2004
moratorium, the Status of Mission Agreement and the
Darfur Peace Agreement.

The rampant insecurity, proliferation of arms and
banditry on roads have taken their toll on the delivery
capacity of an increasingly beleaguered humanitarian
06-62675

community. Our colleagues in El Geneina told me how
they had been forced to evacuate all operations from
the Dorti camp, leaving 9,000 people without any
assistance or protection whatsoever. Without armed
escorts, dozens of humanitarian vehicles have been
hijacked of late.

Three hours after I left El Geneina, a United
Nations Mission in the Sudan (UNMIS) vehicle with
two United Nations volunteers was robbed at gunpoint
by men in military camouflage between the town and
the headquarters of the African Union Mission in the
Sudan (AMIS); the car remains in the hands of the
hijackers. Humanitarian workers are being harassed,
attacked and even killed. Just three days before my
arrival, a World Food Programme driver died from
injuries sustained in one such gun attack.

If this trend continues, if the world's largest
humanitarian operation falters and if the lifeline for
millions of civilians collapses, the situation in Darfur
will spiral out of control. We will see a dramatic
escalation of human suffering and loss of life beyond
anything we have witnessed so far.

It is not only the insecurity that threatens our
humanitarian operations. It is also the wall of
administrative obstacles that the Government has
slowly but surely rebuilt both in Khartoum and in
Darfur that is strangling our operations. A quicksand of
endless bureaucratic obstacles consumes most of the
time of humanitarian relief managers. Some NGOs
have half of their staff paralysed due to the lack of
visas, work permits, stay permits or travel permits, or
to any number of other obstacles. While all agencies
and nationalities suffer from this, non-governmental
organizations are targeted in particular - and United
States aid workers as well. The United States has been
by far our largest donor to the humanitarian operations
in Darfur. Now 26 of 40 American NGO workers have
been blocked from doing their relief work.

Relief workers of all nationalities have to be
granted full access. The same is true for the journalists
who cover our work and who report back to the donor
communities about it. Two American journalists were
blocked from travelling with me to Darfur. This is part
of the wider effort by the Government to restrict access
and reporting on Darfur by international and national
journalists. Journalists have been detained, threatened
with expulsion and harassed by a multitude of
3
Government authorities, particularly from the national
security sector.

In brief, the moratorium on restrictions on aid
operations in Darfur remains in place only in theory at
the moment, as it is being completely undermined by
the daily reality. This reality is summarized in the fact
sheet before the Council, which I also shared with
senior Government officials in Khartoum and in
Darfur. I urge Council members to pursue these issues
with the Government of the Sudan here in New York,
in Khartoum and through other channels. These are not
just bureaucratic issues. They threaten our entire relief
operation.

The Council has previously spoken out in favour
of one of the most established and respected NGOs that
had been suspended by the Government before: the
Norwegian Refugee Council (NRC). On top of its most
recent suspension, the NRC has now received several
letters confirming its complete expulsion from South
Darfur. One letter demanded that the NRC immediately
hand over all its assets to the Government. That would
amount to confiscation of international property. The
NRC has provided important services to several
hundred thousand internally displaced persons (IDP) in
South Darfur. Its expulsion and treatment should be
protested by the Council and by members'
representatives in Khartoum.

I was personally blocked by Sudanese national
security officials from going to four out of six
locations that I had previously agreed upon for my visit
with the Government. I had intended to visit the Jebel
Marra to send a strong message to the rebels to
immediately stop the hostilities and support the
ceasefire. My visit to Tawilla was to highlight the
successful local work of AMIS, and my meeting with
Musa Hillal, the Arab militia leader, was to protest
attacks against the civilian population. Every one of
those visits was blocked.

Each time I have travelled to the Sudan I have
hoped to see a fundamental change in the attitude of
the Government, an attitude that has been characterized
by denial, neglect and the blaming of others. Yet again
this time, I saw no such change, but rather a further
entrenching of that attitude. Senior Government
officials continue to deny the killings, the
displacements and the rape of women.

My message to the Government, both in
Khartoum and in West Darfur was, and is, "Help us to
help your people; do not undermine our effectiveness;
too many lives are at stake". I was pleased to receive
verbal assurances from the Minister for Humanitarian
Affairs that the moratorium on restrictions will be
extended beyond the end of this year. However, six
weeks before the moratorium is due to expire, that
extension has yet to be formally announced to our aid
agencies on the ground. I also agreed with the Minister
to convene an in-depth review of working conditions
for humanitarian organizations. At long last, that
process started this morning with a constructive
meeting with the humanitarian affairs commissioner. A
technical committee with the line ministries, the United
Nations and, if they so desire, NGOs will now address
all current restrictions.

The next weeks may be a make-or-break period
for our lifeline to more than 3 million people. This
period may well be the last opportunity for the
Council, the Government of the Sudan, the African
Union, the rebels and all of us to avert a humanitarian
disaster of much larger proportions than even the one
we have witnessed in Darfur thus far. I hope that the
agreement reached in Addis Ababa, on which the
Secretary-General will brief the Council this afternoon,
will mark a historic turning point to something better.
As humanitarians, we pin high expectations on this
agreement on a re-energized peace process, a
strengthened ceasefire and effective peacekeeping.

Our fear is that time is now being lost in talks
regarding the intricacies of the African Union/United
Nations partnership rather than on the immediate
deployment of a more effective force with a more
proactive mandate. From my humanitarian perspective,
the expectations for the force are as follows. It must
have the mandate, resources, capabilities and
willingness to deploy proactively to areas of risk for
civilian populations, show presence where needed and
protect civilian populations from attack and abhorrent
acts of rape and sexual violence. It must be able to
remain among the people when attacks are imminent. It
must be able to investigate and report violations
expeditiously. It must have the flexibility and mobility
to respond to urgent requests for help from
communities under threat - as should have been the
case in Sirba, Birmaza and the Jebel Marra over the
last 10 days alone. It must restart escorts of, or have a
presence among, women and girls during the collection
of firewood. If requested, it must be capable of
facilitating the escort or protection of humanitarian
staff, assets and transports, including by patrolling key
humanitarian corridors and access roads. And it must
resolutely confront and address attempts to restrict
their operational space or to impose restrictions on its
monitoring or protection activities.

We all know that it may take months for such
forces to be deployed. The Darfurians cannot wait
another day. We therefore need the attacks to stop now.

Allow me also to make a few comments on the
other part of my mission, regarding the Juba peace
talks between the Government of Uganda and the
Lord's Resistance Army (LRA). I would like to thank
the Council for its latest presidential statement on these
talks (S/PRST/2006/45), as I believe that the current
African-led peace mediation efforts in Juba provide a
unique opportunity to bring the 20-year conflict with
the LRA to an end. Except for small incidents, the
cessation of hostilities has been respected, allowing
hundreds of thousands of IDPs to start to return in
northern Uganda. The hopes of millions of Ugandans
rest on the outcomes at Juba.

At the same time, I was struck by the
vulnerability of the peace process, which has made
little substantial progress since the cessation of
hostilities agreement in August. United Nations fund-
raising for, and facilitation of, the peace talks was seen
as critically important by all concerned. To date, six
donors have committed $4.7 million to the Juba
Initiative Project of the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA), while more are in the
process of doing so. A good partnership between the
Department for Political Affairs and OCHA in support
of the Southern Sudanese mediation has been
established.

Following his much publicized invitation, I met
on 12 November with Joseph Kony of the LRA, his
deputy Vincent Otti and other central commanders in
the western assembly area of Ri-Kwangba, on the
border of the Sudan and the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. I was accompanied by the chief mediator,
Vice-President Riek Machar of the Government of
South Sudan, members of the peace mediation team,
the Government of Uganda and representatives of civil
society. Arriving at a clearing in the jungle after travel
by air and by land, I was received by Vincent Otti,
several members of his senior command and some 50
LRA fighters, many of them, seemingly, underage.
06-62675

In our subsequent meeting, I urged Kony to move
towards a speedy end to the conflict, to send senior
commanders to the talks and to ensure the reassembly
of LRA forces in the agreed areas. I reiterated our
demand that they release abducted women and children
and that they make a humanitarian gesture by allowing
the wounded and sick to go to hospital. While,
regrettably, still denying any abduction of children,
Otti and Kony agreed that the LRA would indicate to
us later this month the names of those who could be
released into our care from LRA forces assembled in or
around the eastern area of Owini Ki-Bul.

With regard to the peace process, both Otti and
Kony complained about continued attacks and
movements in Southern Sudan by the Uganda People's
Defence Forces (UPDF), which was preventing LRA
forces from moving into the agreed assembly areas, in
particular in the east. I raised that issue with both the
mediation team and President Museveni in Kampala.
They only marginally raised the issue of the
International Criminal Court. I emphasized the
independence of the International Criminal Court and
stated that peace could not take place without justice.
This morning, Vincent Otti told me by satellite phone
that they are in the process of reassembling and that
they will respect the cessation of hostilities. He also
agreed again to revert to the issue of releasing non-
combatants into our care.

In my rare meeting with the Lord's Resistance
Army (LRA), I was struck by the continued paranoia
among the senior LRA leadership. It will therefore be
critical for the peace process and the eventual process
of disarmament, demobilization and reintegration to
build confidence among the LRA through regular face-
to-face meetings with representatives of the mediation
team and of the international community. It also
explains the disconnect between the series of general
political demands of the LRA mediation delegation in
Juba and the rather more immediate interest of the
commanders in security arrangements.

In Kampala, I debriefed President Museveni on
my meeting with the LRA leadership. I urged him to
give the peace talks more time and to assist the process
by withdrawing UPDF troops from positions that
would make it more difficult for the LRA to assemble
in Owiny Ki-Bul. President Museveni emphasized that
the peace talks should not be an endless businesslike
negotiation and that all LRA must move into the two
agreed assembly areas for the ceasefire to be lasting.
In conclusion, I believe that the J uba peace
process is the best hope ever to bring this cruel conflict
to an end. The time is now. We must not let this unique
opportunity slip away due to a wait-and-see attitude.

In my view the following steps are critical to
support the admirable efforts of the mediation led by
the Government of South Sudan. There must be
continued funding for the mediation effort and for the
ceasefire monitoring through the OCHA-led Juba
Initiative Project. There must also be continued United
Nations political assistance to the mediation, led by the
Department for Political Affairs (DPA). The efforts for
the cessation of hostilities monitoring team consisting
of representatives of the parties and the mediators must
be reinvigorated. Representatives of DPA and OCHA
will participate as observers, and UNMIS will provide
much-needed helicopter transport for the monitoring
team. More permanent facilities in Ri-Kwangba are
also needed to provide an opportunity for more regular
meetings between the mediation team, the Government
delegation and the LRA leadership. Finally, immediate
assistance to assembly areas must be provided to make
the current stand down attractive. Caritas Uganda is
now providing food, water and health care inside the
assembly areas.

Those are all ongoing vital efforts that, together
with the Security Council's continued political support,
should enable the peace talks with the LRA to make
further progress and the nearly 2 million displaced
persons in northern Uganda to return.

