Mr. Tiendrebeogo (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French): I too wish to congratulate you, Mr. President,
and to thank you, along with Ambassador Grauls and
Ambassador Jurica, in your respective capacities as
Chairmen of the three Security Council Committees in
the field of counter-terrorism, both for your briefings
this morning and for the cooperation that has prevailed
in the relations among those three subsidiary bodies of
the Security Council.

My delegation takes this opportunity to
congratulate the 1540 Committee on the excellent
report it submitted to the Security Council in July (see S/2008/493), pursuant to resolutions 1673 (2006) and
1810 (2008). The report assesses efforts by States
during the second biennium of the Committee's work
to implement resolutions 1540 (2004) and 1673 (2006).
These take the form of the submission of first reports
and additional information; the adoption of legislation;
the provision of technical assistance; outreach and the
raising of awareness of States; and cooperation,
including with regional and subregional organizations.

The large number of States that have submitted
first reports and additional information reflects not
only the Committee's dynamism but also the interest of
States in meeting the goal of preventing terrorists from
acquiring weapons of mass destruction. We encourage
the Committee to continue these efforts and to continue
its deliberations with respect to adopting its next
annual programme of work, to be submitted to the
Security Council by the end of January 2009. That
planning tool will be indispensable in evaluating the
progress the Committee makes in the ensuing months.

We also congratulate the 1373 Committee on the
progress it has achieved in its work. The conduct,
jointly with the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate (CTED), of the May 2008 global
survey of the implementation by Member States of
resolution 1373 (2001) (see S/2008/379) is worthy of
mention. The first of its kind, the survey made it
possible to gauge progress achieved and challenges to
be met, broken down by thematic areas and by regions,
and to make appropriate recommendations.

We note that this was possible thanks to
preliminary implementation assessments provided by
Member States; my delegation takes this opportunity to
welcome the large number of assessments that the
Committee has already considered and adopted. This
reflects the commitment of States to the fight against
terrorism and their resolve to continue to cooperate
with the Committee and its Executive Directorate.

Burkina Faso congratulates the Committee and
the Executive Directorate on the success of its field
visits and encourages them to complete the stocktaking
of each Member State's implementation of resolution
1373 (2001), in order to improve the focus on delays
and the substantial assistance to be provided to States
requiring it. It is also important that the working
groups mandated by the CTED reorganization plan
continue their efforts.

The Committee's recent decision to invite States
that have been visited to participate in discussions on
the visit report is a praiseworthy initiative.

Turning to the activities of the 1267 Committee,
we welcome the excellent results achieved, especially
since the adoption of resolution 1822 (2008) on
30 June. We hope that new initiatives by the
Committee will make the current sanctions regime
more effective. Notable advances include the review of
the consolidated list before 30 June 2010, an annual
update, and the introduction of explanations of reasons
for listing.

The publication on the Committee website of
narrative summaries of reasons for the listing of each
individual and entity reflects a desire for transparency
which my delegation hails. The purpose is to ensure a
reliable and transparent procedure for the listing and
de-listing of individuals and entities on the
consolidated list, along with humanitarian exemptions.
Moreover, we are convinced that the review of the
Committee's guidelines will respond to the issue of
respect for human rights in the Committee's listing and
de-listing procedures.

To achieve those objectives, the Committee and
the Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team
will need the full cooperation of States. The 1267
Committee is a very important link in the counter-
terrorism system, and it is vital that the international
community contribute to ensuring the effectiveness of
its activities.

Burkina Faso has consistently stressed the need
for concerted action by the three Committees and
welcomes the exemplary cooperation among them,
among their groups of experts and with the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and regional and
subregional organizations. Such coordination of efforts
is indispensable to ensure a comprehensive approach to
problems and the provision of appropriate technical
assistance.

Finally, my delegation heartily encourages the
continued holding of public informational meetings,
for the sake of transparency and ongoing dialogue with
all States Members of the United Nations. The interest
shown by States during those briefings and the
relevance of the questions raised at them bear witness
to the value of such meetings.

