Mr. Manalo (Philippines): At the outset, I wish
to congratulate you, Sir, and your country on your
chairmanship and leadership of the Council this month.
I also wish to express my delegation's appreciation for
this opportunity to speak on this important topic and to
thank the Secretary-General for his report on this very
important issue. We join others today in underscoring
the need for continued and concerted actions at both
the national and international levels to protect children
in armed conflict. We thank the Secretary-General, the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict and the Executive
Director of the United Nations Children's Fund
(UNICEF) for their respective statements this morning.

It is estimated that there are 300,000 child
soldiers in the world, one fourth of whom are in the
East Asia and Pacific region. Most of these children
were forcibly recruited because of social and cultural
pressures or were simply abducted outright. Poverty
has also been a factor leading to child recruitment.
Those not recruited or abducted have also been victims
of displacement due to armed conflict.

Instead of being in school, these children have
served in the battleground, fighting, or as messengers
and couriers, as cooks, spies or sex slaves. That these
children have been and are involved in wars, growing
up in an environment of destruction, denies the world a
promising future.

One of the most important milestones for
protecting children from involvement in hostilities was
set last February with the entry into force of the
Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of
the Child on the involvement of children in armed
conflict. It was indeed a positive step, a major step, and
will hopefully end the use of children under 18 years
old from serving as soldiers or directly participating in
hostilities.

The Philippines ratified the Optional Protocol last
April, and it has also ratified the 1990 International
Labour Organization Convention No. 182 concerning
the elimination of the worst forms of child labour. We
view these two international instruments as setting
strict standards for preventing the recruitment of
children as child soldiers.
Children are also protected by the Philippines
legal framework. Our Constitution provides that the
State shall defend the rights of children and especially
protect them from all forms of neglect, abuse and other
conditions prejudicial to their development. In this
regard, Philippines law provides that children shall not
be recruited for fighting and that they should be given
priority during evacuation as a result of armed conflict.
In recognition of their special situation, children
arrested for reasons related to armed conflict, whether
as combatants, couriers, guides or spies, are entitled to
release on recognizance within 24 hours to the custody
of the Government or any responsible member of the
community as determined by the courts.

We welcome the fact that the Security Council
has taken steps to address the matter of protection of
and assistance to children in situations of armed
conflict, particularly through resolutions 1261 (1999),
1314 (2000) and 1379 (2001). The Council must
continue to be seized with this issue and take every
opportunity to reaffirm its collective commitment to
protect children and prevent their involvement in
armed conflict by mainstreaming this concern in its
relevant decisions.

Post-conflict reconstruction programmes must
also be tailored to assist children affected by armed
conflict. In the case of girls and young women, who are
often the targets of sexual abuse, abduction and forced
recruitment, rehabilitation services are needed to deal
with their experiences and assist them in reintegrating
society. In the case of displaced children, aside from
basic food, medical care and education, counselling
and family reunification must be important components
of their reintegration programme.

For countries that have emerged from conflict, it
is important that any disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programme include the demobilization
and rehabilitation of former child soldiers. Such
programmes must distinguish the post-conflict needs of
girl soldiers from those of their male counterparts. This
will ensure that the provisions for demobilization and
reintegration needs are directly related to the specific
ways that children have been abused or traumatized
during a conflict.

The healing and reintegration of children affected
by armed conflict should be a priority of any
reconstruction effort and, as such, must be backed by
sufficient resources. This is especially due to the
necessity of finding alternative peaceful ways for
children to develop and have a more meaningful future.
Children are our future. We must all help to
create a world fit for them. At the very least, we must
protect them from the horrors of armed conflict.

