Mr. Plasai (Thailand): At the outset, my delegation
aligns itself with the statement delivered by Her
Excellency Minister Marsudi of Indonesia on behalf of
the Association of Southeast Asian Nations.

Today's meeting and briefings underscore two
important points. First, the endeavour of peacekeeping
is a collective commitment and, secondly, peacekeeping
operations now deploy in increasingly complex
operating environments.

We congratulate the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations on its 2018 substantive
session, which has produced a meaningful draft report
(A/AC.121/2018/L.3) that touches upon the issues of
troop performance and accountability for the first time.
We wish to underline the following key elements.

First, planning is the first important step.
Peacekeeping mandates must be planned thoroughly
and be achievable, realistic, context-specific and
flexible. The careful planning of mission transition and
post-mission United Nations support should also be
in place from an early stage. It is also necessary for
all stakeholders to exchange information based on a
frank and clear situation assessment. Mandates must be
commensurate with an adequate level of financial and
human resources to support an effective and efficient
discharge of mandated tasks, including equipment and
other assets.

Secondly, the efficient and effective achievement
of mandate outcomes depends on the qualities and
capabilities ofpeacekeepers. Ensuring thatpeacekeepers
meet national, international and United Nations
standards is important. The Kingdom of Thailand works
towards that goal before and during deployment. It
should be everyone's priority. Both predeployment and
in-field training require a management approach that is
systematic, as an integral part of operational planning.
Towards that end, Thailand is committed to ensuring
that all its peacekeepers, including the new horizontal
military engineering company that will soon join the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan, are properly
prepared, trained and equipped in order to meet the
diverse challenges that they may face in the field.

Thirdly, developing and aligning a common
understanding among stakeholders is key to ensuring
that the mandate's objectives are met and delivered
effectively. In that regard, we must stress the
importance of close consultations and communication
among the Security Council, host countries, troop-
and police-contributing countries and other relevant
agencies in a timely, appropriate and flexible manner. It
is also important that mission mandates be aligned with
and supportive of national priorities. The emphasis
should be on utilizing the existing mechanisms in
the society to build positive resilience and long-term
drivers of peace.

Fourthly, we need stronger partnerships. Enhancing
the capacities ofregional and subregional organizations
is essential. We must also ensure enhanced dialogue
among the regional and subregional organizations
and the Security Council, as well as other United
Nations bodies, in order to achieve synergy and
ensure complementarity.

Last but not least, active listening and an open
mind in seeking new ideas and being creative are
essential to ensuring that peacekeeping operations are
fit for purpose. As a concrete example of concerted
action on useful new ideas, the Kingdom of Thailand
has joined others in a Group of Friends to support the
management of the environmental footprint of field
missions throughout their life cycle. We are convinced
that a lighter footprint will allow for cost efficiencies,
the improved safety and security of peacekeeping
troops and a better overall delivery of the mandate.

In conclusion, good planning, adequate resourcing
and competent personnel are imperative to the success
of any peacekeeping operation. It is our fervent hope that
we continue our efforts in that direction and continue to
share ideas and experiences in order to further improve
our collective peacekeeping action.

