Mrs. Rugwabiza: At the outset, I would like to
congratulate the United States and Ambassador Nikki
Haley on assuming the presidency of the Council for the
month of September. I assure the United States of my
delegation's full support during its presidency. I would
also like to commend the United States in particular
for convening this important debate on United Nations
peacekeeping reform, with a focus on improving
peacekeeper performance.

Rwanda aligns its statement with those delivered
by the representative of Cote d'Ivoire, on behalf of the
three African members of the Security Council, and
by Ambassador Fatima Mohammed, on behalf of the
African Union

I also highly commend and thank the Under-
Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,
Mr. Lacroix, and Ms. Blakemore for their briefings.

As a top troop- and police-contributing country,
Rwanda considerers today's discussion and debate to
be of critical importance. I should like to focus my
remarks today on a few points.

I will start by addressing some of the ways of
improving the peacekeeping performance of civilians
and uniformed personnel. I recall that, as rightly
outlined in the report of the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations, the Security Council should
continue to encourage and support the Secretariat to
develop

"an integrated performance policy framework for
mandate implementation based on clear standards
for all relevant civilian and uniformed personnel
working in and supporting peacekeeping operations
in the Secretariat and missions" (A/72/19, para. 102)

This framework should contain well-thought-out
benchmarks that we can be used both to measure and to
monitor peacekeeping performance.

Secondly - and here, I should like to emphasise a
point that was made by Ambassador Haley earlier - the
Security Council should ensure that the Secretariat
underlines troop capabilities, operational readiness
and the performance record, including the willingness
to fully implement Security Council mandates, at
the core of which is the protection of civilians. The
performance record cannot be recognized only by
rewarding troops, as has been happening; it should also
be taken into account for future deployment. I think
we have reached a level of maturity in United Nations
peacekeeping where deployment can no longer be
dictated only and exclusively by considerations that are
not performance-related.

Here, I would like to further develop the idea of
operational performance. We have, with a number of
other Members, put together a robust set of guidelines
in the Kigali Principles that, when implemented,
effectively enhance peacekeeping performance
while providing for accountability. For example, the
Principles seek to enhance performance by encouraging
high levels of training, ensuring that peacekeepers are
well prepared to protect, consistent with the mandate,
and to take disciplinary action against personnel if
and when they fail to act to protect civilians, and
when circumstances so warrant. We are encouraged
that countries contributing more than 50 per cent of
peacekeeping troops and that those funding more than
50 per cent of peacekeeping have endorsed the Kigali
Principles. We encourage all Members to endorse the
Principles and use them for their intended purpose as
simple operational guidelines for our peacekeepers and
commanders in the field.
The Principles are informed by Rwanda's
experience. We know from experience what the lasting
impact on peace and security can be when there is a
failure of peacekeeping. We have experienced both the
worst and the best of peacekeeping, and we know that
peacekeeping can make a major difference.

With respect to accountability, we should ensure
that personnel in the field and at Headquarters are held
accountable when it comes to peacekeeping. Here,
we would agree with the very practical and pertinent
proposals that were presented this morning by Under-
Secretary-General Lacroix.

Finally, we would like to emphasise the need for
effective and greater delegation of authority to field
commanders. It is our sense that the Secretariat has the
authority required to do so, so we believe that we do
not need a specific, additional resolution in that regard.
We think that the Secretariat should be able to use the
authority it has.

Still under accountability, I will not underline
points that were underlined earlier by previous
speakers. However, please allow me to emphasize
one point that is dear to all troop-contributing
countries - the caveats. We will once again call on
all troop-contributing countries to remove all caveats
that impede performance. As was well noted by one of
my colleagues, the caveats of some contingents are an
unbearable tax on other contingents.

At this point, allow me to move onto another element
that is dear to Rwanda, which concerns increasing the
number of women in peacekeeping. We were very happy
in July to be able to deploy a police unit that was in full
parity - 50 per cent male and 50 per cent female. This
shows that it is possible. We worked very closely on this
with the Secretariat; however the key element here in in
being able to do so is really leadership - both political
and military. Of course, one needs to have well-trained
female police or military officers.

In conclusion, I will say that we have and have
had a range of interventions that are available to all
of us to strengthen peacekeepers' performance. This
intervention will need the support, coordination and
cooperation of the Security Council, the Secretariat and
all Member States. I have outlined a few interventions
at the policy level in which the Security Council and the
Secretariat play a particularly important role.

I have also mentioned the Kigali Principles on
the Protection of Civilians and what has informed
them. I have provided a few suggestions as to how
the Secretariat, the Security Council and troop-
contributing countries can respond in cases of failure.
In short, I believe that, on this specific subject, we
know what needs to be done to improve performance.
We have the means to do so; we know the challenges. I
think that, at this stage - without intending to promote
a well-known company here - we need to just do it.

