Ms. Keita: I thank you, Sir, for the opportunity to
brief the Council today on developments in Guinea-
Bissau and the activities of the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS).

Following the successful holding of legislative
elections on 10 March, renewed political tensions
resulted in a stalemate over the composition of the
Executive Bureau of the National People's Assembly
and delayed the appointment of a Prime Minister and
the formation of a new Government. The situation was
further complicated by the conclusion of President Jose
Mario Vaz's five-year term in office on 23 June, amid
differing opinions regarding interim arrangements for
the office.

The decision of the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) of 29 June addressed those
issues, enabling the swearing in of a new Government
on 3 July and determining that President Vaz would
remain in office until the holding ofthe next presidential
elections, with limited powers, leaving the management
of national affairs to the new Government.

Allow me to commend the Government for the
unprecedented achievement of gender parity and the
appointment of some highly qualified young people
in the new Cabinet. That opens a new window of
opportunity for inclusive governance in the country.
The 31-member Government is composed solely from
the majority alliance, reflecting the results of the
legislative elections. However, the recent nomination
and replacement of senior officials in key positions,
including the new Commander of the National Guard,
Rear Admiral Agostino Sousa Cordeiro, who is under
European Union sanctions for his participation in the
2012 coup d'e'tat, have triggered negative reactions
from national and international stakeholders.

Meanwhile, the Government has adopted a seven-
month emergency plan aimed at providing relief to key
sectors, namely the education, health, infrastructure
and public services sectors. It has also submitted its
programme to the National Assembly for approval.
However, given the current tensions Within and among
political parties, including within the majority alliance
led by the African Party for the Independence of Guinea
and Cabo Verde, the approval of the new Government's
programme by the National People's Assembly will
be a testament to the majority alliance's strength and
ability to govern the country.

Since the inauguration of the Government, the
political arena has been dominated by preparations
for the presidential election. Several political parties
have organized primaries to select their candidates,
while some independent candidates have also emerged.
As we approach the 25 September deadline for the
submission of candidacies to the Supreme Court for
validation, we will continue to witness the emergence
of new candidates.

Meanwhile, the electoral process remains fraught
with challenges. Some political actors have expressed
concern about the correction of the voters' register to
regularize approximately 25,000 persons who were
disenfranchised in the legislative elections, owing
to their fear of fraud. They have also questioned the
creation of the new position of Secretary of State for
Electoral Management.

There is a general feeling ofmistrust among national
stakeholders surrounding the electoral process, which
must be addressed before the election if we are to ensure
a peaceful and consensual process and an outcome that
is accepted by all. To address that, the group of five
international partners in Bissau - the African Union,
the Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries
(CPLP), ECOWAS, the European Union and the United
Nations - has advocated for enhanced procedural
control, transparent measures, information-sharing
mechanisms and the development of a communication
strategy on the voter register correction exercise.
Ultimately, the joint message is that the country must
remain focused on ensuring the timely holding of the
presidential election.

Moreover, yesterday, 9 September, an ECOWAS
ministerial delegation Visited Bissau to assess
progress in the organization of the election. In its final
communique, it insisted that in the absence of consensus
among all political parties on the voter register
correction exercise, that the same voters register used for
the legislative elections be applied for the presidential
election. It also took note ofthe decision of the electoral
bodies to hold the election in 2019, including the second
rounds, if needed. The communique also requested a
clarification of the responsibilities of the Secretary of
State for Electoral Management. In its response, the
Government indicated today that the correction process
will proceed for now but that the actual register will be
updated only if the presidential candidates agree during
an upcoming meeting at the Parliament.

Meanwhile, the initiatives taken by the Government
and the electoral management bodies - the National
Electoral Commission and the Technical Support
Office for the Electoral Process - to enhance general
communication and consultations with political parties,
are steps in the right direction. To support that, the
United Nations recommends the establishment of an
all-inclusive stakeholders platform of national actors for
information-sharing purposes. In the meantime, civil
society organizations, including women's groups, have
begun preparations for the establishment of a situation
room to jointly monitor the election. They have also
put in place coordinated efforts for the preparation and
implementation of a code of conduct for the election.

The Government has developed a consolidated
election budget that amounts to $5.3 million. The
United Nations is working closely with the authorities
and the electoral bodies to fine-tune and finalize the
budget. Additionally, the Government has committed
to contributing to the electoral budget to cover initial
expenses for the presidential election, amounting to
$730,000, in addition to paying the outstanding debt of
$1.6 million incurred from the legislative elections.

The voter register correction exercise, which
started on 24 August, is the first of the major electoral
activities and is expected to end on 24 September.
However, less than one-quarter of the funding required
for that exercise has been disbursed thus far. To address
this, the United Nations Development Programme has
contributed $100,000 to the basket fund, while the
Government has contributed approximately $160,000
directly to both electoral management bodies: the
National Electoral Commission and the Technical
Support Office for the Electoral Process.

Efforts to mobilize resources from the international
community have yielded limited results so far. Several
pledges and indications of interest have been made, but
with no actual contributions. We expect the first batch
of financial contributions from international partners
to arrive before the first week of October. Should the
funding arrive, it will be applied to the training of civic
educators and of polling-staff trainers during October.

With 75 days left until the presidential election, it
is important that funding be made available now, either
bilaterally or through the United Nations Development
Programme-managed basket fund, to ensure that
electoral operations in the month of November- namely,
the training, deployment and payment of polling
and security personnel, as well as the movement of
materials to all polling stations - are completed in a
timely manner. I therefore wish to take this opportunity
to encourage international partners to extend their
generosity to Guinea-Bissau to provide the necessary
financial support for the election with urgency. Time
is of the essence. The partner's contributions will be
instrumental in ensuring the holding of the presidential
election on 24 November.

Since the formation of the Government, UNIOGBIS
has developed, with the Minister for Women, Family
and Social Solidarity, a programme to promote the
visibility of the eight women Ministers, support their
outreach to the population and discuss key public
administration programmatic areas from a gender
perspective. UNIOGBIS has also supported a civil
society network, including women organizations, in
monitoring and advocating for key reforms during the
post-electoral period.

The political environment continues to negatively
impact the economic performance of the country and
the living conditions of the population. The human
rights situation continues to be negatively impacted by
socioeconomic tensions, including targeted restrictions
on freedom and civil liberties. Upholding these rights
remains crucial to sustaining peace, stability and
development in Guinea-Bissau.

Meanwhile, drug trafficking and organized crime
continue to pose threats to peace and security in the
country and beyond. The seizure by the judicial police
of about 1,869 kilogrammes of cocaine on 2 September
signals that Guinea-Bissau remains a transit route
for drug trafficking, but also illustrates the enhanced
capacity of the judicial police to combat the scourge.
The signing on 2 August of a memorandum of
understanding between Guinea-Bissau, The Gambia
and Senegal to combat drug trafficking and organized
crime along their borders is a commendable effort
to tackle the cross-border threat. I appeal to the
international community to provide financial and
technical support to the Government of Guinea-Bissau
in its fight against drug trafficking and organized crime
in order to prevent losing the gains achieved thus far.

Pursuant to resolution 2458 (2019), measures have
been put in place for the United Nations transition
plan for the prospective closure of UNIOGBIS by
31 December 2020. As a first step, one regional office
has been closed and the remaining three will follow
by 31 December this year. Additionally, coordination
structures to oversee and plan for the transition have
been established in Bissau and at Headquarters.

The development of the United Nations transition
plan, including a preliminary mission drawdown plan,
is ongoing. A full-scale transition implementation will
be launched in close coordination with the United
Nations country team, the United Nations Office for
West Africa and the Sahel (UNOWAS) and the national
authorities following the conclusion of the presidential
election. The United Nations presence in Guinea-
Bissau has also engaged with the Government on the
gradual transfer of the UNIOGBIS residual mandated
tasks to the United Nations country team, UNOWAS
and other partners.

With the arrival of the new Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Ms. Rosine Sori-Coulibaly
in Bissau, as of 5 September, scaled-up engagement
with the Government is planned, in particular after
the presidential election. Meanwhile, UNIOGBIS
and UNOWAS have already started strengthening
their information-sharing arrangements and Special
Representative Chambas of UNOWAS has increased his
engagement with UNIOGBIS on the political process,
having also visited Bissau twice this year.

The year 2019 is pivotal for Guinea-Bissau in terms
of seizing the opportunity to end the recurring cycle
of instability that has hampered its socioeconomic
development for decades. The risk of further instability
in the period leading to the presidential election is high,
with political rivalries and poor economic prospects for
the population. The role of national political stakeholders
in ensuring stability cannot be overemphasized. All
national actors must be mindful of their duties towards
the people of Guinea-Bissau and the need to transcend
narrow individual and party interests.

All efforts must be made to ensure the timely holding
of an inclusive, credible and peaceful presidential
election. Both the Government and the international
community should abide by their commitment to
providing resources for the election. In the longer run,
key institutional reforms, including a constitutional
review, will remain critical to consolidating the
country's stability. Collaboration between all branches
of power and in the National People's Assembly will
therefore be vital in preparing the ground for an
inclusive reform process. The sustained engagement of
international partners will also be crucial to accompany
Guinea-Bissau in its path towards lasting stability.

1 would like to conclude by commending ECOWAS

for its leading role and steadfast commitment to ensuring
stability in Guinea-Bissau, including the maintenance
of the ECOWAS Mission in Guinea-Bissau, despite
other security challenges facing the region. My sincere
appreciation also goes to all partners, including the
African Union, the CPLP and the European Union, for
their valuable contribution to stabilization efforts in
Guinea-Bissau.

