Mr. Onowu (Nigeria): I join others in thanking
His Excellency Mr. Vuk Jeremie, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Serbia, for sharing his perspectives with us. I
thank Mr. Enver Hoxhaj for his statement. I would also
like to thank the Acting Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Farid Zarif, for his update on
the situation in Kosovo.

It is satisfying to note the return to normalcy in
northern Kosovo following last month's incident. We
urge the parties to continue to maintain the momentum
in order to guard against a relapse into violence. They
should also engage just as seriously in promoting
reconciliation and the peaceful settlement of pending
issues through the time-tested principles of
compromise and mutual respect.

While the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2010/514) indicates that the overall security
situation in Kosovo is stable, it remains in a fragile
balance. Incidents of attacks against minority
communities and international personnel and the
underlying tensions in northern Kosovo are indicative
of the challenges in the territory. Of particular concern
is the need to address insecurity and other outstanding
challenges bedevilling northern Kosovo. Concrete and
concerted action is required to strengthen law
enforcement and encourage broad-based consultations
towards promoting social cohesion and reconciliation
among the communities.

We commend the efforts of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
to facilitate dialogue and cordial relations among the
communities. We appreciate the collaboration among
UNMIK, the European Union Rule of Law Mission in
Kosovo (EULEX) and other actors in fostering
cooperation and peace in Kosovo and the region in
general. Finding sustainable and far-reaching solutions
to issues of common concern to the communities and
between the parties will go a long way towards
fostering lasting peace and stability in Kosovo and the
region.

We therefore urge regional and international
actors to work in concert and to intensify their efforts
to reach a durable solution to the problems in Kosovo.
We further urge the parties not to allow the misgivings
over last month's incidents to impede the European
Union-facilitated talks. Both parties have hitherto to
engage constructively in those talks. We commend
them on the results achieved thus far, and urge them to
stay committed to the process. It is only proper that the
international community step up efforts to preserve the
gains in those talks.

In that connection, we urge the European Union,
UNMIK and other international actors to continue to
provide the necessary support to the talks. We also
underline the importance of ensuring that all local
stakeholders are involved in the process.

On the issue of returns, it is essential to sustain
efforts to promote voluntary returns, as well as the
conditions necessary for those returns. In that context,
we support the proposal to include benefits for the
receiving communities in returns projects. The
sustained outreach activities of UNMIK, as well as the
support of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees and of the international
community, are needed to underpin such efforts.

Nigeria notes the intention of EULEX to
commence investigations into the allegations of
trafficking in human organs. We underline the
importance of ensuring that the views and concerns of
all stakeholders are adequately accommodated. That
will ensure that the final outcome of the investigations
enjoy the broadest possible support.

In concluding, we pay special tribute to the work
of the former Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Mr. Lamberto Zannier.

