Ms. Furman (Israel): I would like to thank the
Secretary-General's Envoy on Youth and other briefers
for their briefings today.

Three years ago, the Security Council unanimously
adopted resolution 2250 (2015) on youth, peace and
security. It was a landmark achievement representing
our progress in including and prioritizing young people
and their positive contributions to conflict resolution
and to maintaining peace and security. We are gathered
here today to build on that progress and to emphasize
the role of young people as vital partners for peace. The
youth of today are the world's largest-ever generation of
young people. We must encourage their involvement in
politics, economic development and conflict resolution.
Their ideas, creativity and innovation will help build a
better future for all.

Those efforts are even more critical in the face of
terrorism and violent extremism. We must acknowledge
that young people are often targets for radicalization
and recruitment, but our approach must not be limited
to countering violent extremism. We should rather
encourage young people to become leaders for peace
and security. We must understand that by including
them as part of the solution we can help build their
sense of belonging and purpose and improve their
well-being and self-esteem. Such efforts will in turn
lay the foundations for sustainable peace. We cannot
allow terrorist groups to continue indoctrinating young
people with hateful views and inciting them to violence.
Groups such as Hamas in Gaza recruit youth to terrorist
summer camps where they learn how to stab a Jew, plant
an improvised explosive device and make a Molotov
cocktail. Hamas is not alone in those lethal endeavours.
The Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham exploits social
media platforms in order to recruit young people from
all over the world for terrorist activities. Poisoning
young people's minds in these ways is pure evil. Let us
ensure that summer camps continue to be just for play
and social networks for uniting people.

In the understanding that young people are our
most promising resource, Israel believes strongly
in involving them in United Nations efforts and
foreign-policy decision-making, which is why we
have extended our youth delegate programme to three
months at a time, so that our delegate can contribute to
the work of our Mission and the United Nations on all
three pillars - peace and security, development and
human rights.

Israelis dedicated to involving young people
in local, regional, national and international policy
and efforts to build sustainable peace and security.
Our approach is both top-down and bottom-up, and
works to empower our young citizens through diverse
frameworks. Israel's President, in collaboration with
civil society, has initiated the Israeli Hope programme,
which brings together Muslim, Jewish and Christian
youth from across the country. This special programme
aims to build common understanding and mutual
respect for the cause of peace. Many of our efforts
focus on building bridges and common understanding
throughjoint activities, while others focus on economic
development. We have seen the blossoming of joint
ventures between Israeli and Palestinian youth in
areas that range from peace and security to technology
and innovation. In December, the non-governmental
organization Games for Peace, which uses online
video games as a platform for promoting tolerance and
dialogue between Jewish and Arab schoolchildren,
won the Intercultural Innovation Award of the United
Nations Alliance of Civilizations. Such activities are
key to building a foundation for sustainable peace.

Israel will continue in its efforts to close the gap
between the youth population and young people's
representation in decision-making processes.
Resolution 2250 (2015) is just the starting point. Let us
listen to the voices of our young people. They matter.

