The President (spoke in Arabic): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of the Libyan Arab J amahiriya.

At the outset, I would like to add my voice to
those earlier speakers who welcomed His Excellency
Mr. Boris Tadic', President of the Republic of Serbia. I
would also like to welcome Mr. Skender Hyseni and
extend my thanks to Mr. Zannier, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, for the
briefing that he presented on the latest developments in
Kosovo.

We realize that the situation in Kosovo has
undergone drastic changes and found a new reality that
supports the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) in undertaking its role in
line with resolution 1244 (1999). That makes it
necessary for UNMIK to adjust its mandate to the new
changes and developments, in conformity with
resolution 1244 (1999), particularly given the remark
made by the Secretary-General in paragraph 4 of his
report (S/2009/149) that many Kosovo Albanians are of
the view that UNMIK has achieved its goals.

In that regard, we welcome the acceptance by the
Serbian authorities and Kosovo Serbs of the
deployment of the European Union Rule of Law
Mission. Also, we commend the reconfiguration of
UNMIK and the uneventful deployment of the
European peace mission, and we hope that all parties
will continue their cooperation with the European
mission in coordination with UNMIK, in accordance
with the presidential statement of the Security Council
of 26 November 2008 (S/PRST/2008/44).

We also welcome the readiness by the two parties
to resume dialogue and to engage in discussions at the
technical level. We also understand the positions of
each party and we hope that those efforts to implement
the temporary arrangements and the six mutual
provisions specified by the Secretary-General in his
letter to President Tadic' of the Republic of Serbia of
12 June 2008 (S/2008/354, annex 1) - police, courts,
Customs, transportation and infrastructure, boundaries
and Serbian patrimony - will continue.

We would like to emphasize the need for the
Mission to continue its dialogue with all parties on all
practical issues. While we welcome the stabilizing of
the security situation, we are concerned at the
divergence in views between the Kosovo Albanians
and the Kosovo Serbs and the series of inter-ethnic
incidents, as mentioned in paragraph 9 of the
Secretary-General's report. That may affect the
independence of Kosovo in the long term.

Therefore, we call on all parties to exert further
efforts towards co-existence and harmony and keeping
open the channels of constructive dialogue and
cooperation and to avoid confrontation and violence.
Also, we would like to assert the need for the return of
all internally displaced persons and to protect them and
religious and cultural sites in trying to find common
ground for the maintenance of stability and peace in
the Balkan region.

I now resume my functions as president of the
Council.
I now give the floor to His Excellency the
President of the Republic of Serbia for a further
statement.

