Mr. Adi (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic):
Allow me, at the outset, to express our congratulations
to you, Madam, on your country's accession to the
presidency of the Security Council for the present
month. I also thank your delegation for the initiative of
convening this important meeting.

This year coincides with the one-hundredth
anniversary of the outbreak of the First World War,
a war that underscored the importance of creating
an international body responsible for maintaining
international peace and security. Following the failure
of the League of Nations to prevent the outbreak of the
Second World War, the United Nations was established,
giving the peoples of the world renewed hope that this
Organization, entrusted with the fundamental mandate
of maintaining international peace and security and
saving humankind from the scourge of war, would
succeed. Although the Organization has to date
succeeded in avoiding the outbreak of another world
war, it has not been able to put an end to war or to the
suffering of humankind.

Despite the fact that 15 years have passed since the
Security Council first debated this item, namely, the
protection of civilians in armed conflict, in a series of
annual debates, practical experience has regrettably
proved that the issue of the protection of civilians in
armed conflict clearly continues to be used selectively.
It has been repeatedly exploited in the service of
agendas that contravene the most fundamental norms
of international law.

My delegation has read the concept note (S/20l4/74, annex) presented by your delegation, Madam President,
to guide today's discussion. We should like to underline
the following fundamental points.
First, preventative action - to prevent the outbreak
of conflict and seek the rapid and peaceful settlement
of crises - is the ideal means to protect civilians and
avoid the scourge of war.

Secondly, the fundamental responsibility for the
protection of civilians from any threat they may face,
including the responsibility to protect them from
terrorist acts, falls within the purview of the State
concerned; it is the only actor mandated to maintain
security and stability on its territory.

Thirdly, the issue of protecting civilians in
armed conflict cannot be settled except through full
commitment to the principles of international law and
the provisions of the Charter of the United Nations,
foremost among them the principles of the sovereign
equality of States and non-interference in internal
affairs.

Fourthly, it is utterly unacceptable for the topic
of the protection of civilians to be taken up in an
opportunistic manner, thus rendering it a tool to serve
the political objectives and interests of influential
States. The exploitation by some Member States of
the issue of the protection of civilians, both within
the Security Council and beyond, and the application
of selective policies and double standards will only
further detract from the role entrusted to the Security
Council in the Charter.

Fifthly, the issue of the protection of civilians
must be dealt with in a comprehensive manner that
addresses any type of harm done to civilians, including
unilateral coercive measures imposed by some States
on the peoples of other States, thereby exposing them
to suffering and a slow death by depriving them of
daily necessities - including food, medicine and
fuel - actions that the United Nations has stressed are
illegitimate.

My delegation stresses the need to provide
protection to civilians under Israeli occupation in
the occupied Syrian Golan and the other occupied
Arab territories, and to put an end to the practices of
the aggressive Israeli occupying authorities against
them, with a view to ending the occupation. The
Council's silence in the face of Israel's violations of
international law, international humanitarian law and
human rights law has led Israel to believe that it is
above accountability, and it has therefore persisted in
its aggressive policies, threatening international peace
and security and undermining the principles and rules
of international law.
It is regrettable that some States have once again
exploited this meeting to reiterate their allegations
relating to the situation in my country, in order to
disrupt the ongoing developments with regard to the
delivery of humanitarian assistance and the ongoing
Geneva II talks. Despite our objection to such methods,
we stress that the Syrian Government is more concerned
than anyone else for its own people. It is carrying out its
constitutional duty to restore security and stability and
to protect our people from the terrorism that is targeting
the Syrian State and the Syrian people.

In this regard, we call on the Security Council
once again to shoulder its responsibilities to condemn
the terrorism being carried out against Syrians and to
hold accountable those States that provide weapons,
money, training and safe haven to the armed terrorist
groups that cross borders in flagrant violation of all
international instruments and resolutions on counter-
terrorism, and to make those States withdraw their
mercenaries from Syrian territories and stop attempting
to foil all efforts to reach a political settlement of the
Syrian crisis, through dialogue, in a way that will allow
the Syrian people to decide their own fate, free from
agendas of extremism, terrorism and violence.

Finally, we find it very bizarre that the representative
of Israel would speak about the need for an intervention
by the United Nations in order to protect Syrians,
while Israel has continued for 60 years to occupy Arab
territories and to violate the most fundamental rights
of Arab peoples under this occupation. The call on the
United Nations to intervene in order to protect civilians
and those under Israeli occupation has been, and
continues to be, at the very heart of the statements by
many Member States, particularly under the item that
we are debating today. This call has always been met
with violations on a larger scale, in terms of continuing
the occupation, expanding settlements and ignoring the
legitimate rights of peoples under Israeli occupation.

Let me recall here that Syria has always believed in
the central role of the United Nations in international
relations, as evidenced by Syria's cooperation with the
United Nations and its specialized entities during the
current crisis in the country.

