Mr. Cabral (Portugal): Before I begin, I would
like to briefly express my country's indignation at and
unequivocal condemnation of the senseless and
abhorrent act of Violence that occurred this morning in
Abuja against innocent civilians and against United
Nations officers and property. I wish to present our
heartfelt condolences to and solidarity with the victims'
relatives, to the Government of Nigeria and, through
the Secretary-General, to the whole United Nations
family.

Thank you, Mr. President, for convening this
timely debate. It is most suitable that we address this
issue under the chairmanship of India, one of the
countries that has most contributed to United Nations
peacekeeping - a fact that deserves our recognition. I
also wish to thank the Secretary-General for his
important intervention and for his continuous
commitment to peacekeeping and the high priority he
has assigned to it.

Peacekeeping is the flagship activity of the
United Nations, its most visible face. As we speak, one
hundred thousand women and men are serving the
United Nations as military and police personnel in
17 missions, from Timor-Leste to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, from Southern Sudan to Haiti.
They are implementing the resolutions we approve in
this room, turning our words into actions and our
objectives into realities. Several of these women and
men have given their lives for the United Nations.
Therefore, they deserve our utmost respect and humble
tribute.

Portugal has continuously assumed its part in the
common effort of peacekeeping. Over 20,000 military
and 3,000 police Portuguese women and men have
served in peace operations. We are currently
participating in the United Nations peacekeeping
missions in Timor-Leste and in Lebanon, as well as in
several European Union and NATO operations.

When discussing peacekeeping, we should bear in
mind three of its cornerstone principles.

The first is consent of the parties - essential to
assure the sustainability of a mission. It implies, on the
one hand, a shared strategic understanding of the
objectives, as well as a continuous dialogue and
constructive cooperation between the national

authorities and the mission. On the other hand, this
consent encompasses the responsibility of the national
authorities to collaborate with the United Nations
mission so that the latter has the proper conditions to
fulfil its mandate.

The second principle is impartiality. As Sergio
Vieira de Mello said, "In the UN, we cannot surrender
our impartiality. It is perhaps our greatest asset."

Third is the non-use of force except in self-
defence and in defence of the mandate. In that regard,
we see with satisfaction that the defence of mandates is
becoming increasingly effective, or robust. Regardless
of the preferred term, what is important is the end
result.

Passing from principles to practice, and bearing
in mind that this Council, as the executive board for
international peace and stability, shoulders a
responsibility that is legitimately bestowed upon us by
the whole membership of the United Nations, I would
like to briefly address seven points that we deem
essential to the success of United Nations
peacekeeping.

First, we must continue our efforts to provide
peacekeeping operations with clear, credible and
achievable mandates. Subsequently, those mandates
must be implemented in a precise, full and effective
way.

Second, we must provide peacekeeping
operations with the means required to achieve the
objectives defined by the Council. The capacities on
the ground must match the mandated tasks; otherwise,
the credibility of the United Nations will be
undermined. In that regard, we call upon those
members that possess more resources to contribute
accordingly, be it in terms of force generation or
equipment, such as helicopters.

Third, the combination of widespread and
growing peacekeeping objectives, on the one hand,
and, on the other, the limited resources available
imposes the need for efficient and effective
management and use of those resources. We welcome
the Secretariat's efforts in that regard and encourage it
to continue improving its management performance.
Fourth, the Security Council must also continue
to promote interaction with the relevant peacekeeping
stakeholders. In that regard, we underline the unique
role of troop-contributing countries (TCCs) and police-

11-4815]
contributing countries (PCCs), who match our words
with deeds through their boots on the ground.
Therefore, we are committed to further enhancing the
triangular cooperation among TCCs and PCCs, the
Security Council and the Secretariat in the decision-
making process and throughout the implementation of
the mandates.

Fifth, bearing in mind the various United Nations
presences in areas such as the Great Lakes, or the
Sudan and South Sudan, we highlight the value of
inter-mission cooperation with a View to maximizing
potential synergies and the advantages that arise from a
strategic regional perspective. Moreover, the missions
must enhance their capacity to coordinate the activities
of the different actors on the ground, namely, regional
and subregional organizations, development agencies
and non-governmental organizations.

Sixth, the role of international organizations in
peace and security, in accordance with Chapter VIII of
the United Nations Charter, is increasingly important.
In that regard, we highlight the efforts being made by
the African Union, NATO and the European Union, as
well as those of the Community of Portuguese-
speaking Countries, which is increasingly active in the
promotion of democracy, human rights, political
stability and social and economic development,
namely, in Guinea-Bissau and Timor-Leste.

Seventh, peacekeepers are ever more early
peacebuilders. Peacekeeping and peacebuilding are to
be implemented within a comprehensive approach, no
longer as sequential activities but rather as integrated
efforts, with obvious synergies. Peacebuilding
efforts- such as disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration, security sector reform and the
relaunching of the economy - should be considered
from the genesis of a peacekeeping operation and
carried out as soon as the situation on the ground
permits and throughout the cycle of a mission.
Moreover, a mission should also pave the way for a
smooth transition to long-term development assistance
with a View to a successful exit strategy for
international actors and self-sustained peace and
stability.

The protection of civilians is the paradigmatic
example of the shared responsibility that binds all
Member States of the United Nations, in particular
those serving on this Council. Peacekeeping operations
have a key role to play in protecting civilians in danger
when Governments are unable or unwilling to fulfil
their responsibility. It is incumbent upon the Council to
assure that they will continue to do so. Basic human
rights and, ultimately, the lives of populations at risk
depend upon it.

In our time, failing to protect civilians is
unacceptable and would deeply affect the credibility of
the United Nations. Therefore, we must continue
striving to fully implement resolution 1894 (2009).
Moreover, we welcome the contribution of the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO) to the
definition of a coherent operational approach to the
protection of civilians in United Nations operations.

Since the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000) on
women and peace and security, missions have been
mandated, with significant success, to boost women's
participation in electoral and post-conflict processes, to
prevent sexual violence, and to increase the presence of
female peacekeeping personnel and peacekeepers
trained to address gender issues. DPKO has made
enormous progress in mainstreaming gender in
peacekeeping, but we need to strive harder in some of
those areas.

As Graca Machel stated in her report on the
impact of armed conflict on children, "The protection
of children must be central to the humanitarian,
peacemaking and peacekeeping policies of the United
Nations"(A/51/306, para. 281). We commend the fact
that currently seven peacekeeping missions have
advisers working on the needs of children.

Peacekeeping is an instrumental element in the
promotion of peace, aimed at creating security
environments conducive to comprehensive political
processes through which sustainable solutions to
conflicts can be achieved. In our quest for sustainable
peace, the Council must also increase its focus on
preventive diplomacy and, thus, pay close attention to
new challenges to human security.

