Mr. Da Gama (Guinea-Bissau) (spoke in French):
First of all, I would I would like to congratulate you,
Madam President, on behalf of my country, on your
accession to the presidency of the Security Council
for this month and assure you of my country's full
cooperation and support. I would also like to thank
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Jose
Ramos-Horta for his detailed briefing and encourage
him to continue his efforts to enable the country to
return to constitutional order and thus deal with the
major challenges before us in terms of my country's
stabilization and development. Those are goals to
which the people of Guinea-Bissau aspire. I also
welcome the statements by Ambassador Antonio de
Aguiar Patriota, Permanent Representative of Brazil
and President of the Guinea-Bissau configuration of
the Peacebuilding Commission, and the statement to
be made by Ambassador Antonio Gumende, Permanent
Representative of Mozambique and representative
of the Executive Secretariat of the Community of
Portuguese-speaking Countries (CPLP). I would like to
pay tribute to the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS) through Ambassador Youssoufou
Bamba, Permanent Representative of Cote d'Ivoire and
current Chairman of ECOWAS, for his tireless support
to my country throughout this transition process.

I welcome the appointment of Mr. Carlos Moura
of Brazil as Special Representative of the CPLP for
Guinea-Bissau, and we are very pleased that the
coordination between international organizations, in
particular ECOWAS and the CPLP, is being increasingly
strengthened on the ground.

Since the last coup in Guinea-Bissau, on 12 April
2012, we have been fully aware that the path that will
lead us to the restoration of constitutional order will not
only be long, but also entail huge sacrifices from the
people of Guinea-Bissau, especially the most vulnerable
segments of society, namely, young people and women.
That is due to the fact that our country depends heavily
on the help of its partners, and our major partners
have suspended or reduced their cooperation with our
country.

Today, at the end of the long journey that plunged
the country into significant political, economic and
social crisis, we are driven by our strong belief that this
is the final phase of the transition period. That period
will end, of course, with the realization of the most
important recommendation of resolution 2048 (2012),
which is the restoration of constitutional order.
After consultations with all the political parties
and other national actors, the President decreed that
presidential and legislative elections would be held
on 13 April 2014, thus confirming the postponement
of the elections, which were originally scheduled for
16 March 2014.

This new development in no way reflects a lack
of political will on the part of the authorities of the
country, but rather is motivated by objective conditions
that were not met within the desired time frame. For
example, in order be able to identify the largest number
of voters possible, and given the logistical difficulties
encountered during that process, the electoral census
lasted a little over two months instead of 21 days as
originally planned, thus missing certain legal deadlines
stipulated in Guinea-Bissau's electoral code.

Nevertheless, it should be noted that almost 95 per
cent of voters were counted by the census, including the
country's diaspora, who, for the first time, will be able
to participate in the upcoming election of their leaders.
We should note that the electoral registry has never
before included such an impressive number of voters.

In that respect, I would like to thank all our partners
who, despite the sometimes emergency circumstances in
which they were called to intervene, have, through their
contributions, enabled this process to be successful.
We hope to be able to count on their support during
the post-election period. In that connection, I must
highlight the examples of solidarity and cooperation
received from the Federal Republic of Nigeria, Timor-
Leste, ECOWAS, the African Union and the European
Union, among others. We believe that, at the end of this
transition process, our cooperative relations with our
traditional partners, including Angola, Portugal, Brazil
and others, will be further strengthened, thus allowing
for a full resumption of our friendly relations based on
solidarity.

The elections to be held next April will be a first
step in the major challenge that our country faces in the
coming years.

Along with the urgent need for the reform and
modernization of our defence and security forces,
which, incidentally, remains at the top of our
priorities, Guinea-Bissau needs close support from the
international community so as to undertake a massive
reform of the public administration and establish the
essential conditions for the promotion ofjustice in order
to combat impunity, which unfortunately still prevails
in our society.

The country's social stability will largely depend,
among other things, on the future that we provide for
young people and women. In spite of their vulnerability,
those two groups represent potentially profitable
sectors in the economy if we create for them a climate
conducive to their professional development.

The issue of drug trafficking remains another
challenge to overcome. My country remains committed
to continuing its efforts to eradicate that scourge.
However, given the great fragility of our security
and justice institutions, among others, as well as the
transnational dimension of the phenomenon, regional
and international cooperation must be strengthened.
Guinea-Bissau is open to all types of cooperation in
that field so as to be able to combat that evil.

In that context, we fully support the recommendations
of the Secretary-General in its latest report on the
situation in Guinea-Bissau (S/2014/105), according
to which the post-election phase should merit special
support from the international community in order
to build a lasting foundation for our development and
stability.

In conclusion, allow me once again to reiterate
my country's deep gratitude to the members of the
Council and our partners, who have always stood by us
throughout this difficult transition stage.

