Ms. Ghelani: Iprovide this update today on behalfof
the Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs
and Emergency Relief Coordinator, Mr. Mark Lowcock.

A fortnight ago, we got a glimpse of What life is
like for some 41, 000 displaced Syrians, mainly women
and children in Rukban, near the Syria-Jordan border.
What our colleagues witnessed is a dire humanitarian
situation - people struggling for survival, facing
hunger and lacking the most basic necessities. The
convoy earlier this month was the largest and one of
the most complex carried out by the United Nations and
the Syrian Arab Red Crescent since the crisis began,
nearly eight years ago. The mission lasted 10 days and
involved 133 trucks loaded with essential humanitarian
assistance, vaccines and logistical items. The assistance
delivered was critical and will save lives.

But the gravity of the situation for civilians in
Rukban means that sustained humanitarian access is
needed moving forward. Food supplies, for example,
are expected to last only 30 days. While the primary
objective of this latest convoy was to provide immediate
humanitarian assistance, teams also carried out surveys
of the intentions of internally displaced persons (IDPs)
to inform discussions on possible durable solutions.
An overwhelming majority - about 95 per cent of
IDPs i expressed the Wish to leave the camp, while
more than 80 per cent wished to return to their areas
of origin.

However, all those consulted, regardless of their
profile or tribal affiliation, have ongoing concerns
related to the situation at destination - the lack of
civil documentation, concerns about access to their
property and concerns related to their safety and
security, especially the fear of detention and military
conscription - and requested information and
guarantees on all of those issues.

On 16 February, a statement was released by the
Joint Coordination Committees on the Repatriation
of Syrian Refugees of the Russian Federation and
the Syrian Arab Republic regarding the opening of
humanitarian corridors from the Rukban settlement.
The United Nations has not been involved in the opening
of those humanitarian corridors, beyond providing
supplies to the Syrian Arab Red Crescent for immediate
assistance to those who decided to leave through the
evacuation corridors.

The United Nations welcomes all efforts to ease the
suffering of people stranded in Rukban and to identify
durable solutions. These efforts, however, need to
ensure that any returns or relocations are voluntary,
safe, dignified and well-informed and abide by core
protection standards that comply with international
humanitarian law and human rights law. Dialogue is
ongoing with communities in Rukban, the Russian
Federation, the Syrian authorities and others to ensure
that will be the case in any relocation process.

The United Nations remains extremely concerned
about the protection of civilians who remain in the last
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL)-held areas in
south-east Deir ez-Zor governorate and those who were
able to flee the fighting. Since late last year, more than
37,000 people have fled from Hajin to the Al-Hol camp
in Hasakah governorate, some 300 kilometres north of
Hajin. Close to three quarters of the total population of
the Al-Hol camp is now made up of women and children
under the age of 5. Thousands of additional people are
expected to arrive at Al-Hol camp in the coming days
and weeks.

Extremely harsh conditions are reported along the
route north, including cold temperatures and a lack
of food, water, shelter and health services. At least 75
people, two thirds of them children under the age of 1,
have died since December 2018, either while in transit
or shortly after arriving at the Al-Hol camp, mostly due
to exposure and a lack of access to health care while
making the journey northward.

Response efforts are being scaled up in Al-Hol camp
and in Hajin and surrounding areas, despite considerable
security challenges. For example, on 15 February, a
Syrian Arab Red Crescent convoy of six trucks loaded
with United Nations and International Red Cross and
Red Crescent Movement supplies reached Hajin and
distributed aid to some 5,000 people. Late last week,
the United Nations and partners also completed food
distributions to 15 towns and informal settlements in
the eastern part of Deir ez-Zor governorate,

In addition, the United Nations has established a
transit centre in Suwar, midway between Hajin and
Al-Hol, to receive people during the transit journey.
However, the screening sites just outside Hajin still
remain inaccessible to humanitarian organizations.
Moreover, protection concerns for the displaced include
constraints on freedom of movement, with many of
those arriving at Al-Hol expressing a preference to
move to other locations, in most cases to connect with
family members or friends in Deir eZ-Zor governorate,

Across north-west Syria, an estimated
2.7 million men, women and children remain in need of
humanitarian assistance. Some 40 per cent of children
are out of school, while 2 million residents rely on
water-trucking for most if not all their clean water.
Each month, some 1.7 million Syrians are reached with
critical assistance through cross-border operations out
of Turkey. Ensuring sustained humanitarian access is
therefore critical.

To date, the recent expansion of Hayat Tahrir
Al-Sham areas of influence has not been reported
to have resulted in a significant change in levels of
humanitarian access. The United Nations and partners
are closely monitoring the situation to ensure that
independent, neutral and impartial humanitarian
action is respected. A number of measures are in place
to mitigate the risks of diversion or interference with
aid operations, including screening and vetting of
implementing partners, monitoring of distributions,
commodity tracking systems, facilitating regular
feedback from affected communities and maintaining
engagement with all parties to the conflict in order to
address operational challenges as they arise.

We have frequently reported to the Council on
the plight of civilians in Idlib and surrounding areas
in north-west Syria, who simply have nowhere else to
flee should there be a full-scale military incursion into
the area. While the September agreement of last year
between Turkey and Russia to establish a demilitarized
zone staved off immediate military escalation, the last
few weeks have witnessed an increase in fighting,
with dozens of civilians reportedly killed and dozens
injured. Up to 36,000 people are reported to have been
displaced as a result of intensified shelling, many of
whom have moved northward and are now residing in
camps on the border with Turkey.

As stated last week by the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights:

"Large numbers of civilians, including
hundreds of thousands of displaced people in Idlib
and northern Aleppo, are living an intolerable
existence. They are trapped between the escalation
of hostilities and bombardment, on the one hand,
and, on the other, are forced to live under the
extremist rule of Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham and other
extremist fighters who regularly carry out targeted
killings, abductions and arbitrary detention."

I reiterate today that the risk of military
escalation, and potentially catastrophic humanitarian
consequences persists. It is therefore critical to sustain
and fully implement the Russia-Turkey agreement of
17 September 2018.

Staggering levels of humanitarian need persist
throughout Syria. This year, an estimated 11.7 million
people will require humanitarian assistance across the
country. The United Nations and its partners reach
millions each month with life-saving humanitarian
assistance across Syria. That is only possible only thanks
to the generous support of international donors. More
than $5 billion was contributed to the humanitarian
response plan and the regional refugee and resilience
plan for 2018 - a huge amount of money, which has
saved lives and given hope to millions.

We would like to take this opportunity to thank
every Government that supported our appeals over the
last year, and to urge Member States to ensure timely
funding for humanitarian operations in Syria and
neighbouring refugee-hosting countries in 2019. The
conference to be held in Brussels from 12 to 14 March
will be a critical marker in that regard.
