Ms. Murmokaite (Lithuania): I would like to thank
Under-Secretary-General Ladsous and Commissioners
Hinds, Yiga and Carrilho for their briefings. Lithuania
welcomes the adoption of the first stand-alone resolution
(2185) (2014)) on United Nations police, which we
were happy to sponsor. We appreciate this first-ever
opportunity for the Security Council to speak directly
with the heads of United Nations police components. It
should become a regular event and practice, and should
be as interactive as possible.

With United Nations peacekeeping becoming
increasingly multidimensional, the success ofa mission
depends, more than ever, not just on its military
component but also on its skilled police officers,
who are on the front lines when it comes to stopping
community violence, supporting victims, holding
criminals accountable and helping to build national
justice institutions. A dedicated Council discussion
on United Nations police was long overdue. The rapid
growth of United Nations police personnel, which
started with deployments to the former Yugoslavia in
the early 1990s, has continued ever since. The numbers
of United Nations police have doubled in the last 15
years and now account for more than 12 per cent of
United Nations uniformed personnel. They are deployed
in 12 of 16 United Nations peacekeeping missions.
Only a few years after joining the United Nations,
Lithuania began deploying police officers to missions
in Croatia, Bosnia and Herzegovina and Kosovo. Today
our officers are present in Haiti, Liberia and Cyprus, as
well in the missions in Afghanistan and Ukraine of the
European Union and the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe.

I would like to briefly focus on two topics selected
for today's discussion, the protection of civilians and
the importance of police training.

The protection of civilians by police components
is often front-and-centre of United Nations police
deployments. While military components intervene to
protect civilians under imminent threat, United Nations
police provide a key contribution by patrolling in areas
of increased risk, managing public order, facilitating
the delivery of humanitarian assistance and ensuring
security in camps for refugees and internally displaced
persons. Nowhere is that more evident than in Liberia,
where the challenges faced by the police officers of
the United Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL) and
Liberian National Police in fighting the Ebola outbreak
are enormous and deserve our respect and admiration.
At the same time, the outbreak has exposed persistent
weaknesses in the Liberian police force, such as
insufficient skills and mobility, corruption and a
lack of accountability. Those shortcomings should be
addressed once the crisis of Ebola is behind us.

In South Sudan, what started as a political crisis
is now a humanitarian catastrophe with deep ethnic
divides. The police component of the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) has the tremendous
task of operating in overcrowded camps amid rampant
crime, increasing tensions along ethnic lines and ever-
growing sexual violence. In order to ensure successful
implementation of its realigned mandate, the Mission
should provide its personnel with mediation and
community engagement skills. Additional deployments
of women police officers will be essential to improving
the protection of women and children and addressing
sexual violence in displacement camps.

In the Central African Republic, police will be
instrumental in restoring law and order and stopping
violence, violent crime and looting. Yet police officers
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
should not be given a task that extends beyond their
capabilities. A more robust United Nations military
presence is needed to confront the heavily armed
militias responsible for violations of the ceasefire and
attacks against civilians.

Protection against sexual and gender-based violence
remains a key priority in implementing protection-of-
civilian mandates. United Nations police are again
expected to be at the forefront of an effective response.
In that regard, we welcome proactive approaches, such
as the deployment of a specialized United Nations
police team in the United Nations Stabilization Mission
in Haiti to support national police in preventing and
investigating cases ofsexual and gender-based violence,
as well as the outreach to sexual violence survivors by
female United Nations police officers in Liberia and
Darfur. Furthermore, women police officers do not
just serve and protect, they also inspire local girls and
women to stand up for their own rights and to become
active participants in their country's future. They serve
as role models and encourage women to join national
law-and-order and justice institutions, thus enabling
them to contribute to the security of their communities
long after the United Nations is gone.

Ensuring proper United Nations police training
is both a challenge and an essential element of each
mission. Officers often come from diverse national
police forces with different perceptions about the police
role in the community. In addition to an unfamiliar
location, they face more hostile environments, poor
infrastructure and difficulties dealing with the host
State police authorities. The United Nations and the
police-contributing countries should do their utmost to
ensure that the entire police component is prepared to
act as a single team united by the mission's mandate.

Just as the objectives of United Nations missions
should be closely adapted to the situation of each
host State, so should the training. While conducting
actual police work might be necessary in countries
where national law-enforcement structures are weak
or absent, it can only be an interim measure. United
Nations police officers must be capable and willing to
pass on their experience, with a view to rebuilding the
host State's capabilities and handing over policing to the
national authorities, functioning within the framework
of the rule of law and democratic civilian oversight.
Police components, including mission leadership, must
receive relevant predeployment training, in particular
on the protection of civilians, women, children and
their human rights as well as addressing sexual and
gender-based violence. In that regard, we welcome
the adoption of the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations/Department of Field Support guidelines on
United Nations police in implementing protection-of-
civilians mandates.

Finally, United Nations police must ensure they
remain close to the communities they serve. Speaking
the local language is often indispensable for the
effective implementation of community policing and
the training of national police authorities. We welcome
the partnership between the International Organization
of la Francophonie and the Police Division aimed at
increasing the number of francophone police officers.

Before concluding, I should like to ask a few
questions of the participating Police Commissioners.
With regard to UNMISS, what additional measures are
being taken to ensure that UNMISS police officers have
sufficient skills to mediate, defuse tensions and address
the needs of the victims of sexual and gender-based
violence? With regard to MINUSCA, how will United
Nations police assist the national authorities in arresting
individuals responsible for crimes and violence? With
regard to United Nations Mission in Liberia, how will
the Mission adapt its efforts in building the Liberian
National Police, following the lessons learned during
the Ebola crisis?

