Mr. Pfanzelter (Austria): I have to honour to
speak on behalf of the European Union and the
countries that align themselves with this statement.

First of all, I would like to thank the Chairpersons
of the Al-Qaida and Taliban Sanctions Committee, the
Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC) and the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004) for their comprehensive and informative
briefings. We attach great importance to such regular
public debates of the Security Council in the field of
counter-terrorism and the non-proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction. Open discussions are an important
contribution to strengthening the acceptance,
legitimacy and transparency of the Council's efforts in
this field.

The European Union believes that the
Committees should continue their efforts to increase
cooperation and coordination with regard to monitoring
the implementation of their respective Security Council
resolutions, as well as with regard to sharing
information and coordinating country visits. We
encourage the Council to consider ways to strengthen
its monitoring and enforcement role in counter-
terrorism, including by consolidating State reporting
requirements.

The European Union emphasizes the importance
of respecting international law, human rights law and
refugee law - including due process and the rule of
law - in the fight against terrorism.

We welcome the efforts of the 1267 Committee to
further improve the Al-Qaida and Taliban sanctions
regime, especially the Consolidated List and the
Committee's guidelines, in the light of Security
Council resolution 1617 (2005) and the
recommendations contained in the recent reports of the
Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team.
The adoption of the revised guidelines, on
21 December 2005, was an important step. With regard
to the sections dealing with listing and delisting
procedures, no agreement has been reached thus far.
The European Union expresses its expectation that the
Committee will expeditiously continue its work on
those sections, as mandated by the Security Council.

We stress the call made at the 2005 world summit
to ensure that fair and clear procedures exist for
placing individuals and entities on sanctions lists and
for removing them, as well as for granting
humanitarian exemptions.

The European Union fully supports the work
programme of the Counter-Terrorism-Committee
presented today. We particularly welcome the
envisaged revision of the reporting regime through the
development of a tailor-made approach and by
streamlining reporting procedures. That would help to
address the problems of non-reporting and the
so-called reporting fatigue of Member States. We are
also pleased to hear that the Committee has cleared the
backlog of State reports.

We note with satisfaction that, on 15 December
2005, the Counter-Terrorism Committee's Executive
Directorate (CTED) was finally declared fully
operational. We have also taken note of the review of
the CTED undertaken by the Security Council last
December. We look forward to another comprehensive
review by 31 December 2006.

We strongly encourage the CTC, with the help of
the human rights expert in CTED, to continue its
efforts to streamline human rights throughout its entire
work.

With regard to the efforts to enhance dialogue
with States concerning the area of technical assistance,
the European Union stands ready to continue its
cooperation and participation in CTED visits to
countries with which it has a close relationship. We are
also pleased to note the exemplary cooperation
between CTED, as the key facilitator of technical
assistance, and the Terrorism Prevention Branch of
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, which
provides technical assistance to requesting countries in
the area of ratifying and implementing the 13 universal
conventions against terrorism.

The European Union remains deeply concerned
about the danger posed by the proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction (WMD) and about the acquisition
of such weapons by non-State actors, in particular
terrorists. We fully support all international efforts to
prevent the proliferation of WMD. The 1540
Committee plays an important role in that regard. The
European Union commends the 1540 Committee and
its group of experts for their work in developing a
matrix and building a legislative database on the basis
of the State reports examined and other relevant
information received. That database will be an
important information tool for Member States. We look
forward to its publication on the Committee's website.

With the end of the 1540 Committee's two-year
mandate approaching, on 28 April, the European Union
notes with concern that 67 States - more than one
third of the membership of the United Nations - have
not yet submitted their first reports. We urge all States
that have not yet done so to submit their reports to the
Committee. We would be glad to consider any request
for assistance or advice to such States as might be
required. We look forward to the Committee's final
report before the end of its current mandate and, in
particular, its analysis of existing problems in the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004). In the light
of its ongoing work and the numerous tasks that are
still to be completed, the European Union believes that
the mandate of the 1540 Committee should be
extended as soon as possible.

Terrorism continues to pose one of the most
serious threats to international peace and security. It is
imperative that the United Nations and its Member
States continue to show their unity and resolve in the
fight against terrorism. The European Union strongly
supports the measures outlined in the outcome
document adopted last September. In the light of the
upcoming meeting of the Ad Hoc Committee on
terrorism next week, we reiterate the call of the world
summit to make every effort to conclude the
comprehensive convention on international terrorism
during the sixtieth session of the General Assembly.
We also look forward to the speedy adoption and
implementation of a comprehensive United Nations
counter-terrorism strategy, based on the elements
proposed by the Secretary-General, to strengthen the
capacity of the United Nations system to assist States
in combating terrorism and to enhance the coordination
of all United Nations activities in that regard.

For its part, the European Union adopted a
counter-terrorism strategy at the end of last year,
complemented by a detailed action plan for
implementation, as well as a European Union strategy
for combating radicalization and recruitment to
terrorism. We believe that those documents, agreed at
the regional level, could complement a comprehensive
and global United Nations counter-terrorism strategy
very well.

Let me conclude by reaffirming the commitment
of the European Union to combating the continuing
threat posed by terrorism and the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction through a comprehensive,
integrated and multilateral approach, reinforcing both
internal and international cooperation, in accordance
with the principles on which the European Union is
founded.

