Mr. Jiirgenson (Estonia) (spoke in French): May
I begin by expressing my most profound and sincere
condolences to the families of those who died in the
terrorist attacks on Friday in Paris. To the peoples of
France, and the other countries that have been victims
of attacks - Lebanon, Iraq and Russia - we also
extend our condolences.

(spoke in English)

I warmly thank the United Kingdom presidency for
organizing this timely debate. Let me also thank the
Secretary-General, the Permanent Representative of
Sweden, and Ms. Bouchamaoui for their remarks.

Estonia aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the observer of the European Union.

We welcome the topic of today's debate, which very
accurately links together the three pillars of the United
Nations system: peace and security, development
and human rights. Peace and security are the basis
prerequisites for achieving sustainable development.
Conflict and violence undermine development gains
achieved over decades. At the same time, without
development and human rights there will be no durable
peace and stability. The risks of armed conflicts and
crises, forced migration, weak economies and corrupt
Governments, poor education, climate change and
natural disasters -just to name a few - are all closely
linked and need to be addressed comprehensively.

As voiced by our President during this year's
Sustainable Development Goals debate (see A/70/PV.8),
the linkages between peace and security, development
and human rights are clearly recognized in the recently
adopted 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
(General Assembly resolution 70/1). The promotion
of peaceful and inclusive societies, providing access
to justice for all, and building effective, accountable
and inclusive institutions at all levels are essential to
achieving sustainable development.

Strong national institutions can be based only
on the rule of law and must respect property rights,
freedom of speech and the media, open political choice,
and access to justice. Creating reliable institutions
is also a central part of the transformation needed to
enable countries prone to or emerging from conflict
to foster development, stability and peace. The rule
of law is essential to both preventing and to dealing
with the consequences of violence and conflict, as
well as transnational organized crime, trafficking and
illicit financial flows that directly impact sustainable
development.

I am pleased to see that the Council is taking a
more forward-looking approach. We must invest more
in conflict prevention. It is very hard to end ongoing
crises that often turn into armed conflicts. It is easier
and less costly, in every sense, to prevent violent
conflicts from escalating. The Council has a key role
to play in prevention, and bridging silos across the
development, security and human rights pillars is
central to supporting prevention efforts.

The Security Council has increased its focus
on peacebuilding to reduce the risk of relapse into
violence. The Council should continue addressing
peacebuilding through horizon-scanning briefings, by
ensuring that longer-term peacebuilding is considered
in mission mandates, and by strengthening and
reforming the advisory role of the Peacebuilding
Commission. We encourage the Security Council to
address peacebuilding as early as possible. Addressing
the interdependence between peace and security and
development includes the protection of human rights,
including attention to women's rights, also through
their participation in peace consolidation.

While the primary responsibility for conflict
prevention and sustainable development falls on
Member States, the international institutions must do
their part. The United Nations system needs to work
in a more integrated, flexible and coordinated fashion,
both at Headquarters and at country level, to respond to
the current global challenges, and give more weight to
prevention and early warning tools.

