Mr. Hannesson (Iceland): I would like at the
outset to join other colleagues who have expressed
their condolences to you, your Government and the
Russian people over the tragic loss of life in the two
aeroplane tragedies yesterday.

Iceland, as a member of the European Economic
Area, fully aligns itself with the statement made by my
colleague Ambassador van den Berg on behalf of the
European Union a few minutes ago. Let me, however,
emphasize briefly a few points.

First of all, we would like to express our
appreciation to the Secretary-General for his frank and
informative report (S/2004/634) on the situation in
Afghanistan and to the Special Representative for his
briefing this morning. It is clear from the report that
the situation gives cause for considerable concern. A
central concern is the security situation, both short-
term and long-term.

In the short term it is essential that the provincial
reconstruction teams be reinforced and that a secure
environment be established in which peace-building
can progress. I would like, on behalf of my
Government, to take this opportunity to deplore the
increasingly frequent attacks on United Nations and
non-governmental organization (NGO) staff in recent
weeks, and to express regret - though at the same
time understanding - at the withdrawal of Medecins
sans frontieres, one of the most courageous of the
NGOs, with more than 20 years of experience in the
country.

Iceland is committed to making its contribution to
establishing peace in Afghanistan. Icelandic Foreign
Minister Halldor Asgrimsson travelled to Kabul this
June to be present at the handover of the management
of Kabul airport on 1 June to an Icelandic team. The
operating of the airport is key to the successful
operation of the International Security Assistance
Force (ISAF), commanded by NATO, and Iceland is
strongly committed to that project. I am proud to say
that the airport is being run successfully on a 24/7
basis, although I should say that this is despite a far
from fully manned team.

The long-term human security environment is
crucially effected not only by the activities of extremist
elements, such as the Taliban and Al Qaeda, but also
by the flourishing of criminality, funded principally by
the narcotics trade. That illicit trade has three aspects:
production capacity, trade routes and users. We must
address all aspects if we are to defeat this corrosive
threat to the long-term stability of the country.
Production capacity can be effectively reduced in the
long term only through providing farmers with viable
alternatives. Part of the equation which has the
potential to make drug production less economically
attractive is the fluidity of trade routes. Putting the
screws on the trade routes would surely help. And of
course the demand end of this dirty business needs to
be addressed more effectively.

Another crucial factor in establishing long-term
security is successful disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration (DDR). It is my impression that the most
difficult of the three related processes, that is
reintegration, is also in some ways the most important.
Soldiers who hand in guns must be given constructive
and meaningful roles in society, or the danger is that
they will simply acquire new guns, of which there is a
plentiful supply.

The Secretary-General's report makes it clear that
there are no easy answers. However, there are brighter
aspects, as we have heard this morning from Mr. Jean
Arnault. We would like to commend all those who have
worked so hard on voter registration. The successful
registration of more than 10 million voters, 41 per cent
of them women, is truly remarkable.

