Mr. Yel'chenko (Ukraine): As one of the members of
the Security Council mission to Kosovo, I would like, at the
outset, to thank Ambassador Chowdhury of Bangladesh for
his excellent leadership, which greatly contributed to
achieving the goals of the mission. Let me also convey my
appreciation to the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Mr. Bernard Kouchner, and to all the staff of the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK), the United Nations Secretariat and the Kosovo
Force (KFOR), as well as to the Government of Italy, all of
which greatly assisted in making the visit a success.

In my view, the mission to Kosovo was an important
undertaking in View of both its timeliness and its mandate.
The visit took place at the right time, as it was carried out
just some six weeks before the end of an initial 12-month
authorized period of international civil and security
presences in Kosovo.

As regards its mandate, the Security Council
delegation managed to do a great deal. It observed the
activities of UNMIK, gained information at first hand about
the situation on the ground and conveyed a strong message
to all concerned about the need to reject violence and
effectively implement resolution 1244 (1999) in full
cooperation with UNMIK. It also discussed with the KFOR
Commander the important issue of how to strengthen the
monitoring of the implementation of the arms embargo.

Against this background, we feel that the mandate of
the mission was successfully accomplished. Now, it will
be essential for the Security Council to build on those
findings and conclusions in order to define its further
steps towards implementing resolution 1244 (1999) and
supporting UNMIK.

With this in mind, I would like to make the
following observations. First of all, it is necessary to pay
tribute to the UNMIK and KFOR personnel for their
courage and professionalism in discharging their duties
under extremely difficult conditions. The progress
achieved by all four pillars of UNMIK in their areas of
responsibility over the past 10 months, in particular in
establishing the interim administrative structures,
providing humanitarian assistance and setting up a judicial
system, should be welcomed.

We consider encouraging and promising the positive
signs of the implementation of the agenda for coexistence
and the culture of peace. These can be seen in emerging
cooperation between the two major ethnic communities in
Mitrovica and Orahovac, as well as in the participation of
the Serbs in the Kosovo Transitional Council and the
Interim Administrative Council.
At the same time, however, having noticed some
positive trends towards the return of normalcy, my
delegation remains concerned about the overall security
situation, first and foremost as it relates to the protection
of ethnic minorities and their human rights. Although the
crime rate in the province has gone down, it remains
high.

It is absolutely clear that, unless the proper security
of the national minorities is ensured and their basic
human rights are properly protected, they will continue to
be subject to violence and thus to feel insecure about
returning to Kosovo. Undoubtedly, all necessary
additional security arrangements should be undertaken on
the part of UNMIK and KFOR to reverse this situation.

It seems obvious to us that, after having helped
hundreds of thousands of Albanians to return to the
province last year, the international community should
ensure the safe return from Serbia of about 200,000 non-
Albanians of Kosovo. In this connection, we welcome the
recent establishment of a Joint Committee on Returns to
coordinate these issues.

Given the urgent need to enhance the security
situation in the province, as well as to assist UNMIK

 

Police in meeting pressing requirements for specialized
units, the Ukrainian Government is prepared to send a
specialized police unit of 110 members to Kosovo. In the
same context, I should also like to inform the Council that
the preparation of the joint Polish-Ukrainian peacekeeping
battalion earmarked for the KFOR operation is under way.

Now, I should like to address another issue that I
believe has become the most sensitive for the members of
our mission to Kosovo. Here, I refer to the problem of
missing persons and detainees. I have no doubt that all of
us were deeply moved by the meetings in Djakovica and
other places, during which the Albanian representatives
highlighted this problem to us as a major impediment to
reconciliation. At the same time, most impressive was also
the information on missing persons provided by Bishop
Artemje and other members of the Serb National Council
at Gracanica, as well as by the Yugoslav representatives at
the meeting with the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
Committee for Cooperation with UNMIK.

In this regard, my delegation wishes to place on record
its support for the recommendation to appoint a special
envoy of the Secretary-General on missing persons in
Kosovo, assigned to learn the fate of missing Albanians and
non-Albanians alike during the events of 1999-2000 and to
negotiate this matter with the Yugoslav authorities or any
other Government. At the same time, we are aware of the
fact that the creation of this post will bring no results
unless it is supported by the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia. This support is, in our view, preconditioned on
the full implementation of all provisions of resolution 1244
(1999), in full respect for the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia.

As indicated in paragraph 16 of the report, the
Security Council's mission witnessed the initial phase of the
registration process in the UNMIK-Organization for
Security and Cooperation (OSCE) in Europe centre at
Dobrecani in the anilane region. While welcoming the
start of this campaign, we cannot but be concerned with the
well-understood reluctance or refusal of Serbs to participate
in it, due to inadequate security conditions and lack of
progress in the return of Serb internally displaced persons.
Needless to say, everything should be done to ensure
participation in civil registration and in the municipal
elections of all Kosovo inhabitants, be they currently in or
outside the province. Cooperation between the UNMIK-
OSCE component and the Yugoslav authorities in this
respect is absolutely vital. It is also obvious that the
deprival of the right of numerous Kosovo inhabitants
outside the province to be part of that campaign might give
grounds for a challenge to the legitimacy of its final
results.

We were indeed glad to learn from UNMIK that
some Ukrainian non-governmental organizations, upon
invitation from the OSCE pillar, were helpful in
facilitating the process of registration and in evaluating
access to civil and voter registration for minority
inhabitants of Kosovo.

Now, let me pose a crucial question which all of us,
members and non-members of the Security Council alike,
may want to address. I do not expect, of course, an
immediate answer to the question. How do we see the
future status of Kosovo? Do we really want this dubious
status quo maintained indefinitely? Are we ready to
answer the question: What does substantial autonomy
mean? As far as my delegation is concerned, it would be
impossible to tackle this issue without the real direct
engagement of the parties: the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia and the Albanians of Kosovo. Any decision,
however attractive it might look to the international
community, will not be workable unless it is directly
negotiated and implemented by the parties themselves.
With all respect for the efforts of Mr. Kouchner and other
major international actors, I do not think that the final
decision can be imposed on the parties to the conflict in
Kosovo.
I wish to make one final point of a general
character. The reconstruction efforts in the region as a
whole should be cohesive and not used as a means of
political pressure.

In conclusion, let me say that, as the practice of
sending Security Council fact-finding missions to zones
of conflict has proven its effectiveness and usefulness -
and I want also to mention here the missions to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and to Ethiopia and
Eritrea - we should utilize this practice more frequently.

