Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
appreciates Italy's initiative in holding a public meeting
on the security challenges in the Mediterranean. We
welcome Foreign Minister Alfano's presence in the
Chamber today and thank him for presiding over today's
meeting. The statement by Secretary-General Guterres
has provided excellent context for our discussion, for
which China is grateful.

The Mediterranean is a region where Asia, Africa
and Europe meet. In recent years, the situation in Libya,
Syria and the Sahel region has been deteriorating. The
hotspot issues have continuously been getting worse.
Terrorist forces have been rampant and spreading. The
problem of the illegal transfer of arms is serious. The
regional situation is volatile and unstable, seriously

affecting the development of countries of the region
and their peoples' lives. Many countries are faced with
multiple challenges, such as unbalanced development,
intercommunal conflict, massive flows of refugees and
migrants, and serious cross-border organized crimes,
inter alia.

The fates of the countries and peoples in the
Mediterranean are interwoven, and the spillover
impacts of the regional situation on the surrounding
larger region cannot be underestimated. Expeditiously
improving the situation in the region and finding a way
to achieve regional stability, prevent new conflicts and
build sustainable peace and development will require
the joint efforts of the international community. China
would like to emphasize the following points.

First, regional hotspot issues should be the
focus, and the process of political settlement should
be accelerated. Libya's neighbouring countries, the
African Union, the League of Arab States and the
European Union should step up their efforts to promote
peace talks in support of the action plans and initiatives
on the political settlement of the Libyan issue, so as
to achieve reconciliation, stability and development in
Libya at an early date. The international community
should remain united and push the Syrian parties to
reach an agreement acceptable to all parties as soon
as possible through the Geneva peace talks. Bearing
in mind the specific context in the Sahel region, the
international community should take comprehensive
measures to help cool down the hotspot issues in a
relevant way and achieve overall peace and stability in
that region. The international community should not
neglect the long-standing Palestinian issue. Unless we
resolve that issue at the root ofthe Middle East question,
it will be difficult to truly achieve regional stability.

Secondly, we should strengthen international
and regional efforts, as well as coordination and
cooperation with the countries concerned, and jointly
meet our security challenges. The United Nations
has a central role to play in international affairs in
terms of coordinating efforts in preventive diplomacy,
development assistance, good offices in mediation and
post-conflict reconstruction. Regional organizations
should also play a constructive role, giving greater
assistance to countries of the region in conflict
resolution and development, enhancing capacity-
building and achieving regional stability, while paying
attention in this process to safeguarding the sovereignty
of the countries concerned, respecting their views
and focusing on their needs. At the same time, the
coordination of country and regional strategies should
be strengthened to encourage synergies.

Thirdly, we should resolutely fight terrorism and
appropriately address the refugee and migrant issue.
Terrorism is the public enemy of all humankind. It
seriously undermines the security and stability of the
region. The international community should unite
in its fight against terrorism and comprehensively
use the various means available to it to strengthen
border control and law enforcement cooperation in the
Mediterranean region and adjacent regions, cut off the
financing of terrorists and their supply of arms, halt
the spread of terrorist ideologies and step up the efforts
aimed at preventing the spillover and return of foreign
terrorist fighters.

In dealing with the issue of refugees and
migrants, it is necessary to strengthen support for
countries receiving refugees, eliminate xenophobia
and discrimination against them, and address the root
causes of social instability and development imbalance.
By supporting the countries of origin and transit, we
can create conditions for the return of refugees and
promote the sustainable development in the countries of
origin. China appreciates the efforts of Italy, Lebanon
and Jordan and others in their response to the refugee
crisis in the region.

Fourthly, we should promote inclusive, balanced
development that benefits everyone, respecting the
diversity of civilizations and fostering our awareness
of the community of a common destiny. Conflicts,
war, terrorism and refugee and migrant crises can
all find their roots in poverty and backwardness.
Development is fundamental to resolving these global
issues. We should seek open, inclusive, innovative
and mutually beneficial development outlook for the
Mediterranean region, which could help developing
countries implement the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, enhance their capabilities in terms of
poverty alleviation - or even elimination - and
homegrown development, achieving shared progress
and promoting lasting peace.

We should insist on upholding the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations,
following the new security concept, which is common,
comprehensive, cooperative and sustainable in nature,
in ajoint effort to build a regional security network. We
should construct a partnership that is based dialogue
instead of confrontation or partnership instead of
alignment, strengthen dialogue among civilizations
and religions, abandon zero-sum thinking, adhere to
the general direction of peaceful settlement of disputes,
and resolve differences through political means.

The Mediterranean is a strategically important
region, rich in natural resources, with a unique cultural
background and great potential for development. China
is committed to according continued attention to the
situation in the Mediterranean region, along with
countries of the region and the international community.
The Mediterranean region is an important link along the
Belt and Road, based on the idea ofjointly discussing,
building and sharing. In recent years, China has
proposed and actively promoted joint implementation
of the the Belt and Road Initiative. That proposal has
enjoyed a positive response from the international
community, including the Mediterranean region. China
and the countries of the region have conducted in-depth
and results-oriented cooperation on the strengthening
of connectivity and the development of infrastructure,
and positive progress has been achieved. China will
continue to contribute to the realization of stability,
security and lasting development in the Mediterranean
region and is committed to building the community of
a common destiny.

