Mr. Schulz (Germany): First of all, I, too, would
like to thank the outgoing Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Said Djinnit, for his tireless
efforts and dedication over the past five years and for
all of the success he has achieved. We also welcome the
appointment of Mr. Huang Xia and wish him a steady
hand in his new and important position.

We are pleased to note the successes and positive
developments outlined in the Special Envoy's briefing
today. At the same time, we must also note that many
threats to peace and stability in the Great Lakes
region remain on the agenda. Such threats are rooted
in unresolved political crises, the volatile security
situation and regional tensions.

Many of the previous speakers mentioned the
situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Against that backdrop, let me also say that we consider

it to be of critical importance that President Tshilombo
Tshisekedi implement the political and economic reform
measures that he announced and set out a comprehensive
and sustainable reform programme. Let me also mention
that, like many others, we are also deeply concerned
about the Ebola outbreak in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and strongly condemn attacks against Ebola
treatment centres. We must prevent the politicization of
the Ebola and humanitarian crisis.
Turning now to Burundi, let me also emphasize that
we count on the Presidents ofthe countries in the region
to lead the inter-Burundian dialogue and guide it on a
successful path. The Special Envoy reminded us today
that progress can be made even on the most protracted
issues when political will is displayed by the leaders
of the region. We, too, would like to stress that point.
One good example that I would like to highlight in that
context is the repatriation of disarmed combatants and
dependants of the Forces democratiques de liberation
du Rwanda from the Democratic Republic of the Congo
to Rwanda. It shows how successful the region can
be when countries work together to advance common
peace and security objectives.

Germany remains committed to supporting regional
efforts. As Chair of the International Contact Group for
the Great Lakes Region, we convened consultations
on the region in New York and Berlin at the end of
last year. We also support the Special Envoy through
earmarked funding to the Department of Political and
Peacebuilding Affairs.

Let me also say a few words about regional stability
issues, which are also of critical importance. The
security situation in the region remains volatile. We
are concerned about persistent tensions, the activities
of armed groups and continuous cross-border security
incidents, especially in the cross-border regions of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Rwanda and
Burundi. We are also concerned about the deterioration
of relations between Uganda and Rwanda. The closing
of border crossings has consequences for guaranteeing
supplies and has a direct impact on the population.
We call on all actors to refrain from violence and
from engaging in any kind of proxy conflicts in
the region. Furthermore, we urge countries in the
region to cooperate to neutralize negative forces and
strengthen the relevant mechanisms of the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region. Sustainable
peace and the ensuing space for economic development
are achievable only through regional cooperation. We
encourage regional actors to play an active role in
conflict resolution. We trust in our regional partners
to make effective use of existing mediation tools and
confidence-building measures.

Lastly, with regard to human rights and the
women and peace and security agenda, which was also
mentioned by the Special Envoy, we are concerned
about the shrinking political space and violations of
political freedom in the region. We strongly condemn
human rights violations by all actors, including State
security forces. The protection of children in conflict
situations must be a priority. However, we are also
encouraged by the progress achieved in raising the
profile of the women and peace and security agenda
in the region. We welcome the adoption of the regional
action plan for the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000). Nonetheless, sexual and gender-based violence
remains a source of deep concern. All perpetrators
must be brought to justice. Fighting impunity remains
key to delivering peace and security.

