Sir Jeremy Greenstock: Mr. President, I very
much appreciate the time that you have allocated for
this important subject today to hear the views of
Members of the United Nations.

On 20 January, we heard the views of our
ministers on the Security Council's work on counter-
terrorism, including the work of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC). I welcome the support that they
expressed for the work of the CTC and their
commitment to achieving the full implementation of
resolution 1373 (2001) and to further developing the
CTC's role.

The CTC has discussed the challenge which
ministers set for us all in the declaration adopted by
resolution 1456 (2003). We have agreed on a set of
actions for the CTC to take forward the points in the
declaration. This set of actions is being circulated to
delegations with my speaking notes. The CTC will
keep the Council and the wider membership fully
informed of progress.

The Committee continues to work with the
vigour, focus and transparency which the fight against
terrorism demands. Our expert team is back up to
strength and is continually gaining in experience and
effectiveness. In the current period, as our published
work programme shows, we are concentrating on three
areas: first, working with Member States to raise their
capacity to defeat terrorism in each of their countries;
secondly, promoting assistance programmes to
accelerate the capacity-building process; and thirdly,
creating a global network of international and regional
organizations to maximize the efficiency of each of
them in dealing with terrorism and to share experience
and best practice. The special meeting of the CTC
which I have called for 7 March will help in taking
forward this global effort.

In accordance with resolution 1373 (2001), the
CTC will continue to encourage States to become party
as soon as possible to the international conventions and
protocols relating to terrorism, as the matter of urgency
demanded by the ministerial declaration. The CTC will
remain aware of the links between its work and
Member States' obligations under international law,
including international human rights and humanitarian
law.

The CTC welcomes this opportunity to hear the
views of Member States on the work of the United
Nations in the field of counter-terrorism. I thank them
for their engagement with the CTC in its work so far.
The Committee will continue to be effective only if it
has the confidence and support of the United Nations
membership, and it would be most helpful to hear their
views on the way ahead, as set out for the Council in
my report on behalf of the CTC on 20 January, and in
the ministerial declaration.

