Mr. Khalilzad (United States of America): The
United States is disappointed that the Russian
Federation and China today prevented the Security
Council from adopting a strong draft resolution
condemning and sanctioning the violent regime of
Robert Mugabe. China and Russia have stood with
Mugabe against the people of Zimbabwe.

More than a majority of the members of the
Security Council stood with the people of Zimbabwe
by demanding that Mugabe put an immediate end to
the violence and start serious negotiations with the
opposition. The draft resolution would have supported
the courageous efforts of the Zimbabwean people to
change their lives peacefully, through elections.
Unfortunately, the Russian Federation and China
blocked the adoption of this draft resolution for reasons
that we think are not borne out by the facts on the
ground.

The U-turn in the Russian position is particularly
surprising and disturbing. Only a few days ago, the
Russian Federation was supportive of a Group of Eight
(G-8) statement that said:

"We express our grave concern about the
situation in Zimbabwe. We deplore the fact that
the Zimbabwean authorities pressed ahead with
the presidential election despite the absence of
appropriate conditions for free and fair voting as
a result of their systematic violence, obstruction
and intimidation.

$4
"... We recommend the appointment of a
special envoy of the United Nations Secretary-

General to report on the political, humanitarian,
human rights and security situation and to support
regional efforts to take forward mediation
between political parties. We will take further
steps, inter alia introducing financial and other
measures against those individuals responsible
for violence."

The Russian performance here today raises questions
about the Russian Federation's reliability as a G-8
partner.

There should be no doubt that what is happening
in Zimbabwe affects peace and security in the region.
Deputy Secretary-General Migiro called the situation
in Zimbabwe the "single greatest challenge to regional
stability in Southern Africa". The African Union
adopted a resolution expressing its concern regarding
the "urgent need to prevent further worsening of the
situation and [taking a decision] with a view to
avoiding the spread of conflict with the consequential
negative impact on the country and the subregion".

Three African States - Liberia, Sierra Leone and
Burkina Faso - were among the sponsors of the draft
resolution before the Council today. Liberia and Sierra
Leone, whose democratic Governments emerged after
years of conflict, with the help of the United Nations
and the Security Council, joined in sponsoring the draft
resolution as an indication of their concern about the
impact of the situation in Zimbabwe on the region. We
applaud their courage in standing up for the people of
Zimbabwe.

Further, there are no serious, substantive
negotiations under way between the Mugabe regime
and the opposition, contrary to what the representative
of South Africa reported. The Mugabe regime and the
representatives from the opposition Movement for
Democratic Change (MDC) had a preliminary meeting
in South Africa the other day, in which the MDC laid
down conditions for substantive negotiations. But these
are not yet under way.

Finally, this draft resolution would have
supported regional and international mediation efforts,
not undercut them. This draft resolution would have
empowered regional and international mediators by
giving Mr. Mugabe an incentive to negotiate seriously.
The surest way for Mr. Mugabe to have avoided a
sanctions resolution would have been to have acted
immediately to end the violence and start serious
negotiations with the opposition. He had a week since
our introduction of this draft resolution to act.
Unfortunately, during that time violence has continued,
as has Mr. Mugabe's bellicose rhetoric. For example,
Mugabe's spokesman, George Charamba, said of those
drawing attention to the flaws in the post-29-March
electoral process, "They can go hang. They can go and
hang a thousand times". That is an irresponsible
response and shows the regime's contempt for the
people of Zimbabwe as well as for the international
community.

Although this draft resolution was not adopted,
we will continue to work with all Security Council
delegations to monitor closely the situation in
Zimbabwe and to urge the Secretary-General to appoint
a special representative to support the negotiation
process between the political parties in Zimbabwe and
to report to the Council on the political, humanitarian,
human rights and security situation in Zimbabwe.

