Mr. Lacroix (France) (spoke in French): My
delegation would like to thank the Secretary-General
and his Special Envoy, Mr. Gambari, for their very
thorough briefings.

Unfortunately, what we have just heard about the
situation in Burma and the attitude of the authorities of
that country only confirms our fears. On 26 September,
the Security Council met and urged the Burmese
Government to show restraint. The Burmese authorities
did not heed that urgent call. To the contrary, 10 days
ago a leaden weight descended on Burma.

It is impossible to know the toll of these tragic
days, because the junta is trying to conceal its bloody
repression from the world. But one thing is for certain:
the brutal repression led by the army and the police has
already cost too many lives. France forcefully
condemns this violence against peaceful demonstrators.
This is why, along with its partners in the European
Union, France has decided to strengthen the targeted
sanctions against the Burmese leadership. The
repression is less visible now, but it continues day after
day. Thousands of people are being arrested outside
any legal framework. The population is living in fear
of raids that are being conducted mostly at night by the
police. Among those who have literally disappeared are
many monks. Corroborating evidence attests to temples
devoid of any human presence within and around the
capital.

France expresses its extreme concern about the
fate of these many prisoners and disappeared persons.
The Burmese leaders must know that they will be held
responsible for the fate of these persons.

In that tragic context, France reiterates its urgent
appeal to the authorities to immediately release persons
who have been incarcerated for having peacefully
exercised their right to freedom of expression and of
assembly. We urgently request that the International
Committee of the Red Cross be immediately authorized
to gain access to Burmese prisons. Furthermore, we
demand once again the unconditional release of
Ms. Aung San Suu Kyi and of all prisoners of
conscience imprisoned before the recent events.
Finally, we reaffirm the importance that we attach to

the swift arrival of Mr. Pinheiro, Special Rapporteur on
the situation of human rights in Burma.

At this tragic time, the Burmese people can be
assured of the support of the international community.
France wishes to welcome the very firm position taken
by the Association of Southeast Asian Nations
(ASEAN) in that regard. Over and above that, the unity
and resolve of the international community were
powerfully demonstrated by the Human Rights
Council's unanimous adoption of a resolution in
keeping with the gravity of the situation in Burma.

In that context, the Security Council, which acts
on behalf of the international community, cannot just
remain silent. Its duty is to express - to use the terms
employed by the ASEAN presidency - universal
revulsion at the attitude of the Burmese generals and to
make them understand that they will not be able to stay
in power through a reign of terror and arbitrary action.

But we will be shirking our responsibilities if we
do no more than condemn. We must go further and
send a message of hope to the Burmese people by
helping the Secretary-General to set out prospects for
the future: true national reconciliation and a transition
towards democracy. It is in that spirit that we reaffirm
our full support for the good-offices mission led by
Mr. Gambari, to whom we once again express our
gratitude for his resolute actions, which augur well for
the future. The Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
has been able to establish relations of trust with all the
Burmese parties. We hope that, on the basis of this
initial outcome and the ideas that he has just described,
he will soon be able to make concrete proposals with a
View to launching, with United Nations support, a
genuine process of dialogue that brings together the
authorities and the representatives of the opposition
and of minority groups. To that end, we believe that he
must be able to return to Burma as soon as possible.

We have noted that the head of the junta is
prepared to begin a direct dialogue with Ms. Aung San
Suu Kyi. However, that very belated statement once
again sets out conditions for a resumption of dialogue.
We hope that it is not just another delaying tactic. Of
course, we leave the decision up to Ms. Aung San Suu
Kyi and her party as to whether or not to respond to
this proposal.
On the other hand, if the Burmese authorities
continue to refuse to consider any serious and sincere
dialogue with the opposition or set unacceptable

conditions for its resumption, and persist in their
tactics of repression, terror and human rights
violations, the Special Envoy must make that known
and the Security Council must draw all the necessary
conclusions.

Finally, my delegation wishes to emphasize the
great importance that it attaches to the collective nature
of our effort. We all share the same concern; we all
hope for real progress towards dialogue and
democracy; we all support Mr. Gambari's activities.
The countries of the region, the countries of ASEAN
and China play an essential role, and France pays
tribute to them. It is important that the Council support
and strengthen this collective approach and that we
send clear messages to the Burmese authorities.

