We commend Germany for convening this open debate to consider the issue of human rights in peacekeeping operations. We concur with the statement contained in the President's concept note that: "As the world continues to witness armed conflicts and human rights violations, stressing the universality of human rights and including them in discussions about international peace and security is more critical than ever." (S/2020/604, annex, para. 2) During the previous formal debate of the Security Council on human rights three years ago (see S/PV.7918), their interlinkages with armed conflicts were clearly asserted. It was also reaffirmed at the Arria Formula meeting held on 17 April 2019 at the initiative of Kuwait, Cete d'Ivoire and Peru. Today's meeting therefore has a fitting subject for discussion for the Council given the state of today's world, full of numerous ongoing conflicts. It is also important to give more attention to the topic at a time when the coronavirus disease pandemic has aggravated each and every aspect of international peace and security, including in the human rights dimension. Only several days ago, we marked the seventy-fifth anniversary of the adoption of the Charter of the United Nations, which established the United Nations system based on the fundamental pillars of peace and security, human rights and development. But, in a globalized world, it is evident that sustainable peace and security cannot be achieved in isolation from human rights. Human rights violations are not only a grave consequence of conflicts but, frequently, the very reason that conflicts start in the first place. In the past, we have seen instances when the Security Council was able to establish that link, referring to the danger of the eruption of conflicts and violations of human rights. In the 1990s, the Security Council, after reports on human rights violations in the former Yugoslavia, established the first peacekeeping operation in United Nations history with a mandate for the protection of civilians. As of today, more than half of the current peace missions created or authorized by the Security Council have human rights tasks in their mandates and include substantive human rights capacities or components. As an active contributor to United Nations peacekeeping operations, Ukraine strongly supports further development of the human rights component in United Nations peacekeeping operations. It is particularly essential for enhancing the protection of the most vulnerable in conflicts - children and women. As rightly outlined in the concept note for today's meeting, peacekeeping operations may engage in casualty reporting, capacity-building programmes and public reporting on human rights violations and abuses. In that regard, it is highly commendable that human rights became an indispensable part of the Action for Peacekeeping Declaration of Shared Commitments on United Nations Peacekeeping Operations. Ukraine is proud to be among the first States to endorse the Declaration and notes with satisfaction the growing number of Member States that share the values and purposes of the document. At the same time, there are still drawbacks in the Council's work on human rights. Since the outbreak of the genocide in Rwanda in 1994, which was utterly overlooked, the attitude in the Council to human rights as a core component of conflict prevention regrettably has not changed much. The Council still does not address human rights violations as early signs of impending tragedies. The whole world has been observing for almost a decade the severe consequences of the crisis in Syria and the gross human rights violations committed by various parties, primarily the Syrian regime and its allies. Early warning signs of an imminent conflict were very clear already back in 2011. Immense human suffering, hundreds of thousands of dead, millions displaced and not even the hint of a light at the end of the tunnel. Action by the Security Council on the matter has been blocked by what is now 14 vetoes on the part of the newest non-elected member of the Council - the Russian Federation, which aims not only to revive Stalin's methods but also to reach the veto anti-record of the former Union of Soviet Socialist Republics. More than six years have passed since Russia illegally occupied Crimea. The occupying Power commits massive systematic violations of human rights and seeks to destroy the identity of Ukrainians and the indigenous people of the peninsula - the Crimean Tatars - as well as other ethnic and religious groups. In its resolutions "Situation of human rights in the Autonomous Republic of Crimea and the city of Sevastopol (Ukraine), the General Assembly reaffirmed that Crimean residents should enjoy protection under the Geneva Conventions and applicable human rights instruments. Numerous testimonies of the crimes committed during the Russian aggression against Ukraine can be found in reports of the United Nations human rights monitoring mission in Ukraine, which has been operating in my country at the invitation of the Ukrainian Government in an effort to prevent massive human rights violations by the occupying Power. The failure of the Russian Federation as an occupying Power in Crimea is documented in detail in the recent report (A/HRC/44/21) of the Secretary-General entitled "Situation of human rights in the Autonomous Republic of Crimea and the city of Sevastopol, Ukraine", submitted pursuant to General Assembly resolution 74/168. The report confirms Russia's continued disregard of its obligations as occupying power under international humanitarian law, as well as the deteriorating human rights situation in occupied Crimea, including widespread abductions, enforced disappearances, torture, politically motivated persecution on ethnic and religious grounds and racial discrimination. Let me also note the Secretary-General's reference to the Russian President's Decree No. 187 of 29 April 2019, aimed at simplifying the process of acquiring Russian citizenship for nationals of Ukraine living in Crimea or Donbas. It is yet further proof of the identical nature of Russia's aggressive strategy in Crimea and Donbas. It should be a wake-up call to those who still try to distinguish between Russia's occupation of Crimea and its actions in Donbas, which absolutely represent a continuation of the international armed conflict that Russia started on 20 February 2014. That is why we need concrete, robust actions to compel the Russian Federation to uphold its obligations under international humanitarian law and human rights law in both Crimea and Donbas. Ukraine has consistently promoted the role of prevention in ensuring and protecting human rights, both as a member of the Security Council in 2016-2017 and as a current member of the Human Rights Council. We have always stressed the need to strengthen the innate connection between the protection of human rights and the maintenance of peace and security. The crucial implications of human rights violations for peace and security should be recognized, and it would be only natural for the Security Council to take the lead on this matter. I would like to underline that holding discussions in the Council on the human rights dimension of peace and security so infrequently and sporadically and without a dedicated agenda item does little to boost the Council's ability to fully implement its responsibilities under the Charter of the United Nations. A piecemeal approach to an issue of such fundamental importance for maintaining peace and security can no longer be applied. It is high time to take a fresh look at the role and place of human rights in the work of the Council. The proper consideration of human rights violations in the context of the maintenance of peace and security could contribute considerably to preventing the outbreak of armed conflict. If a conflict is already raging, addressing its human rights dimension may prevent further escalation of violence and serve as a deterrent to conflict-related atrocities. That is why the human rights component should be an integral part of the Council's activity in the area of conflict resolution and management. The Council has no right to repeat its failures in Rwanda, to continue to fail in Syria or to remain impotent on Russian aggression against Ukraine. The time has come to restore the integrity of the entire United Nations system and to bridge the gap between New York and Geneva as regards the human rights dimension of international peace and security.
