The President (spoke in Russian): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Australia, Finland, Indonesia, Japan, New
Zealand, Norway, Portugal and the Republic of Korea, in
which they request to be invited to participate in the
discussion of the item on the Council's agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives to
participate in the discussion, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and
rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Widodo
(Indonesia) and Mr. Monteiro (Portugal) took seats at
the Council table; Ms. Wensley (Australia), Ms. Korpi
(Finland), Mr. Satoh (Japan), Mr. Powles (New Zealand), Mr. Kolby (Norway) and Mr. Lee See-young
(Republic of Korea) took the seats reserved for them
at the side of the Council Chamber.

The President (spoke in Russian): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on its
agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the report
of the Secretary-General on the situation East Timor,
document S/ 1999/ 1024.

Members of the Council also have before them
document S/ 1999/ 1083, which contains the text of a draft
resolution submitted by Brazil, Canada, Namibia, the
Netherlands, Slovenia, the United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland and the United States of America.
Argentina, France, Portugal and the Russian Federation
have joined as sponsors of the draft resolution.

I should like to draw the attention of the members of
the Council to the following documents: S/ 1999/ 1004, letter
dated 21 September, from Finland, transmitting a
statement by the Presidency of the European Union on
East and West Timor; S/1999/1025 and S/l999/1072,
letters from the Secretary-General of 4 and 15 October
1999, respectively, transmitting letters dated 29 September
and 14 October 1999 from the Permanent Representative
of Australia to the Secretary-General, conveying the first
and second periodic reports, respectively, of the
International Force, East Timor (INTERFET).

The first speaker on my list is the representative of
Portugal, on Whom I now call.


