Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We would first like to thank Mr. Jenea,
Ms. Mueller, Mr. Apakan and Mr. Sajdik for their
briefings today.

We took the initiative of convening today's meeting
in order to discuss the implementation of a document
that is extremely important to the settlement of the
internal Ukrainian crisis, the package of measures
for the implementation of the Minsk agreements. It
was signed four years ago on 12 February 2015 by
representatives of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), Ukraine, Russia, the
Donetsk People's Republic and the Luhansk People's
Republic.

We have every reason to bring up this issue in the
United Nations, since as an annex the document is an
integral part of resolution 2202 (2015), of 17 February
2015, which endorsed it in its very first paragraph.
Furthermore, support for the implementation of the
Minsk package was again affirmed in a Security
Council presidential statement (S/PRST/2018/l2) of
6 June 2018. For some reason some of our colleagues
on the Council labour under the illusion - not on this
topic alone, but on this topic especially - that we are
uncomfortable discussing the subject of Ukraine. That
is not only not the case, it is the complete opposite. On
the contrary, we have a greater interest than anyone in
ensuring that the world listens one more time to the
story of how Western countries first orchestrated an
anti-Government coup in Ukraine and then gave Kyiv
carte blanche to do absolutely anything on the pretext
of dealing with What it calls the Russian threat and
aggression.

On 21 February it will be exactly five years since the
moment when in the presence of high representatives of
the European Union (EU), Germany, Poland and France
in the capacity of guarantors, the then President of
Ukraine, Viktor Yanukovych, signed an agreement with
the opposition on a peaceful settlement of the crisis. He
was almost immediately deceived and ultimately forced
to leave Ukraine. Who knows? Perhaps if he had acted
as the current Ukrainian authorities do, or, say, like the
leaders of the democratic countries who are not afraid
to use force against protesters, Ukraine would not have
found itself mired in a deep economic crisis, powerless
and lawless, and would not have ended up as a raw-
materials farm supplying the EU's markets with cheap
labour. Not to mention that he would have had reason
on his side. As we now know for certain, the protesters
were armed and determined to seize power at any cost,
including bloody incitement. And that is ultimately
what they did.

I have purposely described this in detail because
I want it understood that the West as a whole, and
the three pseudo-guarantor countries I mentioned in
particular, bear a direct responsibility for everything
that has happened and is happening, as does the United
States, the true puppet master of these entire Maidan
theatrics, which today encourages and covers up every
one of Kyiv's provocations, including the recent incident
in the Black Sea, and willingly supplies Ukraine with
arms, goading it to reckless action. Unfortunately, it is
obvious to us that the West has absolutely no interest in
Ukraine itself, its future or the welfare of its citizens.
Its sole interest is in the country's capacity as a pawn in
a geopolitical confrontation with Russia.

Four years ago, it seemed as if the international
community and the parties to the Ukrainian conflict
were of one mind as to what the formula for a settlement
should be. In May 2018, during a Council meeting
convened by our Polish colleagues (see S/PV.8270),
we went over the Minsk package of measures in the
greatest possible detail, and I will therefore not do that
today. However, so that Council members could have
the document in front of them, we decided to print
out and distribute copies of resolution 2202 (2015).
Time after time, I have urged Council members to
read it thoroughly. Do not repeat that rote line that
Russia should implement the Minsk agreements. The
agreements contain not a word about Russia. As we
have said many times, the absurdity is that it is Kyiv that
is sabotaging the Minsk agreements and it is Moscow
they are trying to make pay the price for that.

To reiterate the most important point once again, the
arrangement of the steps referred to in the resolution,
from paragraphs 1 to 13, is not accidental, since the order
of implementation of each step is of key significance.
Let me say again that the implementation of paragraph
9, on the transfer to Ukraine of control of the border
with Russia in the Donetsk and Luhansk regions, will
be possible only after all the other conditions have been
implemented, including the disengagement of forces
and equipment, the enactment of a law on Donbas's
special status, the creation of self-governing institutions
based on that, amnesty, an exchange of prisoners and a
number of other measures.
Unfortunately, however, we have full grounds for
saying that Kyiv has consistently and knowingly failed
to implement the Minsk agreements and has sabotaged
them, while our Western partners have covered up all
of its unlawful actions. The best illustration of that
is the fact that on 5 February the office of Ukraine's
Prosecutor General announced the start of criminal
proceedings against Viktor Medvedchuk, one of the
leaders of the Ukrainian opposition, who had declared
his candidacy for the presidential elections to be held on
31 March. The reason for the indictment was his call for
holding the direct dialogue between Kyiv and Donbas
provided for in the Minsk package of measures and for
granting the region special status within Ukraine. In
other words, implementing the Minsk agreements in
Ukraine today is tantamount to treason and subject to
criminal prosecution.

The Minsk agreements' insistence on a direct
dialogue with the Luhansk and Donetsk People's
Republics brings Kyiv out in an allergic reaction. But
our Western colleagues pretend not to notice, thereby
displaying their carefully cultivated double standards.
And they are double standards because in every other
conflict on the Security Council's agenda, we are all
united in insisting that the opposing parties have
to sit down at the negotiating table with the goal of
ending their confrontation or their military action and
launching a political process.

Take Syria. What is the proverbial main thrust of
our efforts there? Correct. It is creating a constitutional
committee with the participation of the Government
and opposition and arriving at an agreement on the
establishment of a Syrian-owned and -led political
process. Now take Yemen. Everyone here applauded
the Stockholm Agreement reached between the Yemeni
Government and Ansar Allah. And now we are all
nervously keeping our fingers crossed and praying that
this still fragile agreement can be implemented. We
all welcomed the Khartoum agreement on the Central
African Republic, whose aim was also reconciling
some hitherto irreconcilable parties.

The goal of any peace process, and no one will
disagree with me, is to reach a political rather than
a military solution to a conflict through direct talks
between the conflicting parties. So why should Ukraine
be any different? Why do our Western colleagues not
make sure that Kyiv will finally agree to sit down at
the negotiating table with direct representatives of this
confrontation instead of trotting out the same worn-
out cliches about how Russia should do this, and this,
and this? But please do not bother. I can answer that
question myself, especially since no one else here cares
to try.

This is happening because the Kyiv authorities'
disingenuous chosen paradigm - "This is not a civil
conflict. It is a war with Russia" - suits them. And
one can chalk up a great deal to war, and that is what
Ukraine's President Poroshenko is doing. It turns out
that all of Ukraine's woes and misfortunes - not just
of the past few years but the past three centuries - are
the legacy of Russia's occupation of Ukraine. Under
that lying paradigm, a new, falsified version of history
is being created at accelerated speed, cobbled together
from all the skeletons in its cupboard. Based on this
paradigm, the Kyiv authorities have to agree to nothing.
After all, according to them, the other party to the
conflict is not their own citizens but an aggressor
country, and therefore the Minsk agreements can be
torn up and thrown in the trash too. And that is exactly
what the Ukrainian authorities have done.

As a result of this fictional paradigm, there is no
need for Ukraine to talk to those of its citizens who live
in Donetsk and Luhansk. And yet for some reason the
residents of Donetsk and Luhansk have not observed the
presence among them of this so-called aggressor. They
have not protested against their de facto authorities and
they are not begging Kyiv to save them. However, Kyiv

has been able to continue to shed crocodile tears for its
citizens while groundlessly christening them terrorists.
But you do not negotiate with terrorists, you destroy
them. And there we have the Kyiv authorities' entire
primitive construct - primitive, but effective. And it is
effective because our Western colleagues are complicit
in it. And that is shameful.

The situation in south-eastern Ukraine remains
explosive. Kyiv has not respected the ceasefire
agreement and has moved deep into the grey zone, as
President Poroshenko's adviser Yuriy Biryukov recently
confirmed. Things have reached a point where the
positions of the parties in some areas are dangerously
close. The OSCE Special Monitoring Mission's recent
reports have confirmed the arrival in Donbas of new
units with Ukrainian tanks and artillery. Kyiv has also
been persistently evading its political commitments,
trying to marginalize the mechanisms of the Trilateral
Contact Group and launch a second round of discussions
on issues that have already been agreed on. That have
been indulged in that by our Western partners, saying,
for example, as Kurt Volker has done, that there is
no place in the Minsk agreements for the proclaimed
republics of Donbas and that they should disappear,
While President Poroshenko has declared that the Minsk
format does not exist. What kind of reaction to such
rhetoric does the Council expect from Donbas?

The result of the total indulgence with which Western
Governments have met any action by Kyiv has been
the creation of a continuing atmosphere of lawlessness
in which extremism and rabid nationalism flourish,
hatred of Russia is kindled and dissent is brutally
suppressed. Kyiv's unwillingness to adhere strictly to
OSCE standards has become increasingly obvious over
the past few years. Everyone in this Chamber has been
trying to ignore that, partly because it is genuinely
difficult to find one's way in the labyrinth of Ukraine's
surrealistic internal politics without a translation or
first-hand information, and has continued to trot out
the tired cliches about democratic choice and the right
to a bright future in the family of democratic nations,
while occasionally gently scolding Kyiv for its lack of
progress in instituting reforms and fighting corruption.
But what they are really doing is knowingly ignoring all
the flagrant violations of democratic - indeed, merely
civilized - norms and the bacchanalia of lawlessness,
lies and emerging neo-Nazism in Ukraine.

Only the other day the OSCE Office for Democratic
Institutions and Human Rights (ODIHR) received an
official refusal from the Ukrainian Foreign Ministry
for accreditation for Russia's observers during the
March presidential elections, while Arsen Avakov,
the Minister of Internal Affairs, has promised to vet
all international observers, not just Russians, using the
database of the extremist Myrotvorets website, which is
banned in some countries. For those who do not know
about it, I should explain that this site contains personal
information about people whom Kyiv nationalists
do not like, in violation of rules on the protection of
personal information. Some of them have already been
killed. That amounts to giving people the black spot
or putting them on a hit list. And if anyone imagines
that only Russians are on those lists I can inform them
that they include personal information about politicians
from Great Britain, France, Germany, Italy, the Czech
Republic, Slovakia and Hungary. These kinds of steps
on the part of Kyiv are yet another gross violation of
its international commitments and a serious assault on
ODIHR, which is supposed to be the gold standard for
monitoring elections. This is also the place to mention
that the Maidan authorities' decision not to open polling
stations in Russia has deprived millions okarainians of
the opportunity to vote there, which calls into question
the upcoming elections' transparency and objectivity.

Of course, the people of Donbas - almost
4 million of them, or roughly 10 per cent of Ukraine's
total population of 42.3 million - will have no chance
of voting either. Who would those Ukrainian citizens
vote - or rather never vote - for? Because they are
certainly not needed by the current Kyiv authorities,
weeping their hypocritical tears for them. For Kyiv
they long ago became self-supporting pawns in its
unscrupulous political games. Incidentally, we should
point out that in its obvious concern for its citizens,
Kyiv has imposed an economic, transportation, energy
and social blockade on Donbas.

I would like to hear something from Kyiv's Western
mentors in this Chamber about their basic assessment
of Ukraine's democratic development. Of course, it
should also include the situation of religious freedom
in Ukraine, where Orthodox churches are being openly
seized with the direct assistance of the legislative and
executive authorities. Amid the heat of the pre-election
campaigns, the Ukrainian authorities have completely
forgotten the separation between Church and State
that exists in civilized countries and that this principle
is guaranteed in Ukraine's Constitution. And yet the
current authorities are shamelessly playing the religion

card, tearing believers apart and flagrantly trampling
on religious freedom.

In conclusion, I would like to once again make it
abundantly clear that the key obstacle to resolving the
crisis and normalizing ordinary people's lives is the lack
of a clear response from Western countries to Kyiv's
unwillingness to implement the package of measures
that has been there for four years now. Essentially, this
means the sabotage of resolution 2202 (2015). As a
result, Kyiv is venturing new provocations that threaten
only to worsen the situation and ruin the peace process.
We hope and would like to believe that the participants
in today's meeting will urge the Ukrainian authorities
to scrupulously implement their international
commitments. Kyiv must finally understand that the
implementation of the Minsk package of measures is
the only chance for peace and for resolving the conflict
in Ukraine.

And one more thing. We want to warn everyone,
both Kyiv and its sponsors, that they should forget
about hopes for a plan B, especially if anyone entertains
any illusions about military means for resolving this
intra-Ukrainian conflict.

