Mrs. Ataeva (Turkmenistan) (spoke in Russian):
Allow me to congratulate you, Mr. President, on your
assumption of your very important post and to wish you
further success.

My delegation would like to express its gratitude to
Secretary-General Kofi Annan for his contribution to the
achievement of peace in Tajikistan and for how the United
Nations is approaching the post-conflict period. We would
also like to thank Mr. Ivo Petrov for his effective work as
representative of the Secretary-General.

We hold a very high opinion of the United Nations
efforts to achieve peace and national accord in Tajikistan.
We welcome the success achieved by all the parties in
this laborious process, which is of enormous significance
for our region.

The long-suffering people of Tajikistan finally have
an opportunity to undertake the restoration of the country,
to redress the consequences of the war and to begin a
new stage of socio-economic development. We wish the
people of Tajikistan peace and prosperity. In emphasizing
the significance of the outcome achieved, we would like
to emphasize the equally important need to reinforce this
outcome, this being one of the links in a chain of
measures to establish peace in the region and to bring
about its development. In this context, we support the
proposal of Secretary-General Kofi Annan on the
establishment and functioning of a United Nations office
for post-conflict peace-building and democracy in
Tajikistan. We also call for comprehensive support for the
peace process in Tajikistan by the international
community.

The work of the United Nations in Tajikistan -
together with that of the Commission on National
Reconciliation, the Tajik parties, the Guarantor States and
international organizations - has demonstrated the real
effectiveness of the joint efforts to implement the General
Agreement and political dialogue. This experience can
serve as the basis for the peaceful solution of conflicts in
other countries.
Turkmenistan, which is committed to all the
peacekeeping efforts of the United Nations, took an active
part in achieving peace in Tajikistan, by participating in
the negotiating processes and as a member of the Contact
Group. Once again, we welcome the achievement of
success in the peace process in Tajikistan and reaffirm
our intention to promote actively the consolidation of
peace in this country and in the region as a whole.

