Mr. Hammond (United Kingdom): I welcome the
opportunity to contribute to this important debate. None
of us doubts that violent extremist ideologies across
North Africa and the Middle East constitute a grave
threat to international peace and security, regional
stability and peaceful civilian life across the world.
In confronting them, we are waging a generational
struggle in which we will prevail only if we speak with
one voice and act with one will.

At the same time, we have to give hope to those
who despair of a better future and may be tempted to
join the Violent extremists, whether they are frustrated
Palestinians who see no hope of resuming the Middle
East peace process, Iraqi Sunnis who await the genuine
inclusiveness that Prime Minister Al Abadi has
promised, or Syrian moderate oppositionists who see
no other way to fight Al-Assad.

The coalition to fight the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant (ISIL) being led by the United States
has brought together more than 60 countries, from
the region and beyond, to take the fight to ISIL. The
United Kingdom has played a major role in delivering
coalition air strikes in Iraq and remains committed to
the coalition as the best mechanism to mount a unified
and comprehensive response. We have already met with
some tangible success, helping to halt ISIL's precipitous
advance across Iraq last year and over time removing its
freedom to operate in more than 30 per cent of the Iraqi
territory that it once held, as well as cutting financing
sources and countering its social media propaganda.
But there is much more to do, and we do not shrink
from the reality that this will be a long haul.

There is also universal agreement that Syrians have
suffered too much for far too long. We must come to
their aid. I want to take this opportunity to acknowledge
the generosity of Turkey, Jordan and Lebanon, in
particular, in hosting millions of refugees fleeing the
violence of the Syrian civil war over years. The United
Kingdom has given over £16 billion in humanitarian
assistance towards the Syrian crisis and neighbouring
countries hosting refugees.

The crisis in Syria is reverberating globally, both
in the violent extremism that it has helped foster and
the migration crisis that it has precipitated. There will
be no lasting solutions to these challenges without
lasting peace and stability in Syria. We have to do more
than respond to the humanitarian consequences of the
conflict if we are to achieve that stability.

But to help Syria navigate its way out of this crisis,
we must be clear about how it arrived there in the first
place. It was the Al-Assad regime that led Syria into the
crisis. Its brutal repression of peaceful protesters, which
we just heard about from Secretary Kerry, followed by
the years of indiscriminate attacks on civilians that
ensued, especially through the indiscriminate use of
barrel bombs, was the root cause. The Al-Assad regime
created the environment in which extremism, and ISIL
in particular, have flourished.

We therefore reject the advice of those who say the
poison of Al-Assad is the cure for the cancer of ISIL. It
cannot be. It was Al-Assad who released jihadis in the
early stages ofthe conflict. It is Al-Assad who continues
to trade with ISIL even now. And it is Al-Assad's forces
that are killing more civilians in Syria each month
than any other actor. Al-Assad has been and remains
one of ISIL's greatest recruiting sergeants, and his
forces remain focused on the destruction of moderate
opposition groups and civilian population centres. Any
attempt to ally with Al-Assad against ISIL will only
strengthen ISIL, making it de facto leaders ofthe Sunni
resistance to the Al-Assad regime.

We owe it to the Syrian people to secure a future
free both of the terrorism of ISIL and the tyranny of
Al-Assad, because Syria can be an effective partner
in overcoming violent extremism only if it has a
representative Government, a Government capable of
working with the international community to confront
ISIL militarily and counter its twisted narrative. The
best contribution Al-Assad and those around him can
now make is to put their country's interests before their
own and step aside to allow a political transition that
will end the civil war and allow Syrians to unite in the
struggle against Islamist extremism. What is needed is a
transition that will provide representative and inclusive
Government and enable the Syrian people to begin the
task of rebuilding their nation. The best contribution we
can make is to support the efforts of Special Envoy of
the Secretary-General Staffan de Mistura in negotiating
such a transition, while standing ready to work with all
partners to make this happen.

Over the last few weeks, the realities on the
ground in Syria have changed. Russian intervention
has strengthened regime morale and reinforced regime
capability. Russia has taken a major decision and
assumed a heavy responsibility by this public propping
up of Al-Assad while he continues to terrorize his
own people. The international community will expect
Russia to use the increased influence it has to stop the
use of weapons like barrel bombs that have targeted and
killed thousands of innocent civilians and prevent any
use of chemicals as weapons by the regime.

We have heard over the last few days about Russia's
intention to use force against ISIL, and we welcome
that focus. But for the reasons I have already outlined,
it is not possible to be an effective part of the fight
against ISIL and at the same time - with the same
force - be attacking the moderate oppositionists
resisting the oppression of the Al-Assad regime. To
say it clearly: actions in support of the regime are
incompatible with the effective prosecution of the war
against ISIL in Syria. This is not a moral judgment, it is
a pragmatic judgment.

We heard this morning ofthe first Russian air strikes
in Syria. Russia will be well aware of the message that
those strikes will deliver. The targets of those strikes
will not have been selected carelessly or at random. It
is very important that Russia be able to confirm to the
international community that the military action it has
undertaken in Syria this morning is directed at ISIL and
Al-Qaida-affiliated targets only, and not at moderate
opponents of the Al-Assad regime.

I have also listened to those who say that the Syrian
people should decide in elections whether Al-Assad
stays or goes. I have to say that this is an illusion. It
denies the reality on the ground. How can there be fair
elections in a country that has lost a quarter ofa million
dead and has 12 million of its citizens displaced, many
of them outside its borders? Healing those wounds can
start only when Al-Assad leaves, whether that is at the
start of a transition or later in the process.

There is of course a way forward. If we can see
an end to the barrel bombing and the indiscriminate
attacks on civilians, if we can encourage de-escalation
on the battlefield so as to reduce casualties, if we can
at the same time embark upon a political process that
leads to a new Syria with a new Government without
Al-Assad, then we could focus opposition strength on
fighting ISIL. The question for the Council is whether
those who have the influence to deliver this outcome
are willing to use that influence to do so. I call upon all
Security Council members to unite in order to deliver a
future for Syria.

