Mr. Gallegos Chiriboga (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish): We are pleased that you, Mr. President,
the Permanent Representative of the Republic of
Indonesia - a country that has played an active role in
peacekeeping missions since 1957 and is currently one of
the largest troop-contributing countries - are presiding
over this important debate on the theme "Investing in
peace: improving the safety and performance of United
Nations peacekeepers".

There are two fundamental issues leading today's
debate. First, peacekeeping missions continue to
operate in difficult environments and with more
complex mandates, including providing support for
difficult political processes, protecting civilians and
supporting national capacity-building, particularly in
the areas of security, the rule of law and respect for
human rights. Secondly, asymmetrical attacks and the
use of terrorist tactics against peacekeepers undermine
the implementation of peace-support mandates
and demand greater efforts to safeguard them and
guarantee their safety. Ecuador therefore reiterates
its support for the Secretary-General in his efforts to
reform the United Nations by means of improving the
Organization's capacity to efficiently and effectively
fulfil its mandates. We are also grateful for the
presence of the Secretary-General at this important
debate, as well as that of all other briefers and for the
information provided.

Ecuador also believes it is important to highlight
the various initiatives and actions that have been carried
out in the past year to address fundamental issues: the
Secretary-General's Action for Peacekeeping initiative,
to which our country is a signatory; the Peacekeeping
Ministerial in September 2018, which was held
with a view to gaining political support and making
peacekeeping missions more efficient and safer as
well as to mobilize the strongest possible support for
political solutions and well-structured, well-equipped
and well-trained forces; and the Declaration of Shared
Commitments on United Nations Peacekeeping
Operations, which is supported by 151 Member States,
including my country, through which we renewed our
collective commitment to United Nations peacekeeping
operations and reaffirmed the primacy of politics
in resolving conflicts and the support role played by
peacekeeping operations in that respect.

It is also relevant to mention the 2017 voluntary
compact on preventing and addressing sexual
exploitation and abuse in peace operations, to which
Ecuador is also one of the signatories. We believe that
the training of personnel ahead of their deployment is
key to contributing positively to that joint commitment.
Accountability and increasing international cooperation
are two other elements that we believe are necessary
for the eradication of sexual exploitation and abuse.
All of those actions reflect the vital importance that
host countries, the Security Council, the General
Assembly, troop- and police-contributing countries
and the Secretariat continue to work in a committed
manner in each of their roles in order to revitalize those
instruments and ensure the responsible, efficient and
effective deployment of peacekeeping missions.

Ecuador believes that the new peace and security

structure, which has been in place since January, as

well as the accession of the majority of Member States,

including our country, to the Secretary-General's Action

for Peacekeeping initiative and the implementation of
the action plan on improving the security of United

Nations peacekeepers, all generate an important

impetus to establish a performance evaluation system

for peacekeeping operations, which would have a

positive impact on accountability to Member States

and would promote transparency and comparability

among missions. In that regard, we welcome the fact

that the Secretariat has embraced the recommendation

issued by the Board of Auditors and is ensuring that the

future development of that comprehensive performance

evaluation system and its experimental application to
peacekeeping operations is adapted to the requests of
the Security Council and General Assembly.

Firm in our conviction as a country of peace,
Ecuador has been participating in several peacekeeping
operations through its presence mainly of military
observers, which includes female personnel, on several
missions - the United Nations Interim Security Force
for Abyei, the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur, the United Nations Mission
in South Sudan and the United Nations Mission for
the Referendum in Western Sahara. Our country is
committed to increasing the percentage of women
participating as military observers. In recognizing the
importance of women's participation in peacekeeping
operations and seeking to promote gender equity
within our armed forces on a permanent basis, we
have developed workshops on gender and women and
peace and security through Ecuador's Peacekeeping
Missions School, which is the entity responsible for
training our military personnel before deployment to
peacekeeping missions.

In conclusion, as a country committed to United
Nations peacekeeping missions, in which it has been
participating since 1952, Ecuador wishes to commend
the commitment of troop- and police-contributing
countries and pay tribute to the memory of the male
and female uniformed and civilian personnel who have
sacrificed their lives in carrying out United Nations
peacekeeping mandates.

