Mr. Hunter (United States of America): I thank the Special Representative for his briefing today, and I also thank the briefers from the African Union and from the European Union. The Central African Republic has faced significant difficulties in the past year. That includes challenges responding to the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) and the arduous work of implementing the 2019 Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central African Republic, as well as preparing for a free, fair and democratic election. However, as we said during the 1 October high-level meeting on the Central African Republic convened by the Secretary-General, the United States remains a strong partner, ready to support the country and to foster its potential. Today I will focus my remarks on the three challenges most directly affecting the Central African Republic's future. First, on the implementation of the peace agreement, the United States calls on all political actors inside and outside the Government to respect the Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation. The peace accord was not signed with any one political party but by the sovereign Government of the Central African Republic. With the support and good offices of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA), the Government has made significant progress in fulfilling the peace agreement's commitments. In that regard, we call on the Central African Republic's neighbours and other facilitator countries to acknowledge their responsibilities and work with the Government to put in place functioning border controls, re-establish legitimate commerce and stop the flow of weapons into the Central African Republic. We also urge the Government to demonstrate its commitment to fighting impunity by expeditiously standing up and implementing justice mechanisms, including the Commission on Truth, Justice, Reparation and Reconciliation and the Special Criminal Court. The United States will continue to help in those important efforts through our assistance in developing the country's security and judicial institutions. All Central Africans deserve access to justice. Secondly, I want to stress the importance of free, fair, inclusive and transparent elections in December. Those elections will be an opportunity for Central Africans to demonstrate the strength and resilience of their democratic institutions as they choose their Head of State and National Assembly representatives. We are encouraged by the United Nations efforts to ensure that women are both on the ballot and registered to vote. We encourage the Government to keep up that momentum to ensure the full, effective and meaningful participation of women in the elections. Local elections, which have not been held since 1988, will also be an important gauge of the success of the decentralization initiatives adopted by the National Assembly. While we were disappointed that voting for Central African refugees was not included in the amended electoral code, the United States will continue working with the Government and our international partners to ensure the success of the upcoming elections. Thirdly, I will touch on the challenges that the Central African Republic is facing because of COVID-19. This pandemic has affected the country's economy, and further economic difficulties lay ahead. That is why the Trump Administration has provided more than $13.6 million in COVID-related emergency assistance as part ofnearly $120 million in humanitarian assistance in 2020. We encourage others to join us and do more to support the country's struggle against this pandemic. The United States recently concluded a four-week virtual monitoring and evaluation review of MINUSCA. The operational and security challenges in the Central African Republic are formidable by any measure. The scope of MINUSCA's mandate is daunting. In fact, a recent evaluation of MINUSCA by the Effectiveness of Peace Operations Network noted that MINUSCA has the most complex of all peacekeeping mandates. In that context, we urge that attention be paid to ensuring full staffing for MINUSCA leadership positions, particularly as we enter this critical election period. Unfortunately, despite many efforts by the Mission to prevent it, we still see far too many instances of MINUSCA peacekeepers engaging in sexual exploitation and abuse. Those abuses are unacceptable. They destroy lives, they erode public trust in the United Nations and they undermine the credibility of peacekeeping. MINUSCA had the highest number of allegations of all missions in 2019 and in 2020. We urge all troop- and police-contributing countries to enforce the United Nations zero-tolerance policy and to swiftly and credibly address criminal allegations of sexual exploitation and abuse. The United Nations must increase its already strong efforts to prevent sexual exploitation and abuse, including by repatriating individuals and units who commit such crimes, as mandated by resolution 2272 (2016). We acknowledge MINUSCA's success in reducing overall violence in the Central African Republic and its multifaceted efforts of negotiation, good offices and kinetic action to reduce the threat of armed groups. The United States salutes MINUSCA's relentless focus on protecting civilians, the outstanding work of the Humanitarian Coordinator to make MINUSCA an agile and responsive partner for responding to needs on the ground, and the overall leadership of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General. In that highly demanding context, where the stakes are so high and mission effectiveness is so critical, we fully agree with the Secretary-General that MINUSCA's presence is key to maintaining peace and stability in the Central African Republic, and we note his recommendation for the Security Council to extend the mandate of MINUSCA for one year, until 15 November 2021. We should all continue to do everything that we can to ensure a prosperous future for the people of the Central African Republic.
