Ms. Plepyte (Lithuania): Let me begin by expressing our condolences in connection with the tragic loss of life in the Ukraine International Airlines crash. At this difficult time, our thoughts go out to the friends and families of the victims. I, too, should like to commend Viet Nam for having convened this important high-level debate. I further wish to express our gratitude to the briefers for their valued contributions. My delegation aligns itself with the statement to be delivered later on behalf of the European Union. The upcoming seventy-fifth anniversary of the United Nations provides us an opportune occasion to renew our dedication to the Charter of the United Nations, as well as to reflect on its importance to international peace and security and to reaffirm its fundamental importance to multilateralism. As Lithuania marks the thirtieth anniversary of the restoration of its independence this year, we would recall that one of the main aspects that enabled us to foster our revived statehood was our commitment to the rules-based international order. Our national experience is an important factor encouraging and motivating us to defend and adhere to the principles of the United Nations Charter. It is with a deep sense of commitment to the founding principles of the United Nations, as enshrined in the Charter, that we take responsibility to deliver on the promise of peace and reaffirm our dedication to multilateralism. We must also seek a new generation of approaches capable of responding to emerging challenges, including those pertaining to climate change, cybersecurity and hybrid threats. The integrity of the rules-based international system is indispensable to the maintenance of international peace and security. Unfortunately, as ongoing conflicts continue to devastate many regions around the globe, some Governments are taking steps to turn their contested claims into faits accomplis through violations of international law and of the principles of the Charter. In Europe, we are also seeing a protracted conflict in Moldova, which has continued for more than two decades. The violation of the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Georgia has entered its twelfth year. For almost six years now, we have witnessed the ongoing occupation and annexation of Crimea by the Russian Federation and its military actions in eastern Ukraine. These blatant and systemic breaches of the Charter of the United Nations constitute a threat to international peace, security and stability. Lithuania, as a strong supporter of the principles enshrined in the Charter, will continue to advocate for accountability for violations of international law, including the illegal use of force in international relations. It is crucial for the United Nations and the international community to develop the capacity for a swift and effective response. The Secretary-General's efforts and contribution to conflict resolution, preventive diplomacy, peacebuilding and sustaining peace are therefore of the highest importance. Preventive diplomacy, as well as early action and mediation, are vital measures in preventing conflicts and mass atrocities. A decisive element of conflict prevention involves putting an end to impunity and ensuring justice for all. The strong voice of the Security Council and its action in support of international law, accountability and justice is of the utmost significance. We cannot further risk the Security Council losing its relevance. Inaction on the part of the Security Council and the international community, directly or indirectly, encourages aggression and the use of force and threatens the entire multilateral system, based on international law. Restraining the use of the veto, inter alia, would make the Council's responses to ongoing crises more coherent and reliable. Lithuania therefore strongly supports the initiative to limit the use of the veto in cases involving mass atrocities, genocide, war crimes or crimes against humanity. Justice cannot be vetoed. It must surpass political manipulation. Finally, international peace, security and justice are not possible without adherence to international law. Ending impunity and ensuring justice is an absolute must in order to reinforce trust in the United Nations, secure the credibility of the multilateral system and ensure its ability to carry out the contemporary stewardship of peace. The resilient and visionary Charter points the way with its enunciation of universal values, its grounding in peace, development, human rights and the rule of law, and its vision of our shared fate and future.
