Mr. Racke (Netherlands): The Netherlands
delegation fully associates itself with the statement
made earlier by the Austrian presidency of the
European Union.

As Co-Chair of the Group of Friends of the Great
Lakes Region, the Netherlands has shown its strong
commitment to contribute and assist in promoting
regional and bilateral solutions to the conflicts that
have ravaged the region for so long. Therefore we have
gladly accepted the invitation of the United Republic
of Tanzania to participate in this open debate of the
Security Council and to add a few remarks of our own,
focusing on the achievements so far and challenges
still ahead.
But first of all, Madam President, let me join
other delegations in strongly condemning the attack
against the detachment of the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUC) on 23 January 2006, which
resulted in the death of eight Guatemalan peacekeepers
and the severe wounding of five others. We offer our
sincere condolences to the victims' families and to the
authorities of Guatemala. We commend the dedication
and courage of MONUC personnel.

The Netherlands Government very much
welcomes the initiative of the United Republic of
Tanzania for this important and timely open debate
emphasizing the continued involvement of the Security
Council with the Great Lakes region. I am particularly
pleased, Madam Minister, to see you presiding over
this meeting.

We saw some quite positive developments last
year. We can wholeheartedly congratulate the
Government of Burundi on the successful completion
of the transition and on the elections. Hopefully, they
will serve as an example for the electoral process in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, which so
successfully started with the referendum on the
18 December. Despite some delays, preparations for
elections in the Democratic Republic of the Congo are
now being carried out with great determination and the
necessary sense of urgency. Let us hope that the
democratic process there is irreversible.

In 2005 we also saw that the countries in the
region had actually aligned themselves in finding
diplomatic and peaceful solutions within the Tripartite
Commission, which has been so successfully facilitated
by the United States. We are pleased to see that
Burundi has joined this Tripartite - now being called
Tripartite Plus - mechanism. We urge that this
mechanism remain in force.

These are all important, positive developments
promoting peace and stability in the longer term.
Concerning the Great Lakes Conference, we still see
some challenges ahead. The Conference, we think, still
has to find a clear focus, and the postponement of the
Summit, which was envisaged to take place in
December last year in Nairobi, has affected the very
credibility of the Conference.

We call upon the countries of the region to
maintain and to show their commitment to the process
and make sure the momentum will not be lost as a
result of the postponement. We think that in the coming
months strong leadership is required, and in that
respect we count on the Tanzanian presidency of the
Conference. Some serious decisions will have to be
taken and difficult choices will have to be made. In line
with the proposals presented by the Tanzanian
Government, we support the idea of a permanent
regional mechanism to strengthen democracy, good
governance, the rule of law, the protection of human
rights and reconciliation.

We urge the countries of the region to honour
their commitments made in the Dar es-Salaam
Declaration of 2004 and to continue their collective
efforts in developing a subregional framework for
promoting and strengthening good relations, peaceful
coexistence and peaceful resolution of disputes. We
also urge the countries of the region to prepare
seriously for the second Summit, in Nairobi, which
should take place as soon as possible, and to adopt a
security, stability and development pact for the
countries of the Great Lakes region.

As far as peace and security is concerned, there
certainly are serious challenges still ahead. The tragic
events in the east of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo that I mentioned earlier have made clear that the
Lord's Resistance Army (LRA) poses a threat to
regional peace and security, affecting the
implementation of the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement in Sudan and the transitional process in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

The recent briefing by the Under-Secretary-
General for Humanitarian Affairs, Jan Egeland,
highlighted once more the impact that the activities of
the LRA are having on the civilian populations of
northern Uganda, southern Sudan and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. The international community
should assume its responsibility to address this threat
to regional security, which is combined with the
humanitarian crisis. In that respect, we hope that the
International Criminal Court's arrest warrants
concerning five leaders of the LRA will be effectively
executed as soon as possible, also in the light of their
preventive impact on further atrocities.

We believe that the so-called core group of
countries already involved in the peace process should
develop a comprehensive strategy to end the conflict
and mobilize broader international support for a long-
term strategy, in support of and in cooperation with the
Government of Uganda. Furthermore, we believe the
worsening detrimental effects of the activities of the
Lord's Resistance Army on regional peace and security
warrant attention by the Security Council. The
international involvement should focus on the political
process, disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration, return, reconstruction and development
and should also assist the Governments in the region to
address the security problems caused by the continued
presence of the Lord's Resistance Army on their
territory.

The Netherlands will continue to remain fully
committed in its efforts to alleviate the tragic suffering
of the people and to promote the peaceful solution of
the conflict.

