Mr. Tafrov (Bulgaria) (spoke in French): I wish
to thank you, Sir, for having convened this meeting of
the Security Council, which offers us the opportunity to
speak our minds about the atrocious acts recently
committed in Kosovo.

I should also like to welcome the Deputy Prime
Minister of the Republic of Serbia, Mr. Covic. I only
regret that his reason for coming here was the
assassination of two teenagers and the serious injury of
four others. Bulgaria categorically condemns the
heinous acts of 13 August in the village of Gorazdevac,
near Pec. I take this opportunity to convey the
condolences of Bulgaria and the Bulgarian people to
the bereaved families, particularly those of Ivan
Jovovic and Pantelija Dakic.

This horrendous act, following the murder of a
police officer of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) barely
more than a week earlier, clearly seeks to undermine
the efforts of all international and local actors to enable
Kosovars to return to their normal lives. Bulgaria
believes that the Provisional Institutions of Self-
Government of Kosovo should not only categorically
condemn the violence, but also help the local police
and UNMIK to identify as quickly as possible the
perpetrators of these crimes and assist the organs of
justice in their work. The cooperation of the Kosovo
Provisional Institutions is, we believe, a true test of
their ability to shoulder greater responsibility in
managing the region and in the transfer of authority.

Bulgaria has followed with growing concern such
acts of inter-ethnic violence and intolerance, which
merely further delay reconciliation among the Kosovar
communities and the return of refugees to their home
towns. It is very important that the international
community, and UNMIK in particular, clearly inform
all of the local political forces and the inhabitants of
Kosovo, irrespective of their ethnic origin or their
place in society, that such acts are absolutely
intolerable to the international community.

Bulgaria also condemns the destruction of
religious monuments referred to earlier by Deputy
Prime Minister Covic. We believe that the destruction
of Orthodox churches and monasteries is totally
unacceptable. The point has been made in the past that
these acts must stop. We hope that UNMIK will be able
to take the steps necessary to deter those who commit
them.

We also believe that such acts of inter-ethnic
violence in Kosovo do nothing to improve the positions
of the various parties to the impending negotiations
between Belgrade and Pristina. They can only impede
the process. This is yet another reason why we hope
that such acts will cease immediately.

In conclusion, I should like to say that the
concerns I have just formulated are shared not only by
Bulgaria in its capacity as a member of the Security
Council, but also by all of the countries of South-East
Europe. We are duty-bound to state this on behalf of all
the inhabitants of South-East Europe, who will never
accept inter-ethnic violence.

I should also like to offer my best wishes to the
new Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Harri Holkeri. He has the experience and the
background necessary to confront the daunting
challenges he faces in Kosovo and we assure him of
our full support.

