Mr. Mohamed (Maldives): I would like to thank
Bolivia for convening today's open debate onthe situation
in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question.
It has been more than half a century since the General
Assembly recommended a two-State solution with
clearly defined borders between the State of Palestine
and Israel.

The Council, through resolutions 476 (1980) and
478 (1980) declared the Israeli occupation ofPalestine to
be illegal;, the annexation of the holy city of Jerusalem
to be illegal; and the shifting of the Israeli capital to
Jerusalem to be illegal. The Council also declared it
illegal for any country to recognize Jerusalem as
Israel's capital, and therefore any move of its embassy
to Jerusalem to be illegal. Through resolution 2334
(2016), the Council called upon Member States to
distinguish, in their relevant dealings, between the
territory of the State of Israel and the territories of
Palestine, occupied since 1967, and reaffirmed the
illegality of Israeli occupation and settlements in the
occupied Palestinian territories.

And yet, the question of Palestine remains
unsettled. As responsible members of the international
community, all Member States, especially the key
players in the conflict, must uphold the letter and spirit
of relevant Council resolutions. The legitimacy of the
Council is fundamental to the credibility of the United

Nations and the maintenance of international peace
and security.

Just last month, Israel's High Court of Justice
rejected a petition to prevent the demolition ofa village
in the West Bank, which would result in the displacement
of hundreds of people, leaving them homeless, without
a livelihood, without a school for their children and
without access to basic health care.

As the people of Palestine continue to live in
unjust conditions in their own homes, we have on many
occasions heard the international community call upon
the people of Palestine to be resilient. If we continue
to merely express sentiments instead of holding
accountable those responsible for multiple breaches of
international law and international humanitarian law,
we are masking our own failures and abandoning our
own responsibility to the people we claim to help.

The Maldives has always believed that an
independent State of Palestine, with East Jerusalem as
its capital, based on the 1967 borders, living side by
side and in peace and harmony with Israel, is the best
and only solution to the conflict. We call on Israel to
fully implement the Council's resolutions and to respect
its legal obligations under the Charter of the United
Nations. We all must act in good faith and respect the
international norms that we have forged to sustain
peace in the Middle East.

In Syria, we are approaching the end of the seventh
year in the conflict and one of the crucial moments in
Syria's north-western Idlib province, where an outbreak
of conflict would result in the worst humanitarian
catastrophe of this century. In such an event, more than
3 million people would be displaced with nowhere to
seek shelter or find food or access health care. It is
our view that all actors involved in the conflict should
prioritize the fundamental human rights of the people
affected over and above anything else, and to allow
humanitarian relief to reach those who need it most.

The already complex conflicts in the Middle
East are being worsened by terrorist groups that are
inflicting destruction and tearing the social fabric of
society in the process. They do not recognize borders,
distinguish between young and old or women and
men, or respect any religion or culture. We must tackle
the factors enabling terrorism through international
cooperation, information-sharing and strategies that
focus on combating violent extremism.

The Security Council can and should act to address
the conflicts in the Middle East. We urge the Council to
use the tools and mechanisms that are already in place
within the United Nations system to pursue dialogue
and to resolve those conflicts. The Government and the
people of the Maldives will always support a peaceful
and lasting solution to the question of Palestine and the
conflicts in the Middle East.

