Mrs. ngu (Nigeria): I join others in thanking
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Abou Moussa, for his comprehensive briefing. We
are also grateful to Mr. Louis Sylvain-Goma and
Ambassador Tete Antonio for their very inspiring and
constructive contributions to our discussions this
morning.

The devastating impact of the Lord's Resistance
Army (LRA) on peace, security and humanitarian
activities in the Great Lakes region must not be
underestimated. While its operational capacity and
cohesiveness have been significantly diminished, its
ability to wreak havoc in the affected areas of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Central African
Republic, South Sudan and Uganda remains
unhindered.

According to a recent United Nations report, the
LILA has killed close to 3,000 people and displaced
more than 400,000 since December 2008. The
indication is that the LRA has been emboldened by the
absence of effective State authority, especially in the
affected areas. If we act to overcome the threat posed
by the LRA, we must address the critical capacity,
institutional gaps and resource constraints inhibiting

the establishment of State authority in the affected
areas.

Cooperation and coordination though information
sharing and joint operations must be prerequisites for
effectively addressing the LRA threat. We therefore
welcome the improved cooperation and coordination of
operations against the LRA by affected States, as
agreed at the second meeting of the defence and
security Ministers of the Central African Republic, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Uganda and South
Sudan, held in June. Beyond that, a great deal more
needs to be done to enhance the efficiency of joint
operations, particularly in the areas of cross-border
information, logistics, intelligence and airpower.

We recognize and welcome the regional
coordinating role assumed by the African Union (AU)
in the fight against the LRA. The establishment of the
Integrated Core Planning Team should be expeditiously
complemented by the appointment of the AU Special
Envoy on the LRA and the establishment of the
regional intervention force. The LRA threat also
requires enhanced coordination of efforts by the United
Nations missions in the region, namely, the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in the Central African
Republic, the United Nations Office in Burundi, the
United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa
(UNOCA) and the various United Nations country
teams working in LRA-affected countries.

While we commend the United States for
spearheading efforts to counter the LRA, we must state
that sustained international, bilateral and multilateral
support will remain imperative for the implementation
of the comprehensive counter-LRA strategy and the
provision of humanitarian assistance to LRA-affected
areas.

Turning to the issue of UNOCA, Nigeria
welcomes the first report of the Secretary-General on
the activities of the Mission (S/201l/704). It is
encouraging that UNOCA has not only become fully
operational but is also working vigorously towards the
implementation of its mandate.

We recognize that, through broad consultations,
the major security threats undermining sustainable
progress in the region have been duly identified. Those
threats, namely, the activities of the LRA, cross-border
tensions, arms trafficking, terrorism and piracy in the
Gulf of Guinea, will be more vigorously addressed if
the States of the region consistently and faithfully act
in concert.

As a country directly affected by the economic
and security impact of piracy in the Gulf of Guinea,
Nigeria welcomes the concern and interest in that great
menace. We believe that the fight against piracy and
other forms of organized crime is a collective
responsibility. We are therefore committed to joining
efforts with other member States of the Economic
Community of Central African States, the Economic
Community of West African States and the Gulf of
Guinea Commission to eliminate that threat, especially
though the implementation of resolution 2018 (2011).
Indeed, our bilateral security arrangement with Benin
to patrol our coastal waters is already proving to be an
effective deterrent to pirates. We look forward to the
forthcoming summit of the Heads of State of the Gulf
of Guinea to outline a comprehensive and effective
strategy to address the threat.

Nigeria remains unwavering in its efforts to
strengthen its relations with the countries of the
Central African subregion. That commitment is
manifest in our support of UNOCA as it explores
opportunities to make contributions to a more peaceful
and prosperous future for the countries and the peoples
of Central Africa.

We lend our unreserved support to the draft
presidential statement prepared by the delegation of the
United Kingdom.

