Mr. Michon (France) (spoke in French): First, I
wish to thank Ms. Bintou Keita, Assistant-Secretary-
General for Africa, and Ambassador Mauro Vieira,
Chair of the Guinea-Bissau configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission, for their briefings.

I would like to take this opportunity to welcome
the positive developments in Guinea-Bissau and to
encourage the Bissau-Guinean actors to continue their
efforts to consolidate the still fragile advances.

France in particular welcomes the holding of
legislative elections in March, which was a major step
forward. Although the post-election situation remains
fragile, the responsible and commendable behaviour of
all Bissau-Guinean civilian and military actors created
a good environment for the elections.

These developments are indicators of the
effectiveness of international community support. In
that regard, I would like to acknowledge the decisive
role of the Group of Five - the Economic Community
of West African States (ECOWAS), the African Union,
the Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries,
the European Union and the United Nations - in
achieving those results. I would like to pay tribute to
ECOWAS in particular, whose unwavering political,
economic and military commitment has borne fruit,
and which remains very involved in supporting its
neighbours. I would also like to highlight the role of
the Peacebuilding Commission, under the leadership of
Ambassador Vieira, and that of its Fund.

The Security Council sent amission to the country in
February, co-organized by cote d'Ivoire and Equatorial
Guinea, which was important because it showed the
Council's support for the holding of elections under
good conditions. Those developments show that the
tools we have collectively deployed in response to this
crisis, including sanctions, have been effective.

As the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding
Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS) enters the last
year of its mandate, France expresses its support for the
new Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Guinea-Bissau, Ms. Rosine Sori-Coulibaly, who
can count on our support in her efforts to support the
Bissau-Guinean actors and implement the UNIOGBIS
transition plan agreed in the Council.

Despite the progress I have mentioned, the political
process in Guinea-Bissau must be consolidated. In
particular, it is critical that the presidential elections
be held in a peaceful atmosphere on the scheduled
dates - the first round on 24 November and the second
round on 29 December. Adhering to that electoral
timetable is key to avoiding a new political crisis. We
therefore expect the Bissau-Guinean authorities to
continue to mobilize fully in the technical preparations
for the elections. In particular, it is absolutely essential
to ensure the proper organization of the National
Electoral Commission and to rapidly reach consensus
on the revision of the electoral lists. Those elections
will close the electoral cycle, and their success, in
our View, is a necessary precondition for progress on
the sanctions front, as mentioned in the Secretary-
General's report (S/2019/664).

In addition, the restoration of lasting peace and
stability in Guinea-Bissau requires progress in other
areas. In that regard, I would recall the importance of
the swift implementation of all the political reforms
provided for in the 2016 Conakry Agreement.

Moreover, as several speakers have noted, the fight
against organized crime, in general, and drug trafficking,
in particular, requires a resolute commitment from the
Bissau-Guinean authorities and the continued support
of the international community. The seizure of a large
amount of cocaine, as mentioned by Ms. Keita, is also
an encouraging sign of that commitment.

Finally, the reform of the security sector, which has
already begun, with the support of UNIOGBIS, is key.
Recent history has shown that there can be no long-
term stability in the country without comprehensive
security sector reform.

We are therefore at a pivotal moment. The coming
weeks should allow us to confirm that Guinea-Bissau is
truly on the road to lasting stabilization. The supporting
role of the countries of the region and, more broadly,
of the international community and the Council will
be critical in the coming period. The Bissau-Guinean
authorities can count on France to support their efforts.

