Mr. Mahugu (Kenya): On 28 August 1998, when
we last discussed the situation in Afghanistan in a formal

 

meeting, my delegation expressed its deep disappointment
at the stalemate in the peace process and the determination
by the Taliban, in particular, to resolve the crisis in
Afghanistan by military means. The Council's repeated
calls for restraint and diplomacy, as well as appeals to stop
all foreign involvement, in the form of overt military and
financial support, have fallen on deaf ears.

The Secretary-General's current report on the situation
in Afghanistan crystallizes these concerns and
disappointments. Fighting continues unabated, with the
overt and covert military and financial support of Member
States; diplomatic efforts are at an impasse; the
humanitarian crisis has expanded; human rights have not
improved; allegations of support for terrorist activities
abound; and illegal trafficking in drugs continues unabated.

In all our previous interventions regarding the crisis in
Afghanistan, we have always stressed that foreign
involvement in the Afghan quagmire was the main cause of
the continuation of the conflict. This reality has been
highlighted on several occasions: by the Secretary-General
in his reports to us, by the United Nations Special Mission
to Afghanistan (UNSMA), by Mr. Brahimi and through
independent reporting. It is clear that this interference has
not changed at all. Indeed, paragraph 10 of the Secretary-
General's latest report (S/ 1998/ 1109) speaks about the
"stark examples" of such outside interference. In paragraph
29 of the report, we are also told that the United Front
leaders complain bitterly of such external interference,
which they consider the main reason for their defeat and
the continuation of war.

We therefore share the Secretary-General's frustration
and disappointment in paragraph 71 of the report that some
of the members of the "six plus two" group continue to
supply the weapons and other war materiel that fuel the
conflict in Afghanistan. We also believe it is hypocritical
for such nations to speak of peaceful solutions to the
conflict while continuing covert and now overt military
support for the Afghan factions.

Therefore, it becomes increasingly difficult for us in
the Council to continue backing rhetorical demands for
compliance with Security Council resolutions. We join the
Secretary-General in appealing to these countries to be
more forthright and transparent in their dealings with the
United Nations with regard to Afghanistan.

My delegation highly values the dedication and
diplomatic perseverance that the Secretary-General's
Special Envoy, Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi, has invested in trying
to achieve a peaceful solution to the crisis in Afghanistan.
His efforts continue to be beset by divisions on the
United Front side and delusions of a complete military
victory on the Taliban side. In addition, his efforts to
reduce regional tensions have born fruit. We share the
Secretary-General's View that Mr. Brahimi' s achievements
should be built upon in collaboration with the Group of
21 and the six plus two group. Although these additional
efforts have not completely come to fruition, we believe
that consistent pressure organized under the aegis of the
United Nations will eventually give birth to a peaceful
solution. Equally important is the continuation of the
parallel effort between UNSMA and all United Nations
funds and programmes to strengthen their coordination
and make it more effective in the context of a post-
conflict peace-building effort. In this regard, we commend
Japan for organizing and hosting in Tokyo a meeting of
the Afghanistan Support Group which just concluded
today.

On the eve of the commemoration of the fiftieth
anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights, my delegation continues to be concerned about the
allegations of massive rights violations by all sides in the
Afghan conflict. In this regard, my delegation appreciates
the Secretary-General's intention to establish a Civil
Affairs Unit within UNSMA to "monitor the situation
and, through their presence, seek to promote respect for
minimum humanitarian standards and deter massive and
systematic violations of human rights and humanitarian
law in the future" (5/1998/1139, second paragraph).

When Kenya joined in co-sponsoring Security
Council resolution 1193 (1998) on 28 August this year,
we did so because we believed that the Council had again
to convey a clear, unequivocal message to the combatants
that the problem in Afghanistan had to be resolved by
peaceful means, through negotiations, and not by military
means. The resolution before us today sends a similar
message and sharpens it to include demands that the
Taliban stop providing sanctuary and training for
international terrorists and their organizations and that all
Afghan factions cooperate with efforts to bring the
indicted terrorists to justice. This is why Kenya has joined
the consensus on the draft resolution before us and will
indeed vote in favour of it.

In conclusion, my delegation takes this opportunity
to commend highly the excellent work done by
Ambassador Lakhdar Brahimi, the Secretary-General's
Special Envoy; the Acting Head of UNSMA, Mr. James
N gobi, who will be leaving the Mission at the end of the

 
year; all the men and women of UNSMA and the other
humanitarian agencies in Afghanistan; and Lieutenant
Colonel Calo, former Deputy Military Adviser of UNSMA,
Nazir Habibi of UNHCR, and Hushim Bashayar of the
World Food Programme, who gave their lives for the cause
of peace in Afghanistan.

