Mr. Quinlan (Australia): Obviously, we welcome
the unanimous adoption of resolution 2165 (2014) by
the Council today, and thank our co-authors, Jordan
and Luxembourg, for the work done in bringing it
to fruition. Decisively, the Council has been united
today in recognizing that the humanitarian situation in
Syria - already the greatest humanitarian crisis of this
century - has become even more desperate, and that
immediate action is necessary to meet the humanitarian
needs of the Syrian people.
While the adoption of the resolution is clearly
welcome, it should not have been necessary. Resolution
2139 (2014) set out very clearly in February the
Council's expectations of what the Syrian parties need
to do in order to relieve the terrible suffering of the
Syrian people, including allowing humanitarian aid to
be delivered across borders and conflict lines. However,
as the Secretary-General has advised us four times,
each month since its adoption in February, resolution
2139 (2014) has been ignored.

As a result, the humanitarian situation in Syria
has actually worsened. Since February, the number of
people in need ofassistance has increased by 1.5 million,
from 9.3 to 10.8 million - half the population - and
the number of those in areas out of reach of assistance
has grown by more than 1 million, to 4.7 million. Only
1 per cent ofpeople in besieged areas are being reached;
only 12 per cent of those in hard-to-reach areas are
receiving aid, and the amount of this meagre assistance
has actually declined each month since February. Six
to seven thousand new refugees are generated every
day, and at least one family in Syria becomes displaced
every minute.

The Security Council was forced to act today
because of the failure by the Syrian parties to implement
resolution 2139 (2014). It was also forced to act because
of the cynical manipulation of humanitarian aid by the
regime as part of its military strategy - a strategy
that continues to include the outrageous use of aerial
bombardment and barrel bombs to deliberately target
and kill Syrian civilians, in defiance of the Council
and of international humanitarian law. Damascus
has pursued a calculated policy of arbitrary denial of
desperately needed humanitarian relief. It prohibits
the delivery of specific life-saving medical supplies
as a matter of policy; medical supplies are routinely
removed from World Health Organization convoys.

The resolution adopted today reaffirms the
Council's determination that the Syrian Government
and other parties to the conflict must transform their
approach to humanitarian access and delivery. It is
time for the Syrian parties to put the interests of Syria's
citizens first. Life-saving assistance must be delivered
through the most direct routes, including across
borders and conflict lines, to reach people in need as
the United Nations determies. The United Nations has
advised that the four border crossing points identified
in today's resolution will allow at least an additional
1.3 million Syrians to be reached - and perhaps as
many as 2 million if successfully utilized.

The Syrian parties are obliged to ensure that
immediate and unhindered assistance reaches those in
need, including by allowing aid across conflict lines.
They must now cooperate with the United Nations
humanitarian agencies and their implementing partners
to ensure that happens.

Both this resolution and resolution 2139 (2014),
which of course remains fully in force, must be
implemented in full. We are under no illusions as
to how hard that will be, and even more so as the
situation deteriorates every day and the scale of what
is needed substantially increases every day. The
Council has affirmed again today that there will be real
consequences and measures for non-compliance.

The resolution also reaffirms that the only
sustainable solution to the Syrian crisis is through
a political process. The appointment of Mr. Staffan
de Mistura as the Secretary-General's new Special
Envoy for Syria is a positive step towards resuming
negotiations towards a political solution. The Syrian
parties, in particular the Syrian Government, must now
move to cooperate closely with Mr. de Mistura and
make genuine and urgent efforts towards bringing an
end to this conflict, which has so devastated Syria, its
people and the region.

