Mr. Perez-Otermin (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
At the outset, I wish to congratulate the sister Argentine
Republic in the person of its Minister of Foreign Affairs,
International Trade and Worship, Mr. Adalberto
Rodriguez Giavarini, who has honoured us by presiding
over this open meeting. I wish him every success in
guiding it.

I also wish to express my appreciation for the
statements made by Deputy Secretary-General Louise
Frechette; Ms. Bertini, Executive Director of the World
Food Programme; and Mrs. Junod, head of the delegation
of the International Committee of the Red Cross to the
United Nations. These statements were very enlightening
and will certainly be most useful to us as we pursue the
objectives of this meeting.

Uruguay has a long tradition of supporting
peacekeeping in the community of nations. We were
present at peacemaking efforts before the Organization
even existed. True to our heritage and vocation for peace,
our country has participated in various missions, offering
military observers, members of military staff, police
officers and contingents numbering approximately 10,000
men sent to the furthest corners of the planet.

We believe that in the century that has just begun,
as in the past one, it will be the human factor that
determines the success of future undertakings. Human
beings are the source and users of new technologies,
structures and processes; human beings - especially
those who throughout history have made a difference -
are responsible for blazing trails and opening horizons.

The protection of United Nations personnel,
associated personnel and humanitarian personnel is the
subject that brings us together today and that concerns us.
This subject is becoming increasingly important, given the
increasing dangers encountered in areas where such
personnel are sent to do their work to maintain peace.

While it is a fact that more civilians have lost their
lives in recent conflicts, it is also true that military
observers and police on the ground have had to assume
risks for which the United Nations does not have
sufficient capacity to prepare for in advance. Very often
certain bureaucratic practices led to situations that have in
turn led to an inability to secure air- transport services
and that have resulted in unfortunate deaths. Uruguay has
suffered the loss of several compatriots who were serving
in peacekeeping operations, and thus we are inscribed on
the list of countries that have paid the highest cost in
situations in which security shortcomings have been the
principle cause of death.

 

On 3 September 1999 my country ratified the
Convention on the Safety of United Nations and Associated
Personnel, which was adopted in 1994 by the General
Assembly and which entered into force one year ago. This
is a major step, but the international community must
provide even greater support to such initiatives. We urge
Member States that have not yet ratified the Convention to
do so as soon as possible.

Other practical measures should be taken to broaden
the United Nations capacity to deal with this issue of
crucial importance. The Office of the United Nations
Security Coordinator must be assigned more staff to deal
with security issues in peacekeeping operations.

For reporting incidents involving the safety of
peacekeeping personnel, the Secretariat has established a
system for prompt consultation with the permanent missions
in New York of troop-contributing countries. We encourage
the Secretariat to continue this effort, because we believe
that this is the best possible mechanism and should be
continued and not be considered as an attempt at micro-
management of these situations.

The fact that the report prepared by the Situation
Centre, which until recently was distributed only to
members of the Security Council, is now available to the
countries who are involved in the peacekeeping operations
is a very important contribution to the management of
situations in which security and related problems endanger
personnel which the contributing countries have placed at
the service of the United Nations. The improved
dissemination of this report was a long-standing demand
that my delegation steadily reiterated, and we appreciate
that this approach has now been instituted.

We also regard the meetings of the presidency of the
Security Council with troop-contributing countries as very
useful. This is already an established and routine practice,
an essential contribution to the successful management of
peacekeeping operations.

Without a doubt, much remains to be done to
improve the security conditions in peacekeeping operations,
and in this regard prior training is essential. Uruguay,
through its training school for peacekeeping operations,
located in Montevideo, is making significant efforts in this
area, and we have already invited other States to attend the
courses being given there. This training is crucial - today
more than ever - given that the most recent kind of
peacekeeping operations involves multidisciplinary efforts,
in which the protection of civilians in armed conflicts is a
top priority, in view of the alarming number of deaths
that have been recorded.

We hope that this special meeting will help to once
again call attention to the need to ensure that during their
important missions United Nations personnel, associated
personnel and contracted humanitarian personnel are
provided with special protection - protection befitting
the importance of the mandates they are being given. This
protection will be even more difficult to achieve if the
necessary resources are not available. Therefore, more
than ever it is essential that States shoulder their
responsibilities vis-a-vis this Organization in accordance
with their role here in the concert of nations.

