Ms. DiCarlo (United States of America): I, too,
would like to welcome Minister Dora Bakoyannis,
Chairperson-in-Office of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), to the Council
today. I would like to thank her for her overview of the
priorities of the OSCE under Greece's leadership. As a
member of the OSCE, the United States appreciates the
creative and assertive role that she has taken upon
assuming the chairmanship.

The strengthened effectiveness of the OSCE
comes from its comprehensive definition of security,
which encompasses human, economic, military and
political dimensions. In that regard, we acknowledge
the full range of OSCE activities, including the
important role played by the OSCE in promoting the
peaceful resolution of conflicts in South-Eastern
Europe and the Caucasus.

We also acknowledge the important role that the
OSCE has played in building strong democratic
institutions, which form the backbone of security in the
OSCE region. That work includes the strengthening of
the rule of law through border management projects,
the development of legislative transparency, assistance
in the reform of criminal justice systems and the
provision of election-related assistance.

The United Nations and the OSCE already enjoy
fruitful cooperation in a number of areas. The United
States welcomes opportunities to broaden United
Nations-OSCE cooperation and dialogue. The
Chairperson-in-Office has described OSCE efforts in
Central Asia, particularly with regard to border
management projects. We believe that there may be
opportunities to strengthen United Nations-OSCE
efforts in that area.

We welcome the OSCE's work in Afghanistan.
The Government of Afghanistan has requested OSCE
technical assistance to fulfil unmet border security
needs. We hope that the OSCE will be able to
implement fully and expeditiously two critical border
security projects planned for Afghanistan.

The Chairperson has also noted OSCE work in
elections in Afghanistan, and we might consider how
the OSCE, in close consultation with the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan, could play
a role in the upcoming presidential elections in that
country.

United Nations-OSCE cooperation has been very
effective when both organizations have had missions in
the field. The OSCE's efforts in Kosovo merit special
attention. Kosovo continues to prosper since its
declaration of independence last year. The OSCE,
working with the United Nations, has played a pivotal
role in Kosovo's development through capacity-
building, elections assistance and support for minority
communities. We hope that the OSCE's important work
in Kosovo will continue as Kosovo continues to
strengthen its democratic institutions and as the
European Union assumes a greater role.

In Georgia, there is a need for close coordination
and cooperation among all international organizations
in order to promote security and stability there. Despite
a diminished presence and persistent challenges in
effectively carrying out its mandate, the OSCE mission
is a component crucial to the establishment of a
durable and lasting resolution to the conflict in
Georgia. We believe that, in order to properly address
key security and humanitarian concerns on the ground,
the current OSCE presence in Georgia must, however,
be bolstered with additional military monitors
empowered to patrol and investigate incidents
throughout Georgia, including the South Ossetia region
of Georgia. We strongly commend the efforts of the
Chairperson-in-Office to find a compromise approach
that would create a framework for the OSCE to
continue its important work in Georgia.

Finally, we support the co-chairs of the Geneva
discussions - the OSCE, the United Nations and the
European Union - in calling for another round of
talks to discuss urgent security issues, including the
non-use of force, in March or April. The security
situation in Georgia remains unstable, so we must not
delay.

Again, I would like to thank Minister Bakoyannis
for all her efforts and offer her the full support of the
United States.

