Mr. Konishi (Japan): Japan shares the deep concern
of its Asian neighbours and, indeed, of the international
community, at the fighting that has continued to rage in
Afghanistan for the better part of two decades. The recent
escalation of fighting in northern Afghanistan between the
Taliban and the various factions allied against it is
particularly disturbing. The hostilities are causing additional
hardship to the Afghan people, who have already endured
unspeakable misery and loss, and pose a grave threat to the
stability of the region, particularly as new waves of
refugees flow into neighbouring countries.

This year alone, the Security Council has issued three
presidential statements stressing that the conflict in
Afghanistan cannot be resolved militarily and calling on all
parties to cease their hostilities and engage in dialogue.
Although Japan was encouraged that direct talks were
convened in the context of the ulema meeting process, our
optimism did not last long, and the Taliban have now
renounced that process and since the beginning of this
month have occupied the city of Mazar-e-Sharif and other
northern cities, with the result that most Afghan territory is
now under their control. These developments leave little
doubt that the Taliban, or, for that matter, the other parties
to the conflict, are not seriously interested in seeking a
peaceful settlement to the conflict.

The draft resolution on which we are about to vote,
and of which Japan is a sponsor, reflects the grave concern
of the Security Council over the deteriorating situation on
the ground. We would like to express our appreciation to
the Russian Federation for its initiative in drafting this
strong and unambiguous message, and we call upon all
the Afghan parties to respond promptly to its demands.

While the United Nations plays the central role in
international efforts to achieve a peaceful settlement of
the Afghan conflict, Japan also attaches great importance
to the efforts of the Six plus Two group, which have the
support and confidence of Ambassador Brahimi, the
Special Envoy of the Secretary General for Afghanistan.
In particular, we welcome the agreement of the group, as
contained in the talking points dated 3 March 1998, to
strive to check the flow of arms and other supplies to the
warring parties. That outside support has only prolonged
and intensified the fighting. In this regard, my delegation
believes that the importance of cooperation and trust
among the members of the Six plus Two group cannot be
overstated. We are therefore especially concerned by the
seizure by the Taliban of the Consulate-General of Iran in
Mazar-e-Sharif and the disappearance of members of its
staff and other Iranian nationals in Afghanistan. Such
actions threaten to destroy the relations of trust which
have been so painstakingly developed within the group, of
which Iran is a member. We earnestly hope that the
missing persons will be released safely and promptly.

Japan strongly condemns and mourns the loss of
Lieutenant-Colonel Carmine Calo, military adviser to the
United Nations Special Mission to Afghanistan
(UNSMA), as well as two local staff members of the
World Food Programme (WFP) and the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR), all of whom were the Victims of gunfire as
they carried out their humanitarian and peaceful duties in
Afghanistan. On behalf of the Government and people of
Japan, I extend my sincere condolences to their families
on their loss.

We are also alarmed by reports of air strikes against
the city of Bamian on 13 August which, in addition to the
human loss they might have caused, also raise the fear
that the great Buddhist statue in that area, recognized as
part of the world's cultural heritage, has been damaged.

The final point I wish to raise today is one that my
delegation has made on previous occasions but which
bears repeating. Lasting peace can be established in
Afghanistan only through a political process which is
accompanied by international reconstruction assistance.
This must be a continuous, two-pronged approach. In the
conviction that reconstruction assistance is an integral part
of the peace process, Japan has decided to host the next
meeting of the Afghanistan Support Group in Tokyo next

 

December, which will address the problems of delivering
international assistance in a situation where hostilities
continue.

The people of Afghanistan have for far too long been
deprived of their right to live in peace and to pursue their
livelihoods in a safe and secure environment. Japan will
continue to vigorously support efforts to achieve a durable
peace in Afghanistan through a comprehensive settlement
of the conflict, so that a Government which represents and
is supported by all ethnic groups can be established as soon
as possible.

