Mr. Elaraby (Egypt) (interpretation from Arabic):
Allow me, Mr. President, to begin by expressing our
warmest congratulations to you on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council for March. I should also like to
express our confidence that your wide diplomatic
experience and renowned wisdom will enable you to
discharge fully the responsibilities of the presidency. It
gives me pleasure also to give your our assurance that the
Egyptian delegation will cooperate with you fully this
month.

I should like also to express our deepest appreciation
to Ambassador Madeleine Albright and to the United States
delegation for the excellence that characterized the
American presidency of the Council during February.

The Council's consideration today of the situation in
Burundi, for the second time in five weeks, bears witness
to the international community's determination to follow
developments in that fraternal African country closely. We
share with it a common link, that great artery, the Nile.

The draft resolution before the Council is a true
reflection of the efforts made since the Council adopted
its resolution 1040 (1996) of 29 January, firstly to achieve
national reconciliation and stability in Burundi by putting
the presidency in the hands of the forces of moderation
and tolerance rather than of the advocates of extremism,
fanaticism and hatred and then to begin a national debate
that would include all parties and would complement the
Agreement embodying a Convention on Governance,
signed on 10 September 1994, that covered power-
sharing.

Here we emphasize once more the responsibility the
people of Burundi themselves bear for normalizing the
situation in their country; I would refer in this context to
the statement by the Permanent Representative of Burundi
just now in which he stressed his Government's
commitment to normalization.

The Secretary-General's report gives a
comprehensive and objective review and an accurate
analysis of the causes and scale of the political tension in
Burundi over the past two months as a result of the
attempts by certain extremist forces to put pressure on the
Head of State and depose him. These attempts were on
the point of blowing away what stability there was in the
country.

On the humanitarian level, there has certainly been
no improvement, especially since the International
Committee of the Red Cross and some other international
relief agencies have halted their activities as a result of
attacks on their personnel and local headquarters. This
prompted the Secretary-General to send the High
Commissioner for Refugees, Mrs. Ogata, to Burundi and
to dispatch a technical team to Bujumbura to consult with
the Government on means of protecting expatriate
personnel and guaranteeing their security.

The first visit by President Nyerere earlier this year
did not yield a positive outcome in terms of dialogue, and
no substantive progress has been made in implementing
the recommendations of the Cairo Conference of Heads
of States of the Great Lakes Region organized by the
Carter Center on 29 November 1995. The situation in
Burundi, in a nutshell, was as summed up by the
President of Burundi himself on 2 January this year: the
country was on the point of collapse.

To avoid an explosion and contain the crisis, so
averting a humanitarian tragedy similar to the one in
Rwanda, the Secretary-General has given us a number of

 

preventive options in his report. These options were
certainly not ruled out by the Council in its resolution
1040 (1996), in which the Council emphasized the need to
begin a serious national debate that would include all
political forces, including extremist ones, as the only way
to solve the present crisis. Indeed, Egypt supports the new
approach proposed by the Secretary-General, combining
preventive diplomacy with pre-emptive measures and
bringing all possible pressure to bear on all parties
concerned so that they take more positive positions.

In this context, Egypt expresses its support for any
humanitarian effort to assist the people of Burundi in the
event that the humanitarian situation there deteriorates
further.

The delegation of Egypt has followed with keen
interest recent international and regional efforts to monitor
the situation in Burundi in particular and in the Great Lakes
region in general. The most significant of these efforts have
been the sixty-third session of the Council of Ministers of
the Organization of African Unity and the Addis Ababa
meeting on 29 February to follow up the results of the
meeting in Bujumbura, which was attended not only by
former President Nyerere but also by many international
and regional organizations, and at which 20 or so African
countries were also represented.

We are most gratified to note that former President
Nyerere, with international support, intends to play a greater
role as a coordinator and focus for the efforts of all these
organizations. We hope that the political forces in Burundi
will respond positively to former President Nyerere's
proposals to defuse the crisis and to prepare for the
convening of a Regional Conference for Peace, Security
and Development in the Great Lakes Region. We also hope
that the meeting scheduled to be held in Tunisia late this
month under the auspices of the Carter Center will be a
preparatory meeting for that Regional Conference.

The Organization of African Unity has played an
important role in Burundi since 1993 in support of
moderation, tolerance, peaceful coexistence and confidence-
building. It has played a pioneering role, despite the
scarcity of its resources, in promptly stepping in to try to
halt the deterioration of the situation in Burundi. It has sent
an observer mission for dual political and military purposes.
Its military observers are currently providing protection to
the officials of the international Commission of Inquiry.
Even though this role was not initially welcomed by certain
parties in Burundi, and even though it received no political
or material support from other international organizations,
it has today become one of the major axes of
development, reaffirming the importance of the regional
organizations' support for containing crises and conflicts
under Chapter VIII of the Charter.

The draft resolution before the Council reflects the
required balance needed to address the present situation
in Burundi. It focuses on the need to support national
dialogue and the importance of that dialogue's
succeeding. At the same time, it calls upon the
international community to continue its preparations
aimed at addressing any adverse developments that could
lead to a deterioration in the situation and an increase in
violence.

The delegation of Egypt will vote for the draft
resolution because it is convinced that there is an
undeniable need to ensure success for the efforts being
made to restore stability and security in Burundi in
particular and the Great Lakes region in general, and to
put an end to the current crisis, which is hindering the
economic and political development to which the peoples
of the region aspire.

