Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): I wish
to thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Mr. Farid Zarif, for his briefing. I welcome the
presence ofthe Prime Minister of Serbia, His Excellency
Mr. lvica Daeic', at today's meeting. I have also listened
carefully to the statement made by Mr. Thaci.

China has always held that resolution 1244 (1999)
is an important legal basis for resolving the question of
Kosovo. Efforts to resolve that issue should be carried
out within the framework of that resolution. It is up to
the parties to find a mutually acceptable settlement
through dialogue and negotiation. The sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Serbia should be fully respected.

China welcomes the recent rounds of the high-
level political dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina,
at which positive results have been achieved. We
encourage both parties to continue to move the
pragmatic and constructive dialogue forward in an
effort to find a long-term solution to the question of
Kosovo so as to maintain the peace and stability of the
Balkans and Europe at large.

The security situation in Kosovo remains calm,
but the northern part of Kosovo remains tense. In
that connection, we express our concern. The parties
concerned must take action to effectively protect the
legitimate rights of the different ethnic groups of
Kosovo, to adopt a prudent approach and to adhere to
dialogue to resolve their differences. It is important to
avoid any actions that might complicate and escalate
the current situation.

China commends the work carried out by the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) under the leadership of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General. We support
UNMIK's continued efforts to implement the Council's
mandate. We hope that UNMIK, the European Union
Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo and the Kosovo Force
will strengthen their cooperation and coordination and
work in synergy so as to play an active and constructive
role in facilitating a solution to the Kosovo question.

