Mr. Salam (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): I thank
Mr. Edmond Mulet, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, for his briefing on the report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) (S/2010/446). My
thanks go also to the Permanent Representative of
Haiti for his statement.

We are pleased that the Haitian Government has
decided to hold elections on 28 November, and we note
that the organization of these elections is possible from
a technical standpoint. We welcome the measures
undertaken by the Government, including appropriate
organizational decrees, the registration of parties
wishing to stand in the elections, and other relevant
steps.
We also welcome the role of MINUSTAH in
providing security assistance to Haiti, participating in
recovery efforts following the earthquake pursuant to
resolution 1908 (2010), and providing electoral
assistance in accordance with resolution 1927 (2010).
We thank the donor countries for covering the
$29-million cost of the elections and the countries
contributing troops to the Mission, and call for the
strengthening of its police contingent, which now
numbers some 3,000 officers, although resolution 1927
(2010) authorizes 4,300. A strengthened police force
will enhance the Mission's ability to protect refugees
and displaced persons and to assist the Haitian
National Police.

We welcome the stabilization of the security
situation following the earthquake, which could have
unleashed social upheaval. However, security remains
fragile owing to the increase in mafia-type activities
following the escape of prisoners after the earthquake;
in violence, including armed aggressions, sexual
violence and others; and in drug trafficking, which
does not seem to have been affected by the earthquake.
We call for the strengthening of the rule of law and the
reform and promotion of justice.

We are alarmed by the deteriorating humanitarian
situation, especially in the refugee camps, where
1.3 million people are living in 1,300 camps. What
makes their situation even more tragic is the lack of a
plan for building permanent shelters in the near future.
We call on donors to honour the pledges they made at
the March donors conference as soon as possible. Haiti
has to date received only $506 million - barely 19 per
cent of the funds pledged.

We reaffirm the importance of the ownership of
the Haitian Government and people, and hope that
Haiti will be able to play a lead role in the recovery
process.

