Mr. Krokhmal (Ukraine): I join previous
speakers in thanking the Secretary-General for his
comprehensive report on the situation in East Timor
and on the activities of the United Nations Transitional
Administration in East Timor (UNTAET). Our thanks
go also to Mr. Hedi Annabi for his introduction of the
report and for his comments this morning.

It was with deep sadness that we learned that on
24 July an UNTAET patrol investigating a cross-border
incursion in the Cova Lima district was attacked with
automatic fire and that a New Zealand citizen, Private
Leonard William Manning, was killed in that incident.
We express our profound condolences to the family and
to the Government of New Zealand. We strongly urge
the Indonesian authorities and UNTAET officials to
investigate the incident thoroughly and to bring to
justice all those responsible for this crime without
delay.

Although I agree with the evaluation of many
previous speakers, that UNTAET has managed to halt
political violence and that the security situation in East
Timor is generally stable, I note that there are still
challenges before us. More than once, it has been
pointed out in this Chamber that the Council should be
given an opportunity to consider the whole military and
security situation in East Timor and to receive a
specific briefing on that issue. We believe it is essential
that the Council receive the most detailed and accurate
information on the security situation on the ground.

The security situation is of obvious relevance to
the return of refugees. Mr. Annabi mentioned that the
registration of refugees has been indefinitely postponed
owing to attacks on workers attached to the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR) by militia members earlier this month. We
condemn those attacks, and we believe that the
UNHCR should be given all the support it needs to
attain its objectives.

We strongly support the role of UNTAES in
guiding East Timor through its transition to
independence. The establishment on 14 July of the
National Council and the reorganization of UNTAET to
include direct participation by East Timorese were of
vital importance. The "Timorization" of the
Transitional Administration is of fundamental interest
to the local communities at this stage, and is conducive
to long-term success in terms of independence for East
Timor.

We are pleased to see that more and more East
Timorese people are involved in the reconstruction
process. We were encouraged to hear from Mr. Annabi
that a number of projects to provide employment for
them are being successfully carried out by the
UNTAET trust fund and by United Nations agencies.

We could continue to highlight significant
advances in the difficult task of promoting
reconciliation and reconstruction in East Timor. At the
same time, it is clear to us that there are still serious
and difficult obstacles. It falls to the Security Council
and to the entire international community to continue
to play an active and leading role in implementing what
was agreed upon in resolution 1272 (1999).
In conclusion, we pay tribute to UNTAET and to
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello, for their efforts.

