Mr. Cunningham (United States of America): The
Council has three goals today: to review the sanctions on
Iraq, to examine the state of Iraq's oil production capacity
and look to allocations in that field, and to assess progress
on the humanitarian sections of resolution 1284 (1999).
Taking a comprehensive look at the humanitarian situation
to focus improvements even more sharply is also a process
envisaged in that resolution. Today my delegation will offer
constructive ideas in all of these areas. Given the questions
posed in recent weeks about the situation in Iraq, I hope it
will be helpful to the Council to review fully how the
United States approaches this important subject.

To accomplish our first goal - assessing Iraqi
sanctions - it would be useful to recall how we got here
in the first place. In 1990 and 1991, Iraq attempted to
annihilate its neighbour, strip it of its property and
resources, and seize its oil. The Security Council and a
strong international response prevented Iraq from
succeeding. Following the conflict, the international
community decided it had to disarm Iraq of weapons of
mass destruction and ensure that it would not again become
a threat to international peace and security.

I trust that no one here today will suggest that that
goal has been achieved. Iraq remains a threat. Unanswered
questions remain in the areas of nuclear, chemical and
biological weapons, and of the missiles to deliver them.
And, given the long pattern of unacceptable Iraqi
behaviour, including public rejection of resolution 1284
(1999), there will be a need to monitor Iraq's weapons of
mass destruction capability for some time to come. In the
meantime, sanctions are the leverage the international
community has to get the Government of Iraq to comply
with Security Council resolutions. That is the goal. And,
as the Secretary-General just told us, that is the solution.
But so long as Iraq is not meeting its obligations under
Security Council resolutions, sanctions remain essential.

I would like to speak now about Iraq's
responsibilities. As the Secretary-General's report makes
clear, the oil-for-food programme will never supplant the
responsibilities of the Government of Iraq to provide for
the needs of its people. It was designed to alleviate the
impact of sanctions on the Iraqi people. But because Iraq
continues to evade its obligations, sanctions have
continued for a period unimagined. At the same time, the
Iraqi regime's refusal over time to fulfil its
responsibilities to care for and feed its own people was
also unimagined and still remains hard to comprehend.

A country that once spent a billion dollars on
education sustains a bloated military-industrial complex
instead. Iraq has consistently underspent on education,
and has chosen to build palaces over building schools.
Even now, seven phases into the programme, Iraq
consistently under-orders foodstuffs and has never met the
minimum calorie and protein targets set by the Secretary-
General, despite record-setting revenues under the oil-for-
food programme.

My delegation has circulated a set of printed charts
to which I would like to refer in the course of my
discussion. Chart 1 shows that, despite growing revenues
and despite daily caloric values for the Iraqi people of
less than the Secretary-General's recommendation of
2,463 kilocalories per person per day, the purchase of
food has remained flat. Even when given the opportunity
properly to feed the Iraqi population, the Government of
Iraq chooses not to do so.

In the meantime, the Iraqi regime has found the
money and the personnel to sow tens of thousands of
landmines within its own borders. Landmines placed by
the regime between 1992 and 1997 have caused more
than 15,000 casualties, of which 15 per cent were
children. The Secretary-General tells us that in areas
where the United Nations has been able to conduct
demining, significant progress has been made in
agriculture and reforestation. Sadly, this kind of

 

improvement has occurred only in the north because Iraq
has banned - placed a permanent hold on, if you will -
United Nations demining activity anywhere else in the
country.

No one denies that Iraq's poor oilfield management
practices and lack of spare parts have resulted in critical
circumstances for its oil production capacity. Yet, at the
same time, Iraq has converted container ports into oil
depots and has brought on line new facilities to export
petroleum products in order to steal money Via smuggling,
money that otherwise would have been destined to the
escrow account and the Iraqi people.

While Iraq was asking for needed international drought
relief assistance, it obtained the resources needed to drain
the southern Amarah and Hammar marshes, causing
environmental damage of historic proportions and
destroying entire villages. Saddam Hussein was able to
build the private lakes around his palaces and build
amusement parks for the elite. We have an example in
visual aid 2, which is a photograph of the Abu Ghuray'b
Presidential Grounds. We can see the water devoted to that
particular installation - not to mention the palace itself.

The warehousing of supplies, the wilful neglect of
specific humanitarian sectors, such as the food basket, the
under-ordering of medicines and nutritional supplements,
the siphoning off of goods to agents of the regime, the
illegal re-exportation of humanitarian supplies, the
establishment of front companies, the payment of kickbacks
to manipulate and gain from oil-for-food contracts - these
and other practices are well documented. Such abuses ebb
and flow at the whim of Iraq's leadership.

Many of our friends have privately complained about
Iraq's subtle and not-so-subtle intimidation of companies
that have filed claims with the Compensation Commission.
Agents of the regime have pressured them to drop those
claims in order to be considered for contracts in the oil-for-
food programme. An informal system metes out economic
reward and punishment, both inside Iraq and out, to
companies and nations in exchange for perceived political
support.

Iraq is not fulfilling its responsibilities. It is hard to
measure the impact of Iraqi obstruction on the broadest
scale. For example, the fact that the Government of Iraq
refuses to divulge or make transparent financial figures and
statistics makes it difficult, if not impossible, to judge the
country's general economic situation. Iraq's tendency to
keep printing currency to finance its budget deficits fuels
the rise in local prices for staple foods.

The United Nations and others have documented
three ongoing Iraqi Government tactics that, to say the
least, have a negative impact on the population: the
indiscriminate bombardment of civilian settlements and
arbitrary killings; the arbitrary arrest and detention of
suspected criminals and so-called traitors; and forced
displacement. The no-fly zones were established to
alleviate the most egregious examples of attacks on the
vulnerable population groups in the north and south.
While no-fly zone patrols cannot prevent every
depredation against Iraqi minorities, their enforcement has
prevented wholesale genocide. In terms of arbitrary arrest,
the human rights Rapporteur points out that in Iraq there
is no freedom of speech or action, since the mere
suggestion that someone is not a supporter of the
President carries the prospect of the death penalty. This
should be kept in mind when we are confronted in United
Nations reports with statistics whose main source is the
regime.

Finally, Iraq remains the country with the highest
number of disappearances reported to the Working Group
on Enforced or Involuntary Disappearances. Moreover,
persons displaced by the regime are deprived of needed
humanitarian relief on the grounds that they are
"temporary residents" of the places to which they have
been banished.

The key areas I have just cited are directly
mentioned in paragraph 27 of Security Council resolution
1284 (1999). That paragraph outlines specific tasks Iraq
must perform to do its part to assuage the suffering of the
Iraqi people. My delegation would like more information
on what Iraq has or has not done in this regard, since the
Secretary-General's report did not detail this needed area
of implementation.

Let us be clear. Sanctions by themselves are not the
problem. The sanctions on Iraq have never targeted the
Iraqi people and have not limited the import of food and
medicine. Where there has been deprivation in Iraq, the
Iraqi regime is responsible, due to both its failure to meet
its obligations under Security Council resolutions and its
cynical manipulation of civilian suffering in an effort to
obtain the lifting of sanctions without compliance.

I have already mentioned the concerns addressed by
two of the special assessment panels created by the
Council early last year, and this is a good time to mention

 

the third - the people of Kuwait. If our humanitarian
regard is genuine, we must not forget or neglect the
families of those who remain missing since Iraq's invasion
and occupation of their country. We must not forget that
the Iraqi regime is accountable for those innocent civilians
and has failed utterly to meet its obligation to account for
them.

Similarly, we must not forget that the victims of Iraqi
aggression were not only Kuwaitis. Thousands of
individuals from Egypt, Jordan, Bangladesh, Pakistan and
a score of other nations lost property, savings or livelihood.
They are justly recouping a share of their losses through the
objective and efficient mechanism of the United Nations
Compensation Commission. More than 5 billion dollars has
been disbursed to date to claimants in dozens of countries.

Let me discuss for a moment the efforts to improve
oil-for-food and north versus south. Had the Government of
Iraq not waited years to decide to accept the oil-for-food
agreement proposed as early as 1991, millions of innocent
people would have avoided serious and prolonged suffering.
We should recall that the first shipment under oil-for-food
did not take place until March of 1997. Even when
Baghdad accepted the oil-for-food programme, it cut off the
flow of oil on several occasions, taking millions of dollars
away from the programme, most recently in December of
1999. We trust Iraq will not wait five years to accept
resolution 1284 (1999), with its important means to expand
humanitarian support. But there is also little we can do
about Iraq's cynical manipulation of its oil exports and its
people. Our challenge here in this Council is how to
improve the humanitarian situation despite Iraqi obstruction.

The oil-for-food programme is the largest
humanitarian programme in United Nations history. While
there have been growing pains, look at the notable
successes in its three years of existence: 13 million tons of
food have been delivered to the Iraqi people, and food
imports are now nearly reaching pre-war levels, as can be
seen in the graph in visual aid 3. Successful veterinary
vaccination programmes have controlled livestock
epidemics and expanded production of poultry and eggs.
One billion dollars' worth of health commodities have been
approved by the Committee established by resolution 661
(1990), and 90 per cent of the drug needs of hospital
patients are being met.

Over $1 billion worth of inputs to other sectors have
already arrived in Iraq. An additional $1.5 billion worth of
goods have been approved by the Committee but have not
yet arrived. These numbers will continue to rise.

These numbers are, of course, composite figures for
the whole country. Although all of Iraq is under the same
sanctions regime and uses the same oil-for-food
programme, the Secretary-General's report highlights
some unfortunate differences in the humanitarian situation
in the north and in the rest of Iraq. Where Baghdad is in
charge of distribution, the full benefits of oil-for-food are
not being achieved. Perhaps there are lessons to be
learned there.

Everyone is familiar with the recent United Nations
Children's Fund (UNICEF) study which found that child
mortality was below pre-war levels in the north, while in
the rest of Iraq the figures were tragically higher. The
Secretary-General's report notes that in the north, the
beneficiaries of supplementary feeding programmes have
dropped from a quarter of a million to about 80,000, as
the result of the effectiveness of that programme. When
the UNICEF report was published, Baghdad, stung by
criticism of its long-standing refusal to order nutritional
supplements, finally relented and ordered them. We are
grateful that the Secretary-General has now highlighted
Baghdad's refusal to operate supplementary feeding
programmes which the United Nations has been
advocating for years. We hope all those expressing
concerns about the people of Iraq will join us in pressing
the Government of Iraq to provide these critically needed
programmes.

In the north, full courses of drug treatment are now
being provided to those suffering from chronic illness. In
the rest of Iraq, citizens with these diseases are not being
properly treated because of erratic, uncoordinated arrivals
of needed medications. The Government of Iraq should
remedy this immediately.

In the area of vaccinations, there has just been an
overwhelmingly successful polio vaccination campaign in
the north. Where the Government of Iraq has been in
charge, there is poorer coverage in certain vaccination
categories than in 1994.

We have heard the theory in this Council that
conditions in the north are better than in the
Government-controlled areas of the south because the
north receives more assistance per capita than the south
and more attention from non-governmental organizations.
But the three northern governorates, throughout the rule
of Saddam Hussein, have been the victims of Government
policies ranging from systematic neglect to systematic
efforts at genocide. At the close of the Gulf War, a
campaign by Saddam Hussein's military forces displaced

 

approximately 1 million citizens in the north. Surely some
in this room will recall the horrific ordeal of tens of
thousands, including women, children and the infirm,
clinging to barren mountainsides in the dead of winter. In
short, the north had a long way to go when the United
Nations arrived. And if there is more non-govemmental
organization activity in the north, it is because non-
governmental organizations are welcome to operate in the
north, unlike in southern and central Iraq, where the
Government is openly hostile to extensive non-
governmental organization operations.

Therefore, my delegation would like to offer the
following proposal: if the Government of Iraq is unable to
manage oil-for-food for the maximum benefit, we believe
that United Nations agencies active in the north should be
empowered to undertake similar programmes in the south
and centre.

The bottom line is that the oil-for-food programme,
while not perfect, works for the Iraqi people, and the
Government of Iraq does not. The United Nations works for
the Iraqi people. The Government does not. Non-
governmental organizations work for the Iraqi people. The
Government does not.
I would like now to address for a moment the oil
sector. I would like to comment on the findings of the
Secretary-General. The Council is responsible for balancing
the needs of the Iraqi oil sector against the needs in other
sectors, such as food and medicine.

We observe with some disappointment that the
Secretary-General's report did not follow more closely the
pattern laid out in his February 1998 report, which outlined
needs across various sectors and the funding necessary to
meet these needs. On the basis of such an approach, the
Council asked the Secretary-General to instruct Saybolt to
lay out a comprehensive, multi-phase plan for attaining
needed revenues. The plan more than succeeded in the last
phase of oil-for-food, when the $5.2 billion cap was
exceeded. The Office of the Iraq Programme, Saybolt and
the Council should recognize that effort as a job well done.
We should not lose sight of the fact that Iraqi oil exports
are at about the pre-war level, a tremendous increase from
where they were less than a year ago. If Council members
will look at Visual aid 4 they will see that trend - how
export revenues have essentially returned to pre-war levels.

Unfortunately, a comprehensive plan for the future is
not outlined in the current report. The report does
recommend, however, an additional $300 million allocation
for the oil sector in phases VI and VII, and we support
that recommendation. In fact, the United States today
introduced a draft resolution that would do just that, and
we look forward to its early enactment.

I have another brief observation relating to the oil
sector: clearly Baghdad does not want the embarrassing
facts of the extent of its gas oil smuggling laid bare. A
simple Saybolt analysis of refinery production, which Iraq
refuses, would show the extent to which Iraq is keeping
revenues from the oil-for-food programme.

As Council delegations heard in the Multinational
Interception Force briefing to the sanctions Committee
yesterday, hundreds of millions of dollars' worth of gas
oil are being smuggled out of Iraq, with the proceeds
going not for oil-for-food humanitarian imports but to the
regime and its cronies. The regime is also spending the
revenue under its control to fund terrorist activities. As
the United States State Department spokesman will detail
later today, the Government of Iraq has constructed a new
headquarters in Iraq for the terrorist group, the
Mujahedin-e Khalq.

No one has seen evidence that any of this money has
been spent for humanitarian relief. Quite the contrary,
smuggling steals money from the oil-for-food programme
and puts it to illicit purposes. If Council members will
look at visual aid 5, they will find a chart that
demonstrates the dramatic rise in illegal Iraqi oil exports
since September.

Smuggling is at historic levels. We believe the
Council should act to designate authorized routes for
refined product. We propose that Al Faw, an export
facility in the Gulf about to become operational, and Abu
Flus, a facility currently used for smuggling oil and
capable of exporting at least 100,000 barrels of oil per
day, be designated for United Nations-monitored export
of refined product. Such a step would have the additional
value of restricting any potential use of these facilities for
smuggling. As we have consistently proposed in the past,
it is time to bring all of Iraq's petroleum and petroleum
product revenues under the oil-for-food programme so
that the full potential of the programme can be realized.
Another $500 million to $800 million annually added to
the escrow account would provide an even more robust
programme in all sectors.

Now I would like to say a few words about holds.
The United States was the original sponsor of the
oil-for-food programme, just as we were an early

 

supporter what was then called "the comprehensive
resolution", which became resolution 1284 (1999). Even as
we insist on compliance, we continue to support
oil-for-food and have played a key role in its
implementation since its inception. The oil-for-food
programme works, and works admirably, despite
manipulation by the Iraqi regime. The great majority of
goods requested - about 90 percent over the life of the
programme so far - are approved.

There is always room for improvement, however. We
will work in the Security Council and the Committee
established by resolution 661 (1990) to put into action what
works best. We have a number of ideas on which we are
already working, and some we will suggest today.

I want to thank the Office of the Iraq Programme for
the work it has done both to improve the quality of contract
submissions and to highlight holds of particular concern, as
was done during the drought and with regard to foot-and-
mouth disease. As a result, the United States released a
number of holds in both areas. In his report the
Secretary-General called for the removal of a hold on a
critical dredging contract for the port of Umm Qasr; and we
have done so.

I want to describe our policy on reviewing and
approving oil-for-food contracts. The United States review
of contracts is guided by two principles that are
fundamental to the Security Council's consideration of Iraq:
preventing Iraq from acquiring the means to again threaten
regional stability and improving the Iraqi people's
humanitarian situation. Maintaining a judicious balance
between these two objectives is a very serious responsibility
from which the United States will not shrink.

In fact, the great preponderance of all goods requested
has been approved since the oil-for-food programme began.
Complaints about United States holds are focused on a
small percentage of contracts presented to the sanctions
Committee.

Our responsibility to the Security Council and to the
region lead us to take this process very seriously. Decisions
on contract holds and releases of holds by the United States
are taken after careful, technical scrutiny. Political priorities
play no role. While we recognize that not all Member
States have the resources to assess thoroughly all contracts,
it is clear, I regret to say, that some Member States that
could do a thorough review have not.

Let us take a clear look at the holds the United
States has. We have about 1,000 contracts on hold out of
the more than 10,000 contracts received by the
Secretariat. For more than one third of these contracts, we
are awaiting requested information from the supplier
about either the goods, the end use or the end user. As
the Executive Director of the Office of the Iraq
Programme noted in its recent paper on holds,

"some 50 per cent of holds could either be avoided
entirely, or the amount of time involved substantially
reduced, if all concerned put more effort into the
provision of appropriate and timely information."

These are called "US holds", but they are really holds
caused by the failure to prepare an adequate submission.

We ask all Member States that are presenting
contracts to the Committee established by resolution 661
(1990) to ensure that contract information is as complete
as possible when the contract is originally submitted. For
example, if one of your firms wants to sell pumps to Iraq,
you should be aware that some pumps are on the list
stemming from resolution 1051 (1996) - that is, the
Security Council's agreed list of dual-use products. We
have to know the materials used in their construction to
determine whether they are dual-use. If that information
is not in the contract, we have to put the contract on hold
while the question is being answered. Vague terms, such
as "spare parts and accessories" or "laboratory
equipment" will again draw questions. Therefore, it would
expedite the process and be much easier for everyone if
we had the information in the original contract
submission. So let us put those holds - more than one
third of the total - off to the side.

There are nearly 400 holds on contracts which pose
resolution 1051 (1996) or other dual-use concerns. On
dual-use items that do not fall under the provisions of that
resolution, many times the concerns of our experts can be
satisfied through additional information or monitoring
arrangements. But we are not prepared to act imprudently
in providing items related to weapons of mass destruction,
particularly in the absence of monitoring and disarmament
in Iraq.

We place a heavy emphasis on ensuring that dual-
use items, such as those on the resolution 1051 (1996)
list, are not permitted into Iraq. Until the United Nations
Monitoring, Verification and Inspection Commission
(UNMOVIC) and the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA) are able to resume their responsibilities

 

in Iraq, including monitoring of such goods, it would be
inappropriate and, indeed, dangerous to approve contracts
for most such goods. We believe that every member of the
Council should hold on such goods, particularly now that
contracts are being marked as containing resolution 1051
(1996) items.

The Council agreed that items on the resolution 1051
(1996) list were serious enough inputs into weapons of
mass destruction to require monitoring by the United
Nations Special Committee (UNSCOM) or the IAEA if
exported to Iraq. Yet some members are not only approving
these contracts, but complaining about United States holds
on such items. We would appreciate an explanation from
other members, particularly those most critical of our holds
on dual-use goods, providing information about their own
criteria for reviewing and approving contracts on resolution
1051 (1996) items and other dual-use items - items which
could enhance the Government of Iraq's ability to obtain,
make or utilize weapons of mass destruction. We are
surprised that the Secretary-General's report did not
comment favourably on the Council's decision that weapons
inspectors monitor resolution 1051 (1996) items.

Where we can improve? At the moment, the United
States has 339 contracts on hold because we have not
reviewed additional information that we have received. For
these, the ball is clearly in our court. This category is
constantly in flux, as holds are cleared out on the basis of
additional information and new contracts are placed on hold
because of inadequate information. Our staffing of these
reviews has not kept pace with the recent sharp increase in
the number of contracts presented and the new requirement
to review contracts within a target of two days. We admit
that it is inappropriate to keep contractors waiting for
lengthy periods for responses to their additional
information, and we are tightening our procedures with a
goal of much quicker response times.

We are also examining our review criteria with the
goal of concentrating our holds on the items of most
serious concern. We began a process this week to re-
examine contracts on hold against these criteria. About 90
contracts were reviewed. Of these, about 70 will be taken
off hold today. This is a large percentage of the contracts
for which complete information is available and resolution
1051 (1996) items are not involved. While I must admit
that we began this process by looking at holds which we
found the most questionable under our current standards,
and that future meetings may not yield such a high
percentage of holds removed, we are re-evaluating our
holds in the light of current circumstances. I will be talking
more later about monitoring of oil-for-food goods, and
how this can also help reduce holds.

There are other categories of holds, too. We have on
hold 14 oil-for-food contracts containing items destined
for the unauthorized export facility at Khor al-Amaya.
When there are so many urgent needs in Iraq, it is
unconscionable for the Government of Iraq to divert
precious resources to a facility which the Council has not
decided that Iraq may use. We have repeatedly urged the
Office of the Iraq Programme to withdraw these contracts
in order to release funds for needed oil spare parts and
equipment.

We are also holding 55 contracts for goods destined
for the Basrah refinery, from which Iraq produces gas oil
which it smuggles out of Iraq in violation of sanctions.
The profits from this illicit trade are used by the
Government of Iraq to procure items prohibited by
sanctions, including luxuries for members of Saddam's
inner circle. The Multinational Interception Force reported
yesterday to the Committee the facts on Gulf smuggling.

We have 166 contracts on hold because they are
linked to companies that have operated or are operating
in Violation of sanctions. Some of these companies are
Iraqi fronts, operating illegally, which funnel oil-for-food
programme revenues directly to the highest levels of the
Iraqi regime. Information about our concerns is provided
to the country capitals submitting these contracts. We ask
submitting States to make every effort to ensure that all
companies submitting contracts to the Committee
established under resolution 661 (1990) are abiding by
sanctions.

Finally, a small number of contracts - 16 of
them - with irregular financial terms have been placed
on hold. We regret that, to date, the sanctions Committee
has been unable to reach consensus on the appropriateness
of these terms.

The Council anticipated Iraqi attempts to abuse the
humanitarian programme, and it wisely mandated a
rigorous review process. A relatively small number of
problematic contracts have not been implemented, but the
vast majority have been approved. As the Secretariat
reported in its analysis of holds, in most sectors, holds
have caused relatively minor shortages.

In reviewing oil-for-food contracts, the United States
has acted, and will continue to act, strictly and objectively
in accordance with the arms-control policies defined by

 

the Council in its resolutions. Our holds are not politically
motivated, nor are they driven by calculations of
commercial prospect or gain. Not all critics of our holds
policy can say the same.

I should like to say a word about United Nations
monitoring and reporting. The best way to reduce the
number of holds is to provide some sort of guarantee that
contracted goods go to approved purposes, and the best way
to achieve this is through better monitoring arrangements,
building on arrangements already in place. Of course, the
absence of UNMOVIC and IAEA monitors significantly
complicates the monitoring picture. But let us for a moment
focus on other aspects of United Nations monitoring.

When the oil-for-food programme began, revenue per
phase was about $2 billion and most purchases were of
food and medicine. During the most recent six-month
phase, revenues were over $7 billion, and most likely they
will be still higher in the current phase. The growth in oil-
for-food purchases has not been in food and medicine but
in sectors such as electricity, water and sanitation and oil
production. While food and medicine generally do not raise
dual-use concerns, these other sectors may.

Despite this enormous growth, the number of United
Nations monitors in Iraq has remained the same, with the
exception of Saybolt and Cotecna monitors, since the
programme began. We applaud the diligence of the
monitors in Iraq, but increased United Nations monitoring
clearly is essential to keep pace with programme growth.
While we welcome any suggestions in this regard, we point
to the Saybolt model as one which bears examining. The
United Nations has contracted with Saybolt to do
assessments of the Iraqi oil sector and to provide monitors
with sectoral expertise. We think this model could be used
in other sectors, such as electricity, and we want to explore
this possibility with the Office of the Iraq Programme and
other Member States.
In addition to being concerned about the number of
monitors, we are concerned about technical expertise and a
better balance between technical experts and humanitarian
workers in the monitoring staff.

A third area of concern is reporting back to the
Committee. Again, we call attention to the Saybolt model.
The Committee should receive more information on a
regular basis.

The United States is already consulting with the Office
of the Iraq Programme on the measures outlined above, and
we ask others in the Council to lend support. If there
were more monitors, with stronger technical
qualifications, reporting more frequently and in greater
detail to the Committee, the United States would be
placing fewer holds on items because it would have
greater assurance concerning the proper monitoring of oil-
for-food inputs. So let us do this quickly.

We view resolution 1284 (1999) as a vehicle for a
robust improvement of the humanitarian situation in Iraq,
and we want to see all aspects of it implemented as
rapidly as possible. All of the humanitarian provisions
requiring action by the Council or Committee have been
completed or are in progress. I note in particular that the
sanctions Committee and the Office of the Iraq
Programme have completed work on the initial lists of
pre-approved items for food, food handling, health
supplies, education and agriculture. We expect these lists
to be dynamic, not static, as new items are added.

Furthermore, as called for in paragraph 26 of the
resolution, the Council approved a plan to allow Iraqi
pilgrims to perform the Hajj. Baghdad's refusal to accept
this plan was inexplicable and extremely disappointing.

The sanctions Committee has also made substantial
progress on implementation of paragraph 18, which would
set up a panel of oil experts. We expect this paragraph to
be operational very soon.

What is ironic about this discussion is that, while the
Council and the sanctions Committee have worked
diligently, the Government of Iraq has done nothing but
speak of rejection and non-cooperation. While today's
discussion is about the humanitarian situation, we must
also note that there are other critical aspects of resolution
1284 (1999) that are also humanitarian in nature,
including disarmament and the issues of Kuwaiti prisoners
of war and property. The Council must remain united in
its efforts to persuade Iraq to accept all aspects of
resolution 1284 (1999).
In concluding this long review, it cannot be
overemphasized that the Government of Iraq bears the
primary responsibility for the welfare of its people. I must
frankly state my disappointment that the
Secretary-General, in his reports, has not reported in
detail on Iraqi progress in meeting its obligations under
paragraph 27 of resolution 1284 (1999). I would like to
ask the Secretary-General and whomever he will appoint
to head United Nations programmes in Iraq - an
appointment which we hope is coming soon - to be

 

much more vigorous in reminding the Government of Iraq
of its obligations and to report regularly to the Council.

We would now like to see what the Government of
Iraq is contributing to the education of its children and to
the better health of its citizens. We are constantly told by
Baghdad that oil-for-food is not doing enough, but what has
the regime done?

Another task for the new head of the United Nations
programme should be to draw up a plan for assisting
vulnerable groups, perhaps in consultation with the
International Committee of the Red Cross. This plan should
include an invitation to humanitarian organizations to
describe projects they would be willing to undertake in
southern and central Iraq. In northern Iraq, United Nations
agencies and non- governmental organizations are improving
the lives of ordinary Iraqis. There is no reason Iraqis
throughout the country should not have access to such
assistance.

Reporting on distribution of supplies by sector is
greatly appreciated. These reports continue to show that
critical oil-for-food inputs are not being distributed in a
timely manner. We request that the new head of the United
Nations Programme in Iraq, as one of his or her first tasks,
be charged with drafting a comprehensive plan for
eliminating backlogs in distribution across all sectors, just
as we are doing on holds.

We support the efforts of the Secretary-General to
ensure that contracts are submitted by Iraq at a smooth
pace, not bunched together at the end of a phase. We would
also support more clarity in the distribution plan. I would
also ask the Secretariat to inform the Council of the date it
should expect to receive the prioritized list of humanitarian
applications called for in resolution 1284 (1999).

I also note that we have no information that Iraq has
dropped the requirement that the involuntarily displaced
establish six months' residence before receiving assistance.
We would welcome reporting on this matter.
Finally, my delegation would like to know what the
prospect is for initiating de-mining in other parts of Iraq.

To sum up, we hope that all of our constructive
suggestions can and will be put into effect. We call on Iraq
to implement the recommendations made by the Secretary-
General in his report. The Government of Iraq must
immediately use a project-based approach to contracts;
share baseline data or collaborate with the Office of the
Iraq Programme to collect it where none is available;
share data on the northern electrical grid; consider
employing pre-shipment inspection agents and use better
suppliers; strengthen cooperation with monitors; ensure
regular distribution of a full food basket; implement a
supplementary feeding programme; and, until it can be
surpassed, meet the target calories per day.

The last chart we have distributed clearly
demonstrates the positive impact of the oil-for-food
programme on improving the food basket. It also shows
that Iraq, right now, could - though it has chosen not
to - put together a food basket that would dramatically
improve the nutritional status of the Iraqi people. Iraq
should also establish efficient distribution networks for
targeted nutrition and supplementary feeding programmes;
ensure adequate funding for basic public health care; and
improve delivery and administration of drugs for chronic
illnesses.

With regard to the Secretary-General's
recommendations for the Committee established by
resolution 661 (1990), we welcome further discussion on
contract payment mechanisms and oil overseers. As I
noted earlier, we are working to make our contract review
procedures more rapid and transparent.

We believe that resolution 1284 (1999) holds the key
to realizing more fully the potential of the oil-for-food
programme. This is the first time such a massive
programme has been undertaken by the United Nations
and the successes of the programme to date are an
enormous tribute to the hard-working men and women of
the United Nations, whose vision, determination and
dedication have made the programme the success it is
today. We look forward to an even better programme as
resolution 1284 (1999) is implemented.

