Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): It is regrettable that the
Council could not adopt draft resolution S/2017/884,
renewing the mandate of the Joint Investigative
Mechanism, which was created based on consensus. The
reason why we voted in favour of the draft resolution
is because there are still credible allegations of the
use of chemical weapons under investigation by the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
Fact-finding Mission in the Syrian Arab Republic, and
the work of the Mechanism is not yet over.

Webelieve thatthe Mechanismremainsanimportant
mechanism to establish those responsible for the use of
chemical weapons in Syria, both State and non-State
actors. We are also convinced by the explanation of
the High Representative for Disarmament Affairs,
Ms. Izumi Nakamitsu, that renewing the Mechanism's
mandate in a matter that ensures institutional continuity
and stability, drawing lessons from the experience of
last year, was crucial.

Despite today's outcome, we are hopeful that every
possible effort will continue to be made to restore the
Council's unity and achieve the necessary compromise
to renew the Mechanism's mandate. The Mechanism's
existence is indispensable as a deterrent to the use of
chemical weapons, not only in Syria, but also in the
wider region. Without a mechanism to clearly establish
responsibility, the Council would be sending the wrong
message to the perpetrators of this heinous crime.

Of course, we know the final report of the
Mechanism will be coming out shortly, and the way we
voted today should in no way be interpreted as an a
priori endorsement of the report or even the slackening
of our resolve to be as objective as possible, focusing
on the technical work of the Mechanism, from which
we expect the highest level of objectivity and fidelity
to what the facts of the case dictate. Its final report is
expected to establish clear responsibility on the Om
Hush and Khan Shaykhun incidents.

Our position has always been consistent. Those
responsible for the use of chemical weapons in Syria
should be punished based on robust and conclusive
evidence. It is impossible to overlook the concerns
of the Russian Federation and Bolivia. That is why
the Mechanism has an enormous responsibility to be
objective and to avoid the appearance of politicizing the
matter, which for some already appears to be politicized.

It is also a matter of self-respect for members of the
Mechanism, as well as its Chair, to be as scrupulous
as possible in that regard. I can assure the Russian
Federation and Bolivia that our standard is very high,
and we will not accept shoddy work. As we have stated
repeatedly, we attach great importance to this matter
of the use of chemical weapons not only because we
are a member of the Council and a signatory to the
Convention on the Prohibition of the Development,
Production, Stockpiling and Use of Chemical Weapons
and on Their Destruction, but also because of historical
reasons which are not necessary to delve into at this
point. Therefore, we will take an appropriate position,
based on the content of the upcoming report, which,
we believe, has to be robust and reliable, both in its
methodologies and in its conclusions.

