Ms. Kane: There have been dramatic
developments in both Israel and the occupied
Palestinian territory this past month, including the
serious illness of Israeli Prime Minister Ariel Sharon
and the victory, just a few days ago, of the Change and
Reform list of Hamas in the Palestinian Legislative
Council elections.

The Quartet principals met last night in London.
A new Palestinian Government has not yet been
formed. In these circumstances, I am sure that the
Council will understand if I confine myself to remarks
that are brief and factual.

Let me turn first to Israeli political developments.
Prime Minister Sharon suffered a significant stroke on
4 January. He remains in an extremely serious but
stable condition in hospital in Jerusalem. The
Secretary-General continues to hope for his recovery.

Vice-Prime Minister Ehud Olmert immediately
took over as Acting Prime Minister, and was
subsequently confirmed by the Knesset to that position
on 16 January. Mr. Olmert has stated Israel's
commitment to a resolution of the conflict in
accordance with the road map, while leaving open the
possibility of further unilateral measures in the West
Bank.

I should like now to turn to Palestinian political
developments. On 25 January, Palestinian Legislative
Council elections were held throughout Gaza and the
West Bank - including in East Jerusalem, after the
Israeli Cabinet agreed to allow 6,300 of the
approximately 120,000 eligible voters to vote in six
post offices, consistent with the precedents set by the
Oslo Accords and the 1996 and 2005 elections.
Overall, 77 per cent of registered voters cast their votes
for a new legislature.

The election was observed by approximately
20,000 national observers and 1,000 international
observers, including missions from the European
Union, the National Democratic Institute and the
Carter Center, and Canada. Overall, the observers
concluded that the campaign took place in a relatively
calm atmosphere, with an absence of provocative
rhetoric. Israeli authorities generally eased travel
through checkpoints to facilitate freedom of movement
on election day, although candidates, campaign
workers and election workers were at times unable to
move satisfactorily through checkpoints during the
campaign period.

The Secretary-General, who had issued a
personal message of support to the Palestinian people
prior to the election, telephoned Palestinian Authority
President Abbas to congratulate him and the
Palestinian people on this important milestone in the
building of Palestinian democratic institutions.

In accordance with the official results announced
by the Central Elections Commission, the Change and
Reform list of Hamas won a majority consisting of 74
seats. The Fatah list won 45 seats, with the remaining
13 seats going to smaller parties and independents.

President Abbas indicated that he would
immediately begin consultations on the establishment
of a new Government. Referring to the obligations and
responsibilities that will fall on it, the President cited

"Palestinian-Israeli agreements starting with the
Oslo Accords and the Arab Summit resolutions
and ending with the resolutions that have been
agreed upon by the international community, in
particular the road map as the sole framework
that is being posed now for implementation".

Hamas leaders have expressed their wish to
explore a Government in which Change and Reform
works with other groups that represent the Palestinian
people. Consultations on the formation of a
Government are continuing.

Let me turn now to the Quartet meeting in
London. Last night, the Secretary-General met with his
Quartet colleagues in London to discuss the political
situation in the aftermath of the election, to address the
urgent crisis of Palestinian finances and to consider the
way forward on security-sector performance and
reform. The Quartet was briefed by Quartet Special
Envoy James Wolfensohn and United States Security
Coordinator Keith Dayton. Former United States
President Jimmy Carter also shared his impressions
after having headed the recent electoral observer
mission.

The Quartet congratulated the Palestinian people
on an electoral process that was free, fair and secure. It
welcomed President Abbas's affirmation that the
Palestinian Authority is committed to the road map,
previous agreements and obligations between the
parties, and a negotiated two-State solution to the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict. The Quartet expressed the
view that all members of a future Palestinian
Government must be committed to non-violence,
recognition of Israel and acceptance of previous
agreements and obligations, including the road map.

Mindful of the needs of the Palestinian people,
the Quartet discussed the issue of assistance to the
Palestinian Authority. First, the Quartet expressed its
concern about the fiscal situation of the Palestinian
Authority and urged measures to facilitate the work of
the caretaker Government to stabilize public finances,
taking into consideration established fiscal-
accountability reform benchmarks. Secondly, the
Quartet concluded that it was inevitable that future
assistance to any new Government would be reviewed
by donors against that Government's commitment to
the principles of non-violence, recognition of Israel
and acceptance of previous agreements and
obligations, including the road map.

Let me turn now to other issues. While the
Palestinian Authority security forces helped to
maintain order during the recent elections, there were
numerous and varied serious security incidents during
the reporting period, many in or emanating from the
Gaza Strip. Those events underlined the need for the
Palestinian Authority to ensure law and order and take
action against terrorism, as reiterated by the Quartet
last night. The events included kidnappings, attacks on
official buildings and installations, breaches of the
border between Gaza and Egypt, Qassam rocket fire
into southern Israel and suicide bombings for which
Islamic Jihad claimed responsibility.

Israel responded to terror attacks and the firing of
rockets by tightening the closure regime, launching air
strikes on areas in the Gaza Strip, conducting lethal
ground operations in the West Bank and carrying out
targeted killings. Barrier construction and land-
levelling in occupied Palestinian territory continued in
the reporting period, despite the ruling of the
International Court of Justice. Earlier this month, the
Israeli Defence Minister ordered that work be resumed
on three sections of the barrier in Jerusalem, which had
earlier been frozen following an order of the Israeli
High Court of Justice. In addition, retroactive permits
were issued for the construction of the Modi'in Illit
settlement neighbourhood of Matityahu East, which is
being built on land belonging to the Palestinian village
of Bil'in.

At yesterday's meeting, the Quartet reiterated its
view that settlement expansion must stop and its
concerns about the route of the barrier. It also took note
of Acting Prime Minister Olmert's recent statements
that Israel will continue the process of removing
unauthorized outposts.

The resisting of eviction notices by eight settler
families living in the wholesalers' market in Hebron
led the Israeli Defence Forces to declare the Jewish
Quarter of Hebron a closed military zone on 16
January. That declaration was lifted three days later,
after the settlers promised to maintain order. The
security forces announced that the evacuation of the
wholesale market in Hebron and the Amona settlement
outpost would be deferred until after the Palestinian
election.

I should like now to turn to Lebanon. In view of
the recent report and briefing to the Council on the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL), I
will not go into details of the situation along the Blue
Line. Four Katyusha rockets were fired from Lebanon,
of which three landed in the Galilee on 27 December,
causing heavy property damage to one Kiryat Shmona
apartment building. Israel reacted with restraint. There
have been 17 Israeli air violations of the Blue Line
since the last briefing. Lebanon has not reacted to any
of those violations. In addition to UNIFIL's efforts on
the ground, the Special Coordinator and the Personal
Representative of the Secretary-General for Lebanon
have continued consultations in order to explore ways
to reduce tension along the Blue Line.

Prime Minister Siniora has continued to bolster
his efforts aimed at securing national unity.
Discussions are taking place between various Lebanese
parties to resolve the current differences among them.
Positive moves have also been made towards initiating
a national dialogue, the necessity of which has been
accepted by all.

On 19 January, the new Commissioner of the
United Nations International Independent Investigation
Commission (UNIIIC), Mr. Serge Brammertz, arrived
in Lebanon to take up his new position. In accordance
with Security Council resolution 1644 (2005), Mr.
Brammertz will extend the Commission's technical
assistance to the Lebanese authorities with regard to
their investigations into the terrorist attacks that have
taken place since 1 October 2004.

Mr. Nicolas Michel, Under-Secretary-General for
Legal Affairs, visited Beirut on 26 and 27 January
2006. The aim of the visit was to discuss with the
Lebanese authorities the nature and scope of the
international assistance needed for the establishment of
a tribunal of an international character in keeping with
the Council mandate to the Secretary-General in
resolution 1644 (2005). The meetings were
constructive and fruitful, and Mr. Michel believes that
there is a broad basis of support for the establishment
of a tribunal of an international character. He expressed
to the authorities his great appreciation for the positive
atmosphere of the discussions and was encouraged by
the general commitment demonstrated to move ahead.
In the following days and weeks, the United Nations
will continue to work closely with the Lebanese
authorities on the matter.

Let me now conclude. As the Quartet reiterated
last night, we must remain committed to the principles
outlined in the road map and to a just, comprehensive
and lasting settlement to the Arab-Israeli conflict based
on Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338
(1973). The United Nations, through the Quartet and in
close consultation with key regional actors, will
continue to work tirelessly for that goal.

