Mr. Mahmoud (Comoros) (interpretation from French): I take great pleasure in seeing you, Sir, presiding
over the work of the Council for the month of April. I
should also like to take this opportunity to congratulate
your predecessor, His Excellency Mr. Sallah, for his strong
and effective leadership of the work of the Security Council
for the month of March. My delegation aligns itself with
the statement made by Ambassador Mapuranga of
Zimbabwe in his capacity as the current Chairman of the
Organization of African Unity (OAU), as well as that made
by Ambassador Ould Deddach of Mauritania in his capacity
as Chairman of the African Group for the month of April.

We are meeting once again to debate the prevailing
situation of conflict in Africa. As the Secretary-General,
Mr. Kofi Annan, reminds us in his report entitled "The
causes of conflict and the promotion of durable peace and
sustainable development in Africa", the resolution of
problems that continue to afflict a large part of the African
continent must take place in a voluntarist political
framework whose first task would be to introduce the basic
elements necessary for development. Such elements would
include a legal authority endowed with the means necessary
to carry out its functions, and, more broadly, a responsible
State whose first task would be to introduce the elements
necessary for ensuring that the country achieved its
economic and political potential. We believe that these are
the elements that must be stressed if a successful
transformation of our societies is to be achieved.

We fully subscribe to the ideas of the Secretary-
General, and we again assure him of our commitment to
support the steps that he takes in this direction. Similarly,
the Government of the Comoros congratulates and
encourages the OAU for establishing its Mechanism for
Conflict Prevention, Management and Resolution. Like
many Member States, we welcome the various signs of
progress and economic recovery that the African continent
has shown recently. The Afro-pessimism of the 19805 is
gradually yielding to measured yet real optimism. Many
countries have committed themselves to stabilizing their
public finances, and various ambitious national
programmes have been implemented with performance
and competitiveness as a common yardstick.

Africa has come a long way, but a great deal still
remains to be done. Indeed, if a country is to prosper and
enjoy any level of economic development, if a State is to
play its role as a guarantor of freedoms, the institutions of
the State must be able to function effectively.

For this reason, His Excellency Mohamed Taki
Abdulkarim, President of the Islamic Federal Republic of
the Comoros, has committed himself to modernizing the
economy of the Comoros. To this end, measures have
been taken with respect to the Government's rate of
expenditure and to private sectors, where various
initiatives are designed to breathe new energy into the
spirit of entrepreneurship. The necessary reform of the
public sector began with an inventory of public goods, an
auditing of resources and an examination of individual
accounts to track down abuses committed during the years
of administrative negligence and misappropriation which
marked the previous regimes.

Various development plans, including those of
foreign investors, have been studied, for the Comoros
needs, inter alia, large-scale international support that
would allow the State institutions to function effectively.
In this context, the Government of the Comoros would
ask all of you to support the Islamic Federal Republic of
the Comoros vis-a-vis the World Bank and the
International Monetary Fund regarding the adoption of a
budgetary aid programme on its behalf, and also to
advocate greater flexibility in the measures related to the
structural adjustment plans that have been drawn up for
the country.

As we said earlier, a great deal of work remains
ahead of us. Nevertheless, we are confident of our
capacity to take advantage of our natural wealth. The
Comoros islands have a wonderful coastline and a
landscape free of all industrial devastation, whose beauty
has often been praised. Despite these assets, we have real
grounds for concern.

Since its independence in 1975, my country has
unfortunately been rocked by a series of raids carried out
by European mercenaries. You will undoubtedly recall the
dramatic events of September 1995, when Comoros was
invaded by international mercenaries, which caused major
economic and social trauma. The people of Comoros have
suffered from many attempts at destabilization that have

 

been fostered abroad. The Government of the Comoros
calls on the Secretary-General to encourage the Member
States of our Organization to ratify the International
Convention against the Recruitment, Use, Financing and
Training of Mercenaries, adopted by the General Assembly
in resolution 44/34 of 4 December 1989.

There is no need for me to recall that for a year now,
separatist ideas have been emerging among the Comorian
population, particularly in the island of Anjouan, which has
been clamouring for a return to French trusteeship. The
tragic events which have occurred in the Comoros in the
past few months resulted from the unprecedented socio-
economic crisis that has so seriously afflicted my country.
Certainly, the incomplete independence of the Comoros is
also an element that should not be overlooked. The impact
of this economic and political instability has undoubtedly
forced the people of Anjouan to revolt against the Comoros
Government. Nonetheless, such a movement could not
endure without external support.

It is high time that action be taken to ensure that such
outdated acts cease to occur anywhere in the world. In a
statement of 1 August 1997, Mohamed Taki Abdulkarim
recalled that the Comoros archipelago was recognized by
the international community in General Assembly resolution
3385 (XXX) of 12 November 1975 as an independent
country comprised of four islands: Grande-Comore,
Anjouan, Moheli and Mayotte.

Decades after the adoption of this resolution, the
question of the Comorian island of Mayotte still appears on
our Organization's agenda. In a spirit of openness and
dialogue, the Government of the Comoros has made several
proposals seeking to resolve this dispute in an atmosphere
of calm and national unity. I will take this opportunity to
reiterate, on behalf of the people of the Comoros, our
deepest gratitude to the Organization of African Unity
(OAU) and its Secretary-General, His Excellency Salim
Ahmed Salim, as well as to the League of Arab States and
all the friendly countries for the decisive role they are
playing in the resolution of the conflicts in my country.

In this distinguished forum, I would like to make a
solemn appeal to the international community, and in
particular to the members of the Security Council, to assist
us in solving the problem of the dismemberment of the
Islamic Federal Republic of the Comoros and to help the
archipelago of the Comoros to enter the twenty-first century
as a reunited country.

You, Sir, would undoubtedly agree with me that, as
human beings, the Comoran people have the right to
peace, security, health, education and hope for a better
future.

