Mr. Diallo (spoke in French): I would first like
to congratulate your country, Mr. President, the
Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan, for the way in which it
is leading the work of the Council this month. Allow me
to also personally thank you for your presence and for
the statement you made on behalf of the Council at the
first meeting of 2014 of the Committee on the Exercise
of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People, held
last Thursday.

I also thank the Secretary-General for his
comprehensive briefing on the situation in the Middle
East, including the Palestinian question.

Our Committee is grateful for the continued
diplomatic efforts of the international community, and
first and foremost for the steadfast efforts of United
States Secretary of State Kerry to encourage the parties
to reach a comprehensive agreement.

The Committee calls on all parties to act responsibly
so as to create a climate conducive to productive
negotiations that will allow for a solution of all final
status issues and bring an end to the Israeli occupation,
a total Israeli military withdrawal from the Palestinian
territory occupied since 1967, including East Jerusalem,
as well as the realization of the inalienable rights of
the Palestinian people, including the right to self-
determination.

As we approach the April deadline, prospects for
peace continue to be undermined by the occupying
Power's actions on the ground, inparticularthe expansion
of settlements. Israel has announced the construction
of thousands of new settlement units since the start of
negotiations in July, the latest of which, concerning
more than 1,400 units, was announced 10 days ago. The
144 settlements, scattered throughout the occupied West
Bank and East Jerusalem and connected with each other
by roads built for the exclusive use of Israeli settlers, are
totally inconsistent with the two-State solution. Their
continued expansion undermines the Palestinians' trust
in Israel's commitment to achieving that solution. Peace

will be possible only when the occupation is brought to
an end and the State of Palestine is truly independent,
sovereign and viable.

Moreover, settlement activities constitute grave
breaches of international law. The Committee calls on
the Council, as the guarantor of international peace
and security, to uphold international law and its own
resolutions, including resolution 446 (1979), which
determined that settlements have no legal validity
and called on Israel to abide by the Fourth Geneva
Convention.

The Committee is also troubled by the recent
tensions on the border between Gaza and Israel, the
rockets fired from Gaza into Israel and the Israeli
air strikes on Gaza, all of which could undermine
the fragile ceasefire between the two sides and have
devastating consequences for the Israeli-Palestinian
peace negotiations.

The General Assembly has proclaimed 2014 the
International Year of Solidarity with the Palestinian
People and requested the Committee on the Exercise
of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People to
organize activities in cooperation with Governments,
United Nations organizations, intergovernmental
organizations and civil society. The objective of the
International Year, which was officially launched last
Thursday, is to promote the key theme of solidarity with
the Palestinian people as a contribution to international
awareness of the question of Palestine and of the
obstacles to the ongoing peace process, including the
illegal settlements. A wide range of activities is being
organized, and we count on the entire membership,
including Council members, for their cooperation and
engagement to make 2014 a historic year for the long-
overdue two-State solution.

