Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri (India): Let me begin
by welcoming you, Foreign Secretary Hague, and the
other Ministers to the Security Council. I would like to
thank the delegation of the United Kingdom for
organizing today's debate to discuss developments in
West Asia and North Africa over the past year. I would
also like to thank the Secretary-General, you
Mr. President, and the other speakers for the valuable
statements made here today. We have listened carefully
to the views expressed and hope that today's
deliberations will help the international community to
develop a more coordinated and consensual outlook to
the serious challenges posed by developments in the
region and beyond.

For more than a millennium now, societies in
West Asia and North Africa have played an important

role in world history. By virtue of the genius of their
peoples, their strategic location and, more recently,
their natural resources, those societies have attracted
considerable interest from far and wide. Over
centuries, countries in the region have built
multifaceted socio-economic and strategic linkages
with the rest of world. Developments in the region
have implications within and beyond the region, and
they naturally are of interest to the international
community.

The relationship between India and the Arab
world is unique, with age-old historic and cultural
connections. The impact of the Arab and Islamic world
on India itself has been profound and far-reaching,
giving rise to a composite culture that is rich in its
diversity and enduring in its essential unity. The region
is home to over 6 million Indians, with some of our
largest economic and trade linkages. It is also the most
important source for our energy needs and, being in our
extended neighbourhood, vitally important to India.

The unrest in West Asia and North Africa, which
began more than a year ago, has its roots in the desire
of people to play a greater role in shaping their destiny,
politically and economically. Those aspirations will not
be met through violence or armed struggle, and a
solution cannot be reached through prescriptions from
outside. In fact, given the history of foreign
interference, such prescriptions will not only be
suspect in the eyes of various segments of society, but
may also have the potential to exacerbate the problem.

In dealing with developments in West Asia and
North Africa, the international community needs to use
all the tools of diplomacy at its disposal and be there to
assist the concerned countries in transitioning to an
inclusive and participatory polity while maintaining
social stability and cohesion. Since the exact nature of
grievances varies from country to country, there is no
one set of measures that can be applied to all of them.
The solutions of the problems in each country have to
take into consideration the society's particular
circumstances and the genius of its people. However,
what is certain is that solutions cannot include
intervention through military force or arming the
civilian population. Such a course of action will only
fuel further bloodshed and instability and create new
marginalized groups. It also risks breeding extremism
and intolerance, whose adverse consequences will be
felt in the region and beyond.

I would like to recall that the Father of the Indian
nation, Mahatma Gandhi, said that "non-violence is the
greatest force at the disposal of mankind". Even during
the course of the past year, we have seen that wherever
changes have taken place without violence, not only
has normalcy returned faster but the changes have been
accepted by society as a whole. We are therefore of the
considered view that the political leaders of the
concerned countries in West Asia and North Africa
should resolve their problems through inclusive
internal political processes that meet the aspirations of
their people, in an atmosphere free of violence and
bloodshed. The principles of national sovereignty,
political independence and territorial unity and
integrity must be respected.

The international community should - including
through the auspices of the United Nations - use
diplomatic leverage and make available technical
assistance in fields such as political, security and
justice sector reforms, the drafting of new constitutions
and legal frameworks, electoral institutions and the
conduct of elections, among others. Actions based on
selective or partial interpretations of a mandate of the
United Nations must be avoided to ensure that long-
term political reconciliation is achieved among various
sections of society through peaceful, inclusive political
processes.

The international community also needs to be
galvanized to expeditiously resolve the long-pending
problem of the West Asian and North African region,
namely, the Arab-Israeli conflict, including the Israeli-
Palestinian problem. That problem cannot be allowed
to be lost in the din and preoccupations of other
developments in the region. Quite apart from the fact
that without a resolution of that conflict, developments
in West Asia and North Africa cannot be adequately
addressed, we seriously run the risk of violence if the
people of Palestine feel marginalized and sense a
complete loss of attention to their plight. Their protests
may get radicalized unless concrete action is taken to
end the occupation of Arab lands, so that all peoples in
the region can live in peace in their respective
homelands and build cooperative relations. Moreover,
the call of the international community for democratic
and political reforms sounds hollow to Palestinians and
other people in the region living under occupation. In
that connection, some important and immediate
measures need to be taken, including putting an end to
all settlement activities and favourable consideration
by this Council of the Palestinian application for
membership in the Organization.

As the world's largest democracy, India supports
measures taken by the countries in the region to
address the grievances of their people in an atmosphere
free of violence and bloodshed. India stands ready to
share its experiences with the concerned countries in
building democratic and plural political institutions and
to partner with them in such fields as the drafting of
new constitutional and legal frameworks, judicial and
security sector reforms, the creation of impartial and
independent electoral institutions for the conduct of
elections, and human resource development, including
training and technical assistance.

India will continue to support the Council in
meeting the challenge of assisting the countries of West
Asia and North Africa in implementing required
political reforms without recourse to violence or
violations of fundamental human rights, and in
building an inclusive political system that enables the
participation of all people. Only that will create long-
term peace, security and stability within the region and
beyond.

