The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of cote d'Ivoire, in which he requests to
be invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
consideration of the item without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Bailly (cote d'Ivoire) took a seat at the Council table.

The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

After consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council recalls that it
endorsed the Ouagadougou Political Agreement
as well as its supplementary agreements.

"The Security Council warmly welcomes
the approval by the Ivorian authorities of the
proposal from the Independent Electoral
Commission to organize presidential elections on
30 November 2008. It underlines that this
announcement, supported by all Ivorian parties,
and the signing by President Laurent Gbagbo of
related decrees, constitute an important step
forward. The Security Council encourages the
Ivorian parties to redouble their efforts to meet
this commitment and the international community
to bring continued support to this effect.
"The Security Council commends the
Facilitator, President Blaise Compaore of Burkina
Faso, for his continued efforts to support the
peace process in C6te d'Ivoire, in particular
through the Ouagadougou Political Agreement
follow-up mechanisms. This support for the
actions of President Laurent Gbagbo and Prime
Minister Guillaume Soro, with the active
engagement of Mr. Choi Young-Jin, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, has been
instrumental towards achieving the establishment
of a consensus among all political parties to hold
presidential elections in 2008.

"The Security Council reaffirms its full
support for the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General in C6te d'Ivoire and recalls
that he shall certify that all stages of the electoral
process provide all the necessary guarantees for
the holding of open, free, fair and transparent
presidential and legislative elections in
accordance with international standards,
consistent with paragraph 9 of resolution 1795
(2008). It fully supports, in particular, the five-
criteria framework elaborated by Mr. Choi
Young-Jin in this regard and welcomed by the
Ivorian parties.

"The Security Council welcomes the visit of
the Secretary-General to Burkina Faso and Cote
d'Ivoire from 22 to 24 April and is encouraged by
the signing, under the auspices of the Secretary-
General, of a Code of Good Conduct for elections
by all political parties.

"The Security Council welcomes the
Secretary-General's report dated 15 April 2008
(S/2008/250). It encourages the Ivorian parties to
build on the ongoing mobile courts process for
the identification of the Ivorian population and
registration of voters. The Security Council looks
forward to the publication of the electoral list as a
crucial step in the electoral process.

"The Security Council calls upon the parties
to make concrete progress to promote political
and security stability, in particular in the context
of the forthcoming presidential elections, in such
key areas as the disarmament and dismantling of
militias, the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programme, the storage of weapons,
the unification and restructuring of defence and
08-32274
security forces and the full restoration of State
authority throughout the country.

"The Security Council takes note with
appreciation of the support of bilateral and
multilateral donors, in particular the Economic
Community of West African States, the African
Union and the European Union. It calls upon
donors and the Government of Cote d'Ivoire to
make further efforts to finance the electoral
process, including through the trust fund
established by the United Nations Development
Programme to that effect, and calls upon the
authorities of Cote d'Ivoire to engage fully with
the donors. It also encourages the international
community to enhance its financial support for
the facilitation.

"The Security Council expresses its
appreciation for the role played by the United
Nations Operation in C6te d'Ivoire (UNOCI),
supported by the French forces, in contributing to
bring the security needed by the peace process
08-32274

and the logistical support required for the
preparation of the elections. It welcomes the
assessment made by the Secretary-General on the
troop level of UNOCI in his report (S/2008/250).
The Security Council will review by 30 July 2008
the mandates of UNOCI and the French forces
which support it, as well as the level of troops of
UNOCI, in accordance with paragraph 8 of
resolution 1795 (2008).

"The Security Council requests the
Secretary-General to keep it regularly informed
of the situation, including on the logistical
support that UNOCI will provide for the
elections."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2008/l l.

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 2 p.m.

