We thank Ms. Stephanie Williams for her briefing today on the situation in Libya. It has been our consistent position that the Libyan crisis can be resolved only by peaceful political and diplomatic means. We welcome the fact that the period of armed confrontation and fratricidal hostilities that has been tearing Libya apart since its statehood was destroyed in 2011 has given way to a phase of negotiations. Our principled approach to achieving settlement in Libya is based on the need to ensure that Libyans themselves make their own decisions without external interference. We have promoted the idea in various international forums that any proposals or initiatives must be approved by the Libyans themselves. When that condition is met, the chances of reaching a consensus and advancing the political process increase significantly. We commend the ceasefire agreement reached by the Libyan parties within the framework of the 5+5 Joint Military Commission. In the interests of strengthening that agreement, discussions are continuing on mutual confidence- building measures, including with regard to civilians. We welcome the steps taken to restore road connections and resume flights between the country's various regions. Those decisions will help to normalize the lives of ordinary citizens and ensure the provision of humanitarian assistance. The unification of the country's security forces is another essential element, as is making arrangements for the stable functioning of the oil industry, on the understanding that the country's natural resources belong to all Libyans. However, we are concerned about the reports of continuing violations of the Libyan arms embargo. We believe that supplies of weapons and the introduction of mercenaries fuel the conflict. That must end, especially since any provocations could disrupt the current ceasefire. The weapons that have continued to flow into Libya since 2011 create the conditions for spreading the threat of terrorism throughout the entire African continent. We believe that in the current critical situation, the States that can influence the parties in Libya should encourage them to work for further de-escalation. We have maintained a dialogue with all parties in Libya and continue to encourage them in constructive approaches. We closely monitored the progress made in the first round of talks in the Libyan Political Dialogue Forum, convened in Tunis under the auspices of the United Nations. The parties arrived at specific agreements on the principles of the transition period. However, they still have to some important issues to deal with concerning the parameters for forming effective national authorities capable of ensuring the country's unity. We believe that national dialogue requires the representation of the broadest possible spectrum of Libyan groups. That will help to ensure that Libya's entire population accepts the agreements while safeguarding the country against further ordeals. The United Nations has played the central role in achieving a settlement in Libya. We are grateful to Ms. Williams for her efforts, but at the same time we call on the Secretary-General to appoint a Special Envoy as soon as possible. That process has been unjustifiably prolonged.
