Mr. Chen Xu (China) (spoke in Chinese): We
should like to thank Under-Secretary-General Gambari
for his briefing on the situation in Angola. We
appreciate his efforts to promote peace in that country.
The peace process in Angola is currently in the process
of changing and Mr. Gambari has said that there is now
a window of hope. The situation is generally
encouraging.

We thank you, Mr. President, for having arranged
this open meeting.

Early this year, President Dos Santos made a
four-point proposal for the achievement of peace in
Angola. Since then, his Government has repeatedly
reiterated the validity of the Lusaka Protocol, indicated
its willingness to continue to strive for national
reconciliation and comprehensive peace and
emphasized its readiness to pursue, together with civil
groups in Angola, ways, formats and specific methods
to attain reconciliation and peace.

The Chinese delegation highly appreciates the
efforts made by the Angolan Government. It is
regrettable, however, that the armed faction under the
leadership of Mr. Savimbi is turning a deaf ear to the
positive proposals of the Angolan Government and
continues to engage in terrorist activities, undermining
peace in Angola and causing many casualties.
Mr. Savimbi and the armed faction under his leadership
must be held fully responsible for the repeated setbacks
in the peace process in Angola.

In such circumstances, we demand that
Mr. Savimbi and the armed faction of UNITA respond
immediately and positively to the good will of the
Angolan Government, lay down their arms and enter
peace negotiations with the Government with the
priority of exploring ways and means to establish a
ceasefire and to resettle armed combatants. This will
help create conditions conducive to a political
settlement of the Angolan conflict and to improving the
humanitarian situation in that country.

In the context of the Angolan peace process, we
commend the approach taken by the Angolan
Government in giving full play to the role of civil
groups. We believe that the Lusaka Protocol and the
relevant Security Council resolutions continue to be the
bases of the peace process.

We hope that the United Nations will play a
greater role in re-establishing peace in Angola. In this
respect, we support the ongoing efforts of Mr. Gambari
and wish him greater success.

