Mr. Kumalo (South Africa): I would like to
congratulate Mexico on its outstanding stewardship of
the Security Council during the month of April and on
convening this debate at such an appropriate time. The
presence this morning of the Presidents of the General
Assembly and the Economic and Social Council is a
wonderful and welcome acknowledgement that we
need all the organs of the United Nations to become
fully involved in post-conflict situations.

We are living through yet another defining
moment for collective security. For more than 50 years,
the United Nations has sought to accommodate the
interests of the powerful States without jeopardizing
the interests of the weaker States. In recent weeks,
however, this delicate balance of State interests has
been upset, exposing the inequality among sovereign
States and leading to greater insecurity for all States. It
is time for the entire United Nations membership to
actively engage in responding to the imbalance in
addressing matters of international peace and security.
We believe that this debate should take place
throughout the United Nations and that it must urgently
address the question of how to reaffirm the rules-based
multilateral system on which our collective security is
premised.

The United Nations has a vital and fundamental
role to play in post-conflict situations. It is the only
organization that can bestow legitimacy and credibility
on transitional arrangements. Over the years, the
United Nations has developed norms and principles to
ensure that comprehensive and multilateral solutions
are found to address complex post-conflict situations.
Among those principles are respect for the sovereignty,
territorial integrity and political independence of States
and recognition of the important role that regional
organizations can play in assisting with peace-building
efforts.

As the Secretary-General pointed out during the
Security Council's interactive debate with regional
organizations earlier this month,

"Our Organization - for all its
imperfections, real and perceived - has built up
unique experience in dealing with a range of
crises, by bringing humanitarian relief to millions
in need, helping people rebuild their countries
from the ruins of armed conflict, promoting
human rights and the rule of law, and engaging in
many other activities that have come to be seen as
essential parts of peacemaking, peacekeeping and
peace-building". (S/PV.4739, p. 4)

South Africa believes that the Secretary-General
and his staff, acting with an approved United Nations
mandate, have the political credibility, skills and
objectivity required for creating an enabling
environment in which post-conflict peace-building and
reconstruction can take place.

The Security Council has consistently taken the
principled position that its responsibilities do not end
with the termination of hostilities in any particular
country. Council members have adopted an integrated
view of security, which takes into account development
and reconstruction issues. Furthermore, the Security
Council has remained open to establishing a working
relationship with the Economic and Social Council and
international financial institutions such as the
International Monetary Fund and the World Bank.

We believe that in doing these things the Security
Council has contributed positively to peace-building
and reconstruction efforts, and we hope that this will
continue. The Security Council is central to the success
of post-conflict stability and transition. However, we
hope that when the Security Council considers the role
of the United Nations in post-conflict situations it will
actively engage regional partners and incorporate their
views, which may be critical for the post-conflict
period.

It is South Africa's view that the United Nations
is indeed collectively greater than the sum of its
individual parts. There is no doubt that it has achieved
great success; it has also had its share of failures. It is
still the most appropriate instrument for ensuring that
an enabling environment is created in places of conflict
and suffering, an environment in which the people can
shape their own future and determine their own destiny.

