Mr. Al-Otaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): Allow
me at the outset to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council for this
month. I wish you every success in conducting our
deliberations.

I would be remiss if I failed to thank your
predecessor, the Permanent Representative of the
United Kingdom, for his leadership of the Council last
month.

We appreciate your swift response to the request
of the Arab Group to convene this meeting. Such
celerity is based in the Council's belief that Israel's act
of aggression today against a State member of the
Security Council represents a grave threat to
international peace and security. Kuwait condemns
Israel's violation of Lebanon's and Syria's airspaces
and its attack against Syrian territory by targeting a
civilian site in the village of Ein Saheb. The statement
issued by our Prime Minister stressed our
condemnation of that act of aggression, which violates
the principles of international law and the fundamental
principles of the United Nations.

We welcome the statement made by Secretary-
General Kofi Annan on this grave escalation and we
share his concern that the deterioration of the situation
in the region could presage further threats to regional
peace and security. Such provocative and unwarranted
acts of aggression by Israel fall within the context of its
ongoing efforts to undermine the peace process by
setting up obstacles to the implementation of the road
map of the Quartet. Such acts also prove the fact that
the Israeli Government is not serious about achieving a
permanent peace in the Middle East and will bring
further violence to the region.

Israel's acts of aggression, by they in the
occupied Palestinian territories or in neighbouring
Arab States, will not achieve its desired sense of
security. Israel should stop shirking its responsibilities
and international commitments. We call on Israel to
commit itself to the obligations it has already assumed,
including those under Security Council resolutions 242
(1967) and 338 (1973), as well as to the principle of
land for peace. Israel should also implement the road
map, with all its obligations, and withdraw from all the
territories it occupied in 1967.

Kuwait stands in full solidarity with the Syrian
Arab Republic in defying the act of aggression
committed today. Kuwait supports the measures to be
taken in defence of the territorial integrity of Syria and
calls on the Security Council to assume its
responsibilities in the maintenance of international
peace and security. The Council must condemn this
escalation and call on Israel to refrain from such acts,
which threaten regional and international security and
will further exacerbate an already explosive situation in
the Middle East.

