The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received a letter from the representative of
Djibouti, in which he requests to be invited to
participate in the discussion of the item on the Council's
agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, I propose,
with the consent of the Council, to invite that
representative to participate in the consideration of the
item, without the right to vote, in accordance with the
relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Olhaye
(Djibouti) took a seat at the Council table.

The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document 8/2008/381, containing a letter dated 9 June
2008 from the Permanent Representative of Djibouti
addressed to the President of the Security Council.

After consultations among the members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council expresses its strong
concern about the serious incidents that occurred
on 10 June along the frontier between Djibouti
and Eritrea, which led to several deaths and
dozens of wounded.
the

"The Security Council condemns Eritrea's
military action against Djibouti in Ras Doumeira
and Doumeira Island.

"The Security Council calls upon the parties
to commit to a ceasefire and urges both parties, in
particular Eritrea, to show maximum restraint and
withdraw forces to the status quo ante.

"The Security Council urges both parties, in
particular Eritrea, to cooperate and engage in
diplomatic efforts to resolve the matter peacefully
and in a manner consistent with international law.

"The Security Council welcomes the efforts
of the African Union, the Arab League and those
States that have offered their assistance and calls
upon the parties, in particular Eritrea, to engage
fully in efforts to resolve the crisis.

"The Security Council encourages the
Secretary-General urgently to use his good
offices and reach out to both parties, as
appropriate and in coordination with regional
efforts, to facilitate bilateral discussions to
determine arrangements for decreasing the
military presence along the border and to develop
confidence-building measures to resolve the
border situation."

This statement will be issued as a document of
Security Council under the symbol

S/PRST/2008/20.

The Security Council has thus concluded the

present stage of its consideration of the item on the
agenda. The Security Council will remain seized of the
matter.

The meeting rose at 7.35 p.m.
08-37954

