I thank Under-Secretary-General Mark Lowcock for his comprehensive briefing on the humanitarian situation in Syria. South Africa remains deeply concerned about the humanitarian situation in Syria. Coronavirus disease (COVID-19) has added a further layer of complexity to this already catastrophic humanitarian situation. Given the multifaceted nature of the humanitarian situation in Syria, we applaud the United Nations, its implementing partners and all of their volunteers and personnel for their continued and committed efforts. With regard to the impact of COVID-19 on the humanitarian situation in Syria, South Africa fully supports both the Secretary-General's call for an immediate and global ceasefire and Special Envoy Pedersen's call for an immediate nationwide ceasefire in Syria. In order to effectively fight the spread of the virus, we must ensure that the necessary equipment and supplies are available to all those who require it. Continued hostilities and violence will hinder and harm the effectiveness of the Syrian Government's response to the COVID-19 pandemic as well as that of the United Nations. An important aspect of this response is to focus on preparedness and response planning to minimize the impact of COVID-19 on vulnerable populations, including people living in close proximity to each other in refugee and internally displaced person camps, who have limited access to basic services, such as water, shelter and medical care. In addition, we are concerned that, while all groups are susceptible to the virus, the elderly and people with underlying health conditions are particularly at risk, especially those in the vulnerable refugee and internally displaced person populations. Included in this response is the need for required testing and assessment capacity. We encourage the international community to assist in ensuring that the necessary equipment is available to that end. Without safe access to the areas where testing and aid is required, however, none of these efforts will be effective. This aspect is important, given that, while sample collection among the thousands of displaced persons living in camps and informal settlements in north-east Syria will be challenging to begin with, collecting samples in areas where hostilities may be ongoing will be even more challenging, if not impossible. South Africa calls on the relevant authorities to ensure that humanitarian workers have safe, sustained and unhindered access to all parts of Syria. It is also important that border crossings affected by COVID-19-related precautionary measures not have a negative bearing on the delivery of humanitarian assistance to the aforementioned vulnerable communities. With regard to the general humanitarian situation throughout Syria, while we are all understandably focused on the impact of COVID-19, we cannot forget the dire humanitarian situation that remains ongoing in the country. The need for shelter, water, sanitation, food and protection remains high. The provision of these services, especially in the north-west, depends on the cross-border mechanism's ability to bring in essential assistance to all those who require it. Nevertheless, additional support is required in the north-east of the country. With the closure of the Al-Yarubiyah crossing point in January, gaps have emerged in the provision of necessary aid to this region. In this regard, we call on the parties to make every effort to authorize all available modalities, including aid deliveries from Damascus and cross-line and cross-border assistance, to ensure that the aid is delivered to the thousands that need it. While we welcome that the 5 March ceasefire agreement continues to hold, we must also be cognizant of the effect that the hostilities over the past decade have had on civilians and essential civilian infrastructure. The impact on the provision of such basic services as health, education and water has been severe. South Africa reiterates that all parties must adhere to their obligations under international humanitarian law, particularly with regard to the protection of civilians and civilian infrastructure. In conclusion, South Africa reaffirms its position that, if there is no progress on the political front, the humanitarian situation will further deteriorate, with an increase in destruction and the loss of life. The only way to resolve the conflict in Syria is through negotiation and dialogue. South Africa calls on all parties to exert every effort to fully implement resolution 2254 (2015) and bring peace, security and stability to all of Syria.
