At the outset, I would like to congratulate Estonia on its assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for the first time in its history and to thank its delegation for organizing today's important debate, the theme of which fits perfectly with the priorities of its mandate, namely, as presented to us, respect for international standards, the fight against impunity, the defence of human rights, addressing environmental issues and the improvement of the working methods of the Security Council. The statement by the President of the Republic of Estonia also demonstrates the country's unwavering commitment to the protection of civilians. I would like to take this opportunity to thank the Secretary-General for his comprehensive briefing, which took stock of the current status of the protection of civilians and highlighted the challenges that the international community continues to face in that regard, as also outlined in his report (S/2020/366). My thanks also go to the President of the International Committee of the Red Cross, Peter Maurer, and to President Johnson Sirleaf, member of The Elders and Nobel Peace Prize Laureate, for their particularly relevant briefings. One year after the twentieth anniversary of the Security Council's adoption of resolution 1265 (1999), which placed the protection of civilians on the Council's agenda, we note that significant normative progress continues to be made, thanks in particular to the commitment of the Council, with the support of all States Members of the United Nations and also of civil society. Indeed, the numerous resolutions and presidential statements, together with the crafting of specific protection-of- civilians mandates in certain missions, have made it possible to establish a robust legal regulatory framework. However, it must be noted that, despite these advances, civilian populations continue to be victims of serious violations of international humanitarian law and international human rights law, with a continuous increase in the numbers of victims, displaced persons and refugees. This situation is likely to worsen further with the coronavirus disease and its short- and medium-term consequences, particularly when it comes to the dynamics of conflicts. It has been noted that some actors are trying to take advantage of this unprecedented situation to advance their agendas, despite the Secretary-General's call for a comprehensive ceasefire, to which Morocco fully subscribes. The efforts of the international community must also continue to take into account sexual violence in times of conflict and pay particular attention to the most vulnerable, especially children and women. Given that the protection of civilians is primarily the responsibility of the States concerned, it is important to strengthen their capacities, if necessary, and always at their request. It would therefore be worthwhile to further explore the potential of the Peacebuilding Commission in this respect. Furthermore, Member States should develop national policies based on good practices and set up institutional bodies to work on the protection of civilians, while continuing and strengthening mechanisms at the regional and international levels. The States concerned can also rely on peacekeeping operations if necessary. Peacekeeping operations remain an essential tool, although they are not always deployed to locations where populations are at risk. The priorities in the protection of civilians in peacekeeping operations that are mandated to provide such protection are now well established, and a significant body of policy and guidance has been developed. It is worth noting the publication last week of the new version of the handbook entitled The Protection of Civilians in United Nations Peacekeeping. As a long-established troop-contributing country in United Nations peace operations, allow me to share the following points with the Council. First, just over 20 years ago, the Security Council gave the United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone the first specific mandate on the protection of civilians. Since then, the protection of civilians by peacekeeping operations has developed significantly. Today more than 90 per cent of peacekeepers are deployed in missions with a mandate to protect civilians, and these mandates are often cited as priority tasks for missions in the various theatres where this is necessary. Secondly, the protection of civilians requires adequate human and financial resources, whether in terms of the number of Blue Helmets deployed or of their equipment and their training. It is also necessary to be able to manage the expectations of all parties involved, be they local populations, host country authorities or Security Council members. Thirdly, the changing nature of conflicts requires us to constantly review our methods and processes. The United Nations has embarked upon a reform of its peace and security architecture that gives the protection of civilians an important place. The Secretary-General's Action for Peacekeeping initiative takes this into account, as does the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations. The role of humanitarians is also essential. Morocco firmly denounces the attacks on humanitarian personnel, which have experienced a worrisome upsurge. Humanitarian workers' detention, abduction or even murder continue to seriously hamper humanitarian operations. In this regard, immediate measures must be taken to ensure humanitarian workers' safety. Another important aspect is humanitarian access, which is too often denied. In addition, States are obliged to fulfil their obligation to combat impunity and fully investigate and prosecute anyone responsible for genocide, war crimes and crimes against humanity, or systematic and serious violations of human rights. Fighting impunity means, in part, putting in place strong justice and accountability mechanisms. In some cases, such international mechanisms as the International Criminal Tribunals for the Former Yugoslavia and for Rwanda, sanctions regimes and hybrid mechanisms such as the Special Criminal Court in the Central African Republic can be tools at our disposal. Refugee and displaced populations need special attention, especially in this period of pandemic, because even in normal times they are extremely vulnerable to violations of their rights. The international community has an obligation to ensure that all their rights are respected and that the aid provided to them actually reaches them and is not misappropriated or subject to spoliation. The registration of refugee populations is a sine qua non for ensuring these rights, as recognized in international law and in Security Council and General Assembly resolutions. Lastly, as has been pointed out, in order to assess threats and coordinate the actions of the various actors, the best protection remains prevention. The preventive dimension can be carried out through capacity-building in the countries concerned, respect for the rule of law, good governance, the entrenching of a culture of human rights and the establishment of early-warning mechanisms that can detect pre-conflict situations and prevent them from turning into violent conflict. We take this opportunity to reiterate our full backing for the Secretary-General's policy of increasing support for mediation and the peaceful resolution of conflicts. Inconclusion, Morocco salutes all those who are working to protect populations in conflict zones and pays them sustained tribute.
