Mr. Kolby (Norway): There is an acute need for
enhanced protection of United Nations and associated
personnel and humanitarian personnel. There has been an
increasing number of violations of the security of
humanitarian personnel in recent conflicts, including in the
Sudan, Kosovo, Chechnya, Burundi and elsewhere. Norway
therefore welcomes the initiative of Argentina, and the
presence here today of the Argentine Foreign Minister.

In our View, it is essential that the United Nations
and the international community remain seized of the
challenging task of increasing respect for international
humanitarian law and contributing to ensuring the
protection of civilians in armed conflict. This requires
compliance with the essential principles and rules of
conduct of armed conflicts, including, inter alia, the
Geneva Conventions of 1949 and their Additional Protocols
of 1977. Concrete measures must be taken. The Norwegian
Government welcomes resolution 1265 (1999), adopted by
the Security on 17 September last year, addressing the
importance of safe and unhindered access for humanitarian
personnel to civilians in armed conflicts and the
establishment of a process to consider further appropriate
steps as a follow-up to the report of the Secretary-General.

Within this context, the safety of United Nations and
associated personnel and humanitarian personnel is a critical
issue. The Norwegian Government worked actively for the
adoption of the Convention on the Safety of United Nations
and Associated Personnel, and we are a party to the
Convention. That Convention represents a major
contribution to the safety of United Nations and associated
personnel and humanitarian personnel. Its entry into force
on 29 January last year was an important step forward.
However, in order to make it an effective tool for
enhancing the protection of United Nations and associated
personnel, more States need to commit themselves to the
Convention. Norway is encouraging other States to ratify
and implement this important instrument, and supports the
decision by the General Assembly last year to request the
Secretary-General to submit by May this year a report
containing analysis and recommendations addressing the
scope of legal protection under the Convention. Norway
has also contributed to the Trust Fund for Security of
United Nations personnel in order to support training and
enhanced security management.

It should be recalled that under international law,
the primary responsibility for the security and protection
of United Nations and associated personnel lies with the
Government hosting a United Nations operation,
conducted under the United Nations Charter or in
accordance with agreements with the relevant
organization. States need to hold States as well as non-
State actors accountable for their attacks on humanitarian
workers operating in territory under their control. The
Secretary-General referred to this aspect in the statement
he made in May last year in The Hague, referring to
accountability for "every militia guilty of crimes against
our common humanity."

The Norwegian Government actively took part in
the process leading towards the adoption of the Statute of
the International Criminal Court. Two weeks ago, on 27
January, the Norwegian Parliament gave its approval to
Norwegian ratification of the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court. We urge all Governments to
make an extra effort with a view to ensuring, through
their early ratification of the Rome Statute, the
establishment of the International Criminal Court without
further delay.

The Norwegian Government is pleased that attacks
against United Nations and associated personnel and
humanitarian personnel are included in the list of war
crimes under article 8 of the Statute. When established,
the Court will play an important role in bringing to justice
those responsible for serious violations of international
humanitarian law. At this stage, our main priority must be
to ensure the final establishment of the Court, which
presupposes 60 ratifications.

We would also like to mention the question of the
applicability of international humanitarian law in United
Nations peacekeeping operations. Norway supports the
general idea of guidelines for peacekeepers. However,
Norway is of the view that the guidelines published by

 

the Secretariat in the Secretary-General's Bulletin need
further study and consultation before they are ripe for
implementation in peacekeeping operations.

Finally, Norway pays tribute to those who have given
their lives in the service of peace, and my country remains
committed to working towards a safer environment for
United Nations and associated personnel and humanitarian
personnel.

