Mr. Salam (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for coming to New
York to preside over today's meeting. I would also like
to congratulate your Mission, Sir, for assuming the
presidency of the Security Council this month and to
thank you for all your suggestions on our work.

(spoke in English)

Let us first admit that the main facts pertaining to
the Middle East conflict have all become increasingly
alarming and that the situation is now deteriorating in
an unprecedented manner. Suffice it here to recall the
following.

With 2,314 Palestinians and 97 Israelis killed, the
year 2014 witnessed the highest civilian death toll since
1967, due to the July/August hostilities in Gaza and a
significant increase in Palestinian fatalities in the West
Bank. In 2014, Gaza also witnessed the highest rate of
internal displacement since 1967. Some 28 per cent of
its population was internally displaced at the height
of the hostilities. It is true that since the ceasefire was
announced on 26 August the majority of internally
displaced persons returned home, but shelter needs
remain enormous, as up to 18,000 families no longer
have homes to return to.

Also in 2014, the number of people displaced in the
West Bank and East Jerusalem due to the demolition
of homes and property was the highest recorded in a
single year since the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs began tracking this indicator in
2008. Moreover, in 2014, the Israeli Government set
a 10-year record for the number of tenders issued for
settlement construction in the West Bank, including
East Jerusalem, and construction starts increased in
2014 by 40 per cent over the previous year. We cannot
fail to mention that 2014 witnessed the collapse of the
United States-sponsored peace efforts, mainly due to
Israel's political intransigence, its refusal to honour its
commitment to release Palestinian prisoners and its
aggressive policy of settlement expansion.

Mr. Hmoud look the Chair.

In 2015, however, worse was to come when the
Prime Minister of Israel, Benjamin Netanyahu, said
loud and clear during his electoral campaign that if
he were to be re-elected, a Palestinian State would not
be established "on his watch". Moreover, he vowed to
increase settlement construction in East Jerusalem by
adding "thousands of housing units". On election day,
in a notorious racist statement, he warned Arab citizens
of Israel against voting "in droves".

Naftali Bennett, Minister of Economy in Netanyahu's
Government, was in turn loud and clear on rejecting
the establishment of a Palestinian State by saying that
"the notion of injecting a State, dividing Jerusalem,
dividing up the country and splitting and slicing it, is
not sustainable". In the same racist vein as Netanyahu,
in one of his infamous speeches, he also suggested that
Arabs were simply "thieves". Let us not forget that
for Avigdor Liberman, Israel's Foreign Minister, the
solution to "disloyal" Israeli Arabs was simple: "We
need to pick up an ax" and behead them.

The situation in our part of the world is indeed
becoming more and more difficult, but this is no excuse
for inaction. On the contrary, the more difficult a
conflict situation becomes, the greater the Council's
responsibility. As a matter of fact, to be meaningful, any
resumption of negotiations on the Middle East conflict
should be based on well-defined parametres. A new
comprehensive international framework and clear and
agreed-upon deadlines are also needed for the success
of such negotiations. Accordingly, the Council is called
upon to shoulder its responsibilities in maintaining
peace and security by addressing these critical issues
sooner rather than later.

Mr. President, do not let the situation deteriorate
any further. It is time for action.
