Mr. Mayr-Harting: I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union (EU) and its member
States. The acceding country Croatia; the candidate
countries Turkey, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Montenegro and Iceland; the countries of
the Stabilization and Association Process and potential
candidates Albania and Bosnia and Herzegovina; as
well as Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova and Georgia,
align themselves with this declaration.

We would also like to thank the Presidents and
Prosecutors for their reports (S/2013/308, S/2013/309, S/2013/310) and briefings. They illustrate the
unwavering commitment and tireless efforts of both
Tribunals in support of the fight against impunity for
the most serious crimes.

We remain steadfast in our support for international
criminal justice. Ending impunity for serious crimes
is indispensable to building sustainable peace and
reconciliation. Victims of mass atrocities deserve
justice and rehabilitation, and those who commit the
most serious crimes must know that they will be held
accountable.

The achievements of the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR)
represent a landmark in that regard. The case law from
the ICTY and the ICTR has contributed greatly to the
development of international criminal law. Moreover,
the Tribunals were a catalyst for the negotiations on the
Rome Statute and the establishment of the International
Criminal Court. We pay tribute to the Tribunals'
achievements and contributions to the fight against
impunity.

Since its establishment 20 years ago, the ICTY
has made a remarkable contribution to peace and
reconciliation in the Western Balkans, as well as to
the development of international criminal justice. It
has given a voice to the victims, especially women and
children.

The ICTY has also set new standards for providing
assistance and support to victims, as well as for capacity-
building and outreach. Those projects are important for
the Tribunal's legacy. The European Union contributes
to the ICTY Outreach Programme for 2013 and 2014.

Progress has been more uneven in the transition
to national war crimes prosecutions. Regrettably,
some Western Balkan countries continue to face
difficulties in prosecuting war crimes cases. Some
also suffer from significant backlogs. The European
Union has repeatedly emphasized the importance of
local ownership and that remains essential. Building
the necessary national capacity and increasing public
awareness are important elements in that respect, and
further efforts are needed.

The International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda
has made an invaluable contribution to our shared
goal of ending impunity for genocide crimes and has
played a key role in strengthening the rule of law and
promoting long-term stability and reconciliation. The
apprehension of the remaining fugitives must, however,
remain a priority. We reiterate our calls for the effective
cooperation of all States concerned, particularly those
in the Great Lakes region.

We welcome the transfer of cases to the domestic
Rwandan courts for prosecution. To be successful, that
process requires the ongoing commitment of both the
Rwandan authorities and the international community.
More progress must be made in reforming the genocide
ideology law, while promoting a future based on
genuine reconciliation. If the Rwandan courts are seen
to be conducting fair, impartial trials, that will be a
significant step forward in the country's transitional
process and a major lesson for other countries engaged
in transitional justice reform and peacebuilding.

In order to preserve the important achievements
and legacy of the ICTY and the ICTR, we support the
process establishing the Residual Mechanism of both
Tribunals in accordance with resolution 1966 (2010). In
that regard, we welcome the launch of the ICTY branch
of the Residual Mechanism in The Hague, which will
begin to function on 1 July.

We will continue to strongly support both the
principle and system of international criminal justice
and its integral role in the reconciliation process, and
we call on all States to do the same.

