Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank today's briefers, whose work we
also support, for their comprehensive overview of the
situation in Yemen. The briefings we have just heard
reaffirm the need for united international efforts to
advance the political settlement, end the conflict and
alleviate the humanitarian situation in the country.

Before moving on to considering the conflict in
Yemen directly, we would like to express our concern
about the rise of tensions in the Persian Gulf. We expect
all the incidents that have taken place in the area to be
duly investigated. Russia condemns the attacks on oil
tankers, and their organizers must be identified and held
accountable. However, we emphasize that artificially
stoking the situation and jumping to conclusions
and accusations are not conducive to an impartial
international investigation but rather politicize and
undermine trust in it. We call on all parties to engage
in dialogue and assess the situation judiciously. In
that connection we would like to remind the Council
of resolution 598 (1987), which requested that the
Secretary-General work together with States of the
region to develop a security architecture for the region.
We once again point to Russia's proposal to launch
a process for developing confidence-building and
security measures in the Persian Gulf and eventually
the whole of the Middle East. That has a direct bearing
on the conflict in Yemen, among other things. The
escalation of aggressive, accusatory rhetoric and the
artificial incitement of anti-Iranian sentiments are
having a destabilizing effect on the tense situation in
the entire region and could undermine our collective
diplomacy and undo the gains made on the Yemen issue
under the auspices of the United Nations, however
small they may be.

It is our collective responsibility to support
the efforts of Special Envoy Martin Griffiths and
Lieutenant General Michael Lollesgaard, who are doing
painstaking work to induce the Yemenis to implement
the Stockholm Agreement. The parties have begun to
implement the first phase of the redeployment of forces
from the ports of Al-Hudaydah, Saleef and Ras Isa, and
Ansar Allah's unilateral withdrawal of forces was an
important step towards implementing the broader plan
for the disengagement of the opposing parties. We note
the growing role in that context of the United Nations
Mission to Support the Hudaydah Agreement and call
for its full deployment as soon as possible, which will
make it possible to closely monitor the steps being
taken to implement the agreements regarding the Red
Sea ports. The progress in Al-Hudaydah is making it
possible to move forward with the achievement of other
aspects of the Stockholm Agreement, including the
exchange of prisoners and the de-escalation of tensions
in Taiz, as well as discussions on a framework for a
political settlement.

Russia will continue to provide assistance to the
United Nations mediation efforts to resolve the Yemenis'
differences. We would like to note the support that
the Special Envoy is receiving from the Ambassadors
accredited in Yemen from the five permanent members
of the Council, and we call on all who are interested
in the speedy restoration of peace in Yemen to work
actively with the parties to the conflict on whom they
have influence to convince them of the futility of a
military solution.

As we have heard from our briefers, against the
background of the lack of progress towards a political
settlement in Yemen, the humanitarian situation
continues to worsen every day. Two thirds of the
country's population are suffering from hunger and
lack access to essential medicines and basic social
protective services. The civilian infrastructure is in
ruins and the national economy is collapsing. The
longer the war lasts the more difficult post-conflict
reconstruction becomes. Like other Member States
of the United Nations, including Yemen's immediate
neighbours, Russia will continue to do its part to assist
the Yemeni people through bilateral channels and by
contributing to the activities of the major humanitarian
organizations. We stress that emergency humanitarian
assistance to the population of Yemen must be provided
regardless of who controls what territory. We call on
all parties to the Yemeni conflict to ensure unimpeded
access for humanitarian personnel, comply with
international humanitarian law and refrain from the
indiscriminate use of force and intentional damage to
civilian infrastructure, especially oil production and air
transportation facilities.

Alleviating the humanitarian situation in Yemen is
vital not only right now but also with regard to future
national reconciliation issues. However, humanitarian
efforts are not and cannot be a panacea. The solution is
exclusively in the political arena, and in that connection
we have great hopes for the mediation efforts of the
United Nations. We will support and actively assist
Mr. Griffiths in that regard.

