The President: I thank the representative of Chile for
his kind words addressed to me.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
representative of the United States.

The United Nations Angola Verification Mission
(UNAVEM. III) is now the largest United Nations peace-
keeping operation deployed anywhere in the world. It has
some 6,500 soldiers from over 30 countries prepared to
perform the mandates set forth by this Council.

Having personally toured UNAVEM. III's operations
a few weeks ago, I can confirm that the United Nations
peace-keepers are critical to the peace process launched
by the Lusaka Protocol, as is the Secretary-General's
Special Representative, Mr. Maitre Beye. The brave men
and women of UNAVEM. III deserve our support at this
important juncture on the road to peace in Angola. But in
the final analysis the future of Angola rests not with the
men and women of UNAVEM. III, but with the
Government of Angola and with UNITA.

When I met with President dos Santos and Mr.
Savimbi in January and delivered the letters to them
approved by the Security Council, I found the two men
who professed to want peace and who professed to be
willing to take the necessary steps to make peace, as
spelled out in the Lusaka Protocol. I challenged them, as
the Council must challenge them today, to match deeds
with words.

To a large extent, the Government of Angola has
been moving in the right direction over the last several
weeks. In the months ahead it must continue to integrate
fully UNITA into the political and military institutions of
the country and to help UNITA soldiers make the
transition into either civilian life or a reconstituted
Angolan army. There can be no reconciliation in Angola
unless this is accomplished.

UNITA's poor performance under the Lusaka
Protocol has jeopardized the peace process and
undermined the viability of UNAVEM. 111. When I visited
UNITA headquarters in Bailundo last month, Mr. Savimbi
promised me - a promise he repeated publicly to the
media - that by Thursday, 8 February, 16,500 UNITA
soldiers would be quartered in four sites administered by
UNAVEM. III. Last Friday he reiterated this pledge to me
by telephone, saying that he would not rest until he
fulfilled this commitment. Unfortunately, as of this
morning only 5,150 soldiers, many of them unarmed, had
arrived in the quartering sites. Approximately another
2,000 are reportedly moving towards the quartering sites.

Every UNITA soldier who enters a quartering site
makes a courageous decision - for himself, his family
and his country. It will take comparable courage on the
part of Mr. Savimbi and the other UNITA leaders to see
this process through to the end.

 

But Mr. Savimbi's pledge to me at Bailundo is not
enough. Even if 16,500 UNITA soldiers are quartered, the
opportunity for peace in Angola will be lost unless UNIT A
follows through on schedule with the quartering of the rest
of its soldiers, and the opportunity for peace will be lost
unless the Government of Angola integrates UNITA
soldiers into the new army, the Government and civilian
life. Both leaders must make their promises of peace stick.
They must seize the opportunity for peace that the
international community is offering them.

There is no purpose to renewed war in Angola. All
acknowledge that. The people of Angola want peace. If the
leaders of Angola do not take a risk for peace now, then
this beautiful country, which possesses enormous economic
potential for its people, will be plunged back into a
pointless but devastating war that will destabilize southern
Africa once again.

I have seen what Angolans are capable of doing to
each other, and nobody in his right mind can possibly wish
it upon his own people. The humanitarian challenge in
Angola, as the Secretary-General describes in his report, is
daunting. Demining alone will take decades to accomplish,
and even then Angolan children will continue to lose their
limbs to an unseen and ageless enemy.

The Security Council will bear witness to the conduct
of both the Government of Angola and UNITA in the
weeks ahead. The Council anticipates that if the Secretary-
General reports insufficient progress towards implementing
the Lusaka Protocol, then our Governments will re-evaluate
the merit of continuing UNAVEM. III's mandate to
February 1997.

The United States will not allow a sound peace-
keeping operation, which spends nearly $1 million per day,
to be slowly undermined by the failure of leaders to fulfil
their promises.

This afternoon I plan to speak with Mr. Savimbi by
phone again. As President of the Security Council, I will
report to him on today's discussion and the expectations
that the international community holds for Angola. Let us
hope that during the next few weeks the Lusaka Protocol
will be firmly back on track, that UNAVEM. III will be
able to fulfil its mandate, and that the people of Angola
can, after decades of destructive war, finally realize the
quiet miracle of a normal life.

I resume my function as President of the Security
Council.

The next speaker is the representative of Norway. I
invite him to take a seat at the Council table and to make
his statement.

