Mrs. Taib (Malaysia): I thank you, Madam
President, for convening and chairing this meeting.
I am grateful to Mr. Miroslav Jenca, Assistant
Secretary-General for Political Affairs, for his briefing
this morning.

My delegation associates itself with the statement
delivered by the representative of Venezuela on behalf
of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries (NAM).

On 25 September, the third report on the
implementation of resolution 2334 (2016) for the period
from 20 June to 20 September was presented verbally
by Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special Coordinator for the
Middle East Peace Process and Personal Representative
of the Secretary-General (see S/PV.8054). During
the presentation of the report, we heard once again a
recounting of the blatant disregard of the call for the
implementation of the provisions in the resolution,
including an increase in the rate of settlement activity.

We remain disappointed by the continued illegal
Israeli settlements, which reflect gross violations of
Palestinian human rights and a blatant disregard of the
provisions outlined in resolution 2334 (2016). When
the Security Council finally decided to take action to
preserve the two-State solution in December 2016, we
did not expect to see the continued disregard for the
responsibility to implement the resolution.

During the NAM. Ministerial Meeting on
Palestine in September, we recalled that the political
declaration had highlighted the importance of the
Secretary-General's reports on the implementation of
resolution 2334 (2016), and, as such, we are committed
to support the movement to institutionalize that
position and explicitly outline measures to ensure that
non-compliance is addressed.

We recognize positive developments and are
encouraged by the reconciliation agreement arrived
at by Fatah and Hamas on 12 October in Cairo. We
urge the negotiating parties to remain fully committed
and to stay on track with regard to honouring those
commitments so as to allow unity to prevail and the
Palestinian Government to assume its responsibilities
in Gaza, including addressing the grave humanitarian
crisis there.

The prolonged occupation and the sustained
settlement enterprise cannot be viewed lightly in the
face of positive developments. They have generated
only more despair, frustration and insecurity in the
region and beyond. We cannot let the Palestinian plight
continue to fall on deaf ears.

Malaysia reiterates the need to address the root cause
of the conflict by ending the repressive occupation of
Palestine by Israel. The international community must
not remain a bystander in relation to the worsening
situation on the ground. We are of the View that it is
misleading to assume that the occupying Power and the
occupied people have the same level of legal, political
and moral obligations and responsibilities. We restate
that substantial obligations are clearly imposed on
occupying Powers to protect the general welfare of
the inhabitants of an occupied territory, including the
protection from forcible transfer, and the protection of
their property. We believe that silence with regard to
that is as good as being complicit.

In conclusion, the words of the Secretary-General
during his recent visit resonated with us and must
be reaffirmed by all of us here that the international
community cannot simply turn away and allow
the situation to deteriorate. We have a role and a
responsibility to support the parties in resolving the
conflict. Malaysia remains committed to advancing a
just, comprehensive and final solution to the conflict
that would see the establishment of an independent,
contiguous and viable Palestinian State based on the

1967 borders with East Jerusalem as its capital, living
side-by-side in peace and security with Israel.

