Sir David Hannay (United Kingdom): I should like
to offer my congratulations to Ambassador Li Zhaoxing -
somewhat belatedly, as this is the thirty-first day of the
month during which he has presided over the Council, but
better late than never - and to you, Sir, who have presided
today like someone who had been doing so for 31 days
rather than just one. Also, I thank the Ambassador of
Botswana for his chairing of the Council last month.

 

My Government welcomes the adoption of these
three resolutions. We hope that they will help to sustain
a continued United Nations presence in the Republic of
Croatia, the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina and The
Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and to underpin
the continuing efforts of the international community to
bring about a peaceful solution to the problems of the
region.

It is fashionable to belittle the achievements of the
United Nations Protection Force (UNPROFOR). But they
have been considerable, and they have been attained only
at considerable human cost. So far, as other Permanent
Representatives have reminded us, UNPROFOR has lost
155 soldiers killed and has had 1,366 wounded. I should
like at this stage to express my gratitude to the
Ambassador of Botswana for the extremely eloquent way
in which he spoke about UNPROFOR's contribution. As
my country has nearly 4,000 troops in Bosnia, this was a
very welcome thing to hear, and I hope that the
Ambassador's words fell on fertile ground. The
international community as a whole should recognize the
courage of the troops who are willing to take these risks,
and the commitment of their Governments.

In Bosnia, UNPROFOR has escorted convoys,
negotiated and monitored cease-fire agreements and
heavy-weapons agreements, mounted anti-sniper patrols
and, where possible, helped to begin the painful task of
rehabilitation and reconstruction. Progress on
consolidating the Bosnian-Croat Federation depends
crucially on UNPROFOR's work in disengaging the two
sides' forces and dismantling the confrontation lines. It is
no exaggeration to say that there are hundreds of
thousands of people alive today in Bosnia because of
UNPROFOR. I would not claim, however, that
UNPROFOR has never failed in its efforts. But too often
those who criticize it misunderstand the nature of peace-
keeping operations and expect UNPROFOR to undertake
tasks for which it has neither the mandate nor the
resources.

UNPROFOR in The Former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia is a strikingly successful example of
preventive action. When The Former Yugoslav Republic
of Macedonia entered the United Nations two years ago
there were many who did not expect it to survive.
UN PROFOR has played an invaluable role in maintaining
the stability of that country's borders and as a symbol of
international commitment to its sovereignty and territorial
integrity.

 

UNPROFOR in Croatia has also had its successes. The
Yugoslav army was successfully, and peacefully,
disengaged. Some stability has been achieved in a tense and
volatile situation. UNPROFOR has been able to monitor the
Cease-Fire Agreement and, more recently, to facilitate the
implementation of the Economic Agreement between the
Croatian Government and the Krajina Serbs. Those who
have driven from Zagreb to Belgrade on the reopened
highway will have experienced a striking example of
UNPROFOR's work.

My Government, however, understands very well the
frustration of the Croatian Government at the slow rate of
progress. Key elements of the Vance plan remain
unimplemented - in particular, the demilitarization of the
United Nations Protected Areas and the return of refugees
and displaced persons. But the withdrawal of United
Nations forces would not advance the Croatian
Government's legitimate aims. On the contrary, the
increased tensions would only exacerbate the risk of
renewed fighting in Croatia, which could all too easily spill
over into a wider conflict. This would be a disaster for
Croatia and for the region as a whole.

We hope that all those concerned in Croatia will now
work constructively under the mandate for the new United
Nations Force which the Security Council has agreed today.
We attach particular importance to the early conclusion and
implementation of a status-of-forces agreement. The Force
in Croatia will need to continue to monitor the cease-fire
between the two sides, which is vital to continued stability,
and it will also need to facilitate the implementation of the
Economic Agreement. It will monitor Croatia's
internationally recognized borders.
Negotiating a mandate for the new Force has been a
difficult, but important, task. My Government warmly
commends the efforts of Mr. Stoltenberg and Mr. Akashi.
We now urge all concerned to cooperate fully in the
implementation phase so as to ensure the deployment of the
new Force as quickly and smoothly as possible. Fresh
obstacles created now will merely delay progress in the
peace process and in bringing about the mutual recognition
of the States of the former Yugoslavia for which we are all
working.

My Government remains fully committed to Croatia's
sovereignty and territorial integrity within its internationally
recognized borders. At the same time, it is essential that a
satisfactory autonomous status and protection for individual
rights be firmly established for the Krajina Serbs if the
much needed reconstruction and rehabilitation is to go

 

ahead. The deployment of the United Nations Confidence
Restoration Operation in Croatia (UN CRO) will clear the
way for further talks on economic normalization, and the
start of talks on a political settlement. The latter, as the
Contact Group has urged, should not be long delayed.

Sadly, the more encouraging news from Croatia is
not matched in Bosnia. My Government is increasingly
concerned by the slide towards a resumed war. No side is
likely to win outright victory. A negotiated settlement
remains the only way to lasting peace. A further
escalation in the fighting would put at risk the political
process, increase the difficulties in delivering
humanitarian aid, which benefits all those in need, and
could even call into question UNPROFOR's ability to
remain in Bosnia. We believe this would be disastrous, in
particular for the real victims, the ordinary people of
Bosnia. We therefore appeal to all sides to show restraint,
and to cooperate with UNPROFOR in implementing the
cessation-of-hostilities agreement. That agreement should
be extended in order that the political process can
continue. The Contact Group will be visiting the region
again next week. We urge all sides to respond
constructively to the proposals the Group will be putting
forward so that the desperately needed progress in the
peace process can be achieved.

