Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I think that the worst nightmare concerning Idlib has come to pass. As Mark Lowcock just told us, the United Nations has been warning of this day for a long time. And this is within an environment in which nightmares happen 24/7. Idlib has long been, as it were, the refuge of last resort for all those people who had to flee the attacks on Aleppo and elsewhere. Now, having thought that they were safe in Idlib, they find themselves under even greater attack. As my Foreign Secretary has said, this is vicious campaign of attrition, and it continues to force civilians to flee by targeting their schools, hospitals and emergency first responders. We condemn the repeated flouting of international humanitarian law. Mr. Lowcock explained that millions of people are currently facing a protection crisis. We know that an investigation by the United Nations board of inquiry is under way to determine why deconflicted sites have been targeted. We have heard the statistics of those who - sadly - were killed in January, including as a result of air strikes that incapacitated Al-Shami hospital, the last remaining surgical hospital serving southern Idlib. The continued onslaught by Syrian forces, backed by Russian and Iranian forces, has displaced over 550,000 people since | December, more than the entire population of Sochi. Turkey has made efforts to seek a peaceful solution in Idlib and prevent millions more Syrians having to seek refuge. However, we have seen the Syrian authorities frustrate and ignore the memorandums of understanding. Multiple ceasefires have been broken - often- and they are violated as quickly as they are announced, after one or two days. Mr. Pedersen outlined the attacks that we have seen in the last few days, which led to Turkish fatalities and increased the risk of a further regional conflagration. We are deeply concerned about the impact of that escalation on Turkey, which is already hosting more than 3.5 million refugees who fled the repression in Syria. Therefore, the United Kingdom, along with France and the United States, called for this meeting so that we can call once again for an immediate, genuine and lasting ceasefire in Idlib and for a lasting solution to the situation there. Both of the United Nations representatives briefing us today have stressed the imperative of that. We have heard a lot of superlatives today, including what Mr. Lowcock described as the largest single allocation from the Central Emergency Response Fund since the war began. How many more imperatives are we going to need before the Syrian authorities commit and adhere to a ceasefire? I think it would be very good if the Syrian representative could explain in his intervention why there should not be a ceasefire and why the ceasefires that have been agreed already should not be adhered to. We never get a very clear answer to that question, and yet the number of people, including children, who are suffering from current Syrian policies continues to increase. Council members have said time and again that the only sustainable way forward for Syria is a political solution under resolution 2254 (2015). The offensive being perpetrated in Idlib and the failure of multiple ceasefires serve only to underline that it is the United Nations and the Security Council - and not the Astana format - that should remain the guardians of the political process, and that our absolute priority should be to achieve a sustainable solution in order to address the humanitarian disaster in north-west Syria. Mr. Lowcock has set out exactly what that means in terms of numbers. I would also like to use this opportunity to encourage the Secretary-General to consider whether the United Nations, beyond the critical humanitarian role it is already playing, can assist in any way in achieving a lasting ceasefire. As a Security Councilmember, the United Kingdom stands ready to support any United Nations-backed agreement. For the record, we continue to support the Special Envoy's work on the political process and encourage him to pursue all of the elements of resolution 2254 (2015). As discussed at last week's humanitarian briefing (see S/PV.8707), the mass destruction and displacement are already inflicting a terrible toll on the people of north-west Syria. There are more than 3 million people stuck in that ever-shrinking pocket, which has a population density greater than that of the Gaza Strip. The United Kingdom is already providing more than $50 million in humanitarian assistance to north-west Syria this fiscal year, and we are looking at what more we can do to help. We have spent more than $3 billion to help Syria since the conflict began. I would like the Syrian representative to explain why the conflict is continuing when it is hurting so many of his own people. Finally, I want to conclude with a tribute to the United Nations, on both the political and the humanitarian sides, for the work that it does in those terrible circumstances and without the necessary assistance from the host Government.
