Mr. Legwaila (Botswana): The people of Liberia
have experienced more than two months of relative peace.
This is a short period of time, given the tremendous
suffering the Liberians have had to endure over the past
six years. And yet, 75 days of peace, after so many years
of death and destruction, represent a period of hope and
promise - the hope for peace and the promise of a better
tomorrow. This is the period for which the people of
Liberia have yearned all these years. We share with them
the joy of waking up to a day without the staccato of
machine-guns and the loss of innocent lives.

Botswana welcomes the positive developments in
Liberia and hopes that the parties and political leaders of
that country will move expeditiously to consolidate the
peace process and establish a firm foundation for stability
and national reconciliation. The efforts that have been
made by the Liberian National Transitional Government
are encouraging. We urge it to continue its commitment
to the implementation of the Abuja Agreement, as it
represents the only hope so far for peace in that war-torn
country. The emergent peace process in Liberia requires
of the members of the Council of State a demonstration
of a willingness and a readiness for compromise and
pragmatism in addressing priority issues. The momentum
for peace must not be lost.

The Liberian political leaders have a primary
responsibility to ensure that the fighters under their
command comply with the Abuja Agreement. In this
regard, the disengagement, disarmament and
demobilization of the combatants are among the areas that
demand their urgent attention. While it is essential that
the Council of State assume overall authority in the peace
process, it is equally important that the members of the
Council should not lose command of their fighters. They
still have a major responsibility to ensure that the fighters
report to the assembly points. We are concerned by
indications, cited in paragraph 19 of the Secretary-
General's report, that there is:

"an apparent weakening in the command structure
within some of the factions". (S/1995/88], para. 19)

It would not be in the interests of the peace process to
allow this situation to get out of control.

 

The Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) Monitoring Group (ECOMOG) has a Vital role
to play in the implementation of the cease-fire and the
disarmament and demobilization of the combatants. The
pivotal contribution of ECOWAS member States to
bringing about the Abuja Agreement and their continued
determination to ensure its successful implementation are
admirable. In operative paragraph 7 of the draft resolution
before us Member States are urged to demonstrate their
support for peace in Liberia in practical terms. The
international community is called upon to provide the
necessary financial and logistical support to ECOMOG to
enable it to carry out its mandate. The time has come for
the international community to assume its responsibilities in
the restoration of peace in Liberia.

The Secretary-General correctly points out in the
report before the Council that the demobilization and
reintegration of the combatants into the mainstream of civil
society are essential if the peace process is to succeed. The
United Nations has the responsibility to ensure that the
gains that have been made are not reversed by the lack of
resources for demobilization. Botswana fully supports the
provision of resources for the demobilization under the
assessed budget. The demobilization process is too
important to be left to voluntary contributions, which may
not be disbursed in a timely manner.

The international community is fully aware of the
needs of the Liberian people. The Conference on Assistance
to Liberia, held on 27 October 1995, offered an opportunity
to reassess the sum total of the problems facing Liberia
today. The humanitarian needs of 700,000 displaced persons
and over 700,000 refugees are enormous. The return and
resettlement of the refugees and displaced persons are vital
to any comprehensive and durable peace. The recovery and
rehabilitation of the Liberian national economy is a major
challenge, which the people of Liberia cannot tackle alone.

Subparagraphs (a) to (g) of operative paragraph 2
clearly outline the adjusted mandate of the United Nations
Observer Mission in Liberia (UNOMIL). The successful
implementation of the mandate will depend to a large extent
on the cooperation of the Liberian parties with ECOMOG
and UNOMIL, whose presence should be seen as one
creating an atmosphere in which the Liberians themselves
can work with each other to rebuild their war-ravaged
country. The people of Liberia should understand that the
continued provision of assistance by the international
community is contingent upon their demonstrated
consistency in working towards the attainment of national
reconciliation and lasting peace.

