Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Jan Kubis, for his briefing. Uruguay acknowledges
his challenging work and that of the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq, which, working in close
coordination with the Iraqi Government, is carrying
out the important task of addressing the various crises
currently affecting the country.

The plight of the Iraqi people is deteriorating.
As mentioned in the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2016/897), armed conflicts, acts of violence and
terrorism have continued to claim many victims. Iraq
continues to face multiple and great humanitarian,
political, economic and security challenges, the
principal among which is the fight against terrorism.
Once again, Uruguay reiterates the urgent need to face
the terrorist scourge in an effective manner, within the
framework of international law and together with the
United Nations. Uruguay supports the efforts of the
Iraqi Government, with the help of the international
coalition, to combat the grave threat posed by the
Islamic State to Iraq's sovereignty, territorial integrity
and its civilian population.

Those responsible for war crimes, crimes against
humanity and, possibly, genocide committed against
the civilian population must sooner or later be held
accountable and brought to justice for such atrocities.
Like in Syria, we are concerned about new information
that the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham may have used
chemical weapons in its attacks. Uruguay vigorously
condemns any use of chemical weapons against civil
populations and calls for an in-depth investigation into
such claims.
As we have warned for many months, the retaking
ofMosul has the potential to become one of the greatest
humanitarian crises in recent times. In the great
struggle to reclaim Mosul, the Iraqi Government must
include the protection of civilians and an immediate
response to the humanitarian emergency as part of
its military offensives. The reconstruction of civilian
infrastructure, the normal provision of services and the
gradual return of internally displaced persons to their
homes must be priorities for the Government.

We urge the parties to the conflict to respect and
protect civilians, including women, children, persons
with disabilities and the elderly, respect human rights
and allow access of emergency humanitarian aid,
according to international humanitarian law. Lastly,
we commend the intense efforts being undertaken by
humanitarian agencies to protect civilians in Mosul. In
that regard, we encourage them to continue their efforts.
Nonetheless, it remains clear that military operations
alone will not eliminate the terrorist threat in Iraq. Iraqi
political leaders must overcome their differences and
mutual distrust and reach consensus on a single vision
for national reconciliation, without which, it will be
very difficult in the future to heal the wounds, caused
by so many years of conflict, from which its people
continue to bleed.

