Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We would like to share our thoughts with you,
Mr. President, on the report of the High Representative
for Bosnia and Herzegovina (see S/2017/922, annex). In
our opinion, of all the reports Mr. Inzko has submitted
to the Security Council since 2009, this is the most
biased. To a lesser extent, the document refers to the
implementation of the General Framework Agreement,
but essentially it forms part of the tendentious and
biased attacks on the Republika Srpska that a number of
delegations in this Chamber have unfortunately already
seized on. There is only one thing to be gleaned from
the report, which is that the Bosnian Serbs alone are to
blame for all of Bosnia and Herzegovina's problems.
It is clear to anyone even slightly familiar with the
situation in Bosnia that the picture painted by the High
Representative is a long way from the truth and very
misleading, and testifies to the fact that its author has
lost touch with reality.

We are deeply disturbed to see that Mr. Inzko
has entered the realm of blatant Serbophobia and
that his daily activity has been reduced to improving
his relations with Banja Luka and lobbying for Euro-
Atlantic integration for Bosnia and Herzegovina, in
contravention both of his mandate and internal political
realities in the host country. I will say straight out that
we should not be engaging in hostilities but carrying
out our duties conscientiously. That approach requires
fostering national reconciliation processes, mutually
respectful internal political dialogue, compromise and
consensus and, of course, respectful consideration of
the views of all the parties. Mr. Inzko should bear in
mind that in Bosnia and Herzegovina he represents
the entire international community, not the individual
members of his own choosing. He has to conduct
agreed-on policy, not carry out somebody's individual
instructions or be guided by personal hostility.

However, let us get to grips with the reality of the
situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina, whose main feature
is a deep internal political crisis at both the Bosnian
level and in the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina,
founded on the absence of any equal or mutually
respectful dialogue among the three constituent
peoples. Strangely enough, the High Representative
failed to underscore that in his report. It is exactly
that absence of genuine inter-ethnic interaction that is
creating problems in the functioning of Government
bodies, hindering the process ofimplementing essential
socioeconomic reforms - including, incidentally,
the European agenda - and compelling local ethnic
communities to undertake additional efforts to
establish and protect the equality and broad autonomy
guaranteed by the Dayton Agreement.

The Peace Agreement signed in Paris in 1995
contains a fully functioning set of rules and conditions
for the functioning of Bosnia and Herzegovina that
has no need of outside interference. Every decision
should be the result of internal political dialogue and
consensus. That applies to one of the current priority
issues, the reform of the electoral laws, which should be
based on respect for one of the key Dayton provisions,
equality for all peoples. That same principle should
also be observed in the Bosnia and Herzegovina
justice system, about whose fairness, independence,
impartiality and effectiveness many serious questions
have been raised, one revealing example being the
Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina's recent decision in
the case of the Bosniak commander Naser Orie during
the Yugoslavian conflict. It is surprising that in his
report Mr. Inzko decided not to dwell on issues that are
matters of such urgency for the citizens of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, who are clearly losing faith in justice. He
completely fails to mention the systemic problems in the
special services at the Bosnian level, which are giving
two of the constituent peoples reason for concerns
about their independence from political pressure, their
impartiality and their due national representativeness.

We do not agree with Mr. Inzko's theme of blaming
the Bosnian Serb leadership for undermining Dayton.
In its alternative report to the Security Council, the
Republika Srpska clearly and unequivocally articulated
its commitment to Dayton and the integrity of Bosnia
and Herzegovina, presenting a well-reasoned position
on the country's key issues that differs from that of
the High Representative. We recommend that Council
members not dismiss this document but rather read
it carefully, especially since it was circulated in New
York in advance of the meeting, in contrast to the report
of the High Representative.

This issue also applies to the High Representative's
reaction to the Republika Srpska National Assembly's
adoption on 17 October of a resolution on military
neutrality, which far exceeded the comments from
NATO headquarters in Sarajevo. We do not see why
the highest representative body of that entity cannot
democratically inform the Bosnian federal authorities
of its position on a very painful issue for Bosnian Serbs
that is also one of the most hotly debated questions in
Bosnia and Herzegovina - its rapprochement with
NATO. It should not be ignored.

In the light of all of this, one thing is clear. The
external protection mechanism, in the person of the
High Representative, has outlived its usefulness. It is
not playing a positive role in the settlement process
but is rather introducing unnecessary tension and
engaging in matters unrelated to his mandate under
the pretext of advancing Euro-Atlantic integration. We
propose considering the practical aspects of shutting
down the Office of the High Representative, including
taking into account the 5+2 programme. That proposal
was approved in 2008, but the Office continues to
function. Major steps to reduce its budget and staff are
clearly required.

We should be focusing on the future agenda for
Bosnia and Herzegovina rather than on protectorate
forms of influence. That focus should be on an
unconditional transfer of all responsibility, without any
exceptions, to the local authorities. That should include
the judiciary, where there are still three foreign judges
presiding over the Constitutional Court of Bosnia
and Herzegovina, which calls the sovereignty of the
country into question; promoting an equitable and
mutually respectful internal political dialogue, as the
only possible path to genuine national reconciliation;
ensuring that international presences refrain from
interfering in local affairs, as happened in the recent
decision of the High Judicial and Prosecutorial Council
on vetting judicial officials; and rejecting unilateral
sanctions as a tool for putting pressure on objectionable
individuals, which only increases tension. Those are the
things that the Security Council should be discussing.

Russia has traditionally maintained friendly
relations with all the peoples of Bosnia and Herzegovina
and the Balkans generally. The region should be a
platform for collaboration and constructive cooperation
on goals that unite us all, such as strengthening peace,
security and stability in the country and region, and

which are becoming increasingly urgent, especially in
the light of the terrorist threat in Europe.

In conclusion, we would once again like to express
our gratitude to the authorities, political stakeholders
and civic organizations of the Republika Srpska for their
unveiling of a memorial to Vitaly Ivanovich Churkin,
who, first as Special Representative of the Russian
President and then as Permanent Representative of
Russia to the United Nations, made a tremendous
contribution to the stabilization of the situation in
the region.

