Mr. Atlassi (Morocco) (spoke in Arabic): First,
I would like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on
assuming the presidency of the Council this month
and on your initiative to hold this debate today on the
situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian
question. It clearly shows that your country is
committed to continuously supporting the Palestinian
question particularly in the current situation. I would
also like to thank Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process and
Personal Representative of the Secretary-General, for
his valuable briefing on this topic.

Today's meeting is being held under very difficult
and delicate conditions. The situation in the Middle
East is deteriorating day by day, particularly with
regard to the Palestinian question. We must recognize
that tensions in the region have dominated international
political discourse, at the expense of the Palestinian
question. The situation in occupied Palestine is clearly
worsening, which could have grave consequences,
owing to the continuation of the policies of Judaization,
colonization and oppression policies methodically
exercised by the Israeli occupation authorities against
the Palestinian people. These policies have exacerbated
tensions and thwarted the prospects of any action that
could help resolve the situation and relaunch the peace
process, which has been stalled since 2014, in order to
reach a two-State solution and establish the State of
Palestine with East Jerusalem as its capital, based on
the 4 June 1967 borders.

The use of excessive force against unarmed
civilians in such a way that causes casualties among
them is deplorable and to be condemned. Such actions
only exacerbate tensions and perpetuate the cycle
of violence. The use of force and violence has never
been the key to peace or the peaceful solution that is
so sorely desired and needed today. Conditions that
are not conducive to a decent life cannot support the
peace process. The settlement activities continue in
violation of United Nations resolutions, especially
resolution 2334 (2016), which only serves to provoke
the Palestinians and the international community.

The city of Jerusalem has a privileged status, not
only for its inhabitants, but also for the adherents of
the three monotheistic religions. Jerusalem is the first
Qibla and the third holiest site in Islam for more than
1.5 billion Muslims. The city of Jerusalem has a special
legal status, which must not be challenged in any way,
pursuant to relevant Security Council resolutions.

The Kingdom ofMorocco, whose King, His Majesty
Mohammed VI, chairs the Al-Quds Committee,
insists on the need to safeguard the historical, legal
and political status of Jerusalem. Morocco calls on
the United Nations and, in particular, the permanent
members of the Security Council, to fully discharge
their responsibility to protect that status and ensure that
nothing undermines international efforts to resolve the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict. It is now necessary for the
international community to shoulder its responsibility
and encourage the parties to return to the negotiation
table and relaunch the peace process based on the two-
State solution - a solution that is more at risk now
than ever of vanishing and opening the door to chaos,
violence and hatred.

At the request of His Majesty King Mohammed
VI, Mr. Nasser Bourita, Minister for Foreign Affairs
and International Cooperation, visited Palestine on
27 March. He was welcomed by President Mahmoud
Abbas, the Palestinian Minister for Foreign Affairs
and other Palestinian leaders. The purpose of the visit
was to reaffirm the Kingdom of Morocco's unchanging
View in support of the Palestinian people, their leaders
and their just cause. Additionally, the visit provided an
opportunity to hold consultations on the current delicate
situation and rebuff all attempts to rid Jerusalem of
its Arab and Islamic identity. The visit also helped to
strengthen our bilateral relations and place Morocco's
capacities - be they diplomatic or economic - in the
service ofthe Palestinian question. In order to reinforce
that cooperation, the Joint Morocco-Palestine
Committee will meet soon to forge closer ties between
the two countries and to adopt a number of conventions.

In conclusion, the position of my country with
regard to the conflict is unchanged and consistent with
the Arab Peace Initiative and its principles and terms of
reference for peace, namely, for the establishment of an
independent Palestinian State with East Jerusalem as
its capital, within the 4 June 1967 borders, living side
by side with Israel in peace, security and harmony. As
in the past, Morocco is ready to effectively commit to
all initiatives that seek to advance the peace process
and reach a settlement to achieve security and stability
in the region.

