Mr. Lambertini (Italy): While aligning myself
with the statement delivered by the observer of the
European Union, I would like to offer some remarks on
a national basis.

At the outset, I wish to express Italy's sincere
appreciation to Lithuania for convening this debate and
all its efforts to ensure an effective follow-up to this
process. I would also like to reiterate Italy's enduring
commitment to actively participating in multilateral
efforts aimed at curbing the illicit trade in small arms
and light weapons (SALW), with particular reference to
multilateral forums.

This meeting on the human cost ofthe illicit transfer,
destabilizing accumulation and misuse of such weapons
further underscores the vital importance of addressing
the problem, since small arms, light weapons and related
ammunition are fuelling current regional conflicts.
Resolution 2117 (2013), which we highly commend,
is but the most recent of many resolutions clearly
highlighting the threat posed by the destabilizing flow
of these weapons to peace and international security.
In that respect, it is worth recalling the regional
dimension of the problem, recognized as crucial from
the very beginning of the process. My country believes
that the countries of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe have progressively developed a
core of common understandings and best practices that
might be of great use in shaping consensus at the global
level - hence, the pivotal role played by regional and
subregional organizations, as stressed in the same
resolution.

Furthermore, Italy welcomes the adoption of
resolution 2195 (2014) on the fight against transnational
threats, including terrorism, organized crime and the
trafficking of weapons. Such threats were recently
addressed by the Assistance Strategy Committee,
which, under the auspices of the Roma-Lyon Group
on Counterterrorism and Anti-Crime, adopted a West
Africa strategic assistance framework in November
2014. This strategic framework aims to better coordinate
donor assistance against serious and organized crime.
Italy is ready to contribute to this endeavour in the
framework of a regional conference with States and
regional organizations in the Sahel and other parts of
sub-Saharan Africa.

Africa is particularly affected by armed violence
fuelled by the illicit trafficking of small arms and
light weapons. We have witnessed with great concern
that the proliferation of conventional arms stemming
from Libyan arsenals has largely contributed to the
destabilization of the wider region. One of the biggest
accumulation in recent times of small arms and light
weapons, as well as man-portable air defence system
stocks, is now occurring in Libya, which is estimated
to be the largest for a non-producing country in the
world. Arms originating from this country have been
identified throughout the region. The primary motive
for such stockpiling is business rather than use. The
illicit flow of weapons, drugs and migrants has indeed
clustered around certain hubs in Libya and is exerting
socioeconomic effects, as well as security ones. Given
the cross-border nature of the accumulation of such
weapons and ammunition, Italy believes that the only
way forward is to secure arms, provide capacity-
building to border guards and the police, and increase
regional cooperation. We stand ready to assist Libya,
as well as other African States, in implementing their
border security and weapons control capacity.

Italy has been active within the European Union
in elaborating ways of curbing the destabilizing
accumulation and misuse of SALW and their
ammunition. I can assure the Council that my country,
along with its European Union partners, will continue
to offer its cooperation to interested States, taking into
consideration the role of up-to-date technology and best
practices in physical security and stockpile management,
as well as in marking and tracing weapons. We indeed
consider the tracing of illicit SALW in conflict zones
to be a fundamental prerequisite for finding ways
to tackle the illicit flows of such weapons to areas
affected by armed conflict or instability. The patterns
ofillicit trade and diversion that become visible through
tracing can be used to enhance the effectiveness of law
enforcement and arms control measures designed to
fight illicit proliferation.

Moreover, greater clarity and uniformity are
required if we wish to effectively combat illicit
trafficking while not harming legal commercial
interests and legal trade, consistent with national and
international obligations. The Arms Trade Treaty
(ATT) is in this regard a balanced and broad-based text,
the result of comprehensive and inclusive negotiations,
in which all Member States' views have been reflected.
We believe that the Treaty has the potential to contribute
significantly to international peace and security by
regulating the international trade in conventional
arms, making it more responsible and transparent, and
eradicating illicit arms trafficking. Furthermore, the
inclusion of the prevention of gender-based violence in
the ATT can make a dramatic difference for women,
who are among the most vulnerable victims of armed
violence and conflicts.

Finally, I wish to underline the importance ofkeeping
the process - national coordination activities, regional
seminars and United Nations conferences - open to the
participation of all potentially concerned constituencies.
Non-governmental organizations and private industries
are precious partners in our endeavour. Their active
presence in our meetings would provide us with
comments, analysis and proposals that are extremely
useful, as they lead us to consider relevant issues from
perspectives that are complementary to the ones of
national administrations. Ultimately, they remarkably
help us develop a more focused and comprehensive
understanding of the problems we are faced with and
their possible solutions.

