The Secretary-General: Allow me to first thank
the Japanese presidency, and to thank you personally,
Mr. President, for convening this meeting. I would also
like to acknowledge and welcome the many Ministers
and other representatives around the table, as well
as the participation of the Republic of Korea and of
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea in this
important meeting.

The situation on the Korean peninsula is the
most tense and dangerous peace and security issue
in the world today. I am deeply concerned by the
risk of military confrontation, including as a result
of unintended escalation or miscalculation. I know
that the Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs
briefed the Security Council earlier this week on his
recent visit to the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea. I will not repeat what he had to say, but I want
to note that his Visit involved the first in-depth political
exchange of views between the Secretariat and officials
in Pyongyang in almost eight years. Indeed, his visit
came at the end of a difficult year.

This year, the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea conducted activities related to its nuclear
and ballistic missile programmes at an alarming and
accelerated pace. On 3 September, it conducted its sixth
nuclear-explosive test, involving what it claimed was
a "two-stage thermo-nuclear weapon". The test caused
a seismic event of magnitude 6.1. Over the year, the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea has conducted
20 ballistic missile launches. Those have included its
first tests oftwo intercontinental-range ballistic missiles
and tests of new medium- and intermediate-range
ballistic missiles. In September, two Hwasong-IZ
intermediate-range ballistic missiles overflew Japan.
No aviation or maritime safety notifications were given
for any of those launches.

The International Atomic Energy Agency remains
unable to access the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea to verify the status of its nuclear programme.
The Agency monitors developments through satellite
imagery; at the Yongbyon Nuclear Scientific Research
Centre, it has observed signatures consistent with
the operation of a plutonium production reactor and
reported centrifuge enrichment facility. The Agency
also continues to observe indications of ongoing
mining, milling and concentration activities at the
Pyongsan uranium mine and Pyongsan uranium
concentration plant.

The Democratic People's Republic of Korea
remains the only country to continue to break the
norm against nuclear testing. Its actions show blatant
disregard for the will and resolutions of the Security
Council, and undermine the international norm against
nuclear testing and the nuclear non-proliferation
regime. Resolution 2375 (2017), adopted in September,
includes the strongest sanctions ever imposed on the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea. I reiterate my
call on the Democratic People's Republic of Korea's
leadership to comply with the relevant Security
Council resolutions and allow space for the resumption
of dialogue on denuclearization and sustainable peace
on the Korean peninsula.

While all concerned seek to avoid an accidental
escalation leading to conflict, the risk is being
multiplied by misplaced overconfidence, dangerous
narratives and rhetoric and the lack of communication
channels. It is time to re-establish and strengthen
communication channels, including inter-Korean and
military-to-military channels. That is critical to lower
the risk of miscalculation or misunderstanding and
reduce tensions in the region. Any military action could
have devastating and unpredictable consequences.

The unity of the Security Council is an essential
instrument to achieving the goal of denuclearization,
and creates the space for diplomatic initiatives aimed
at achieving it in a peaceful manner. The Security
Council's call in paragraph 30 of resolution 2375 (2017)
is united to "further work to reduce tensions so as to
advance the prospects for a comprehensive settlement".
It also expresses

"its desire for a peaceful and diplomatic solution
to the situation and [welcomes] efforts by
Council members as well as other Member States
to facilitate a peaceful and comprehensive solution
through dialogue" (resolution 2375 (2017), eighth
preambular paragraph).

The Secretariat and I are the Council's partner in
that effort, and my good offices will always remain
available. I believe that the Secretariat adds strategic
value in three key areas: first, impartiality; secondly,
the voice and norms, values and principles for peaceful
and diplomatic solutions, in line with international
law; and, thirdly, offering channels of communication
with all parties. The Organization is a key venue
where all six parties are represented and can interact
to narrow differences in understanding and promote
confidence-building measures. As Secretary-General,
I commit to protecting and strengthening those three
areas. Security Council unity behind that effort
is essential.

I welcome the Council's humanitarian and human
rights concerns. The Secretariat has consistently
conveyed the importance of disassociating the
peace and security situation from the humanitarian
imperative. Seventy per cent of the population of the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea is categorized
as food insecure, and 40 per cent are malnourished.
The 2017 Democratic People's Republic of Korea
Humanitarian Needs and Priorities document calls
for $114 million to meet urgent requirements, which
is only 30 per cent funded. I ask all Member States,
particularly those around this table, to carefully
consider the humanitarian principles that underpin our
work. The people of the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea need our generosity and help.

Not long from now, athletes will gather in
Pyeongchang for the Winter Olympics. I express my
sincerest hope that the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea will take part. As the General Assembly
has recognized, the Olympic Games can foster an
atmosphere of peace, development, tolerance and
understanding on the Korean peninsula and beyond.
We need to spread and deepen that spirit of hope and
possibility. Diplomatic engagement is the only pathway
to sustainable peace and denuclearization. We must do
everything we can to reach that objective and avoid
a level of danger that would be unpredictable in its
trajectory and catastrophic in its consequences.

