Mr. Alcalay (Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to begin by hailing the presence of the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Colombia, Mr.
Guillermo Fernandez de Soto, who is presiding over
this important meeting. At the same time, I wish every
success to our colleague Alfonso Valdivieso, as, during
this month of August, in which Colombia holds the
presidency of the Council, he continues the marvellous
job begun this morning by his Foreign Minister. We are
certain, Sir, that the work of the Permanent
Representative of Colombia as President of the
Security Council this month will be a reflection of his
estimable record as a diplomat at the United Nations
and of Colombian diplomacy in general.

I would also like to salute the presence of the
Secretary-General in our discussion this morning. This
underscores the importance that the Secretariat
attributes to the debate that is taking place in the
Council today.

Although it is true that small arms and light
weapons are not the causes of conflicts, ready access to
them, combined with their widespread circulation and
uncontrolled proliferation, has contributed to
disturbances that affect communities around the world.
The tremendous ease with which it is now possible to
acquire these weapons on the international market,
their indiscriminate spread in civilian populations and
their use in violent activities and in crime - in
addition to their use in terrorism, organized crime and
drug trafficking, as has been noted here on various
occasions - make the problem even more disquieting.
In order to illustrate the seriousness of this situation,
suffice it to mention that in the last decade 46 of the 49
conflicts that took place in various parts of the world
were carried out chiefly by means of the use of small
arms and light weapons. Millions of men and women
around the world today mourn the loss of members of
their families, and countries have lost outstanding
professional people to help their development because
of the harmful effects of these small arms and light
weapons.

But at this stage, the debate, which is the second
of its kind in this Council, is of particular importance
because it was preceded by an important and successful
meeting, the Conference on the Illicit Trade in Small
Arms and Light Weapons, under the brilliant leadership
of Ambassador Camilo Reyes, to whom all previous
speakers have paid tribute for his remarkable
contribution to the negotiations on the Programme of
Action. Thus, the Security Council faces a task that has
already been developed in the General Assembly, and it
must take further steps and become a compass for
action, working to incorporate all the contributions that
have already been made in order to make an effective
and efficient contribution to what has already been
done in the General Assembly, as a number of speakers
have stressed.

The delegation of Venezuela takes the view that
consideration of this issue by the Security Council is a
significant challenge in this debate that the
Organization has been holding on an issue of tangible
current importance on the multilateral disarmament
agenda, concerning which we need to pool our efforts
to adopt a comprehensive approach that takes into
account aspects such as arms control and disarmament,
post-conflict peace-building, conflict prevention and
social and economic development. This endeavour
requires coordinated action involving a range of
different bodies that are concerned with this issue so as
to ensure this comprehensive approach.

The Security Council's role should certainly be
oriented towards considering the implications of this
problem within the purview of this principal organ,
which is international peace and security. From this
standpoint, it is our view that the Council has a specific
interest in this issue, given its responsibility in peace-
building, which in turn involves support for the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of ex-
combatants, pursuant to the agreements voluntarily
entered into by the parties. At the same time, the
measures adopted by the Council in dealing with
conflicts in various regions of the world have a genuine
impact on efforts to reduce the spread and excessive
accumulation of small arms through the
implementation of arms embargoes, whose provisions,
by the way, are binding on all States, and Venezuela
complies with them in full.

The United Nations has given significant impetus
to the development of a global awareness, which has
enabled the first steps to be taken towards the creation
and implementation of measures that, as they are
phased in, could be an effective advance in controlling
the illicit trafficking, excessive accumulation and
uncontrolled proliferation of small arms and light
weapons. In this endeavour, we should highlight the
work of the various panels of governmental experts,
which have been created to identify better within this
Organization the means of tackling the problem in its
true dimension. The recent Conference on Small Arms
and Light Weapons made it possible for us to secure a
global political commitment by means of the adoption
of the Programme of Action, whose aim is to prevent,
combat and eliminate small arms and light weapons in
search of a peaceful balance inside our countries, and
which highlights the chief responsibility borne by
States, the chief architects in carrying out these
measures.

Venezuela considers that efforts to find solutions
to the problem of the illicit traffic in small arms and
light weapons should follow a comprehensive,
balanced and non-discriminatory approach that takes
into account the specific characteristics and
experiences of the regions, subregions and countries
involved, with a view to tackling this criminal activity
in all its aspects. At the same time, my country
considers that with the support and participation of
civil society, the primary responsibility for tackling
these problems should fall to Governments. From this
standpoint, there must be safeguards for the right of a
State to acquire weapons to meet its legitimate needs of
defence, in conformity with Article 51 of the United
Nations Charter, in order to prevent manipulation and
biased interpretations.

In various regions of the world, States have taken
specific measures to counteract the illicit proliferation
of small arms. This is true in our hemisphere, where
the Organization of American States broke new ground
by adopting in November 1997 the Inter-American
Convention against the Illicit Manufacturing of and
Trafficking in Firearms, Ammunition, Explosives and
Other Related Materials, and with the preparation of
model regulations on firearms, parts and components
by the Inter-American Drug Abuse Control
Commission.

The commitment of Venezuela to international
endeavours to combat illicit trade in small arms and
light weapons is attested to by the adoption by the
National Assembly, the legislative organ of the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, of the Inter-
American Convention against the Illicit Manufacturing
of and Trafficking in Firearms, Ammunition,
Explosives and Other Related Materials, as published
in the official bulletin of the Republic, issue number
37.217 of 12 June ofthis year.

Venezuela is convinced that the international
community must base its efforts on cooperation in
order to tackle the problem of small arms and their
effects on peace and stability, in view of the links
between them and other illicit activities that might also
jeopardize the security of States.

Allow me to conclude by noting the result of the
Conference on Small Arms and Light Weapons. This
outcome is the beginning of a process that will make it
possible to achieve measures of greater depth and scale
as we proceed further, in order to tackle the problem
effectively and comprehensively. In this regard, we
believe that the elimination of the excessive
proliferation and accumulation of small arms, together
with other measures proposed here, will undoubtedly
contribute to the solution of the conflicts to which we
have referred.

