Mr. Spinellis (Greece): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the members of the Human Security
Network, namely, Austria, Chile, Costa Rica, Greece,
Ireland, Jordan, Mali, Norway, Panama, Slovenia,
Switzerland and Thailand, and on behalf of the Republic
of South Africa as an observer.

The Network is a cross-regional group of States
that promotes human security as a people-centred,
comprehensive and prevention-oriented approach for
achieving peace, development and human rights. The
protection of civilians in armed conflicts is a core
matter for the Network.

First, I should like to express my appreciation to
Luxembourg for taking the initiative to convene this
very important meeting and for the comprehensive
and stimulating concept note (S/2014/144, annex). We
welcome the holding of this debate to tackle this critical
matter. We also welcome the adoption of resolution 2143
(2014), which enables us to proceed with a successful
way forward.

The Human Security Network also welcomes the
launching of the campaign "Children, not soldiers",
initiated by the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Children and Armed Conflict and UNICEF,
in collaboration with other United Nations partners,
with a view to ending and preventing the recruitment
and use of children by Government armed forces in
conflict by 2016.

The Human Security Network remains concerned
by the numbers of children that are negatively affected
by conflict and post-conflict situations, as mentioned
by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General.

Since Graca Machel's seminal report (A/51/150)
recognized the impact of armed conflict on children,
millions of children have continued to be caught amid
armed conflicts, not only as mere bystanders but as
targets of multiple acts of violence, such as attacks
against schools, mutilations and sexual abuse, as well
as hunger, disease and exploitation as tools of war.
Such children are subjected to death and suffering and
are consequently transfigured into victims of terror
and fear. We therefore remain deeply concerned for
children's safety in all armed conflicts, including in
Syria, the Central African Republic, the Democratic
Republic of Congo and many other places. Furthermore,
we strongly deplore the use of schools as detention and
torture centres.

This is a grave and urgent matter, and it is therefore
essential to shift our focus to action plan adoption and
implementation as a practical way forward. Action
plans are vital strategic tools in order to end these
horrendous violations against children in situations
of conflict. It is therefore important for concerned
Member States to pursue concrete, time-bound action
plans and to commit to action plan implementation
through national-level strategies. We acknowledge
that respect should also be given to the time frame of
the action plans, and non-compliance should result in
direct consequences for those concerned.

The importance of strengthening national
accountability mechanisms is also essential. It is vital
to ensure an adequate child-protection mandate and to
place importance on the monitoring and reporting of
violations. We highlight the monitoring and reporting
of violations, which should be upheld and considered
as noteworthy tools, to mitigate the ongoing effects
of impunity. That should be accompanied by political
dialogue, demarches, multilateral cooperation and
mainstreaming the issue of children in armed conflict
in order to advocate for the protection of children.

The Security Council is encouraged to exert
pressure on perpetrators and to apply the necessary
measures to address these violations. That includes
imposing lawful consequences for perpetrators.
Stronger collective commitment to the responsibility
for dealing effectively with persistent perpetrators
of violations against children in armed conflict is
encouraged of all States.

It is the responsibility of all States to investigate
and prosecute those responsible for violations against
children. It is therefore important to develop legislation
criminalizing violations against children and to
develop the necessary prosecutorial and investigative
capacities. In that regard, we reiterate the importance
of ensuring universal registration, including late birth
registration, in order to investigate and verify the age of
recruits and ensure protection of those under 18 years of
age from active military service. Furthermore, Member
States are encouraged to take the necessary steps to end
violations such as the military use of schools and to
hold perpetrators accountable for violations that have
already been committed.

The Human Security Network highlights the
importance of focusing on the prevention of future
violations, and of restoring and integrating those who
have been affected by conflict through protection
and relief. The Arms Trade Treaty is a step forward
towards the protection of children in armed conflict, as
its provisions establish that exporting States shall take
into account the risk of covered conventional arms or
items being used to commit or facilitate serious acts of
violence against children.

The implementation of concrete primary prevention
strategies is imperative. That should include sustainable
ways to ensure an age-verification process in recruitment
procedures, measures to ensure that children have
birth certificates, and education programmes to
inform communities on national and international laws
pertaining to recruitment and the consequent reporting
of unlawful recruitment practices.

We underscore the importance of peacekeeping
missions and the provision of key psychosocial services
to children and their families affected by armed conflict.
We must also aim to support national institutions and
mechanisms that protect civilians in armed conflict.

The Human Security Network urges Member
States to keep concerns relating to children high on the
international agenda and remains committed to, and
diligent in, the implementation of resolutions relevant
to the topic, including resolutions 1261 (1999) and 1998
(2011), as well as resolution 2143 (2014), adopted by
the Security Council today, which contains important
provisions to ensure and protect the right of the child
to education. The members of the Human Security
Network are dedicated and committed to responding to
the issues that have been raised.

I should now like to add some remarks in my
national capacity.

Greece welcomes the holding of this debate to tackle
this critical matter. We also welcome the adoption of
resolution 2143 (2014), which enables us to keep up the
momentum to proceed to a successful way forward.

Greece aligns itself with the statement delivered
earlier on behalf of the European Union.

It has already been established that the impact
of armed conflict on children is a grave and urgent
matter. It is therefore essential to shift our focus to
the implementation of Security Council resolutions
adopted to date as a practical way forward.

Greece welcomes the Secretary-General's latest
report (S/2014/144) and we too express our concern
pertaining to the escalating numbers of children that
are negatively affected by conflict and post-conflict
situations. This is in addition to the military use
of, and attacks on, schools as a tool of war. Schools,
which formerly represented a place of safety, are now
being transformed into places of trepidation and terror.
Lamentably, the culture of violence is replacing the
culture oflearning, thereby reinforcing ideologies of an
unsafe world.

In Syria, for example, approximately 1,000 schools
were used as detention and torture centres in 2013.
It is vital for Member States to protect children and
teachers from attacks and to protect children's rights
to education by taking steps to end the military use of
schools and to hold perpetrators accountable. A strong
commitment to the responsibility for dealing effectively
with persistent perpetrators of violations against
children in armed conflict is encouraged of all States in
order to combat impunity. The importance of national
protection and accountability mechanisms is therefore
essential. Engagement with non-State armed groups for
the purposes of ending violations and concluding action
plans is also necessary.

It is important for Member States to pursue concrete,
time-bound action plans and to commit to action plan
implementation through national-level strategies. It is
therefore crucial to call upon donors to support national
efforts to strengthen capacities for child protection.
That includes training and capacity-building for child
protection workers and advisers, peacebuilders and
peacekeepers, and working together with communities
on preventive efforts.

We must also aim to support national institutions
and mechanisms that protect civilians in armed conflict.
Furthermore, the monitoring and reporting of violations
should be upheld and considered as noteworthy tools to
mitigate the ongoing effects of impunity. That should
be accompanied by political dialogue, demarches,
multilateral cooperation and mainstreaming the topics
of children in armed conflict so as to advocate for the
protection of children.

In the words of a former child soldier in Sierra
Leone, Ishmael Beah, "children have the resilience to
outlive their sufferings, if given a chance". Let us work
together to give those children a chance for hope and a
future.

