Mr. Andjaba (Namibia): Let me take this
opportunity to commend my dear friend and colleague
Ambassador Holbrooke for the outstanding leadership
he provided to the mission. His steadfastness, firmness
and ability to persuade contributed immensely to the
success of the mission. I also wish to thank
Ambassador Holbrooke for introducing the report and
for the comments he has made on the mission's
activities while in the region. In addition to the points
that he has made, I wish to emphasize some points that
are of importance to my delegation.

It is true that all the mission's interlocutors urged
the deployment of phase II of the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUC) as soon as possible. Naturally,
Namibia shares the same view. The 14 April ceasefire
agreement continues to hold and the status-of-forces
agreement has been signed. These two very important
factors alone have paved the way for deployment of the
5,500 military observers. Any further delay of the
arrival of the military observers in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo might be misinterpreted and
taken advantage of by the enemies of peace in the
Congo. This time, we cannot fail the people of the
Congo. Resolution 1291 (2000) has put the
responsibility for the deployment of military observers
entirely on the Secretary-General. We therefore urge
him to bring the initial deployment timetable forward
and to deploy the observers to the Democratic Republic
of the Congo without further delay.

Furthermore, we wish to express our appreciation
to those Member States that have offered to contribute
their troops to MONUC.

The inter-Congolese dialogue is no doubt one of
the important pillars of the Lusaka Ceasefire
Agreement. Namibia supports the early holding of such
a dialogue and we encourage the facilitator to continue
to work with all Congolese to resolve the outstanding
issues, thus paving the way for the early holding of the
dialogue. In this regard, we urge all Congolese parties
to work together and cooperate with the facilitator to
find a mutually acceptable venue.

On 25 April, in this Chamber, the facilitator of
the inter-Congolese dialogue presented his work plan
for the dialogue and outlined the difficulties he was
experiencing, including the lack of human and material
resources. We therefore renew our call for
contributions and technical assistance to bolster the
efforts of the facilitator and to give the peace process
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo a chance to
succeed.

Now that the ceasefire is holding, the time has
come for the exchange of all prisoners of war, as
provided for in the Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement. We
therefore insist that those parties holding prisoners of
war cooperate with the International Committee of the
Red Cross to secure the release of such prisoners.

We remain gravely concerned at the reports of
human rights violations in the eastern part of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. The recent May
2000 report of the Human Rights Watch, entitled
"Eastern Congo Ravaged: Killing Civilians and
Silencing Protest", documents in graphic, grim detail
war crimes being committed against civilians in the
east. The report only confirms media reports about the
most horrendous atrocities. The systematic rape of
women and girls in the east must stop. The 15
Congolese women who were buried alive in the east
should not be forgotten. Their cries should echo the
call for immediate deployment of the United Nations
observers in the Democratic Republic of the Congo to
assist in the process for peace, stability and
development in that country.
We call on the rebels and their supporters to cease
terrorizing the civilian population of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. This situation demands
immediate action and it is imperative that those
responsible be held accountable for their actions. While
on this critical issue, let me pay tribute to the United
Nations agencies for their crucial work in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo in addressing the
desperate humanitarian situation of the Congolese
people. Furthermore, I also wish to thank the non-
governmental organizations for their contribution in
this regard.

There is no doubt that the illegal exploitation of
the natural resources of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo is helping to finance the ongoing war. This
illegal exploitation is taking place in violation of the
sovereignty of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and resolution 1291 (2000) and should not be allowed
to continue. The mission has recommended the early
establishment of an expert panel to take this matter
forward, in concurrence with an earlier proposal by the
Secretary-General. We fully support this proposal and
are ready to consider a formal decision on this burning
matter.

The resumption of fighting between Ugandan and
Rwandese troops in Kisangani on 5 May is most
deplorable. It is acceptable neither that foreign forces
wage war against each other on foreign territory, nor
that they invade another country. The resumed fighting
has resulted in the deaths and injury of innocent
Congolese civilians. Worse still, those who inflicted
the damage and caused death do not seem to be
remorseful about it. We look forward to the immediate
and unconditional withdrawal of the forces of Uganda
and Rwanda, as committed in the agreement between
the two countries.

In conclusion, let me pay special tribute to the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Ambassador Morjane, to the Force Commander of
MONUC, General Diallo, and to the men and women
of MONUC for their tireless efforts in carrying out
their mandate under difficult conditions.

