Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I thank
you, Madam President, for convening and presiding
over this important debate today, thereby maintaining
the momentum built up by resolutions 2170 (2014) and
2178 (2014). I want to thank Ambassadors Quinlan
and Murmokaite' for their briefings, and I welcome
the adoption of today's strong presidential statement
underlining once again the Council's unity on the
issue of combating terrorism and violent extremism
(S/PRST/2014/23).

The international terrorist threat continues to
evolve, posing an increasingly acute and widespread
danger to Member States. We have witnessed the
terrible suffering of those living in territories
controlled by terrorist groups. We have been appalled
by a calculated series of brutal murders of journalists
and aid workers by Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL) and other Al-Qaida-related groups. We have
learned of plots involving terrorists who have fought in
Syria and Iraq to murder innocent people in their home
countries. Some of those individuals have come from
the United Kingdom after being radicalized through
the increasingly sophisticated use by ISIL of digital
propaganda. Now more than ever, the international
community must improve its collective response,
working together with the United Nations to combat
an increasingly sophisticated and dangerous terrorist
threat. There are three areas where additional effort is
specifically needed.

First, we need to counter the extremism and
extremist ideology that underpin terrorism. As the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
said in the Council yesterday (see S/PV.7314), little
attention has been paid to the underlying struggle for
minds. My Prime Minister noted in his general debate
speech in September (see A/69/PV.8) that we must take
a long-term approach and address the root cause of
terrorist threats, in particular the poisonous ideology
of Islamist extremism, which distorts the Islamic faith.
In the case of ISIL, it is a terrorist group that seeks
to misrepresent a religion with a warped, extremist
ideology. ISIL uses that political ideology to justify and
fuel its terrorism, to challenge and contradict United
Nations values and to undermine peace in the Middle
East. We should all continue to denounce ISIL and other
terrorist groups' hijacking of religion for violent ends
and work together to defeat the ideology of extremists.

Secondly, we must disrupt the financing of terrorist
groups. ISIL is sitting on extensive assets, yet it also
relies heavily on the income it generates. Resolution
2170 (2014) made clear that direct and indirect trade
with ISIL, the Al-Nusra Front or other Al-Qaida groups
constitutes financial support in breach of United
Nations sanctions. The international community must
work in concert, deepening cooperation to disrupt that
income, suppressing the market for their oil, tackling
illicit trade in their commodities, breaking the vicious
cycle of ransom payments that incentivize future
kidnappings, and sanctioning those Who trade with
Al-Qaida groups and raise funds for them. The United
Kingdom therefore welcomes the Monitoring Team's
recent report (S/2014/770) and its recommendations for
future action.

Finally, the international community must disrupt
the travel of an unprecedented number of individuals
to conflict zones, such as Syria, to fight in terrorist
groups. In the face of that threat, resolution 2178 (2014)
is particularly important, as it obliges States to disrupt
travel by foreign terrorist fighters and to both prosecute
and rehabilitate them on return. The United Kingdom,
like Australia and many other countries, has taken
legislative action domestically to implement those
obligations.

I conclude by noting that the United Nations system
continues to have a vital role to play in the face of
these, and indeed all, terrorist threats. In particular,
the United Nations as a whole has a responsibility to
defend and promote United Nations values in response
to the extremist narratives promoted by terrorists.
For example, there is a significant opportunity for the
United Nations to up its game in terms of strategic
communications on countering extremists. The United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights put
it well yesterday, when he said that thought must be
undermined by thought, in order to overturn ISIL's
ideology of violence and death.

That effort should build on existing resources
and the excellent work already being done, including
the analytical expertise of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate and the capacity-
building expertise of the Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force. But it must go wider,
including relevant United Nations agencies, funds and
programmes and United Nations field missions, so that
the combined United Nations response and messaging
is both more coordinated and more integrated. With
such an increasingly holistic and energized approach,
the United Nations has the potential to deliver truly
impactful support to the regions and the countries most
vulnerable to the threat of terrorism.

