Mrs. Perceval (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like to thank Mr. John Ging, Director of the
Coordination and Response Division of the United
Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs, for his briefing on the worrying humanitarain
situation in southern and eastern Ukraine.

Argentina once again expresses its deep concern
about the situation in southern and eastern Ukraine
and its increasing deterioration. The fears that we
have already expressed about the impact of the
re-escalation in violence on the civilian population
unfortunately seem to be justified, with the threat
that the humanitarian crisis will become increasingly
severe. We are concerned about the growing number of
displaced persons as as result of the violent clashes in
the Donetsk and Luhansk regions. There is no need to
reiterate the information provided to us by the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs. Rather,
we must understand that the international community
cannot remain indifferent towards the number of people
in Ukraine, most of whom are women and children,
seeking refuge in Russia.

The reports of the increasing number of civilians
who have lost their lives as a result of artillery fire
in areas controlled by armed groups are alarming.
In addition, the attacks by armed groups on water
facilities, power plants and other key infrastructure - it
has been said, and we agree - subject the population
to an extremely vulnerable situation, which increases
the threats directly generated by the violence. We find
ourselves in a situation where it is difficult to access
health services, sanitation is worsening and there could
be outbreaks of infectious or non-infectious diseases
associated with those difficulties and the lack of access
to health services.

We launch an urgent appeal for strict respect of
obligations with regard to the protection of civilians
in the areas affected by the violence. We must also
ensure that there are the conditions for civilians to
leave the areas affected by the clashes between the
Ukrainian forces and the armed groups, in particular in
the Donetsk region. All measures must be taken so that
the urgent needs of the displaced can be addressed. We
must underscore that if the hostilities continue, the low
temperatures that will come with the arrival of winter
will put the displaced persons, in particular women and
children, in an even more fragile situation.

We would also like to acknowledge the work done
by the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs in coordination with other United Nations
agencies, particularly in developing the basis for a
future humanitarian response in Ukraine. There can be
no question that we support the call to the international
community to lend all its support to the efforts under
way to help the displaced and provide the necessary
assistance.

Lastly, we believe it is vital to emphasize the
importance of ensuring that an investigation be made
of all the incidents in which civilians have lost their
lives or been injured, because we must determine who
is responsible and guarantee accountability, a condition
that Argentina believes is necessary if security, peace
and the required social dialogue that Ukraine needs are
to be achieved. We therefore emphasize the urgent need
for an inclusive and constructive political dialogue,
which is the only way this crisis can be resolved.

