Mr. Dejammet (France) (spoke in French): I thank
the United Kingdom delegation for organizing this
discussion during its presidency of the Council.

There is no single prescription for all the crises and
conflicts in Africa. But we can draw some conclusions and
learn some lessons from our experiences.

First of all, as most other speakers have already said,
there should be improved relations between the Security
Council and regional and subregional organizations or
indeed ad hoc regional initiatives. In the past, the Security
Council has not always been kept adequately informed
about certain regional initiatives; there is recourse to the
Council only in the latter stages of dealing with a matter,
leaving it insufficiently prepared to give its endorsement
or to make recommendations. The chairmen or
secretaries-general of organizations or ad hoc committees
that are engaged in negotiations ought to meet more often
with the Council, and the Council ought to invite them at
key stages of a peace process in which they are engaged.
This, of course, would apply first and foremost to the
Chairman and the Secretary-General of the Organization
of African Unity (OAU).

On the other hand, States that have the resources
should provide financial and logistical support to regional
or subregional organizations and to ad hoc coalitions
when these are engaged in a peacekeeping operation.
What was done for the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) Monitoring Group
(ECOMOG) in Sierra Leone and in Guinea-Bissau was
inadequate. I fully agree with Ambassador Fowler's
comment that assessed financing for peacekeeping
operations is preferable to voluntary financing.

But the best way to help Africans solve their
problems is, first of all, to train them for peacekeeping.
That is the purpose of programmes undertaken by a
number of countries, including France. And we must help
them to prepare and implement those operations.

The second approach is direct United Nations action,
which would answer the criticism that the Organization
does too little too late. First of all, the United Nations
must prepare itself to act rapidly. The United Nations
should be able to consider the means to launch an
operation in good time. The Security Council attempted
this for the first time with the adoption of resolution 1279
(1999), on the Democratic Republic of the Congo, which
requests the Secretary-General

"to take the administrative steps necessary for the
equipping of up to 500 United Nations military
observers with a View to facilitating future rapid
United Nations deployments". (resolution 1279 (1999), para. 9)

For the first time, we agreed, finally, to prepare in
advance. We should continue on this track. One cannot on

 

the one hand, deplore the slowness of the United Nations
response and on the other reject all innovation.

Secondly, it is obvious that we should ensure that the
resources of an operation are in line with its mandate. To
whittle down the format, the components or the budget of
United Nations operation is the best way to ensure failure.
The financial dimension must not become a constraint that
determines everything else. When we are dealing with the
maintenance of peace and security, the cost should be an
outcome and not a determining factor, and the most
enthusiastic declaration of intentions is worth nothing in the
face of stinginess on the part of States.

T hirdly, the best way to resolve conflicts is obviously
to try to prevent them. We had a debate two weeks ago on
this subject. Preventing conflicts requires many actions that
very often are not within the purview of this Council. In the
political sphere, we should promote the idea of genuine
power sharing, which protects the rights of minorities and
thereby avoids a vicious circle of seizure of power or
political or ethnic revenge. It is up to all of us, Member
States, organizations and donors, to send the same message
about the appropriateness of having power sharing accepted.

In the economic sphere we must maintain a
meaningful level of assistance for development, along with
what is being done in the area of trade. Three quarters of
the least developed countries are located in Africa, and
there are no miracles - they have to be helped. The
requirements for official development assistance remain
substantial. I would agree with what was said by the
representative of the United States regarding the campaign
against AIDS. But this campaign against AIDS, in terms
both of prevention and of treatment, also requires
assistance. It requires solidarity, meaning funds for giving
treatment.

All of these recommendations will serve no purpose,
obviously, if we do not apply them in concrete cases. Many
crises in Africa are at a critical stage. Many of them have
been on the agenda of the Council for several months, if
not several years: the Great Lakes, Sierra Leone, Angola,
Somalia, Ethiopia and Eritrea and, obviously, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. Decisions in the weeks
to come on all of these topics - and I would like to
emphasize the case of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo - will show the extent of any real resonance of the
words uttered today.

