Mr. Zagaynov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): At the outset, we, too, would like to thank
the delegation of Spain for having led the work of the
Council in October and wish the current President
every success this month.

We have taken note of the tenth report of the
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court (ICC)
regarding the investigation of the situation in Libya,
and we thank Ms. Bensouda for her comments.

In 2011, when the Security Council decided to
refer the Libyan situation to the ICC, a number of our
colleagues said that involving the Court would help to
end the wave of violence, bring to justice to all those
guilty of the worst crimes, and thereby prevent future
crimes. Unfortunately, as the report confirms, that
did not happen. The situation in the country did not
stabilize and the increase in violence continues. The
horrendous list of crimes in the Prosecutor's report is
not growing any shorter. It includes the abduction and
murder of civilians, illegal arrests and detention, the
torture of detainees, to which we must now add the
mass executions and other evil deeds committed by the
Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant (ISIL).

We have studied the information in the report
regarding the individuals active in the Libyan case. The
Prosecutor of the ICC reiterated that it intends to handle
the situation of Abdullah Al-Senussi and, if required,
to request a review of the Court's ruling pronouncing
Libya capable of conducting an investigation in that
case. In that regard, the report again concludes that
there are insufficient grounds to transmit such a
request, despite the information regarding the practice
of torture and sexual violence in prison and despite the
death sentence imposed on Abdullah Al-Senussi on
28 July by the court in Tripoli.

To strengthen the Court's standing, its ability
to conduct unbiased investigations of the actions of
all the parties to a conflict, including in Libya, is of
key importance. No significant steps forward have
been noted in that regard. As we have noted, there is
sufficient information regarding alleged crimes, not
only by former partisans of Muammar Al-Qadhaffi
but by other participants to the conflict, including the
rebels and now, of course, ISIL. However, the report
does not refer to any real procedural steps concerning
them. We have only dry statistics and lists of figures
regarding civilian deaths. Russia hopes that in the
future the Court will address this more concretely. The
calls for continued investigations of civilian deaths
resulting from NATO air strikes also went unheard.

We take note of information in the report regarding
cooperation between the Libyan authorities and the
Prosecutor of the ICC. In that context, I would like
to stress the importance of forging and strengthening
cooperation with those States in which investigations
are conducted for the successful discharge of the
Court's mandate. We have noted that, in her comments
today, the Prosecutor referred to so-called atrocity
crimes. As is well known, neither the Rome Statute nor
the corpus of international law contains or has defined
such a category of crime. In that respect, we consider
it important to adhere to the terminology agreed by
States, including within the framework of work on the
Rome Statute.

By way of conclusion, we hope that the Prosecutor
of the ICC, within the framework of further procedural
steps, will take into full account the need for a settlement
in Libya, whose foundation should be the restoration of
statehood and a process of national reconciliation, and
which should also pay due attention to investigating
crimes committed by all sides to the conflict.

