Mr. Cui Tiankai (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
should like to congratulate you, Sir, on Slovakia's
presidency of the Security Council for this month. I
wish to commend Slovakia for its initiative to hold this
open debate. I am pleased to see you personally
presiding over the meeting.

Security sector reform has become an important
part of United Nations peacekeeping and
peacebuilding. United Nations experience in Liberia
and Sierra Leone shows that efforts to reform the
security sector are conducive to restoring peace and
promoting development and that they bear fruit. It also
reminds us that such reform efforts are still facing
many problems and challenges, which we must meet
effectively.

The Secretary-General, the President of the
General Assembly, the President of the Economic and
Social Council and the Chairman of the Organizational
Committee of the Peacebuilding Commission have just
made very enlightening statements. I would now like to
make four comments.

First, in carrying out security sector reform, we
should bear in mind the general goals of peacekeeping
and peacebuilding, focusing on lasting peace and
sustained development for the countries concerned.
Reform should aim to ensure the involvement of
security sectors such as the army and the police in
nation-building, the preservation of stability and the
promotion of economic growth. It should not be used
as a tool for war and violence or as a catalyst for
conflict and chaos.

Secondly, security sector reform should serve the
comprehensive strategy of peacekeeping and
peacebuilding. The mandates of United Nations
missions are different from one another, as they deal
with different issues. Reform should match and
complement efforts towards reconciliation, economic
recovery, the rule of law and human rights protection,
and vice versa. The international community should
give equal weight to those aspects and make parallel
efforts in those areas.

Thirdly, the important role of the United Nations
should be fully recognized in security sector reform.
Currently, too many institutions are involved in reform
and there is too little coordination among them. As a
result, efficiency suffers. The United Nations, given its
unique position, should play the leading and the
coordinating role in the reform process and mobilize
all resources so as to increase efficiency. The United
Nations could formulate a comprehensive approach to
security sector reform by drawing on practices that
have proved effective over years of United Nations
peacekeeping operations. The General Assembly, the
Security Council, the Peacebuilding Commission, the
Economic and Social Council and relevant United
Nations missions should be more involved, and
coordination and communication between the United
Nations and relevant regional organizations should be
strengthened.

Fourthly, the will of the countries concerned
should be respected in any security sector reform
exercise. In the final analysis, the rebuilding of
national institutions is essentially a country's internal
affair and will depend on the country itself. As
countries have different conditions and problems, it is
useful to consult them and to listen to their opinions.
The international community, for its part, should act
more as an adviser and assistance provider aiming at
improving their capacity to build their own strength
and helping them to find mechanisms and approaches
that fit their own conditions, instead of going beyond
given mandates or even acting arbitrarily.

The United Nations was founded following the
scourges of the two world wars. It has the important
responsibility of building a harmonious world of
lasting peace and common prosperity in the twenty-
first century. We are duty-bound to reach out to those
who are suffering as a result of conflicts and help them
to emerge from the abyss of war, restore law and order
and enjoy stability and security. We should bring
conflicting parties together through mutual tolerance,
the resolution of differences and national
reconciliation. We should help them to heal the wounds
of conflict and embark on the road to development,
thus enabling them to enjoy the dividends of peace. All
of that is in conformity with the spirit of the Charter of
the United Nations and is essential to conflict
prevention, as well as peacekeeping and peacebuilding.
China is ready to work with the Council to attain those
objectives.

