Mr. Djani (Indonesia): We would also like to thank the Niger for organizing today's important debate. We would also like to thank all the briefers for their comprehensive and eye-opening presentations. As Indonesia has repeatedly underscored, children are not soldiers. They are our future. Therefore, their rights must be ensured to enable them to become our future agents of peace. Access to quality education is a right for children that gives them the foundation to contribute to peace and security. However, observations today show that conflict is obstructing children's right to education. Schools, which have traditionally been safe places, are targeted. In 2019, almost 500 schools were under attack. Children are also often attacked while on their way to or from school. Teachers and educators have also been targeted, as mentioned by Ms. Virginia Gamba and Ms. Henrietta Fore. Indonesia therefore remains deeply concerned over the resulting alarming number of children denied access to quality education and the increasing attacks on schools, including in the Sahel region. The presidential statement (S/PRST/2020/8) adopted today clearly demonstrates our solid and firm support for the protection of children and schools. We thank the Niger and Belgium for initiating the statement. Against that backdrop, allow me to highlight three pertinent points on this matter. First, with regard to strengthening national capacities on child protection, national Governments have the primary role to protect all children and provide their educational needs. By strengthening national capacities, including education budget facilities, Governments would be able to develop specific provisions that protect children's rights, specifically their right to education. National legislation and legal frameworks would be geared towards the protection of children and their education. Child protection should also ensure that there is no discrimination in education. Girls should have the same rights as boys in education, as well as in all walks of life. Indonesia is committed to ensuring the accessibility of education at all levels and for all students. Today, we have the fourth largest education system in the world, covering approximately 646,000 schools, 3 million teachers and 60 million students. Over decades, there has also been a significant improvement in school enrolment at all levels in Indonesia. Our current priority is to improve the quality and learning outcomes of education. We do not stop there. We also share our experience with many countries and assist in rebuilding schools in our neighbouring countries. Secondly, regarding the importance of promoting a multi-stakeholder approach, the national efforts of Governments and the continued support of United Nations agencies, regional organizations and civil society organizations are equally important in restoring safe access to schools. We commend the work of UNICEF. We also commend the support of peacekeeping missions, which continuously work hand in hand to rehabilitate, repair and replace schools that have been subject to attacks. They also need to find innovative ways to provide education in conflict areas. Indonesian peacekeepers have contributed to promoting education through teaching activities and educational videotapes and books. Our peacekeepers in the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon, as well as in many United Nations agencies, have also engaged with children through civil-military cooperation and the use of smart cars as a tool for mobile learning. As we discuss this important issue, it becomes more pertinent to once again promote community engagement and training for peacekeepers related to the issue of child protection. Thirdly, protecting schools has been a dire challenge in armed conflict. It is even worse during the coronavirus disease pandemic. While many schools are opening in many countries, including here, after months of the pandemic, schools in conflict areas are closed indefinitely. For them, education becomes a luxury, and less a priority, due to the economic difficulties and security concerns as a side effect of the pandemic. They do not have the luxury of having a virtual or digital education, as in many developed countries; hence our job to ensure concrete action and support for children in armed conflict. Children affected by conflict now face heightened vulnerabilities because of the pandemic. Restrictions to mitigate its spread become a challenge for educational activities and response to violations against children. As mentioned in the concept note (S/2020/881, annex) for today's debate, we strongly support the preservation of and respect for the civilian character of schools, including during the pandemic. Any attack should be condemned. Indonesia also reaffirms the call for a global ceasefire that may become a critical moment to rebuild schools in conflict situations. That is needed for development to proceed and prosper. We also appeal to all stakeholders and donors to enhance the contribution and assistance to countries in need to ensure that children can have their education. This year also marks 20 years since the adoption of the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the involvement of children in armed conflict. The Protocol strongly condemns direct attacks on objects that have a significant presence of children, particularly schools. The issue at hand is not really the access to education but the safety and security to be educated. Children are not soldiers. They are our future. Their place is in school to study and reach their full potential.
