The President: The Security Council will now begin
its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The Security Council is meeting in accordance with
the understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have received photocopies of
a letter dated 28 November 1995 from the Permanent
Representative of Angola to the United Nations addressed
to the President of the Security Council, transmitting the
text of the Joint Communique issued by the Government
and UNITA on 13 November 1995, which will be issued as
a document of the Security Council under the symbol
S/ 1995/991.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council welcomes the joint
communique issued by the Government of Angola and
UNITA on 13 November 1995 (S/ 1995/991) in which
they reaffirmed their commitment to the peace
process. The Council is pleased to note that some of
the steps necessary to carry out the provisions of the
Lusaka Protocol (S/l994/l44l, annex) have been
taken recently, including the resumption of the
military talks in Luanda, and the movement of the
first UNITA combatants to quartering areas on 20
November 1995, the first anniversary of the signing
of the Lusaka Protocol. The Council underlines the
need for the quartering process to be completed as
soon as possible.

"The Security Council, however, notes that
despite these positive steps there continue to be
cease-fire violations, importation of weapons,
restrictions on freedom of movement, and the
presence of mercenaries. The Council stresses that
much remains to be done urgently to implement
fully the Lusaka Protocol, including strict
observance of the cease-fire, the continuation of the
quartering process, the quartering of the Rapid
Reaction Police, the return of the Forcas Armadas
Angolanas (FAA) to defensive positions, and the
resolution of questions regarding the modalities of
military integration. The Council calls upon the
Government of Angola and UNITA to continue to
cooperate with UNAVEM. III and to respect fully the
status and security of international personnel.

"The Security Council will follow
developments in Angola closely and looks forward
to receiving the comprehensive report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in Angola by 8
December 1995."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/ 1995/58.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on the agenda.

The Security Council will remain seized of the
matter.

The meeting rose at 12.55 pm.
