Mr. Cardenas (Argentina) (interpretation from Spanish): Just very briefly, as we close this debate, I would
like to offer a few thoughts prompted by the statements to
which we have been listening.

Subsidiary organs are an option which is explicitly
provided for in the Charter. It could thus hardly be
suggested that the proposal to set up a subsidiary organ
implies an institutional reform. On the contrary, this
proposal is designed to maximize the possibilities which
derive from the constitutional instrument of the United
Nations. We can see this clearly from Articles 29 and 44 of
the Charter.

Providing an opportunity for Member States to be
heard would simply enable the members of the Security
Council, before taking decisions for which they are and will
continue to be responsible, to hear Member States which
belong to this Organization but not at that time to the
Council. This would not only enrich the Council; it would
enhance its transparency and, as has been said here today,
also enhance its representativity.

It seems noteworthy that a category of membership -
the most privileged - is suggesting that the initiative we
are promoting amount to establishing a new category -
that of troop-contributing countries. This is specifically
provided for in the Charter. We should recall that the
meeting of any organ can always be an open meeting.

To try to get out of the deadlock which we have
reached on procedures and in order to improve present
procedures we have to believe in openness and to
understand and respect the need for transparency. There
is no room for extremism. We do not have to fear the
views of third parties. We have to hold a vision of the
future of the Organization which is more generous than
autocratic, understanding that there is no conflict between
the desire to listen and the responsibility of taking
decisions.

We are very pleased to have heard some delegations
speak about the need for a Security Council resolution to
implement the proposal. We trust that this will be
discussed and eventually agreed to. We feel that this is
relevant to the substance of the issue before us, and we
do not agree with the intention to immediately downgrade
any future juridical instrument, for that would be
detrimental to the initiative.

In any case, this philosophy of openness lies behind
the kind of meeting we are holding here today. We are
discussing an issue in an open forum before we
specifically take up this item in the Council itself.
Unfortunately, this year, despite the best intentions, we
have had only two such meetings: one in January during
the presidency of my own country; and the second today.

We have been able to considerably improve things
this year. For example, overcoming some domestic
resistance, we have begun a dialogue on a regular and
direct basis with the Special Representatives of the
Secretary-General and even with the Force Commanders
in the field. This dialogue is also very helpful to us when
we take decisions. We have also tried to go on missions
to the field more often and to continue with the Arria-
formula meetings. All of this means that the nature of the
Council will become more modern, more open and,
accordingly, more in keeping with its responsibilities,
over which there can no longer be any kind of tutelage.

This initiative is being taken against the background
of transparency, of the will to listen, of the desire to
share. And this, as we see it, is the path for our
Organization in the future. If we understand this and work
together, the United Nations will have time on its side,
instead of giving the impression that some within the
Organization are fighting against time.

 

There are some things which we do not venture to We have begun to move forward on the road pointed
undertake - not because of the difficulty inherent in them,
but because sometimes we try to make them difficult
precisely because we are not willing to face up to them.

out to us by New Zealand. lt is now a matter of
improving things, of listening to those who are acting in
peace-keeping operations in the field. My delegation
believes that the procedures it has suggested today
deserve thorough analysis by the Security Council.

