Mr. Martinez Blanco (Honduras) (interpretation from Spanish): My delegation wishes to associate itself with your
expressions of regret, Mr. President, over the departure of
Ambassador Merimee of France. We wish him every
success in his new diplomatic post.

My delegation is grateful to the Secretary-General for
submitting the twelfth progress report on the United Nations
Observer Mission in Liberia (UNOMIL). We welcomed the
fact that, following the conclusion of the Abuja Agreement
on 19 August this year, the parties have created the Council
of State and re-established a complete cease-fire, which is
being respected. We are also gratified to know that, now
that a timetable for the implementation of the provisions of
the peace Agreement has been agreed, from the cease-fire
to the holding of elections, the parties have begun the
process of separation of forces.

These are encouraging events, because it seems they
have dispelled the concerns that we expressed in the past at
the lack of determination of the Liberian parties to fulfil
their commitments and of the Liberian people to put an end
to the war. My delegation is convinced that the constant
demands of the international community that the faction
leaders put an end to the conflict and to the suffering of the
Liberian people have facilitated the palpable progress in the
peace process which the Secretary-General describes in his
report. It is right to recognize the valuable efforts made by
the members of the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS) and of the Organization of African
Unity (OAU) to push the peace process forward in Liberia
and to see to it that, with a View to peace, stability and
national reconciliation, the parties pledge to sign the
Cotonou, Akosombo and Accra Agreements.

The presence in Liberia of the cease-fire Monitoring
Group and of the United Nations Observer Mission in
Liberia (UN OMIL) also deserves our appreciation. Without
their action, the history of Liberia would be different today.
We also commend the tireless efforts of the Secretary-
General and his Special Representative to facilitate the
peace process.

We share the observation of the Secretary-General
that, in spite of the signing of the Abuja Agreement and the
assistance that the United Nations and the international
community can give to the parties to implement it, the
parties themselves must show with deeds their will to
maintain peace. Although the signing of that Agreement
represents substantial progress in the implementation of
the Akosombo and Accra Agreements, in the final
analysis it is the responsibility of the Liberian factions
and political leaders to find a definitive solution to the
political crisis and, to that end, to take advantage of the
current positive stage in the peace process.

The Liberian parties still have a number of tasks to
accomplish in accordance with the timetable for the
implementation of the peace Agreement, such as the
separation, disarmament and demobilization of their
forces. We therefore believe that the presence of
UNOMIL is necessary, and we will therefore vote in
favour of the draft resolution, which extends its mandate
until 31 January 1996.

Lastly, in order to back the peace process and the
implementation of the commitments undertaken by virtue
of the Agreement, the international community must
provide all the material assistance that it can, either
bilaterally or through the Trust Fund for Liberia.

