Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): I am sorry for taking the floor again. It is
nobody's concern, be it Turkey or anyone else, to talk
about who leads Syria and about the Syrian people's
choices, just as nobody has the right to talk about the
choices of the Turkish people, or those of any people, of
the States Members of the Organization. It would seem
that the Turkish Government has neither understood,
nor will it understand, this principle. I will spare the
Council the many instances of the Turkish Government's
complicity, some of which have appeared in Council
documents, in the crimes that have been and continue
to be committed in my country.

A little while ago, I cited the example ofthe head of
a terrorist group, a takfiri group linked to Daesh and the
Al-Nusra Front, who is now in Turkey. He is planning,
in coordination with Turkish intelligence, to bring the
situation in Damascus to a head once again. This is
only one example. Nonetheless, the most devastating
example is the Turkish regime's complicity in the use
of chemical weapons at Khan Al-Assal, in Aleppo, two
years ago. When we requested the assistance of the
Secretary-General to investigate the use of chemical
weapons at Khan Al-Assal and to identify those
responsible for their use, he replied to us regarding only
the first part of our request, saying that he would help us
determine whether or not chemical weapons were used
at Khan Al-Assal, but that he could not help us identify
those who used chemical weapons. That is what the
Secretary-General told us after holding consultations
with some influential States on the Council.

But now we have the proof: Turkey allows weapons
to be smuggled from within. High-ranking Turkish
customs officials were fired for stopping and inspecting
a truck full of weapons, contrary to the directives of
the Turkish President. Trials have been taking place in
Turkey, and the media is discussing them. The Turkish
regime - frankly, I do not like using the word regime
in this forum of legitimacy; I will call it the Turkish
Government, not the Turkish regime - has spared no
effort to undermine the Syrian people. It built refugee
camps for Syrians before the crisis, as was the case in
Iraqi Kurdistan. It used chemical weapons and accused
the Syrian army of doing so, in order to incite President
Obama to attack Syria. That is also what the French did.

There is an important book everyone should read. It
was also published in Paris, and it is titled Les Chemins
de Damas, written by Georges Malbrunot and Christian
Chesnot. In it, they demonstrate the complicity of
the French Minister for Foreign Affairs in the use
of chemical weapons in Ghouta, near Damascus, in
August 2012, at a time when Mr. Sellstrom was on his
way to Khan Al-Assal to investigate the use of chemical
weapons there. Mr. Sellstrom was unable to visit Khan
Al-Assal and that remains the case to date. We still do
not know what happened at Khan Al-Assal. And now
the Ambassador of Turkey comes to us making grand
statements about his desire to assist the Syrian people.
Is that how he helps the Syrian people?

