Mr. Laurin (Canada) (spoke in French): Thank
you, Mr. President, for organizing this debate and for
giving us the opportunity to speak on this important
issue. I am convinced that our discussions today will
reaffirm the international community's resolve to work
together to put an end to the proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction (WMD) and to promote measures
to strengthen our collective security.

We want the United Nations, including the
Security Council, to continue devoting attention to this
issue in order to help all Member States to fulfil their
obligations with regard to non-proliferation, arms
control and disarmament norms - norms whose
objectives are universal and whose implementation is
nearly so.

The Council has shown its leadership in
addressing a new challenge arising in a transformed
world security environment, namely, the threat of non-
State actors seeking to acquire, develop, transfer or use
WMD. We would strongly support any resolution that
would facilitate important efforts by States to
criminalize trafficking in such weapons.
(spoke in English)

It is equally important that a draft resolution on
this subject show clarity and balance. The Council
should ensure that definitions and concepts are clear,
that Member States fully understand the measures that
they are being called upon to undertake and that the
Council's role - as well as the roles of other
international bodies, such as the International Atomic
Energy Agency and the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons - are well
understood.

Canada supports the establishment of a committee
to monitor implementation of this resolution. Given the
gravity of the challenge before us, the committee's
duration should be long enough to allow it to
effectively carry out its mandate and to meet the
objectives set out by the resolution. A six-month limit
could handicap the committee by imposing impractical
deadlines.

We should also recall that the aims of the
international treaties that underpin our non-
proliferation efforts are first and foremost to achieve
effective progress toward general and complete
disarmament, including the prohibition and elimination
of all types of weapons of mass destruction. The draft
resolution should recognize this important balance and
equal emphasis on non-proliferation and disarmament
obligations.

Canadians recognize the importance of the
Council's addressing the issue of proliferation of WMD
and the threat it poses to international peace and
security. Canada strongly supports a draft resolution
that will help us confront the proliferation challenge,
that respects the rights and obligations of States under
current international treaties and that encourages the
international community to use its energy and
creativity to improve and build on the complex
structure of non-proliferation, arms controls and
disarmament regimes and mechanisms that have been
established over the past 50 years.

In closing, we encourage the Council to continue
its consultations with Member States and to adopt a
constructive draft resolution that attracts broad support
and leads to effective implementation.

