Mr. Ney (Germany): Please allow me to thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this meeting and for
providing the opportunity for major contributors to
peacekeeping to actively participate in the review of
United Nations peacekeeping. I would also like to
thank the Under-Secretaries-General, Susana Malcorra
and Alain Le Roy, for presenting their views on
necessary adjustments in peacekeeping at the very
beginning of a hopefully fruitful dialogue with the
main stakeholders.

09-3860]
Germany fully supports all the points stated
earlier by the European Union Presidency.

From Germany's point of view, today's
discussion is an important step in a dialogue on
peacekeeping encompassing the various initiatives that
have been generated over the past months. We thank
the Secretariat for its concise analysis of the current
state of peacekeeping, an analysis that intelligently
walks the fine line between maintaining the beneficial
approaches of the Brahimi report while at the same
time pointing to necessary adjustments.

It has often been said that peacekeeping is the
United Nations flagship enterprise. This is true,
because a unique responsibility for the stability and
peace of the entire world lies and remains with the
United Nations. While peacekeeping is not the only
means at hand, it is a decisive tool for mastering that
challenge. The execution of this task is a success story,
while not free of setbacks and criticism. We all admit
that we have a responsibility to improve peacekeeping
even further.

Such an endeavour requires focus, a focus that
helps to separate the urgently necessary from the long-
term desirable, a separation made necessary in part by
there being limited resources available for coping with
all the crises at hand. Our discussion should
concentrate on those adjustments required to
strengthen peacekeeping as a credible means in crisis
management. The reason why Germany puts emphasis
on a thorough, focused process is that the people
affected by the crises deserve the best.

Many thoughts expressed in today's discussion
find our support. I would like to emphasize four
particular ones that are central in our mind.

First, the need to improve and expand the existing
consultation mechanisms has already been addressed
by the EU Presidency. This is crucial. An intensive
dialogue with all stakeholders, above all the Member
States contributing to peacekeeping, is absolutely
essential.

Secondly, before the Security Council adopts a
resolution, a clear understanding of operational assets
available is necessary. It is a cornerstone for
developing clear and achievable mandates.
Consequently, Germany fully supports the Committee
of Thirty-Four statement in this year's report that:

"The Special Committee strongly
recommends that the Security Council be fully
advised on the availability of the operational and
logistical capabilities which would be necessary
for the success of a peacekeeping operation, prior
to making a decision on a new or major change to
an existing mandate." (A/63/19, para. 67)

Thirdly, with regard to the New Horizon
initiative, Germany proposes that this project not end
with another non-paper. I recommend aiming for a
document, based on the consent of all of us, thus
providing a tangible basis for decision-making and
execution.

Fourthly, work has been done regarding the
compilation of basic documents so as to transform the
document entitled "United Nations Peacekeeping
Operations: Principles and Guidelines" into a library of
documents that can assist all who work in
peacekeeping. Germany would like to see that finalized
and made accessible for all contributors sooner rather
than later.

In conclusion, Sir, allow me to thank you and the
Under-Secretaries-General for taking this initiative and
allow me to reiterate Germany's willingness and
dedication to contribute meaningfully to the adjustment
process, so that peacekeeping remains a credible tool in
the hands of the United Nations, a body with the
unique legitimacy to manage crises.

