Mrs. dos Santos Jalo (Guinea-Bissau): The
creation of a security advisory group on conflict
prevention in countries emerging from conflict is yet
another part of the United Nations battle for peace and
security in the world. Today we are discussing one
such country, Guinea-Bissau.

Let me express my deep appreciation for the
attention that the Security Council and the Economic
and Social Council have been paying to countries
emerging from conflict, especially Guinea-Bissau.
Today, we are discussing the report of the
Representative of the Secretary-General in Guinea-
Bissau. As one can see from the report, Secretary-
General Kofi Annan has discussed the political,
economic and social situation in Guinea-Bissau, which
remains of great concern.

It had been quite some time since the Economic
and Social Council Ad Hoc Advisory Group has visited
the country with representatives of the Bretton Woods
institutions. At that time, they went over the details of
the problems in Guinea-Bissau by meeting with
President Yala, members of the Government,
opposition figures, the media, civil society and people
of all stripes. All these efforts were made to better
understand the situation in the country and find better
ways to address the economic crisis and calm social
tensions.

Those efforts continued after the return of the
delegation from Bissau. The group produced a report
that puts forward very positive recommendations. The
report states that both sides must work with each other
in a spirit of partnership and compromise.

It has not yet been possible to implement such an
approach, for reasons that will become clear during the
visit to Guinea-Bissau. I shall arrive in the country two
days before the delegations of the Economic and Social
Council and the Security Council. In saying this, I am
continuing to appeal to the international community not
to give up helping the people and Government of
Guinea-Bissau to find a way out from the deep crisis in
which we now find ourselves.

I would also like to make some comments about
the positive parts of the report, including the military
and security aspects. A positive sign is that the World
Bank is helping the Government find a way to pay
some of the arrears to teachers and to feed some 80,000
children of Guinea-Bissau. Another positive part of the
report concerns the United Nations Children's Fund
programme to promote early childhood development
and to feed children.

I am aware of the fact that the situation in
Guinea-Bissau requires that we do more than simply
maintain order at the border with Senegal. We must
also bring calm to the cities and villages of Guinea-
Bissau by improving the security of the people and
breaking down all kinds of barriers that prevent the
country from moving towards development and peace.

I will not end my statement without appealing yet
again to the international community for its support. As
I said before, it must not give up on Guinea-Bissau. I
appeal to it to continue to help the country. Problems
exist and must be resolved. How is this to be done? If
we must wait until everything is in place before
assistance is given to the country to hold elections, I
believe the population will continue to suffer. This is
not what either the United Nations or the international
community as a whole would want.

Finally, I would like to express my appreciation
to the donors that continue to help the country, such as
Italy, which has forgiven 100 per cent of debt, Japan,
which has donated rice, and the other countries that in
emergencies have provided money to calm the
situation. I would like to voice my appreciation to all
those in the international community who are fighting
for improvements in the country.

