Mr. Rodriguez Parrilla (Cuba) (interpretation from Spanish): I wish to congratulate the delegation of Kenya on
its presidency and express the hope that the representative
of Portugal enjoys a well-deserved rest this evening after
having so successfully presided over the meetings of this
Council for almost a month.

More than three decades after the Security Council's
adoption of resolution 242 (1967), Israel continues its
illegal occupation of Palestinian and other Arab territories,
in open defiance of the norms of international law and the
provisions of the many resolutions and decisions of the
General Assembly and this Council.

At its most recent regular session and at its tenth
emergency special session, the General Assembly
considered in detail the deplorable situation in the occupied
Palestinian territories. The Security Council also held
several meetings last year on this question, especially on
the decision of the Government of Israel to begin building
a new settlement in J abal Abu Ghneim, in the south of East
Jerusalem. Only the veto of one permanent member
prevented the Council from adopting resolutions on this
matter on 7 and 21 March 1997.

The Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable
Rights of the Palestinian People has reiterated that the
situation in the occupied Palestinian territories, including
Jerusalem, is deteriorating alarmingly, in particular with
respect to Israeli settlements and the continued blockades,
which harm the Palestinians economically, violate their
human rights and provoke increased violence and tension.

Despite the urgent appeals of the United Nations, the
settlement policy, instead of disappearing, is being
strengthened. More housing is being built in existing
settlements, encircling roads are being constructed to link
them and the Palestinians of Jerusalem are being denied
residency rights.

The Government of Israel, in a further step in the
wrong direction, has recently announced a new programme
to strengthen and expand its illegal control over Jerusalem.
This programme is a flagrant violation of the provisions of
the Fourth Geneva Convention of 1949 and of the many
resolutions adopted by the Security Council and by the
General Assembly at its tenth emergency special session,

 

and is placing the peace process in the Middle East in
extreme danger.

Cuba resolutely condemns these and other actions,
which are totally devoid of legal validity and represent a
clear challenge to the international community. General
Assembly and Security Council resolutions on the legal
status of Jerusalem must be respected.

Holding this open debate is the most basic duty of
the Security Council in dealing with the serious
developments in the occupied Palestinian territories. The
legitimate right of Member States to request the Council
to hold open debates so as to deal with questions of
international peace and security can in no way be
questioned or subject to any conditions.

Furthermore, it is worrying that the Council is
unable immediately to adopt a resolution that reflects the
overwhelming majority position of United Nations
Member States and of members of the Security Council
on the issue under discussion, a position that has been
reaffirmed once again today.

We wonder how long we will have to continue to
witness the double standard adopted by some permanent
members of the Security Council, which look after their
national political interests, promoting or blocking as they
see fit decisions on issues considered by the Council,
thereby exploiting the prerogatives afforded them by the
anachronistic right of veto.

The Security Council considers issues that are not
within its competence and interferes with the mandate of
the General Assembly, while at the same time making
inexplicable omissions. Regrettably, the item under
discussion is an excellent example of this tendency.

The Security Council has an opportunity to enhance
its credibility and demonstrate its adherence to the
mandate conferred upon it and to the principles contained
in the Charter of the United Nations. As the body
entrusted with guaranteeing international peace and
security, the Council has an obligation to adopt specific
measures to put a stop to ongoing actions that violate
international law and its own resolutions.

In conclusion, I should like once again to express the
resolute commitment of Cuba to the cause of the
Palestinian people and the achievement of its inalienable
rights.
 

