Mr. Plumbly (United Kingdom): My delegation
assisted in drafting this draft resolution, and we will vote
in favour of it. We strongly support the efforts of the
international community to counter the illicit arming and
training of Rwandan elements dedicated to conducting
armed attacks against Rwanda and to ensure that the arms
embargo is effective.

The Commission of Inquiry has done a very
professional job, but in some cases it has not met with the
cooperation it needs. The Secretary-General's report
makes it clear that its work is not yet complete. Some of
its findings so far, in respect of one possible arms
embargo violation in particular, are disturbing. The draft
resolution before the Council will have the effect of
ensuring that the Commission can remain in being, though
in reduced strength and on a standby basis, to complete
its earlier investigations and to pursue any further
allegations of violations. My delegation believes that this
should be possible within existing resources. The
resolution also sends the signal that the Council expects
fuller cooperation with the Commission, in particular
from Zaire, and that it wishes to see other mechanisms
put in place in the region to ensure that the arms embargo
is fully effective. We believe the idea of a United Nations
monitoring presence on the ground worth pursuing.

As the representative of Rwanda reminded us, the
continued instability of the Great Lakes region is a matter
which must remain of great concern to this Council. We
saw all too clearly two years ago where it can lead.
 

Another of the messages sent by this draft resolution is that
the Council and the international community remain
committed to addressing the problems of the region. In that
context, we attach great importance to the implementation
of Security Council resolution 1050 (1996), the
establishment of a United Nations political office in
Rwanda and the retention of the United Nations radio
station there now that the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Rwanda has withdrawn; to the fullest support
for former President Nyerere's efforts to further political
dialogue in Burundi; and, in the longer term, to holding a
regional conference, as encouraged repeatedly by this
Council, to address the wider problems of the region.

