Mr. Burian (Slovakia): I too would like to thank
Mr. Sukehiro Hasegawa for his comprehensive
briefing. I also would like to welcome His Excellency
Mr. Jose Ramos-Horta, Foreign Minister of Timor-
Leste, to the Council and to thank him for his
important contribution to our debate.

Since the representative of Austria will shortly
make a statement on behalf of the European Union, and
since Slovakia fully associates itself with that
statement, I will make only a few additional comments.

We commend the progress Timor-Leste has made
in many areas of State-building with the support of the
United Nations Office in Timor-Leste (UNOTIL). At
the same time, we understand that the Government of
Timor-Leste still faces formidable challenges in its
drive to consolidate peace and democracy in the
country. Those challenges were clearly identified by
the Secretary-General in his report (S/2006/251).

The recent eruption of violence in the capital,
Dili, is a sad reminder of the terrible history and of the
ordeal that the people of Timor-Leste went through in
1999 and a warning that peace and stability in the
country are far from guaranteed if the people of Timor-
Leste do not achieve an improvement in their difficult
economic and social situation and if the fragile
democracy is not strengthened. Therefore, we believe
that the United Nations should continue to pay close
attention to Timor-Leste and provide focused
assistance in order to consolidate the investments that
the Organization has already made over the past six
years. In this regard, we support the Secretary-
General's proposal for extending the United Nations
presence in Timor-Leste by establishing a small
follow-on integrated office for a period of 12 months
after the UNOTIL mandate expires.

We agree with the Secretary-General that the
primary task of the integrated United Nations office
should be to create favourable conditions and a level
playing field for truly free and democratic elections in
the country. It should also exert a stabilizing influence
on all segments of society throughout the period
leading to elections. Besides providing electoral
support to relevant State institutions, the new office
should continue to assist the Government of Timor-
Leste in addressing problems of security-sector reform,
strengthening judicial capacities, protecting human
rights and promoting justice in Timor-Leste. Further
strengthening and development of critical State
institutions is a task of utmost importance and thus
must be properly supported by the donor community.

Last but not least, we welcome the positive
developments in the relations between Timor-Leste and
Indonesia. We believe that it is important that both
countries resolve the problems of border management
as soon as possible. In that regard, we would like to
encourage both sides to complete the process of
delineating the borders and to conclude an agreement
on border management in the near future. This could
substantially strengthen security and help to avoid
dangerous incidents in the border area.

We also would like to see tangible progress
achieved in the process of justice and reconciliation in
Timor-Leste in order to bring the perpetrators of
serious crimes and atrocities committed in the 1990s to
justice and to close this sad chapter in the history of
Timor-Leste.

In closing, we wish the people of Timor-Leste
every success and would like once again to assure them
of our continued support in the critical years ahead.

