Mr. Dolgov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): Mr. President, first of all, I would like to
thank you and your delegation for organizing today's
Council meeting on its working methods. We believe
that a dialogue on these important issues requires a
balanced, professional approach, and one that does not
politicize the substance of the item under discussion.

Russia, as a permanent member of the Council,
favours increasing the effectiveness of the Council's
work, while maintaining its expeditiousness, with a
reasonable balance between transparency and
effectiveness in its work. We will not forget that the
important thing is to build the Council's capacity to
carry out its prerogatives under the Charter of the
United Nations for the maintenance of international
peace and security.

The questions of enhancing the working methods
of the Council lie within its exclusive competency.
These questions must be considered within the Security
Council Informal Working Group on Documentation
and Other Procedural Questions. Work in this area is
not public, yet it should be done on a planned basis and
through rational, constructive interaction with all
interested delegations of States Members of the United
Nations.

In recent years, significant progress has been
achieved in increasing the openness of the work of the
Council, as evidenced by the regular practices of
holding open meetings, of inviting interested parties to
them, of briefings by the President of the Council for
United Nations Members, and of consultation with a
wide range of international participants.

Increasing the quality of its interaction with other
members of the Organization in connection with issues
falling under the Council's competency is a key
element in improving the Council's working methods.
It is currently our practice to establish ways and means
to carry out dialogue between the Council, the General
Assembly, the Economic and Social Council, other
United Nations bodies, regional organizations and
international partners. The current mechanisms for
interaction work; however, there is no doubt in this
regard that, working together, we could focus on
finding additional ways to enhance them.

We support further strengthening the practice of
holding active consultations between members of the
Council and countries contributing troops to
peacekeeping operations, in order to ensure that those
countries can participate at the earliest stages of
planning for such operations. In doing that we must
fully utilize exiting procedures as well as previously
adopted Council decisions in this area. This has to
work like a two-way street. It is important that the
Council also receive the fullest assessment possible
from troop-contributing countries with regard to the
relevant issues. We believe that troop-contributing
countries will participate more actively with members
during Council meetings.

We believe that increasing transparency in the
work of the Council could benefit from the Russian
initiative on reinvigorating the Military Staff
Committee to ensure the relevant level of military
expertise as the Council develops the military aspects
of its peacekeeping operations. The time has come for
that body to function with its full Council membership.
We believe that implementing this proposal should be
of interest to both the permanent and non-permanent
members of the Council. Under the provisions of the
Charter, there is an opportunity for constructive
involvement in the Committee's work by interested
countries contributing troops to United Nations
peacekeeping operations.

We believe that any enhancement of the working
methods of the Security Council must continue to take
place on a regular basis within the Working Group
especially established by the Council for that purpose,
which is currently headed by Ambassador Arias. We
welcome the very constructive cooperation that exists
in that body. That work should be subordinate to the
priority task of effective and expeditious work on the
part of the Council in maintaining international peace
and security, in strict compliance with the Charter of
the United Nations.

