Mr. Bessho (Japan): Japan shares the deep concern
regarding the ongoing violence and the serious
humanitarian situation in South Sudan. It should be
noted, however, that there has been some progress
since late November, most notably the 25 November
decision by the Council of Ministers of the Transitional
Government, which consented to the full and immediate
deployment of the Regional Protection Force, and
President Kiir's 14 December speech to the Parliament
on an inclusive national dialogue. We are encouraged
by the demonstration of political will by the President.

Such commitments would be meaningless if their
implementation were delayed, and, in that case, it is
the South Sudanese people who would suffer. What is
absolutely necessary is for the Transitional Government
to swiftly translate those commitments into concrete
actions in order to prevent large-scale violence and for
it to cooperate fully with the United Nations Mission in
South Sudan, including by expediting the deployment
of the Regional Protection Force.

Japan believes that it would be counterproductive
to introduce additional sanctions measures at a time
when the Transitional Government is making some
positive moves. The Council must continue to engage
with the Transitional Government. Japan believes that
there is still room for diplomatic efforts aimed at urging
the Transitional Government to make further progress.
All the parties and actors can play a significant role,
individually or collectively.

Our Prime Minister's special envoy visited Juba
just this week to urge action by the South Sudanese
leadership, including President Kiir, on those issues.
We will continue to make such efforts. Japan remains
strongly committed to the well-being of the people
of South Sudan and to the country's long-term
development. Japan will continue to contribute to South
Sudan's peace and security.

Concrete actions on the part of the Transitional
Government are key. The international community,
including the Security Council, will closely monitor the
situation on the ground. We should also recall resolution
2327 (2016), including paragraph 10, which the Council
adopted unanimously. Japan decided to abstain on
today's draft resolution for the aforementioned reasons.
J apan's abstention today should not be interpreted as an
endorsement of the status quo or an attitude of wait-and-
see. The Council should remain seized of the matter.
