Mr. Kolby (Norway): Today, the international
spotlight is not on Afghanistan. However, it is of
crucial importance that we not lose focus on
Afghanistan. Remarkable progress has been achieved
since the Bonn Agreement, but there is still much to do
before we can ensure viable and lasting peace and
security.

Norway believes that the United Nations should
be a key actor in the reconstruction process in post-
conflict environments. We therefore fully support the
integrated approach of the United Nations in
Afghanistan. In effect, the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) has succeeded in
taking an appropriate assisting role - as opposed to a
leadership role - in the development process. We also
stand fully behind the work of Mr. Brahimi, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for
Afghanistan, and are very pleased to note the excellent
relations that have grown out of the cooperation
between the Afghan Transitional Administration and
the Special Representative.

Norway is deeply concerned about the
deteriorating security situation in Afghanistan. The
difficult security situation - which led to the tragic
death of four German members of the International
Security Assistance Force (ISAF), to the assassination
of a staff member of the International Committee of the
Red Cross and to several recent attacks on civilian aid
workers - is undermining the possibility of providing
humanitarian assistance throughout the country. ISAF
is crucial in maintaining stability and security in the
Kabul area. Norway will continue to participate both in
that operation and in Operation Enduring Freedom.

We are convinced that, in the long run, successful
implementation of an Afghan-led security sector
reform is essential in order to ensure positive political
and economic development in Afghanistan with the
assistance of the international community. We have
noted with interest the ongoing discussions on
establishing provincial reconstruction teams in order to
increase security in Afghanistan. The concerns raised
regarding a confusion of roles between those teams and
civilian aid workers need to closely looked at. The
expanding drug economy is also a threat to peace and
stability, not only in Afghanistan, but also in the region
as a whole.

Narcotics are rightly described as a cancer, and
excising that cancer is vital for our societies. Norway
appreciates that President Hamid Karzai is firmly
committed to carrying out this fight in Afghanistan in
cooperation with the international community. It is a
fight that requires a multidimensional approach and the
United Kingdom's efforts as the lead nation of donors
involved in counter-narcotics efforts in Afghanistan are
highly commendable.

The Bonn Agreement spells out an ambitious
timetable for the adoption of a new constitution that
should safeguard the interests of all Afghan women and
men. In this regard, it is vital that the Afghan people
actively take part in an open consultation process as
soon as possible. Norway supports this process through
the Constitutional Commission and by supporting non-
governmental organizations that facilitate consultations
with the population on grass-roots levels.

Afghans have a right to choose their own leaders.
This is clearly recognized in the Bonn Agreement. A
prerequisite for free and fair elections is a security
situation in which people feel free to express their
views without fear of intimidation or persecution. The
United Nations agreement to play a key role in
preparing the elections is welcome and needed.

Significant progress in clarifying relations
between the central Government and the provinces has
been achieved lately, especially as regards customs and
tax revenue. We strongly support the Afghan
Transitional Administration in its efforts to control
domestic revenue collection.

Afghanistan is one of the major recipients of
Norwegian development assistance. Norway has
pledged $53 million in assistance to Afghanistan in
2003. So far, about 80 per cent has been disbursed or
committed. Norway has a long-term perspective on its
commitment to Afghanistan.

It is essential that the international community
honour the pledges made at the Afghanistan
Development Forum in March this year and disburse
funding fully and as quickly as possible. Norway is a
strong supporter of joint financing mechanisms, such
as the Afghanistan Reconstruction Trust Fund (ARTF).
In order to strengthen the Afghan Transitional
Administration, it is important that the large donors
also support the Afghan national budget through the
ARTF.

Norway is very pleased that the Afghan
authorities have taken the leadership in donor
coordination through the establishment of the
Consultative Group mechanism. At the same time, we
emphasize the continued need for flexible and
independent humanitarian action.

There is a real risk that the Bonn process will
stall if security is not extended to the provinces. Peace,
stability and economic development can be achieved
only through a prolonged commitment from the
international community in Afghanistan. Security is the
most essential condition for positive development.

