The President: I thank the Deputy Secretary-
General very much for his statement. I should now like
to make a satement in my national capacity.

It is an honour for me to be here this morning to
preside over this meeting of the Security Council on
Somalia. I am grateful to the Deputy Secretary-General
for his insightful briefing.

Following the Somalia Conference on 7 May, the
United Kingdom has chosen to make the situation in
Somalia a high priority for its presidency of the Security
Council this month. The Conference was distinguished
by the close working partnership between Somalia and
the United Kingdom. I am therefore delighted that the
Deputy Prime Minister has joined our meeting today.
I commend her tireless efforts since taking office to
promote peace and stability in Somalia.

Somalia has been through a dramatic shift over
the past 12 months. A new Parliament and Government
have been appointed in the most representative political
process in a generation. Somalia has a provisional
Constitution. The economy is recovering. The diaspora
are returning. Above all, there is a sense of hope.
Somalis are determining their own future.

Last month in London, we saw a united international
community ready to support the next phase of recovery:
Somali-owned and Somali-led. Somali Ministers
shared detailed plans for developing the country's
armed forces, police, justice sector and public financial
management systems. The international community
endorsed those plans and committed expertise and
funding to deliver them.

The Security Council can be proud of its recent
role in Somalia, from ensuring that the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) has the resources and
mandate to succeed, to guiding the United Nations
towards its deepest level of engagement in Somalia for
more than two decades. The Council has stood beside
and behind the Somali people. We have a collective
responsibility to ensure that continues.

I am delighted that the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Somalia (UNSOM) deployed on 3 June. The
Mission will play a key role in making the efforts of the
United Nations more coordinated and coherent and in
providing Somalis with "one door to knock on".

Of course, none of that progress would have been
possible without the enormous contribution of the
African Union, and of AMISOM. in particular. I pay
tribute to the bravery and sacrifices of all AMISOM,
Ethiopian and Somali personnel. History will show the
magnitude and importance of their contribution and
efforts in bringing peace to Somalia.

We look to both the United Nations and the African
Union to work in a complementary manner, for the
good of the Somali people. We are encouraged by
the forthcoming joint United Nations/AU review of
AMISOM's progress. The development of AMISOM's
concept of operations in January 2012 was an example
of the strong cooperation between both organisations.
The results on the ground speak for themselves. We
will support that work in any way we can.

It is in the interests of Somalia, the region and
the wider international community that momentum
be maintained, but we cannot be complacent. History
has shown that, if Somalia is allowed to backslide
into instability and conflict, the consequences will
be felt well outside its borders in the form of regional
instability, piracy and terrorism.

For all the progress that we have seen, Somalia
continues to face huge challenges. We should be under
no illusions as to the sustained efforts that will be
required, in Somalia and from its international partners,
to ensure that progress continues. Somalia lacks public

services - schools, hospitals, clean water supplies.
More than 70 per cent of Somalis still live on less than
$2 a day. There is very real suffering on a daily basis.
We cannot stand by and risk another famine like the
2011 crisis, when more than quarter of a million people
are confirmed to have died.

Al-Shabaab is under real pressure but, as recent
attacks have shown, it still remains determined to kill
innocent civilians and halt Somalia's progress towards
peace and prosperity.

The international community must work to
continue partnership with the Somali Government
to address those challenges. That means supporting
President Hassan Sheikh Mohamud's six-point plan by
ensuring that the commitments made at the Somalia
Conference are fully realized and aligned in support
with Somali priorities. It means ensuring the right blend
of international support to Somalia. It is imperative that
AMISOM. and the United Nations, especially through
UNSOM. and bilateral partners, work closely together in
a coordinated manner. It means ensuring that AMISOM
has the appropriate tools to carry out its mandate and
to develop effective, legitimate and affordable national
security forces, with clear accountabiliyt and oversight,
which will be essential for the Somali Government to
fulfil its role of protecting people and property and
preserving public order.

International partners should work together to
ensure that our support to the development of Somali
security forces is coordinated and aligned to the
Federal Government's plans. It means addressing
serious human rights concerns. Somalia remains one
of the worst places in the world to be a woman. I
welcome the Government of Somalia's commitment to
improving human rights, tackling sexual and gender-
based violence and protecting both women and children
from the effects of conflict. They will have all of our
support as they tackle those vital issues. Ultimately,
political progress will remain the key to the long-term
stability of Somalia.

I welcome the Somali Government's commitment
to holding democratic elections in 2016; to achieve
that, much needs to be done to resolve the outstanding
constitutional issues and the relationship between the
Federal Government and the regions. I welcome the
recent dialogue between the Government of Somalia
and the regions and hope that it will continue. I
commend the role played by IGAD and Somalia's
neighbours. We were pleased to host the talks between
Somalia and Somaliland in Chevening in June 2012 and
welcome the continuation of the dialogue in Turkey. It
is only through dialogue that lasting solutions can be
developed.

I also welcome the European Union's plans to hold
a conference on Somalia in September. The conference
will help sustain the momentum to build a new and long-
term partnership between Somalia and the international
community for political reconstruction and economic
development.

In conclusion, Somalia has come a long way since
the days of extremism and tyranny, which brought
nothing but misery to the long-suffering Somali people.
The next 12 months will be pivotal for Somalia. We
must support the Federal Government to ensure that
plans agreed in London are implemented swiftly to
realize improvements in security, policing, justice and
public financial management. We must ensure that
ordinary Somalis across the country see changes on the
ground. And we must improve coordination between
the international community. Along with the Council,
the United Kingdom will stand shoulder-to-shoulder
with the Somali people and their Government as they
continue their journey towards a brighter tomorrow.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Council.

