Mrs. Nl'ifiez Mordoche (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish): It is my honour to speak on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement. The Non-Aligned Movement
has reaffirmed on many occasions its clear position on
the situation in the Middle East. The Movement is
deeply concerned at the increasing deterioration in the
situation on the ground and the impasse facing the
peace process in the region. The Non-Aligned
Movement has reiterated its deep concern at the
situation in the occupied Palestinian territory during
the most recent period, particularly as the result of the
disproportionate, indiscriminate and excessive use of
force by Israel, which has caused has caused a large
death toll and injuries to Palestinian civilians as well as
huge material destruction.

It is clear that the question of Palestine is at the
core of the problem in the Middle East. As long as this
situation remains unsolved, pockets of tension in the
region will continue to proliferate.

There can be no just and lasting solution to the
question of Palestine that is not based on the principle
of land for peace, which includes the establishment of
an independent Palestinian State in all the Palestinian
territory occupied since 1967, with East Jerusalem as
its capital, living in peace and security with Israel and
its other neighbours. Israel must immediately stop its
aggression against the Palestinian civilian population
and withdraw its troops from the Gaza Strip to the
positions it occupied before June 2006.

Israel must put an end to its occupation of and
illegal practices in the occupied Palestinian territory,
including the illegal construction of the separation
wall, which is aimed at seizing and annexing
Palestinian land and property and modifying the
demographic and geographic character of the
Palestinian territory.

The Non-Aligned Movement reaffirms its support
for Mahmoud Abbas, President of the Palestinian
National Authority and Chairman of the Executive
Committee of the Palestine Liberation Organization, in
2
his rejection of a so-called Palestinian State with
provisional borders. Such a so-called provisional State
would, in essence, be no more than an entity under the
domain and control of Israel as the occupying Power,
rather than a sovereign and independent State.

The Movement rejects any attempt to alter the
terms of reference of the peace process and further
rejects the imposition of unilateral measures aimed at
the imposition by Israel of an unlawful and unilateral
solution. The Non-Aligned Movement stresses the need
for the resumption of direct and substantive
negotiations between the parties so as to achieve a
comprehensive, just, lasting and peaceful settlement to
the question of Palestine, on the basis of the relevant
United Nations resolutions and in accordance with the
norms and principles of international law enshrined
therein.

The Non-Aligned Movement expresses its strong
condemnation of Israel's heinous act of aggression
against the blessed Al-Aqsa mosque and the holy city
of Al-Quds al-Sharif - the demolishing of a historical
road connecting Bab Al-Maghriba with the holy
Al-Aqsa mosque compound, in addition to two rooms
adjacent to Al-Buraq wall. The Non-Aligned
Movement also condemns Israel's continued
excavation work beneath the holy Al-Aqsa mosque
compound, undermining its foundations and
threatening it with collapse. The Non-Aligned
Movement considers those acts and measures taken by
Israel, the occupying Power, as a provocation to the
feelings and sentiments of the more than one billion
Muslims in the world. The Movement denounces
Israel's continued policy of denying Palestinian
worshippers access to their religious sites.

In the context of the grave situation that the
Middle East faces at present, the Non-Aligned
Movement reaffirms the permanent responsibility of
the United Nations, including the Security Council,
with regard to the situation in the region.

It is no secret that Israel's unpunished acts are to
a large extent the result of the protection provided it by
the United States Government in the Security Council
and in other international forums. The United States
has shackled the Security Council through the use of
31 vetoes relating to draft resolutions on the question
of Palestine and through countless threats to resort to
this undemocratic and obsolete privilege.
07-23762
The impasse facing the peace process does not
benefit anyone, not even the Israeli people, who also
suffer the consequences of their Government's policies.
Actions such as the brutal military aggression against
Lebanon and Israel's presence in the occupied Syrian
Golan are likewise unacceptable.

The Government of Lebanon has continuously
endeavoured to stabilize the situation in its territory
following Israel's relentless aggression and serious
violations of the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Lebanon. The Non-Aligned Movement welcomes the
steps taken by the Lebanese Government to implement
resolution 1701 (2006), particularly through the
deployment of the armed forces in the region south of
the Litani River and along the Blue Line. The
Non-Aligned Movement also welcomes the
deployment of Lebanese armed forces along the
northern and eastern borders of Lebanon with a view to
ensuring the security and stability of the borders.

The Movement remains deeply concerned at the
ongoing air and land violations by Israel of the Blue
Line, in breach of resolution 1701 (2006), and strongly
calls on Israel to end its occupation of the northern part
of Al-Ghajar, a town on the northern side of the Blue
Line, and to refrain, starting immediately, from any
violation of Lebanese sovereignty and of resolution
1701 (2006), as well as from any act of provocation
vis-a-vis the Lebanese armed forces or the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon.

The Non-Aligned Movement calls for a prompt
settlement of the Sheba'a farms issue, with full respect
for Lebanese sovereignty and territorial integrity, as
stipulated in resolution 1701 (2006). In that regard, the
Movement takes note of the important proposal made
by the Lebanese Government in its seven-point plan
regarding the Sheba'a farms and calls on all parties to
cooperate to protect Lebanon's sovereign rights in that
area, and notes the important endeavours of the
Secretary-General in that regard.

The Movement is acutely aware of the enormous
challenges facing Lebanon as a result of the 1.2 million
cluster bomblets launched by Israel during its
aggression against Lebanon last summer. While
condemning the use of such weaponry by Israel and
deploring the death toll resulting from them, the
Movement strongly urges Israel to provide the exact
locations of use of those deadly weapons, as well as
07-23762
maps of the mines planted by Israel during its
occupation of southern Lebanon.

The Non-Aligned Movement urges the Security
Council to decide on the entry into force, with no
further delay, of a comprehensive and lasting ceasefire
in Lebanon. The Non-Aligned Movement welcomes
the generous contributions and pledges made during
the Rafik Hariri Paris 111 conference, held in Paris on
25 January 2007.

The Non-Aligned Movement reaffirms that all
measures and actions already taken, or that will taken
in future, by Israel, the occupying Power, such as its
illegal decision of 14 December 1981, which purports
to modify the legal, physical and demographic
conditions and institutional structure of the occupied
Syrian Golan, as well as the measures taken by Israel
to implement its jurisdiction and administration there,
are null and void and have no legal effect.

We reaffirm also that all those measures and
actions, including the illegal construction and
expansion of Israeli settlements in the Syrian Golan
since 1967, are a clear violation of international law,
international agreements, the Charter of the United
Nations and the relevant decisions of the Organization,
including resolution 497 (1981) and the Fourth Geneva
Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian
Persons in Time of War of 12 August 1949, as well as a
challenge to the international community.

The Movement demands that Israel abide by
resolution 497 (1981) and Withdraw completely from
the occupied Syrian Golan to the borders of 4 June
1967.

The Non-Aligned Movement will continue to
support and contribute in every way possible to efforts
to achieve a just, comprehensive and lasting peace in
the Middle East, based on all relevant United Nations
resolutions, including resolutions 242 (1967), 338
(1973), 425 (1978), 1397 (2002) and 1515 (2003), the
terms of reference of the Madrid Conference, the
principle of land for peace, the Arab Peace Initiative
adopted by the summit meeting of the League of Arab
States held in March 2002 at Beirut, and the Road
Map.

