Mr. Iddi (United Republic of Tanzania): I want
to join other speakers in thanking you, Mr. President,
for organizing this important debate on the situation in
the Middle East. Events in the Middle East continue to
remind us of the complexity of the task of bringing
about a lasting and just settlement to the age-old
conflict that has brought great suffering and destruction
to the region. I also want to thank the Secretary-
General for his report (S/2006/956) and his insightful
statement to the Council.

The United Republic of Tanzania has, over the
years, remained gravely concerned about the endless
Violence in the occupied Palestinian territories,
especially in the Gaza Strip, which has resulted in the
loss of many lives, including those of women and

children, and the destruction of critical infrastructure.
We have continuously reminded Israel that, while it has
a right to protect its citizens, it needs to exercise
maximum restraint, especially when reacting to
individual acts of Violence directed at its territory. In
the same vein, we have called upon the Palestinian
Authority to halt all acts of violence directed against
Israel, including the firing of rockets, which in their
totality undermine compliance with peace agreements.

We are keenly conscious that the Security
Council has for many years supported the search for
peace in the Middle East. That is demonstrated in its
numerous resolutions, as well as its support for the
Madrid terms of reference, the principle of land for
peace, the Arab Peace Initiative and other agreements
that have been reached by the parties involved in the
conflict. In addition, the Council has continuously
supported the efforts of the Quartet in the
implementation of the Road Map, seeking a two-State
solution - a Palestinian and an Israeli State - living
side by side in peace and security.

Regrettably, despite all those efforts, a lasting
solution to the Palestinian question remains elusive.
There has been more talk than there has been action.
That state of affairs must be reversed, and agreements
must be translated into serious and concrete action. It
is up to the Palestinians and the Israelis to realize that
no peace agreement will be viable unless both of them
accept, and act in line with, common aspirations for a
two-State solution. They must both comply with their
obligations to the Road Map and the requirements of
the Quartet. For its part, the international community
must assist in every way possible, so that the peace
accords are implemented.

With that in mind we are following with keen
interest renewed signals hinting at a revival of the
peace process. We therefore urge Palestinians to forge
a Government of national unity and to work with Israel
towards peace and security for all in the region. We
therefore welcome the agreement between Prime
Minister Olmert and President Mahmoud Abbas to
establish a ceasefire in Gaza, and we hope that it will
hold and contribute to an atmosphere supportive of the
peace process.

We welcome the proposal for an international
peace conference on the Middle East. We see it as an
opportunity to generate positive political commitment
to resolve the Palestinian question in the search for
durable peace in the region. We also View the current
climate as conducive to the launching of a serious
peace process leading to a comprehensive solution to
the conflict. It must not be wasted.

The United Republic of Tanzania expresses its
appreciation for the regional efforts of Arab States in
the search for peace and stability in the Middle East,
including helping to avert the humanitarian crisis
confronting the Palestinian people. The current
ceasefire should provide a real opportunity to bring
about a lasting settlement that guarantees security and
prosperity for the region and to avert further
humanitarian tragedies. The situation calls for renewed
emphasis on supporting the parties and ensuring that
the people of Palestine can control their own destiny in
peace and hope, and that the people of Israel obtain a
real chance to live in security and in full partnership
with their neighbours.

Turning to the situation in Lebanon, recent
events, including the killing of a leading politician,
Cabinet resignations and anti-Government rallies, have
contributed to increased tensions. The deterioration of
the security situation is placing the country's
democratic system in danger, thereby threatening its
independence. We call for maximum self-restraint and
for the kind of wisdom required to bring about a
unified, peaceful Lebanon. The people of Lebanon
deserve nothing less.

