Ms. Wilson (Australia): I am honoured to speak
on behalf of Canada, New Zealand and Australia (the CANZ group).

We are committed to implementing the sustaining
peace resolutions (Security Council resolution 2282 (2016) and General Assembly resolution 70/262) and
believe that peacekeeping operations make a key
contribution to sustainable peace. The resolutions
emphasize that sustaining peace must become a shared
task and responsibility. Better reflecting the primacy of
politics was highlighted by the report of the High-level
Independent Panel on Peace Operations (S/2015/446)
as one of the four essential shifts for peace operations
reform. Advancing these goals requires the continued
leadership of the Security Council, the Secretariat
and Member States, and includes a commitment to
improving in three areas on which we will focus today:
managing transitions, integrating sustaining peace
with ongoing reform processes, and financing for
peacebuilding. The time for engagement is now.

Failed transitions out of peacekeeping missions
increase the risk of relapse into conflict. Improving
transitions was a key motivator for the sustaining peace
resolutions. The issue is now urgent, particularly given
the scheduled closure in Liberia, the downsizing in
Darfur and the transition in Haiti. Effective transitions
require broad consultation and access to financing
to ensure that resourcing and policy approaches
are appropriate.

In the spirit of more inclusive working methods, the
Council should engage closely with the Secretariat and
the Peacebuilding Commission, which should in turn
engage across the United Nations system and outside
it, with the international financial institutions, civil
society and others. We commend the assessment and
planning for ongoing peacebuilding needs in Liberia,
noting that capacity-mapping efforts reveal a troubling
capacity cliff in the United Nations country teams'
ability to take on key tasks. That needs to be addressed.

Secondly, increasing predictable, sustained
financing for peacebuilding must be a high priority
if we want the pivot to prevention to achieve its
potential. Better coordination with other peacebuilding
contributors - including United Nations agencies,
the international financial institutions, regional and
bilateral partners, and donors 4 is crucial. This is
especially the case when operating environments
are fluid.

Donors also have a key role to play in addressing
the fragmentation of United Nations peacebuilding
financing. By requesting joint analysis and contributing
to pooled and unearmarked funds, donors can
powerfully incentivise coordinated and coherent United
Nations peacebuilding efforts. We reiterate our call for
ambitious options to be put forward for predictable
and sustained financing, including on assessed and
voluntary contributions. In addition to rationalizing
existing resources for peacebuilding, we must further
empower the United Nations peacebuilding architecture
to coordinate and engage more broadly in order to
access funding and conductjoint analyses.

We must also focus on increasing women's
participation in peacebuilding. We commend the
Peacebuilding Fund for allocating 20 per cent to
women's empowerment projects in 2016, and call for
continued efforts and increased financing to support
women in actively participating.

Thirdly, we urge continued efforts to align reform
processes with the sustaining peace perspective. It is
essential that the current range of reform processes
contribute to improving the ability of the United
Nations system as a whole, including peacekeeping
operations specifically, to build and sustain peace.
Those responsible for reform processes should fully
absorb and apply the sustaining peace resolutions in
their work.

We urge the Council, the Secretariat, funds
and programmes and all Member States to support
reforms and retain the focus on why the reforms are
being pursued. The Peacekeeping Defence Ministerial
Conference, to be held in Vancouver, Canada, in
November, will be a good opportunity to advance
this perspective.

In closing, CANZ strongly supports implementation
of sustaining peace and recognizes the vital role of
United Nations peacekeeping missions in achieving
this. We are committed to reform efforts that are
coherent, coordinated and lead to effective United
Nations action, including on peacebuilding.

