Mr. Liden (Sweden): The United Nations Transition
Mission in Haiti (UNTMIH) has successfully followed up
on the efforts of its predecessors in making significant
contributions in an area of fundamental importance to
Haiti's political, economic and social development. The
United Nations system has been instrumental in improving
the conduct and effectiveness of the Haitian National
Police. We are pleased to note that emphasis can now be
put on the civilian element of the international presence in
Haiti.

The setting up of a new mission, the United Nations
Civilian Police Mission in Haiti (MIPONUH), once more
demonstrates the increasing importance of civilian police in
the development of democratic institutions following strife
or conflict.

The case of Haiti still requires some exceptional
solutions, due to the fragile security situation. We are
satisfied that the arrangements envisaged in MIPONUH are
tailor-made for Haiti, and will not necessarily serve as
precedents for other civilian police operations.

In establishing a new civilian police mission in Haiti
today, the Council has acted on a request by President
Preval. The success of this operation depends on the
complete cooperation and support of the Haitian authorities.

Reform of the National Police is far from the only
essential requirement for consolidating democracy and the
rule of law in Haiti. The absence of a functioning and
reliable judicial system remains an immediate concern. The
Haitian leaders must do their utmost to re-establish faith in
their capacity to resolve the problems facing their country
and to earn the respect of the people.

The international community remains committed to a
long-term programme for the development of Haiti in
support of national efforts. This programme should include
economic, social and institutional development. We foresee
a need for increased involvement by international financial
institutions and United Nations special agencies in this
process.

Sweden, for its part, is presently considering a
contribution to the United Nations Development Programme
(UNDP) Trust Fund for Haiti.
We give our support to the draft resolution.

