Mr. Alimov (Tajikistan) (interpretation from Russian):
First allow me to convey our gratitude to you, Sir, for your
handling of the work of the Security Council during
November and wish you every success in discharging
your important and highly responsible job.
Today the Security Council will be adopting an
extremely important decision aimed at supporting the
peace process in the Republic of Tajikistan. The
Government of Tajikistan believes that international
support will make it possible to cement the peace process,
give it an additional impetus and dynamic, and make it
more stable and irreversible.

Expanding the mandate of the United Nations
Mission of Observers in Tajikistan (UNMOT) will
definitely mark the beginning of a qualitatively new stage
in the practical implementation of the General Agreement
on the Establishment of Peace and National Accord in
Tajikistan. This decision is of exceptional value precisely
at this time, when the Commission on National
Reconciliation, which has demonstrated a high degree of
tolerance and confirmed its spirit of constructive
cooperation, has started the practical implementation of its
programme of work in keeping with the tight timetable
for implementing the General Agreement.

The vigorous efforts made by the President of the
Republic of Tajikistan, Mr. Emomali Rakhmonov,
together with the leadership of the United Tajik
Opposition (UTO) to obtain wider support in the country
for the peace agreement arrived at between them is
already yielding real fruit.

The Agreement on a Ceasefire and the Cessation of
Other Hostile Acts concluded between the Government of
Tajikistan and the UTO is, on the whole, being complied
with effectively. In accordance with the Act on Mutual
Forgiveness an exchange of prisoners of war and
detainees has taken place.

Intensive planning work is being carried out to
implement the Amnesty Law. At the individual level, in
keeping with the relevant legislative procedures in the
Republic, cases of previously convicted citizens or those
under investigation are being reviewed, and the
responsible State organs are making recommendations
regarding amnesty on each one.

Work has started to prepare amendments and
additions to the current Constitution of the country.
Together with the Republic's experts and jurists,
representatives of UNMOT, the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and the International
Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) are also involved.

 

The resolution of military questions is also entering an
active phase. After 16 November armed formations which
have not declared their loyalty and allegiance will be
considered to be illegal and will be subject to compulsory
disarmament. At the same time, it is important to note that
the process of registration of UTO fighters inside
Tajikistan, though not without difficulty, is nonetheless
continuing. Questions of repatriation of UTO fighters from
the territory of Afghanistan are in the course of resolution.

There has been substantial progress in the repatriation
of Tajik refugees who are in northern Afghanistan. We are
particularly gratified at the active repatriation of our
compatriots from the Sakhi Camp in the Mazar-e-Sharif
region by the shortest route through Termez.

There are serious reasons to hope that with the active
assistance of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees and the assistance of the
Government of Uzbekistan, the absolute majority of Tajik
refugees who through a stroke of fate had long found
themselves on the other side of the Panj and the Amu
Darya Rivers will greet the 1998 new year in the circle of
their families and friends on home soil in Tajikistan. They
have been impatiently awaited in their homes, towns and
villages where each returning family, particularly old
people, women and children, is surrounded by warmth and
attention and given as much assistance as possible from the
authorities and State and private enterprises.

The regular meetings between the country's President,
Emomali Rakhmonov, and the Chairman of the
Commission on National Reconciliation and Leader of the
UTO, Abdullo Nuri, have become an important factor for
strengthening international confidence. They are actively
stimulating the process of complying with the provisions of
the General Agreement on the Establishment of Peace and
National Accord in Tajikistan.

All this shows that Tajikistan is witnessing an actively
developing process of consolidation of its society. The
emerging new political reality in the Republic is allowing
less and less space for the opponents of the peace process
and obliging everyone to adapt to the new conditions.

Tajikistan realizes that the national reconciliation that
has started is just the first, although a very important, step
on the long path to the establishment of a civil society. It
should be followed by another step - a much more
difficult and lengthy process of national and State
construction aimed at the organic integration of the country
into today's mutually linked and mutually dependent world.

The Government of the Republic of Tajikistan
understands that the main responsibility for the country's
future lies on the shoulders of the Tajik people itself. Yet
it is also true that our own efforts are clearly not enough,
either to assist the least protected strata of the population
in the near future to free themselves from the grip of
poverty or, particularly, to restore the socio-economic
infrastructure of the south of the country that has been
destroyed by the war. The people of Tajikistan would be
grateful to the international community if it could give us
the assistance that it so sorely needs at this critically
important stage.

We are grateful to the Secretary-General of the
United Nations for convening, on 24 and 25 November
1997, in Vienna, the capital of Austria, a donor
conference to provide international support for peace and
reconciliation in Tajikistan. It is expected that more than
120 delegations will attend the conference, representing
Governments, international financial institutions and non-
governmental organizations. The delegation of Tajikistan
will take part in that conference, headed by the President
of our country, Mr. Emomali Rakhmonov.

The results of the work of such a representative
international forum are being awaited in Tajikistan with
a high level of emotion. We hope that the participants in
the conference, on behalf of their Governments and
organizations, will come out in favour of substantial
support for the Tajik people in consolidating the peace
process. This will soon allow each country to join the
post-conflict-building; to take part in strengthening the
bases of an independent democratic State; to demonstrate
their individuality in their work, irrespective of their own
political, philosophical or religious views and ambitions;
and to contribute to the development of the emerging new
socio-economic and political relationships.

Support from the international community will help
us not merely to stabilize Tajikistan's economy and to
create favourable conditions for normal, stable
development in the post-conflict period, but also to attain
stability in Central Asia and beyond.

The war has left in its wake not only material
destruction, which, for the foreseeable future, can be
restored; but also deep mental wounds that will long
make themselves felt in society as a whole and in each of
its cells. The toxins of mutual distrust continue in some
areas to poison the general atmosphere and to befuddle
the minds of individuals in our country. Certain people,
playing out outmoded scenarios, are trying to use

 

terrorism and bandit-like attacks to derail the peace process
and to nudge it off the high road and onto slippery, twisting
byways. However, the country's shift towards
comprehensive and just settlement of the conflict and the
establishment of genuine civil peace and concord is
irreversible. A grim page of the history of the ancient Tajik
people has been turned forever.
It is a great honour for me, on behalf of President
Emomali Rakhmonov of the Republic of Tajikistan, to
express profound gratitude to the Secretary-General for his
unflagging attention and support to the Tajik people in this
difficult period for us. We express the hope that the United
Nations and its specialized agencies will continue to make
an important contribution to the consolidation of the
country's stabilization process and that they will
consistently and decisively help to restore Tajikistan's
economy and social sphere in this post-conflict period.

My Government offers words of special gratitude to
the Security Council for its constant attention to the
situation in Tajikistan and on the Tajik-Afghan border.
Resolutions of the Security Council and statements of its
Presidents have had a decisive impact on resolving the
inter-Tajik conflict by stressing the main responsibility of
the Council for the maintenance of international peace and
security, pursuant to the United Nations Charter. The
Council's authority has been enhanced by the individual
efforts of a number of members who have sought to move
the peace process in Tajikistan forward.

The Government and people of Tajikistan are sincerely
grateful to the Russian Federation and the Islamic Republic
of Iran, which have played an exceptionally important role
in promoting and successfully concluding the inter-Tajik
talks, and for their having provided substantial assistance in
the post-conflict period. We highly commend the very
valuable political contribution made in implementing the
General Agreement by States and international
organizations members of the Contact Group of guarantors.

The Tajik Government commends the work done by
the international humanitarian and non-governmental
organizations, which have successfully supplemented the
noble efforts of the United Nations in meeting the urgent
humanitarian needs of the most vulnerable people,
particularly in regions to which refugees from Afghanistan
have been returning, and in carrying out the large-scale
programme financed by the United Nations Development
Programme for the rehabilitation, reconstruction and
development of Tajikistan.

The Government of Tajikistan expresses profound
gratitude to the Secretary-General's Special
Representative, Mr. Merrem, for his invaluable
contribution to resolving the inter-Tajik conflict. We hope
that he, together with his associates in the United Nations
mission in Tajikistan, will continue to fulfil their difficult
and often dangerous duties.

We take very seriously our commitments to the host
country agreement and are profoundly mindful of our
responsibility for the security of United Nations
personnel. Our Government, together with the United
Tajik Opposition, has begun to develop a joint guard unit,
which will be established upon decree of the President.
We hope that this unit will discharge its responsible
mission and set an example for others in the reintegration
process. Also important in this context is the decision of
the Commonwealth of Independent States to extend and
expand the mandate of its collective peacekeeping force
in Tajikistan, whose job at this stage will include the
provision, as and when necessary, of assistance in
ensuring the safety of the personnel of the United Nations
Mission of Observers in Tajikistan (UNMOT), the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe and
other international organizations.

We express the hope that joint efforts will be
successful and effective and that international personnel
will receive from the Tajik people adequate support and
hospitality, and will thus be able vigorously and fully to
discharge the broad range of responsible and important
tasks included in the updated UNMOT mandate.

