Mr. Al-Nasser (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): Allow
me at the outset to express our profound gratitude and
appreciation for the great efforts of His Excellency
Mr. Kofi Annan, Secretary-General, in seeking the best
means to defuse the crisis afflicting Lebanon. Our
thanks go to all members of the mission dispatched by
the Secretary-General to the region, headed by
Ambassador Vijay Nambiar, and for the briefings they
gave us. We would also like to commend Mr. Jan
Egeland, Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs, for his briefing regarding the humanitarian
needs in that region.

Everyone is fully aware of the grave situation in
the Middle East; it has suddenly deteriorated as a result
of the excessive use of military force by Israel against
Lebanon on the pretext of self-defence. However, the
greatest majority of the targets of the Israeli military
aggression have been civilian targets, including the
international airport, residential buildings, factories,
power plants, bridges, highways and even grain silos
and houses of worship. This leaves no doubt that the
aim of this war goes beyond its stated objective.

In one week, the Israeli campaign has claimed the
lives of hundreds of people, injured more than 1,000
civilians, displaced half a million citizens, caused
major suffering for the Lebanese people and devastated
its emerging economy, which required long years of
rebuilding after the war. The current situation also
poses a grave threat to Lebanon's nascent democracy
and to the Lebanese Government. This is an
unwarranted and uneven war.

Indeed, it is saddening to us that this Council,
which is tasked with the maintenance of international
peace and security, stands idly by, unable and
powerless to put an end to the bloodbath engulfing our
Lebanese brothers, although the Israeli aggression
against Lebanon is a blatant and clear violation of
resolution 1559 (2004), which affirmed the unity,
territorial integrity and sovereignty of Lebanon.

It is a delusion to think that the destruction of
Lebanon will provide security for Israel or that it will
strengthen and enhance the role of the Lebanese
Government of Mr. Fouad Siniora. On the contrary,
what is happening will only deepen the hatred and
rancour among the people for generations to come and
will prompt many of those who call for peaceful
coexistence between the Arabs and Israel to take
opposite positions, in addition to effectively weakening
the Lebanese Government.

Is this what we really want? Does the shelling of
Lebanese national institutions strengthen the authority
of the Government and ensure the allegiance of its
army, or does it weaken it? Does the targeting of the
Lebanese army - which has become a victim of Israeli
bombs, both those prohibited by international law and
those that are not - strengthen the prospects of its
control over south Lebanon? Israel's unleashing of its
military machine against that country is tantamount to
State terrorism.

Three days ago, the Office of the Coordinator of
Humanitarian Affairs held a briefing to determine the
requirements for facing the deteriorating situation in
Lebanon. What kind of equipment was requested? The
result of the assessment was a request for equipment
used in such natural disasters as earthquakes, since the
bombing has spared nothing, neither human life nor

property.

It is deplorable that the lives of innocent people
have become mere statistics. Has our Council not
listened to Prime Minister Siniora, who said, "I appeal
to your humanitarian conscience not to abandon
Lebanon?" Has our strong, united Council - which
has dealt consistently, firmly and forcefully with the
real questions that threaten international peace and
security - not heard the sound of explosions in
Beirut? Have we not seen the bodies of children and
old men being lifted out of the ruins? Have we not
heard about the bombing of ambulances?

History will never be compassionate. Where is
our conscience? What has become of our call for
respecting human rights, foremost among them the
right to life? The Council bears a major responsibility
under the Charter, and defusing the crisis makes it
imperative that we create the necessary conditions,
because conditions do not create themselves. How long

will the doors of our Council remain closed while the
children of Lebanon knock on them and all peace-
loving peoples call upon it to act?

Stop the bloodbath! The terrible humanitarian
conditions experienced by civilians, the deteriorating
situation of women, children and the elderly, the sick
and the handicapped, make it incumbent upon our
Council to come to their aid decisively. Justice makes
it incumbent on us to hold Israel responsible and to call
on it to compensate for all the destruction that has been
afflicted upon Lebanon and its people.

The situation in Gaza is not very different from
that which we described in Lebanon. There, too, we
find that military aggression does not spare civilians.
Again we find the infrastructure being targeted.
However, the humanitarian situation in Gaza was very
bad before and has become worse since the hostile
actions initiated by the Israeli army in the Strip during
the past weeks. It is a fact that Israel, the occupying
Power, refuses to respond to the calls of the
international community to refrain from pursuing its
military aggression.

There is no point now in assigning blame to any
party. Instead, we would like to diagnose the problem
and its root causes, so that we can deal with it before it
is too late, before the war escalates beyond the
situation that we have today.

The attempt to deal with the question by
implicating other States, with whose policies we may
agree or not, is a call for pouring more fuel on the
flames. It is easy to open the gates of hell, but what
guarantees our ability to close them and to prevent
their fire from scorching everyone? The road to hell is
paved with good intentions.

Throughout the past week, the Secretary-General
has made efforts to mitigate the crisis in that region.
He has established personal contacts and dispatched a
diplomatic team to the region. These are laudable
efforts. He also submitted a number of proposals to the
Council yesterday with the aim of finding a solution to
the crisis. It is our view that some of the Secretary-
General's ideas are positive and have purpose and
could help in defusing the festering crisis. Yet, we need
to coordinate closely with the Government of Lebanon
in any resolution regarding the nature and structure of
a United Nations presence in that country with respect
to that country's sovereignty and internal affairs.
The State of Qatar, as a member of the Security
Council, has appealed to the Council from the
beginning to act promptly to put an immediate end to
the bloodshed in Lebanon and to contain the crisis
before it becomes a veritable bloodbath. However, the
continued silence of the Council will only allow the
bloodshed to go on, thereby victimizing even more
innocent people.

