Mr. Hamer (Netherlands): I thank Mr. Petritsch,
the High Representative, for his report and briefing and
welcome him back in our midst.

Much has been achieved in Bosnia and
Herzegovina over the past five years since the
Dayton/Paris Peace Agreements. And yet, as the High
Representative has made clear, much remains to be
done. One milestone of progress will be the general
elections on 11 November. My delegation shares the
hope of the High Representative, and indeed of the
entire international community, that the trend in favour
of multi-ethnic or moderate political parties,
established in the municipal elections last April, will be
continued in these general elections.

But there are less encouraging signs as well. At
several levels there is still a lot of obstructionism, a
lack of dialogue and a lack of constructive engagement.
These problems are usually, if not always, inspired by a
desire to protect vested interests. We support the High
Representative when he finds himself forced to
intervene and to impose regulations - which will
serve all in Bosnia and Herzegovina, not only
particular interest groups. We also call on all to fully
engage in the process of fostering functional and
democratically accountable common institutions.

The economy of Bosnia and Herzegovina remains
an area of concern. On the one hand, there is marked
progress - the growth rates are indeed impressive; on
the other, economic reform has been slow and the
country, as Mr. Petritsch remarked, has fallen 10 years
behind in its development. The Netherlands welcomes
the economic strategy adopted at the Brussels meeting
of the Peace Implementation Council last May and we
hope that this strategy will facilitate the transition from
a donor-dependent economy to a self-sustaining market
economy.

In this context, I should like to underline once
again the importance we attach to privatization. Here
again, preservation of the current economic status quo
serves only economic and political vested interests. A
quick, equitable and transparent privatization process
will help the country to finally catch up.

I have one question for Mr. Petritsch concerning
the economy. Economic experts have noted a marked
difference in economic development and prosperity
between the Federation and the Republika Srpska. I
would appreciate it if the High Representative could
share his views on this matter with us and if he could,
perhaps, elaborate on the implications ofthis divide for
the prospects for cooperation.
Finally, the High Representative and most
speakers have noted the considerable progress made
over the past year in the area of refugee return. There is
no better yardstick for the success of peace
implementation than the decision of individuals that it
is safe to return. Judged by that yardstick alone, Bosnia
and Herzegovina is on the right path. That is the result
of hard work under difficult circumstances by all
concerned 7 citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina as
well as international personnel. To them, as to the High
Representative, I should like to pay tribute for their
achievements.

