Mr. Sandoval Mendiolea (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): I thank Kuwait for this opportunity to
participate in the open debate on the working methods
of the Security Council and to exchange views on
the topic.

By virtue of Article 24 of the Charter of the United
Nations, we members conferred upon the Security
Council the primary responsibility for the maintenance
of international peace and security. In discharging that
duty, the Council acts on our behalf. In my statement
I will refer to two specific issues to which Mexico
attaches particular importance, as they go to the heart of
the expectations and legitimate demands of the Member
States with regard to the effectiveness of the Council.

First of all, I refer to the misnamed right to the
veto. The Charter of the United Nations does not
contain an explicit veto power for the five permanent
members, but rather a voting rule that requires the
concurring affirmative vote of the five permanent
members. The veto therefore should not be seen as a
right or a privilege, but as a responsibility that must
be exercised as such. Unfortunately, the use of the
veto - so far on approximately 280 occasions where it
has been used - has prevented the effective fulfilment
of the responsibilities entrusted to this organ. Far from
being conducive to defending the collective interest
with arguments that facilitate consensus among
the members of the Council, the use of the veto has
obstructed and derailed the common interest and has
encouraged division among members. Abuse of the
exercise of the veto is contrary to international law and
violates the principles of humanity and the dictates of
public conscience, which constitute cardinal principles
of international humanitarian law today.

In 2015, Mexico and France jointly presented a
political declaration stating that situations of mass
atrocities, when committed on a large scale, specifically
crimes against humanity, war crimes and genocide, can
constitute a threat to international peace and security
and require action by the international community. In
such cases, the Security Council should not be prevented
from acting for the use of the veto. The signatories of the
declaration - 100 States so far - propose a collective
and voluntary agreement among the permanent
members, with a view to refraining from the use of the
veto in cases of mass atrocities. The French-Mexican
initiative - as well as the code of conduct promoted by
the Accountability, Coherence and Transparency group,
which complements it - seeks to improve the efficiency
of the Security Council while fostering a new culture of
responsibility and accountability among the permanent
members of the Council vis-a-vis the international
community, in addition to visibly contributing to the
effectiveness, legitimacy and accountability of the
Council in carrying out its work.

We invite the permanent members to follow the
example of France, a country that, by promoting this
initiative, has shown determination and a deep sense of
collective responsibility. We also invite those countries
that have not done so to join the French-Mexican
initiative, which is still open for signature.

The second issue that Mexico wishes to draw

attention to are the continuous references to Article 51
of the Charter of the United Nations by some States to
address threats to international peace and security with
military action, especially against non-State actors.
Mexico is troubled that such a practice, coupled with
the ambiguous language of recent Council resolutions,
runs the risk of a de facto broadening of exceptions to
the general prohibition on the use of force, as set out
in Article 2, paragraph 4, of the Charter of the United
Nations, in an irregular manner.

Beyond the substantive issues, my delegation is very
concerned by the way in which the Security Council
deals with letters, a matter that falls within their working
methods. First, there is a lack of transparency regarding
how such letters are processed. As far as my delegation
is aware, the letters are not published or referenced in
The Journal ofthe United Nations, so that even in cases
where they have an official public document number
it is extremely difficult not only to obtain the text but
even to know that letters were submitted. Likewise, my
delegation does not know whether the Council, after
receiving such a letter, beyond acting as a filing office,
holds some formal or informal debate to study and
consider its content.

Given the importance and gravity of the issues
addressed in those letters, as well as the interest that
this represents for all Member States, we hope that the
Security Council will review and modify its working
methods in order to lend transparency to the way in
which it responds to the letters addressed to it that
invoke the inherent right of self-defence under Article
51 of the Charter of the United Nations.

