Mr. Diallo (Guinea) (spoke in French): This
meeting provides Member States with an opportunity
once again to voice their views on the thorny issue of
terrorism as a threat to international peace and security.
I would like to take this opportunity to convey to the
President, in his capacity as the Chairman of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC), the appreciation
of my delegation for his presentation of the
Committee's report and the eighth programme of work,
of which we have taken note. I should also say once
again how grateful our delegation is to the Chairman,
the other members of the Committee and the
Committee's support staff for the quality and quantity
of work carried out in the area of transparency.

The submission by all Member States of their
initial reports is something we should take note of.
This substantial work has been made possible thanks,
among other things, to the ability and perseverance of
the Committee, working through its subcommittees and
experts. We must now give further thought to the
reasons why some countries are late in submitting their
reports, in order that we can come up with appropriate
solutions.

We are pleased with the continued cooperation
between the Committee and international, regional and
subregional organizations. We hope that the outcome of
the follow-up meeting with the Organization of
American States, which is to be held in Washington
next October, will make it possible to strengthen that
cooperation, which is essential to eradicating terrorism.

The issue of assistance is also a crucial element.
Designing a register and matrix in this field is
encouraging. However, we must pay more attention to
this matter, which means greater involvement by the
Committee to ensure better coordination.

In another area, my delegation would like to
emphasize the need to strengthen legislation and
national mechanisms and to ratify the various
international instruments on terrorism. The welcome
increase in countries acceding to those instruments
should be followed up. For its part, my country very
recently ratified the International Convention for the
Suppression of the Financing of Terrorism and the
Convention on the Marking of Plastic Explosives for
the Purpose of Detection.

My delegation is more convinced than ever that
combating terrorism is a long-term challenge in which
success will depend on our continued solidarity. We
also note with interest the establishment of cooperation
between the Counter-Terrorism Committee and the
Committee established by resolution 1267 (1999),
which share many interests. We believe all United
Nations terrorism policies should be implemented in a
coordinated and consistent manner. In the same vein, it
is essential that we harmonize the efforts of the Ad Hoc
Committee established by General Assembly resolution
51/210, the Committee established by resolution 1267
(1999), the Counter-Terrorism Committee and the
Policy Working Group on the United Nations and
Terrorism.

Finally, I wish to emphasize the success achieved
in the context of combating terrorism. That success
uniquely illustrates the fact that the international
community has the will to live up to its responsibilities.
Guinea, which has always opposed terrorism in all its
forms and manifestations, will continue to make its
contribution to this joint undertaking.

