The Secretary-General: We are approaching a
historic moment for East Timor and, indeed, for the
United Nations. It is with considerable emotion that I
join you in welcoming the elected leaders of the people
of East Timor - President-elect Xanana Gusmao and
Chief Minister Mari Alkatiri - who will participate in
this debate, and to whom, in less than one month's
time, the United Nations will joyfully hand over full
responsibility for the destiny of their country.

Since the tragic events of September 1999, which
followed the democratic decision of the East Timorese
people to seek independence, the United Nations has
been working hard to build a sustainable national
administration, in close partnership with Member
States and, most importantly, with the East Timorese
themselves.

It may have seemed improbable to some at that
time that East Timor would become a viable State
within two and a half years. But I believe history is
about to confound the sceptics. Credit for this should
go first and foremost to the East Timorese people, who
have shown great courage and perseverance in
rebuilding their country.

They have risen to every challenge that has
confronted them and have unfailingly demonstrated
their commitment to democracy. There are still
daunting challenges ahead, but with a determined and
dedicated leadership in place, and a strong
constitutional foundation, I believe they can now face
the future with confidence.

We, the international community, can also take
pride in the contribution we have made. After the swift
restoration of order by the international force,
authorized by this Council, the United Nations itself
was given a mandate of unprecedented scope under
resolution 1272 (1999), adopted on 25 October 1999.

Since then, peace has been secured, and basic
governmental structures and laws have been put in
place. A sense of normality has returned. Children are
attending schools, roads are being built, buildings
reconstructed, health systems established, and new
businesses are opening up every day.

The citizens of East Timor have turned out in
overwhelming numbers to vote in the Constituent
Assembly and presidential elections. Most
encouragingly, in the last few months increasing
numbers of refugees have returned.

But all this is only the start. The Government of
East Timor faces enormous tasks before - and, above
all, after - 20 May. It must not be left alone. The
international community must ensure that the
investment it has made does not go to waste. It will
still have a crucial role to play in helping the Timorese
to consolidate their new institutions. That is why I very
much hope the Council will approve the detailed
proposals for a follow-on peacekeeping presence
contained in my report.

In the initial stages, this mission - called the
United Nations Mission of Support in East Timor
(UNMISET) - will provide support in three areas that
are critical for the stability and viability of the new
State: public administration, law and order, and
external security. That support will be reduced
gradually over two years, as the role of the United
Nations becomes one of providing normal development
assistance.

I am confident that the Timorese will continue to
develop their own sources of revenue and to manage
their resources prudently, in keeping with their track
record thus far. But East Timor will continue to need
financial and budgetary assistance. Moreover,
sustainable growth will require investment from the
private sector, both domestic and foreign. I urge all
Member States to do their utmost to encourage it.

Good relations with its nearest neighbours will be
essential to East Timor's future stability. This will
include close cooperation with Indonesia, in order to
ensure timely agreement on the delimitation of the
border, on the situation of the remaining refugees in
West Timor and on cooperation in prosecuting those
accused of the serious crimes committed in 1999.

Confidence is vital, and the best way to provide it
is to continue the strong partnerships that have brought
East Timor this far. I trust this will continue throughout
the mandate of UNMISET, and beyond.

I hope to be present in person for the
independence ceremonies on 19 and 20 May, and I
must say I look forward to that historic night with some
excitement. It will mark the climax of the East
Timorese people's historic struggle to assert their right
of self-determination, which I have no doubt will be
celebrated in song and story for centuries to come.

As Secretary-General, I am proud of the part the
United Nations has played in that struggle, and I am
especially pleased that we are now in this last phase. I
pledge that this will mark not an end, but a new
beginning, and that the United Nations stands ready to
play its full part alongside the independent nation of
East Timor.

