Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Under-Secretary-General Jeffrey Feltman for his
briefing.

A week ago, we convened in the Chamber (see S/PV.7281) to note just how threatened the two-State
solution was as a result of the war of July and August,
which led to a critical humanitarian situation in Gaza,
which was largely destroyed, and an exacerbation of
tensions on the ground in Jerusalem and the West Bank.
However, it is also threatened by the lack of political
prospects for meeting the aspirations of Israelis and
Palestinians.

For several months, France has repeated that the
current situation is untenable. For the past week, we
have again seen evidence that it is dangerous, especially
in East Jerusalem. We condemn the criminal action of
22 October, which killed two individuals and injured
seven other civilians. We also condemn the violence
committed by settler groups against Palestinians and,
finally, we condemn the planning of more than 1,000
new housing units in East Jerusalem, compounding
the decision to build more than 2,600 housing units
in Givat Hamatos, which we all know is an especially
sensitive area, where, for the first time in 15 years, a
new settlement would be created.

The relentless pace of settlement construction,
which is illegal under international law, confirms that
the status quo is non-existent. Every day the situation
deteriorates and moves us further away from the
possibility of two States living side by side in peace
and security. We must draw the necessary conclusions.
Those actions are all contrary to peace and only fuel
tensions, yet what we need is a climate of dialogue.
More specifically, we are very concerned by the recent
flare-ups of tension, the increase of provocations by
religious nationalists and the restrictions of access to
the Haram al-Sharif, which echo throughout the entire
region. France reaffirms its belief in the importance
of Jerusalem's multicultural character and of free
access to its holy sites for all believers, regardless of
their religious affiliation, and would like to emphasize
that any questioning of the status quo carries a risk of
significant destabilization.

Today we cannot dismiss the possibility of an
uncontrolled explosion of violence in Jerusalem and
the West Bank. It is in nobody's interest that this
should lead to a new intifada. It would mean permanent
insecurity for Israel and would only ensure that
Palestinians' living conditions deteriorate even further.
In that context, France calls on the leaders ofboth sides
to show a spirit of responsibility. It is their duty to take
all the necessary measures to calm rather than stoke
the tensions in Israeli and Palestinian public opinion.
To that end, we welcome the efforts of the Palestinian
Government of national unity aimed at reconciliation,
an essential step towards peace. We urge the parties to
refrain from any speech that could be seen as inciting
violence. We call on the Israeli authorities in particular
to abandon their plans to build new housing units in
Jerusalem, which, we should emphasize again, are
illegal under international law and liable to worsen
the tensions between the parties. We urge them to
take the steps necessary for a resumption of the peace
negotiations as soon as possible, since they are the only
way to reach a political solution to the conflict.

The crisis in Gaza this summer and the violence
in Jerusalem and throughout the Palestinian territories
are only symptoms of a deeper sickness, which is
the deadlocked peace process. The lack of political
prospects for Palestinians and the numerous threats to
a two-State solution that arise on a daily basis all help
to maintain a breeding ground for violent flare-ups that
victimize both sides.

If we are to make peace rather than just discuss
it, we must therefore change our method. New
negotiations will come to nothing if they are not
based on clear parameters and a clear timeline, as the
successive failures of negotiations for the past 20 years
have shown. What could that new method be? First, we
can no longer accept the Security Council's remaining a
mere spectator in the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. While
nothing, obviously, can replace negotiations between the
parties, the Security Council should seriously consider
taking action by establishing a balanced framework for
those negotiations. France is ready to commit to that
path.

Next, clear-headed consideration should tell us that
mistrust between the parties has never been stronger,
to a degree that we can no longer settle for calling for
resumed direct negotiations as a panacea. An agreement
is more impossible than ever without a renewed and
stronger international effort. For that, the commitment
of the United States will of course be decisive. But
Europe should also shoulder its responsibility and use
any leverage available to it, as must the Arab States,
Russia and all the members ofthe Council. It is essential
and urgent that all parties mobilize in order to ensure
that the hope of peace and the prospects for the two
parties do not simply vanish irretrievably.

