Mr. Sadeghi (Islamic Republic of Iran): Allow
me to begin by expressing our deep sorrow and
condolences to the people and the Government of
Lebanon in connection with the criminal and terrorist
act that took place in Lebanon today. We were shocked
to hear of the assassination of Mr. Pierre Gemayel and
strongly condemn this heinous terrorist act. The fact
that this criminal act took place on the very day when
the Security Council is discussing yet again Israeli
crimes and atrocities in Palestine and the wider region
of the Middle East raises serious questions and
concerns.

This meeting of the Security Council offers an
opportunity to review the difficult circumstances and
the gravity of the security and humanitarian situation in
the occupied Palestinian territories and the wider
region in the light of the developments of the past
several months, developments that have resulted in the
cruel loss of innocent human lives and in significant
destruction of the basic infrastructure in the Palestinian
and Lebanese territories, in flagrant violation of
international legality.

Recent rounds of aggression resulted in a display
of more images showing the inherent dynamics of
occupation, sustained by collective punishment, the
indiscriminate use of military force and utter disregard
for international human rights and humanitarian law.
Given the nature of occupation, Israeli provocations
are showing no sign of abating, as the occupiers are
doomed to constantly planning further acts of
aggression.

Consequently, while Palestinian homes and
civilian infrastructure are completely at the mercy of
the Israeli air force and artillery, the Israeli regime
continues to violate resolution 1701 (2006), including
through daily violations of Lebanese airspace and
harassment of UNIFIL forces, as United Nations and
UNIFIL spokespersons repeatedly report to all of us.

What we have witnessed over the short span of
time since last summer is indicative of what
generations of Palestinians and others in the region
have gone through in the past several decades. Some
wish to make it a routine matter, an inescapable fixture
of the region. It represents the continuation of the
established Israeli policy of using military force to
dictate a solution to the rightful resistance that would
be mounted by any people under occupation.

If we take history as a guide, we will see that no
occupying Power has ever been able to force an
occupied people into submission, and the approach that

the Israeli regime is taking now has been tested time
and again under similar circumstances and has always
proved futile.

Likewise, all signs indicate that resistance against
the occupation of Palestine has only been growing in
ferocity and strength in the past several decades, and
the result of the actions of the occupiers and those who
support them has been more tension and turmoil in the
region, with a growing impact across the world.

The tragedy of Palestine lies at the heart of the
Middle East conflict. It is the major source of the anger
and desperation that is being felt throughout the
Muslim world. Israel's criminal acts against the
Palestinians and other peoples of the region and their
impact on the Islamic world represent the gravest
challenge to global security. It is evident that full
restoration of the rights of the Palestinian people and
the establishment of a democratic Palestinian State
with Al-Quds as its capital are imperative for the
attainment of comprehensive and lasting peace and
stability in the Middle East and beyond.

Peace in the Middle East cannot be achieved
through aggression, State terrorism, intimidation or
occupation. We are convinced that durable peace in
Palestine and the Middle East will be possible only
through justice; an end to discrimination and to the
occupation of Palestinian, Syrian and Lebanese
territories; the return of all Palestinian refugees; and a
democratic mechanism through which all inhabitants of
Palestine, as well as Palestinians driven out of their
homeland, would have the possibility of determining
their future in a democratic and peaceful fashion.

Given the huge threat that the Israeli occupation
poses to regional and international peace and security,
it should be treated as the most important item on the
agenda of the Security Council. As the Council has
been seized of this matter for several decades, its
failure to put an end to the Israeli occupation has
denied hope to the people of Palestine and left them
with no other choice but to stay the course of
resistance.

Under these circumstances, there should be no
doubt that those who impede justice and accountability
for Israeli war crimes by repeatedly abusing the veto
power bear responsibility for the bloodshed that we are
witnessing time and again. They are also responsible
for the undermining of the authority and credibility of
the Security Council brought about by their actions.
The international community should not allow
periodic Israeli military aggressions against an
exhausted and defenceless civilian population to
continue, as their impact on the region and beyond are
growing increasingly severe. So far silence and
inaction have been interpreted by the Israeli regime as
consent, and even encouragement, for more criminal
activities. The international community should firmly
condemn and denounce Israel's scorn for international
law and its contempt for the purposes and principles of
the United Nations. More importantly, the impunity
with which the Israeli regime carries out its criminal
acts should be brought to an end.

The Israeli regime should be made to understand
that it cannot continue to violate the basic elements of
human rights and international humanitarian law in the
Palestinian territories and to occupy Palestinian land
with impunity. Its practices in the occupied Palestinian
territories must be investigated, and it must be assigned
28

criminal responsibility for the destruction that has
resulted from its aggression. We hope that the efforts
under way in the General Assembly will lead, inter
alia, to an independent international investigation into
the recent aggression in Gaza and its implications for
and under international humanitarian law.

Before concluding, I would like to place on
record the fact that my delegation rejects the baseless
allegations raised once again against my country at
today's meeting. Indeed, no one present here nor any
other member of the international community needs to
be reminded of how absurd those allegations are. None
of us need to be reminded that no smokescreen can
conceal the atrocities and the crimes of the Israeli
regime in Palestine and in the wider region.

