Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
thanks Peru for convening and presiding over today's
meeting. We also thank the Secretary-General's Envoy
on Youth for her briefing. China listened attentively to
the briefings of youth representatives, Ms. Muganda
and Ms. Ramyar.

Youth play an important role in promoting
socioeconomic development and maintaining world
peace and stability. At present, young people in a number
of countries and regions are being affected by armed
conflict and, as a result, face poverty, unemployment
and other difficulties. At the same time, youth around
the world are taking decisive action and making efforts
to promote global peace and stability.

Resolutions 2250 (2015) and 2419 (2018), adopted
by the Security Council in recent years, mandate the
protection of young people from the harm of armed
conflict and support the role of youth in peace and
security. The international community should make
tangible efforts to implement the relevant resolutions
so as to strengthen the protection of young people in
conflict zones and foster a favourable environment for
the development of youth. In addition, young people in
all countries should be encouraged to continue to play
an active role and shoulder their due responsibilities in
maintaining international peace and stability.

China would like to make the following points.
First, we must step up political efforts to settle regional
hotspot issues. In accordance with the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations and
its own mandate, the Council should work to prevent
and resolve conflicts through political means and
assist conflict-affected countries in advancing their
respective peace processes, in order to create an
environment of peace and tranquillity in which young
people can live. Pursuant to resolution 2419 (2018),
relevant United Nations agencies and the Secretary-
General's special envoys and special representatives,
including his Envoy on Youth, must engage in closer
exchanges on the needs of youth in armed conflict and
in post-conflict situations.

Secondly, we must prioritize the role of youth in
the prevention and resolution of conflict. It is important
to fully consider youth-related factors in the political
settlement of hotspot issues and ensure the constructive
participation of young people in their own countries'
peace processes, draw on their strengths, extensively
listen to their views and prevent their marginalization.
The United Nations and the wider international
community should strengthen coordination with
the African Union, the League of Arab States, the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations and other
regional and subregional organizations and provide
greater support to youth-related projects.

Thirdly, we must resolutely counter terror and
extremism, as they can harm young people. The
international community should act upon the relevant
Council resolutions and adopt a unified standard to
resolutely combat all forms of terrorism and violent
extremism. We must take steps to prevent terrorists
and extremist ideologues from eroding the minds of
young people, cut off terrorist and extremist channels
of deception and incitement that target young people,
and crack down on the online recruiting, planning
and fundraising activities carried out by terrorists and
extremists. It is equally important to encourage young
people to become a positive peace-loving group.

Fourthly, we must foster an environment that
enables youth to grow. Extreme poverty and imbalanced
development, inter alia, are deep-rooted causes of
conflict. The United Nations should assist developing
countries in bolstering their sustainable-development
capacity in an effort to advance the implementation
of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and
capitalize on the dividends created by young people.
The United Nations and the international community
should support national Governments in developing
youth policies in line with national conditions, provide
training and employment opportunities for young
people, enable them to build their own businesses and
constructively engage in politics, and nurture their
sense of responsibility for social stability.

China supports the ongoing implementation of
Council resolutions on youth, and we look forward
to a comprehensive and balanced report from the
Secretary-General, as called for by the aforementioned
resolutions. In June, the Department of Political and
Peacebuilding Affairs and the Mongolian Ministry for
Foreign Affairs co-hosted a North-East Asia regional
workshop on youth, peace and security, which was a
useful endeavour in promoting the implementation of
the relevant Council resolutions. China sent delegates
to the workshop to actively participate therein.

Youth are crucial to a nation's prosperity and
strength, and they are the future and hope of humankind.
We must therefore work together to foster a new type
of international relations that features mutual respect,
fairness, justice and mutually beneficial cooperation.
We must continue to promote the comprehensive
development of youth and support the younger
generation in making important contributions to world
peace and development.

