Mr. Plasai (Thailand): I would like to join
previous speakers in congratulating New Zealand for
its successful presidency of the Security Council this
month. I would also like to express my delegation's
appreciation of the initiative of bringing up the issue
of peace and security challenges facing small island
developing States (SIDS), which is a good follow-up
to the Third International Conference on SIDS, held in
2014 in Samoa, and which will hopefully allow us to
add new dimensions to the response the United Nations
system may have in this regard. We also appreciate the
informative briefings by the Secretary-General, the
Prime Ministers of Samoa and Jamaica and the Minister
of Finance of Seychelles.

As a developing country and a maritime nation,
the Kingdom of Thailand shares many interests and
concerns with SIDS and in recent years has been
steadily intensifying partnership and cooperation with
island countries. In Asia and the Pacific, for which the
Kingdom has been the United Nations regional hub
since 1947, we have been working closely with our
SIDS friends to address those common concerns.

Last August, in recognition of 2014 as the
International Year of Small Island Developing States,
the Royal Thai Government hosted the first Thailand-
Pacific Island Countries Forum in Bangkok. The
conference opened a new chapter for closer development
partnership based on five priority areas of cooperation,
namely, ecotourism, information and communication
technology, alternative energy, rural area development
and infrastructure, and environmental conservation
and management. A new Thailand-Pacific Action
Plan has also been adopted to reflect the ideas and
comments brought out at the conference and set the
future direction for our comprehensive partnership,
not only with the Pacific island countries but beyond.
With the emergence of the Economic Community of the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), the
year 2015 also provides a new window of opportunities
for closer partnership between ASEAN and SIDS.

I would like to focus on some of the pressing issues
of concern we share with SIDS that should continue to
rank high on the United Nations agenda, starting with
climate change. We may recall in that regard that the
Security Council's first-ever debate on the impact of
climate change on security (see S/PV.5663) took place
in this very Chamber eight years ago.

Today, climate change remains a major threat to the
very survival of SIDS, as it can lead to drought and
extreme weather phenomena, rises in sea levels, coastal
erosion and ocean acidification. The United Nations
system should urgently mobilize efforts to come up
with a long-term global response, starting perhaps with
the anticipated agreement at this year's Paris meeting of
the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change, which we hope will be an important milestone
in efforts to limit global greenhouse gas emissions
to levels required to hold off increases in the global
average temperature.

Climate change is also a threat to food security
for SIDS, which are already vulnerable in that regard
due to their high dependence on subsistence fishing
for domestic consumption and on food imports, as well
as to their narrow land-resource base. That in turn
undermines efforts to eradicate poverty and achieve
sustainable development. The entities of the United
Nations system should work together to assist SIDS
in developing sustainable agriculture, enhancing their
productive capacities and improving their regional
connectivity.

Closely linked to climate change are the issues
of water management and natural disasters. Both
are of course vital for all countries, but they can
disproportionately affect SIDS. The United Nations
system should work to help them respond to their
current critical needs, particularly to improve access to
fresh water and address the problem of water scarcity, to
build resilience, strengthen monitoring and preventive
mechanisms, raise awareness and increase their
preparedness to respond to and recover from disasters.
Given the uniqueness of SIDS and their particular
vulnerabilities, we support their access to technical
assistance and financing for sound investments in
water-management infrastructure, as well as for early
warning and disaster risk reduction and management
systems.

Another critical challenge for SIDS is the illicit
exploitation of natural resources, especially illegal,
unreported and unregulated fishing. As a State with
a large part of its population relying on the oceans'
healthiness, but also as a fishing nation, the Kingdom of
Thailand fully recognizes the vast impact of this issue
on sustainable development, and we share a common
stance with SIDS.

We are therefore very pleased to see the
conservation and sustainable use of the oceans, seas
and marine resources listed as a stand-alone sustainable
development goal - goal 14, for which we voice our
unwavering support. To achieve that important goal, we
need strong political will and commitment on the part
of the international community. In the years to come,
the United Nations system can play an important role,
particularly in strengthening the regime for cooperation
between the coastal and flag States of fishing vessels in
waters under national jurisdiction, and in developing
strong mechanisms for the conservation and sustainable
use of marine resources in waters beyond national
jurisdiction.

To that end, the Kingdom of Thailand supports
the initiatives of SIDS and other Member States to
follow up on and implement goal 14 through regular
global conferences until 2029, and looks forward
to participating constructively in the process of
developing a legally binding instrument under the
United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea in
the context of the forthcoming preparatory committee
on marine biological diversity of areas beyond national
jurisdiction.

At the Third International Conference on Small
Island Developing States last year, we reaffirmed
our support for SIDS' efforts to effectively combat
transnational organized crime. We are pleased that our
cooperation with SIDS in that area, in collaboration with
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, has been
going well. We are ready for further partnership and
urge the international community to further cooperate
with SIDS in addressing their transnational organized
crime concerns, taking into account their vulnerability
as small economies with expansive exclusive economic
zones.

Through the United Nations system, Member States
and other stakeholders, let us build a partnership to
raise awareness and support for SIDS as they cope with
their challenges. The Kingdom of Thailand, as always,
is committed to standing shoulder to shoulder with our
SIDS friends as a reliable and responsible development
partner.

