Sir Emyr Jones Parry (United Kingdom): Thank
you for convening this meeting, Mr. President, and for
your presence with us. The United Kingdom is very
grateful for the presence of so many distinguished
participants and for their contributions.

I would like to associate myself with the
comments which Ambassador Ryan of Ireland will
present later on behalf of the European Union.
West Africa should be a high priority for us all.
Investments that we have made in individual countries
risk being wasted if we cannot collectively find lasting
solutions to the interrelated problems of the subregion.
We therefore much appreciate the Secretary-General's
recommendations on how to tackle them.

If I may, I would now like to make three broad
suggestions as to how this report might be followed up
effectively.

First, we clearly need a strategic approach.
Conflict in West Africa is the result of long-standing
structural macroeconomic and governance failure.
Mercenary activity, proliferation of small arms and
light weapons, environmental degradation, youth
unemployment - all these are real problems, but they
are also symptoms of a bigger failure. Preventing
further conflict requires more than just addressing
these symptoms. We need a strategy for dealing with
the underlying causes. Such a strategy should build on
the existing initiatives, including those of the New
Partnership for Africa's Development (NEPAD) and
the African Union, and particularly those of the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), which have been described this morning.
Specifically, in our view, the Secretary-General's
recommendations should be implemented within this
strategy, so that instead of a series of initiatives we
have a coherent, integrated action plan.

Second is the role of key subregional
organizations. The United Nations alone, much less the
Security Council, cannot devise and implement a
conflict prevention strategy. As participants in the
ECOWAS summit noted this week, that has to be a
collective effort, with the countries of the region taking
the lead, supported by ECOWAS, the African Union,
NEPAD and the international community.

The European Union recently undertook a joint
mission to ECOWAS with the United Nations. That
mission proposed a political dialogue with ECOWAS
heads of State to endorse a strategic approach to
conflict prevention in West Africa. The United
Kingdom very much welcomes this strengthening of
European Union links with the United Nations, but we
also, on the substance, welcome the ECOWAS
declaration on subregional peace and security that, as
Minister Akufo-Addo mentioned, reaffirmed the
importance of a regional approach to conflict
prevention and resolution.

Thirdly, we need a more effective use of United
Nations assets across the region. The pressure on
scarce peacekeeping resources is growing rapidly, with
new peacekeeping missions in Cote d'Ivoire and,
likely, in Burundi and Sudan as well. We have to stock
those missions and do justice to those particular cases,
but that means using the assets at our disposal to
maximum effectiveness, and that is not easy. Sharing
resources across missions and across borders risks
confusing mission mandates and potentially disrupting
the lines of command and control. When it involves
joint border patrols it will require agreement from the
different Governments concerned. But these potential
difficulties have to be tackled and overcome, and the
Secretary-General has said in his latest report on the
United National Mission in Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL)
that he intends to make recommendations to the
Council on this by the end of the year. We look forward
to these recommendations because they are very
necessary in order to put into place the content of a
regional approach by United Nations interventions.

I would like to make three additional points that
relate to the Secretary-General's specific
recommendations. First, as a number of colleagues
have emphasized, trafficking in small arms is one of
the great killers in Africa, and it undermines peace and
stability. Organized crime is increasingly involved, and
I agree with the comments made by Mr. Chambas on
the need for ECOWAS to strengthen its Moratorium
and its implementation.

We urge those who have not yet done so to
consider ratifying quickly the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime and
its Protocols, and we would encourage parties to take
advantage of assistance from the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime. Technical assistance is available.
I specifically welcome the account we have been given
this morning of the Unit to be established within
ECOWAS to actually tackle the question of small arms.

Secondly, we strongly support the Secretary-
General's ambition to involve civil society more widely
on issues of governance and security. Civil society has
its place, and I listened to what the Minister said about
United Nations interaction with government and with
civil society. My answer is that of course the United
Nations ought to be primarily involved with
Government, but it also needs to work consistently
with civil society, because there is a key role for civil
society in programmes of disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration, education, the media, and so on. It
should be a central element of conflict prevention, not
an afterthought. The same goes crucially for the role of
women in peace-building, if there is anything that the
Special Representative can say to us later to ensure that
women's equal participation in the myriad of peace and
security issues in the region becomes a reality.

Thirdly, we need to tackle the use and the misuse
of West Africa's rich natural resources - timber,
diamonds - which should be used to fund
development and progress but are on occasion used to
fuel conflict. That needs to be tackled. I commend the
recent - very recent, indeed - transparency initiative
of the extractive industries as a basis for looking at this
problem.

In conclusion, I look forward to the Council
regularly reviewing progress in this area. I hope also
that we will give serious consideration to sending
another Security Council mission to West Africa this
year to discuss with the Governments concerned and
the people on the ground how they see the challenges
and how the United Nations can best deliver the
support that we need to give.

