The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as representative of the United Kingdom.

I would like to thank Mr. Simonovie for his briefing
and for his latest report on Ukraine. I can understand
why Ambassador Churkin does not want the Security
Council to discuss this United Nations report, because
it provides further damning evidence of the appalling
abuses perpetrated against the civilian population
by pro-Russian armed groups in eastern Ukraine. It
also acknowledges Ukraine's legitimate right and its
sovereign duty to restore law and order and to protect
its citizens.

We share the United Nations view that force must
be used proportionately and in full compliance with
domestic and international law. We welcome Ukraine's
clear, unambiguous commitment to these important
principles.

There is one overwhelming conclusion to be drawn
from this report: that these armed groups cannot
possibly claim to be acting in defence of the civilian
population, the very same population against which
they are committing the most appalling human rights
abuses. They are abducting women and children in
order to extort money from their families. They are
using civilians as forced labour and as human shields.
They offered the local population the choice between
fighting on the front lines and facing detention, torture
and mistreatment. They abduct people simply because
they are HIV-positive and tell them that they must
"wash off the guilt with blood".

All of these abuses and many more are detailed in
the United Nations report. These are not the actions of
those interested in protecting the civilian population.
They are the actions of violent and abusive armed
thugs. As the United Nations report puts it, these groups
exercise their power over the civilian population in raw
and brutal ways which are "putting the whole civilian
population at risk".

In addition to those human rights abuses, the report
highlights the fact that separatists have deliberately
targeted critical public utilities, including water,
electricity and sewerage. In so doing, they are denying
the people under their control access to basic services.
We welcome the urgent action that the Ukrainian
Government is taking to restore these services in the
liberated areas.

So if these armed groups are not defending the
interests of the people they claim to represent, the
question must be asked: whose interests are they
defending? We must also ask why the Russian Federation
continues to support them. By supplying those groups
with weaponry, training and personnel, Russia is
fuelling the suffering of an innocent population, the
same people whose welfare they claim to care so much
about.

Throughout this crisis, Russia has acted in violation
of international law, in violation of human rights and in
violation of its own stated objectives. There have been
many moments when Russia has had the opportunity to
change course, when 100 countries rejected the illegal
annexation of Crimea, when Ukraine elected a new
President whose legitimacy could not be questioned,
when 298 innocent lives were lost in the shooting down
of MH-17. Yet despite those watershed events, Russia
continues recklessly to fuel the conflict. As we speak,
Russia is building up its forces on the Ukrainian border.
An additional 8,000 troops have arrived since 11 July.
Many more are stationed in the illegally annexed region
of Crimea.

Now we hear that Russia is ready to intervene on
humanitarian grounds to alleviate the suffering that
it has manufactured. This is completely unwarranted.
Russia is the problem, not the solution.

As we were briefed by the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs earlier this
week, the United Nations is already fully engaged.
United Nations agencies, including the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and
UNICEF, are present on the ground and are working
with the International Committee of the Red Cross,
international non-governmental organizations, civil
society organizations and local communities to support
the Ukrainian-led humanitarian response. But rather
than supporting this effort, Russia threatens unilateral
action.

If Moscow wants to contribute, there are two things
it can do immediately: first, it can help to fund the
United Nations activities and, secondly, it can cease its
support for illegal armed groups. That is the only way
the people of eastern Ukraine will be able to return to
their daily lives free from the fear of intimidation and
violence that the report describes.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I give the floor to the representative of Ukraine.

