Mr. Al-Khussaiby (Oman): We too wish to join the
representative of the United States in congratulating you,
Sir, on a smooth month during your presidency. We
would like also to wish you the very best on your way
towards retirement.

Oman has joined the consensus and voted in favour
of the resolution just adopted, extending the mandate of
the United Nations Observer Mission in Liberia
(UNOMIL) until 15 September 1995, because we
continue to be of the opinion that the international
community should continue to render its support to the
Liberian peace process, albeit not indefinitely or
unconditionally. In this connection, we support the
linkage in paragraph 2 between the continuation of that
support and the need for immediate action on the part of
the Liberian parties to peacefully resolve their differences
and achieve national reconciliation.

The resolution we have just adopted is, in our
opinion, different from previous Security Council
resolutions on the situation in Liberia in the sense that it
is not a "business-as-usual" renewal of mandate, and
could well be the last of its kind unless substantial
progress is achieved by the parties towards the
implementation of the Akosombo and Accra agreements.

 

Furthermore, the message contained in this resolution
is loud and clear: the parties have had ample time to
demonstrate their desire for peace. Now, the time has come
for them to make a choice: either they continue down the
path of sustained fighting and political stalemate, in which
case they cannot and should not count on the international
community's support for the peace efforts in their country;
or, on the other hand, they demonstrate through concrete
steps the political will necessary to bring the long-standing
Liberian crisis to an end. In that case, they would richly
deserve the sustained support of the international
community. We sincerely hope that the Liberian parties will
opt for the second course of action and take full advantage
of the next two and a half months to implement fully and
in good faith the steps mentioned in paragraph 4 of
resolution 1001 (1995), which we have just adopted.

UNOMIL, in conjunction with the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) Monitoring
Group (ECOMOG), has made a tireless effort to assist the
Liberian people to overcome their tragedy. While we
commend and salute these efforts, we reiterate the very
important fact that the burden of achieving peace and
national reconciliation rests primarily on the Liberian
people themselves. Accordingly, we urge the Liberian
parties to demonstrate a sense of responsibility by
overcoming their differences pertaining to the installation of
the Council of State and to the implementation of the
relevant aspects of the Cotonou and Accra agreements so
that the Liberian people can ultimately taste the fruit of
peace, security and stability.

Finally, we commend the Secretary-General, his
Special Representative, ECOMOG and UNOMIL for their
tireless efforts in assisting the Liberian people to bring
about a peaceful settlement of their conflict.

