Mr. Dorda (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, Mr. President, let me convey to
you our greetings and express our appreciation for
implementing the first part of rule 48 of the provisional
rules of procedure of the Security Council by enabling
the international community, on whose behalf you
work, to participate in the work of the Council. We
truly appreciate that.

Secondly, let me say from the beginning that my
statement will be directed to minds and to consciences.
My statement will also be a record for future events
and for history. Nothing continues eternally. God alone
is eternal. We are born, we live, and we die. We are
recording for future generations to see that words of
truth were uttered in the Security Council when it
seemed that right had no place to thrive on this planet.
Might has become right, and it seems that there are no
rights and no might whatsoever for any in this world at
this particular time.

To describe history, for my statement to be
directed to consciences and to record history, I would
say the following.

First, throughout history - and I would
challenge any person to come forward with any atlas or
geographic map with the word Israel in any part of this
world - that name has never been applied to a single
inch of land. The name Israel is the name of the
prophet Jacob, and when God spoke to the Israelites he
said, you sons of Jacob. Never in history or geography
was there ever a State called Israel on Palestinian land.

Secondly, four countries were put forward as
candidates for a Jewish homeland: Argentina; Uganda;
Jabal Al-Akhdar in my country, Libya; and Palestine.
So what rights exist in Argentina, Uganda, Jabal Al-
Akhdar in Libya, or even Palestine?

Thirdly, we must differentiate between two
things: nationalism or nationhood and religion. For me
to worship God as a Muslim, following the word of
Mohammed, does not mean that I am not Libyan.
Golda Meir and Peres came from Byelorussia, their
country. Being Jewish is a religious issue; it has
nothing at all to do with nationality or nationhood.
Sharon also was never Palestinian. Begin came from
Poland; he was Polish. His homeland was Poland, not
Palestine. Netanyahu is American. He is a New Yorker
from Brooklyn, I believe.

If they have the right to settle in Palestine
because Moses, may God bless his memory, was born
there or received the word of God there, that argument
would also apply to Christians. Jesus, may God bless
His memory, was born in Palestine. The word of God
came to Him in Palestine. If that argument can also be
applied, then all Muslims, from Indonesia all the way
to the United States of America, can also go and settle
Mecca and Medina, in Saudi Arabia. Where does faith
connect with nationalism or nationality? Palestine is
for Palestinians - Muslims, Christians or Jews, the
oriental Jews who have lived in Palestine.

Fourthly, there has been talk about peace. Let us
review that. Our brothers, the Palestinians, were told:
put your liberation efforts aside, sit at the negotiating
table in a political process, and they went along that
path. They went everywhere they could, from Oslo to
Madrid to Wye River to Wye Plantation to Wye-I-do-
not-know-where to Camp David to Sharm el-Sheikh.
No stone was left unturned. So what happened? Did
they obtain anything? Did the other party comply with
its previously signed agreements? Not at all.

Look at the latest issue of Time magazine. At
least it is not a Libyan magazine; I think you all know
that. There is a map in it. I am sure that members have
seen it. However, kindly look at it again. Members may

note that what is left of the West Bank and Gaza Strip
is now all settlements. All these places are settlements.

What will negotiation be about? The land already
has been filled with colonial settlements. What will be
returned to the Palestinians? Hundreds of villages and
towns have been built on the West Bank and in the
Gaza Strip. What is to be returned? The land cannot be
returned because it is now full of new settlers from the
four corners of the globe. The Palestinians are
deported, are exiled from their land. Those who have
been exiled are prohibited from returning. Palestinians
own the lands where the settlements were built. Their
homes were destroyed, their farms were destroyed, and
even the trees were bulldozed and uprooted.

What is left for the Palestinians? What are the
Palestinians to build a State upon? After all that, the
Palestinian who attempts to defend his home, honour,
children, whose land is being usurped, whose home is
being bulldozed, whose trees are being uprooted, is
labelled a terrorist. Where is the logic in that? The
terrorist who is now occupying is given the legitimate
right to defend himself. What right? He is aggressing.
He is killing. He is beating. He is occupying, and he is
uprooting the trees of others. He is building settlements
on that land. He brings in new settlers from all over the
globe. That person has the right to defend settler
colonialism? Where is the logic in that?

That is the very logic that has turned young boys
and girls into martyrs who have decided to die in order
to free their land and their own personal and family
property. They do so in defence of their freedom. So
have they become terrorists? That logic can be stood
squarely on its head. This is a provocation to the world
and to all free peoples. This is turning logic on its
head. We thank them because they have unmasked
Arab regimes even of the very fig leaf of that logic. We
also thank them for having revitalized the Arab street.

I have previously said in both the Security
Council and in the General Assembly that our region is
pregnant and that no one can say whether the child to
be born will be healthy or not. Most probably, the child
will not be healthy. Legitimacy has now been bestowed
upon all forces, whether religious, nationalist or
otherwise. They have all been given the green light for
change, including, most regrettably, religious extremist
organizations. They have been given great legitimacy.

An Arab President is being detained and the very
dignity of an Arab people is being raped and overrun
by tanks and bulldozers on its own land. The Arab
peoples can therefore only step on the Arab regimes
that are now kneeling in cowardice. In those
circumstances the Council will be utterly helpless and
able to do absolutely nothing because the will of the
people in the streets of the Arab world will rage. This
is a certainty; it is only a matter of time. However,
those official Arab regimes, by kneeling before the
facts, have given legitimacy to all those movements.
What, then, is to be the solution?

The Security Council must deal with this issue as
one of occupation, the last case of occupation in the
world. The Council has an opportunity before it. Those
of sound mind and logic have an opportunity to look
into, consider and evaluate a solution - the same
solution we saw in South Africa - if indeed there are
those who are searching for peace and security in our
region.

We know what is taking place. We know full well
what will happen. We are therefore not speaking of
decisions to be taken. We know what the balance of
political power is in the world, in the United Nations
and, most particularly, in the Security Council. Since
1990, the Security Council has been in a straightjacket.
We therefore direct our statements to minds and
consciences. We are recording these words for history.

