Mr. Naeemi (Afghanistan): Before delivering
my brief statement, I would like to highlight a couple
of points because we are cited in the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2019/509).

At the national level, in the ongoing armed conflict
in Afghanistan, children are the primary victims.
The Taliban and illegal armed groups use and target
children in their operations. The Government of
Afghanistan follows a zero-tolerance policy regarding
the recruitment of children to its security forces. Sadly,
we must report to the Chamber today that although more
than 1 million children are eligible to go to school, they
are unable to attend.

I would like to congratulate Poland on assuming
the presidency of the Security Council for the month
of August and for taking the initiative to convene
this timely debate on the topic of children and armed
conflict. I also thank the Secretary-General for his
report and commend the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict,
Ms. Virginia Gamba, and her capable team for their
sustained efforts and commitment in supporting
children in conflict-affected countries. I also thank the
other briefers for their insightful remarks.
In the ongoing armed conflict in Afghanistan,
children are the primary victims. As reported by
the Secretary-General, in 2018 children constituted
one-third of the 3,062 verified civilian casualties.
In addition, 1,207 child casualties - 327 dead and
880 injured 4 were reported by the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan in the first half of
2019. Many victims of the recent suicide attacks in
Kabul, Logar, Kandahar and Nangarhar were children.
Although Government efforts focus on their protection,
the Taliban and other illegal armed groups continue
using and targeting children as part of their operations.
They lure, brainwash and force them to partake in the
conflict as soldiers and suicide-bombers.

The Afghan Government is fully committed to
the protection of children in conflict and strongly
condemns and opposes all forms of violations against
children, including recruitment, killing and maiming,
rape and other kinds of sexual violence, abduction,
attacks on schools or hospitals and the denial of access
to humanitarian assistance. To that end, the Government
has taken concrete and decisive steps to address the
situation and ensure the protection of our children.

With regard to recruitment, the Government
follows a zero-tolerance policy on child recruitment
in the Afghan National Defence and Security Forces.
Strict regulations were established following the
endorsement of the road map for the implementation of
the joint action plan in 2014 and the new penal code of
Afghanistan, which has been in force since 2018. The
results of those efforts have been reflected in official
reports from the Afghan National Defence and Security
Forces, which indicate no recruits in 2018.

One thousand and nine underage children were
also prevented from enlisting in the Afghan National
Army, as well as 300 applicants in the Afghan national
police forces, through the implementation of the age
assessment guidelines for the prevention of child
recruitment in the military forces and the establishment
of child protection units at the police headquarters of
all 34 provinces.

As we celebrate the tenth anniversary of resolution
1882 (2009), in addition to taking stock of past
achievements, it is fitting to reflect on how we can
enhance efforts to address the six grave violations
against children more effectively. In that regard, my
Government is working in close cooperation with the
Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General and the United Nations country-level task
forces on monitoring and reporting to the United
Nations country team to implement the action plan and
delist the Afghanistan national and local police from
the shame list, based on the noticeable progress made
to end underage recruitment. We also continue to report
on the implementation of the action plan, with the
seventh annual report having been presented in April.

In conclusion, allow me once again to reiterate
the commitment of my Government to continuing to
protect our children from conflict, as well as our work
with the United Nations in fully implementing the joint
national action plan to prevent child recruitment.

