Mr. Abdrakhmanov (Kazakhstan): I thank the
Deputy Prime Minister and you, Sir, and commend
the Malaysian presidency for focusing today's debate
on the global fight against the proliferation of all types
of weapons of mass destruction (WMDs), which are
posing one of the greatest threats to international peace
and security and human survival. We also appreciate
the tireless efforts of Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon
in this area.

For well-known historical reasons, I will
concentrate on the nuclear sector in my statement, as
issues of nuclear disarmament, non-proliferation and
nuclear security are the main foreign-policy priorities
of Kazakhstan. My country is currently the Chair of
Working Group I of the United Nations Disarmament
Commission on recommendations for achieving the
objective of nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation
of nuclear weapons. I would therefore like to address
some of the key points raised in Malaysia's well-
prepared concept note (S/2016/712, annex).

Kazakhstan selected nuclear-security and
non-proliferation issues as one of the four main pillars
of its campaign for an elected seat on the Security
Council for the period 2017-2018, and it will remain a
priority for us even after our term has expired. Indeed,
nuclear terrorism poses one of the greatest challenge to
the security of all nations. It is clear that the role of the
Council should be greatly enhanced to help strengthen,
universalize and effectively implement all the key
instruments such as the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons, the Comprehensive Nuclear-
Test-Ban Treaty (CTBT), the Convention on Certain
Conventional Weapons and the Convention on the
Prohibition of the Development, Production and
Stockpiling of Bacteriological (Biological) and Toxin
Weapons and on Their Destruction, as well as such
Council resolutions as 1540 (2004), 1718 (2006), 2270
(2016), 2231 (2015), inter alia, as well as all policies and
mechanisms.

All United Nations entities need to regularize and
institutionalize their work undertaken with regional
organizations, as well as specialized agencies such as
the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) and
INTERPOL. Multilateral and bilateral support should
focus on capacity-building, training and exercises,
stronger counter-smuggling programmes and enhanced
border controls, as well as WMD forensics. We
commend Spain for its active chairmanship of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004) and for its contribution to the
goals of the global non-proliferation movement.

The more secure a country feels, especially through
positive and negative security assurances, the more
likely it will be to abandon weapons. Serious attention
should be given to controlling technology transfer of
the means of delivery of WMDs. Long-range missiles,
cruise missiles and unmanned aerial vehicles are also
matters of grave concern. In the current biennium
2016-2017, Kazakhstan is chairing The Hague Code
of Conduct against Ballistic Missile Proliferation and
intends to submit a relevant draft resolution at the
seventy-first session of the General Assembly.

We also need to support multilateral institutions,
such as the United Nations Office for Disarmament
Affairs, the IAEA, the Organization for the Prohibition
of Chemical Weapons and the Comprehensive Nuclear-
Test-Ban Treaty Organization, which are charged with
verification and upholding compliance and must be
supported by regional and subregional mechanisms,
civil society and mass media. We all need to improve
policy coordination, export control and States'
ability to work together to prevent, detect, assess,
respond and mitigate possible use of WMDs and the
resulting destruction.
The establishment of nuclear-weapon-free
zones strengthens global nuclear non-proliferation.
Kazakhstan, together with other countries in the
Central Asia region, established a nuclear-weapon-free
zone in their region. Having seen the great benefits ofa
nuclear-weapon-free zone, we support the establishment
of a Middle East zone free of nuclear weapons and all
other WMDs.

My country can claim be the first country ever
to close a nuclear-test site. It later also renounced
the world's fourth-largest nuclear arsenal. This year,
on 29 August, we will celebrate the twenty-fifth
anniversary of the closure of the Semipalatinsk nuclear-
test site - also the date designated by the General
Assembly as the International Day against Nuclear
Tests. An international conference devoted to the
anniversary will be held in Astana from 28 to 29 August,
and a commemorative meeting of the General Assembly
devoted to the International Day against Nuclear Tests
will be held in New York and hosted by the President of
the Assembly on 31 August.

Kazakhstan currently co-chairs, together with
Japan, the Article XIV Conference of the CTBT. As we
celebrate the twentieth anniversary of the CTBT this
year, we call on all States to fully implement the action
plan for facilitating the entry into force of the CTBT
in 2015-2017. To that end, President Nazarbayev of
Kazakhstan, in his recent security paradigm document
entitled "Manifesto: The World. The 21st century",

proposes a 2045 global strategic initiative plan to
eliminate the root causes of war and conflict and create
a nuclear-weapon-free world by the United Nations
centenary in 2045. Kazakhstan considers the adoption
of the Universal Declaration on the Achievement of a
Nuclear-Weapon-Free World by the General Assembly
last December to be the first step. It also calls for ending
political conflicts, reducing poverty and promoting
development assistance and human rights. Since
security and development are interconnected, President
Nazarbayev also called for transferring 1 per cent of the
defence budgets of Member States to the special United
Nations Sustainable Development Goals Fund.

In conclusion, we call on all States to promote
confidence and trust in order to reach comprehensive,
general and complete nuclear disarmament, create a
powerful global anti-nuclear movement and prevent the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction.

