The President (interpretation from Russian): I should
like to inform the Council that I have received letters from
the representatives of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil,
Canada, Croatia, Egypt, Japan, Malaysia, Norway, Spain,
Turkey and Ukraine in which they request to be invited to
participate in the discussion of the item on the Council's
agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, I propose,
with the consent of the Council, to invite those
representatives to participate in the discussion without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of
the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Misic' (Bosnia and Herzegovina) and Mr. Nobilo (Croatia) took seats
at the Council table; Mr. Valle (Brazil), Mr. Fowler
(Canada), Mr. Elaraby (Egypt), Mr. Owada (Japan),
Mr. Yoogalingan (Malaysia), Mr. Biarn Lian
(Norway), Mr. Yanez-Barnuevo (Spain), Mr. Celem
(Turkey) and Mr. Zlenko (Ukraine) took the seats
reserved for them at the side of the Council Chamber.

The President (interpretation from Russian): I have
received a request dated 15 December 1995 from
Mr. Vladislav J ovanovic to address the Council. With the
consent of the Council, I would propose to invite him to
address the Council in the course of the discussion of the
item before it.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Jovanovic took
a seat at the Council table.


The President (interpretation from Russian): The
Security Council will now begin its consideration of the
item on its agenda. The Security Council is meeting in

 

accordance with the understanding reached in its prior
consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the report
of the Secretary-General pursuant to Security Council
resolution 1026 (1995), document S/ 1995/ 1031. Members
of the Council have before them document S/ 1995/ 1033,
which contains the text of a draft resolution submitted by
Argentina, the Czech Republic, France, Germany, Italy,
the Russian Federation, the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland and the United States of
America.

I should like to draw the attention of the members of
the Council to the following other documents:
S/l995/999, letter dated 29 November 1995 from the
Permanent Representative of the United States of America
to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary- General;
S/1995/102l, letter dated 7 December 1995 from the
representatives of Bosnia and Herzegovina and Croatia to
the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General;
S/1995/1029, letter dated 11 December 1995 from the
Permanent Representative of the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General; and S/l995/1034,
letter dated 14 December 1995 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President of the
Security Council.

In view of the exceptional importance of the entry
into force as soon as possible of the draft resolution under
consideration today, members of the Council agreed in
the course of prior consultations on the following
procedure for the meeting: First, representatives of the
three countries whose Presidents signed in Paris the Peace
Agreements on Bosnia and Herzegovina will be invited to
speak; the Council will then proceed to the voting; upon
the conclusion of the voting, the representatives of those
countries that have expressed the wish to speak in the
course of the discussion of the agenda item will be called
on to speak.

Taking into account the fact that the content of this
draft resolution has been the subject of fairly detailed
discussion, in particular in the briefing given a short while
ago by the President of the Security Council for the
non-members of the Security Council, and also in the
light of the urgent need to which I have already referred
to ensure its immediate entry into force, members of the
Security Council express the hope that Member States
concerned will show understanding of this proposed
procedure.

 

The first speaker is the representative of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, on whom I now call.


