Mrs. Audouard (France) (Spoke in French): Let me
first thank Ambassador Llorentty Soliz for his briefing
today and for the presentation of the programme of work
of the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1540 (2004).

Almost three months after the Council's
unanimous adoption of resolution 2325 (2016) on the
non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction,
today's meeting is an opportunity to come together
to discuss non-proliferation challenges and our joint
efforts to address them. The situation has not changed.
The proliferation of biological, chemical and nuclear
weapons and their delivery systems and their risk of use
by States or terrorist groups remain very real dangers.

In North Korea and Syria, the non-proliferation
standard that is at the heart of our collective security
is regularly, and even openly, being flouted. The rapid
development of North Korea's nuclear and ballistic
programmes is cause for great concern, as is the use of
chemical weapons in Syria. I note that the responsibility
for those ghastly actions has already been attributed
to the Syrian Army and Da'esh in four cases, and the
possibility of there being additional such weapons in
Syria increases the risk of the spread of those toxic
chemical substances.

In the face of such extremely serious challenges,
we must, more than ever, be mobilized for action. The
1540 Committee will guide the actions of all States, so
as to pool efforts to combat proliferation in a tangible
way. I would also like to thank the Expert Group of
the Committee for their crucial analysis and awareness-
raising, which is indispensable to the action of the
Committee. The 2016 comprehensive review confirmed
measurable progress, both nationally and regionally,
in the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) and
subsequent resolutions. Nevertheless, despite the
progress achieved in the past 12 years, much work still
lies ahead.

We welcome the work carried out last year under the
leadership of Spain, which enabled us to strengthen the
means at our disposal through the adoption of resolution
2325 (2016). This year's promising programme of work
ofthe 1540 Committee, which hasjust been presented to
us, also seems well-conceived and allows us understand
the path ahead.

I would like to stress the importance of the
cooperation, assistance and interaction that must
accompany our efforts. We must all prevent and curb
the financing of weapons of mass destruction, do our
best to secure our sensitive assets and materials and
tighten controls over our exports in order to reduce the
risk of their being misused in emerging technologies.
However, we should not act alone. When it comes to
cooperation and assistance, I pledge the commitment
of my delegation, which has assumed responsibility for
the coordination of the working group on assistance
in order to improve the effectiveness of the assistance
mechanism, along the lines already mentioned.

France attaches particular importance to
strengthening the regional dimension of assistance
and consistency in meeting assistance needs. In that
regard, the 2016 African Union Review and Assistance
Conference on the Implementation of Resolution 1540
(2004) in Africa was a success and can serve as a tool
and inspiration for future action. We welcome efforts
undertaken by other stakeholders, as was noted by other
speakers. I also note the role of the European Union,
which, thanks to its ongoing dynamism and awareness-
raising, does its part to promote cooperation.

Finally, if we are to succeed, we must enhance
synergies with organizations outside the United Nations
that face the same challenges, such as the International
Atomic Energy Agency, the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons, the World Customs
Organization and the various export control regimes,
as well as with entities within the United Nations
such as the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001) concerning counter-
terrorism and the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons-United Nations Joint Investigative
Mechanism. We must strengthen the links among
those organizations.

We once again thank Bolivia for its leadership and
commitment at the helm of the Committee and pledge
our full support.

