Mr. Cunningham (United States): We welcome
the High Commissioner. We greatly appreciate his
rapid and forthcoming response to our request to hear
of his visit to West Africa. We very much appreciated
his briefing.

The United States is deeply concerned by the
ongoing humanitarian crisis under way in Guinea and
along its borders with Liberia and Sierra Leone. I want
to commend the work of the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR).
Mr. Lubbers and his people are making a truly heroic
effort to deal with this problem. Some of us have seen
parts of it first hand and it is quite a difficult situation.
The suffering of nearly 500,000 refugees and at least
150,000 displaced persons is, of course, greatly
exacerbated by the Revolutionary United Front (RUF)
cross-border attacks that began in September 2000,
which have thus far led to the deaths of over 1,000
innocent victims. These attacks and the ongoing
instability prevalent throughout the region stem in
large part from RUF activities and from the Liberian
Government's ongoing support.

The Council's adoption yesterday of resolution
1343 (2001) represents an important step in efforts to
halt Liberia's provision of assistance to the RUF and to
other armed groups in the region. It is in keeping with
our strategic goal of diminishing the ongoing violence
in West Africa by weakening support for the RUF. If
we succeed, we will have gone a long way towards
addressing a central cause of the humanitarian crisis
now threatening the innocent people of Guinea, Liberia
and Sierra Leone and, as I think Mr. Lubbers foresees,
helping open the way to a return of the refugees in
conditions of safety.

We support the urgent action to safeguard the
refugees and displaced Guineans trapped in south-
eastern Guinea. The United States has made $3.5
million in emergency funds available to UNHCR to
support the relocation of refugees from camps along
the border to safer sites further north. We gave an
additional $1.25 million to the World Food Programme
to provide food for the victims of the conflict. This is
on top of the $54 million the United States already has
contributed to UNHCR's global appeal for Africa. We
are willing to consider additional support in response
to UNHCR's needs.

We urge the High Commissioner to continue with
the effort to relocate refugees and displaced persons to
safer areas of Guinea and to devote all available
resources to ensure the success of this mission.

Our current priority in Guinea is the prevention of
a humanitarian catastrophe. We think the only way to
do this is by assisting in the evacuation of non-
combatants, including refugees, from areas of conflict
or potential conflict near the borders to more secure
areas of Guinea, where humanitarian aid can be
delivered in safety.

We support efforts to gather financial and
political support for the relocation effort within
Guinea. We hope the international community will join
us in supporting this, and we recognize and strongly
commend the Government of Guinea's continued
hospitality towards the refugees, under what are very
difficult circumstances.

The immediate need for protection and relief
should be at the forefront of our decision-making. The
United States does not support the creation of "safe
corridors" or "safe passage" for refugees through RUF-
held territory. The risks to refugees' lives are too great.
The RUF is not trustworthy. Its past brutal treatment of
civilians is well known.

I also wish to note that the United States does not
support rapid, large-scale repatriation of refugees to
Sierra Leone at this time. We need to be judicious - I
think the High Commissioner used the word "prudent"
in his briefing, and I am sure that UNHCR will be.
Security conditions are unacceptable, the humanitarian
network is strained, and 90 per cent of the refugees
come from areas still under RUF control.

As the High Commissioner requested in his
comments to us, efforts by the United Nations Mission
in Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL) to re-establish peace and
stability are under way, and the Council and the
Secretariat are in the process of strengthening
UNAMSIL. That is indeed our central task now,
because a stronger and more capable UNAMSIL is
essential to many of the things we seek in the region.
The Council shortly will consider an extension of
UNAMSIL's mandate and the augmentation of its force
structure.

As the Sierra Leone Government, with
UNAMSIL's assistance, begins to expand its control
over more of the country, an increasing number of
refugees will be able to return to a safe and secure
environment. We look forward to that. We will have to
give some thought, as Ambassador Greenstock
suggested, together with the Secretariat and
UNAMSIL, to ways of maximizing the impact of
UNAMSIL deployments and how best to take
advantage of its potential in the future, because there
will be conflicting priorities and requirements.

In closing, I should like to commend High
Commissioner Lubbers for his efforts to alleviate the
suffering of the inhabitants of the Mano River States.
We call on all nations to support the work of the High
Commissioner and to join us in taking steps to reduce
the regional violence that has spawned the current
humanitarian crisis.

