Mr. Kohona (Sri Lanka): At the outset, I wish to
join previous speakers in thanking you, Sir, for having
convened this timely debate on a matter that
increasingly demands the focused attention of the
international community. I should also like to thank the
Secretary-General, the Under-Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief
Coordinator, the High Commissioner for Human Rights
and the Director General of the International
Committee of the Red Cross for their helpful briefings.

We welcome the emphasis put by the Secretary-
General on the need to achieve a more tangible
improvement in the protection of civilians most
affected by conflicts. In that context, we would like to
propose that, where satisfactory and successful
experience exist with regard to the care and protection
of civilians, including in post-conflict situations, best
practices from such national cases should be compiled
as an annex to the Secretary-General's future report on
the topic.

While encouraging non-State actors to adhere to
the principles of international humanitarian law in
order to better ensure the protection of civilians is a
laudable objective, this may prove to be a double-
edged sword, as it could also confer unintended
legitimacy on violent perpetrators of terrorism and
terrorist groups. That might pose a political dilemma
for legitimate Governments fighting terrorist groups
and seeking to protect their sovereignty, territorial
integrity and, in many cases, their cherished
democratic way of life, and might thereby add a further
confusing element to ongoing conflicts.

Despite the brutal onslaught unleashed by a
terrorist group that laboured for over 27 years to

undermine our Government economically and its
ability to function effectively as a State, my country,
Sri Lanka, has taken determined measures to establish
a credible national human rights framework through a
range of domestic legislative and administrative
measures that are fiercely enforced by the courts. The
legislation gives expression to seven core human rights
treaties and other related international instruments,
including the four Geneva Conventions, to which
Sri Lanka is a party.

Sri Lanka respects and firmly identifies with the
principles underlined in the thematic resolutions
adopted by the Security Council since 1999. It will
continue to strengthen its human rights framework as
the security situation further improves. Sri Lanka's
commitment is illustrated by the manner in which
broad civilian protection issues were addressed during
the conflict and the speed and efficacy with which it is
now confronting the challenges of resettling internally
displaced persons (IDPs), rehabilitating former
Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam combatants and child
soldiers, post-conflict reconstruction and development,
and accountability and reconciliation issues. Even
cynics will have to acknowledge the professional
commitment with which the Government has
approached those issues.

Sri Lanka's decision to engage the Liberation
Tiger terrorists militarily in 2006 followed their
arrogant refusal to return to peace negotiations and
their persistent resort to unbridled terrorism. The
massive toll on civilian lives, public assets, religious
and world heritage sites, vital economic assets and the
immense suffering of civilians could no longer be
tolerated by a responsible and democratically elected
Government.

As has been repeatedly emphasized, our military
engagement with the Liberation Tigers was clearly
based on a well defined distinction between the
terrorists and the Tamil civilians, and its goal was a
humanitarian rescue operation to relieve approximately
300,000 civilians held as human shields and used as a
bargaining chip by the terrorists. The terrorists were
not averse to locating heavy weapons amidst those
innocent civilians.

The Government policy of zero civilian casualties
had a deep impact the country's professional armed
services, which were trained in humanitarian standards
by the International Committee of the Red Cross
(ICRC). The ICRC also assisted in evacuating over
7,000 injured and their care-givers to Government-run
hospitals. These policies paid dividends as expected, as
thousands of Tamil civilians fled to Government-
controlled areas, once the terrorists lost their coercive
hold on the civilian population, and all were fed,
clothed, sheltered and otherwise cared for in camps
prepared in advance to receive them.

Pivotal to civilian protection is the partnership
based on trust that was established with United Nations
agencies and other humanitarian actors on the ground.
Trust is the first casualty of any subtle politicization or
assumption of a judgmental approach by external
entities, which invariably upsets the delicate balance
between the parties in such situations. It is therefore
imperative that humanitarian agencies and their
workers carry out their work on the basis of the
principles of neutrality and impartiality; that they
conform to national laws; that their activities match the
identified policy priorities of host Governments; and
that they be cognizant of local political, cultural and
social sensitivities. No one size fits all, and experience
and expertise gained elsewhere may not fit a given
situation on the ground. A tendency to grandstand or be
paternalistic will invariably have negative
consequences. Public perceptions matter enormously,
particularly where public opinion influences political
dynamics and where the public is literate and
politically conscious. Public order and political
stability are also critical. Therefore, neutrality,
impartiality, sensitivity and trust assume a seminal
importance in such contexts.

Today in Sri Lanka, 78 non-governmental
organizations (NGOs), including local NGOs, and 11
United Nations agencies, are working in partnership
with the Government on rehabilitation, resettlement
and reconstruction programmes.

Sri Lanka takes the policy view that NGOs
establishing parallel services to those of the
Government that are not sustainable cannot have long
term benefits for the welfare of the people. NGOs must
have the capacity to deliver programmes and self-
generated funding to work with the Government on
prioritized policy areas and activities.

Post-conflict needs and requirements are even
more complex and sensitive than the needs that were
felt earlier. Sri Lanka does not fancy being converted
into a laboratory for an NGO industry, a testing ground
for post-conflict theories or prime learning ground for
those seeking internships.

Sri Lankan society - which has experienced two
violent youth insurgencies and a 27-year terrorist
onslaught during the critical part of its development
trajectory - is one that is now gradually coming into
its own. Sri Lanka as a State party to seven core human
rights treaties and other related international
instruments in the area of international humanitarian
law, including the four Geneva Conventions, is deeply
committed to the principles underpinning those
instruments. The multidimensional revitalization
programme being implemented in the country is now
laying the foundations for fostering justice, security
and opportunity for all. The culture of respect for
human rights and humanitarian standards will be
revitalized in this progression, ensuring the further
consolidation of the protection principle in our law and
society.

