Mr. Shen Bo (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
would like to thank Mr. Grandi, United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees, and Mr. Swing,
Director General of the International Organization for
Migration, for their briefings.

China has paid much attention to the evolving
situation in Libya. In the past two years all the
parties in Libya have made great efforts to move the
implementation of the Libyan Political Agreement
forward, and some progress has been made. However,
Libya is still facing a number of challenges, including
a fragile security situation, continuing armed clashes
and rampant terrorist activity. On the other hand, there
are massive flows of migrants and refugees in the
Mediterranean, a worsening problem of trafficking in
persons and an increasingly complex global situation
for refugees and migrants. The combination of unrest
in Libya and the issues of refugees and migrant poses
many challenges to security and stability in Libya and
the region.

The causes of the refugee and migrant issues
are complex and multifaceted, and Libya has a long
way to go in terms of improving its overall security
situation. The international community should
encourage international cooperation in tackling the
symptoms and the underlying causes of the situation
by taking comprehensive measures and coordinating
the efforts of the many stakeholders involved, both in
promoting a political settlement and dealing with the
refugee-migrant issue, with a view to restoring stability
in both the country and the region as soon as possible.

First, the focus should be on a political settlement
and the creation of a safe and stable environment.
Ending the internal conflicts and achieving stability
in Libya as quickly as possible will establish a major
foundation for resolving the refugee-migrant issue
appropriately. China supports all efforts that can help to
stabilize the situation, promote the political settlement
process and bring all the parties in Libya together in
the fight against terrorism. We also hope that all the
parties in Libya will engage in an inclusive political
dialogue and promote the political process actively and
effectively. The international community should work
to increase its consensus on the issue, giving support
to Libya's neighbours and regional organizations, such
as the African Union and the League of Arab States
in their efforts to promote peace and the political
settlement action plan.

Secondly, we should strengthen international
and regional coordination on combating terrorism
and transnational organized crime. The international
community should be united in fighting terrorism,
while working in an integrated manner by using
various means to cut off the channels that terrrorism
uses to supply itself with financing and arms and
the ways in which it spreads its ideologies. With a
view to preventing a recrudescence of these terrorist
groups, which will only exacerbate the region's
instability, the international community should help
the countries concerned to build up their security
capacities, strengthen border controls between Libya
and its neighbours, foster information-sharing and
cooperation between law-enforcement agencies,
destroy the criminal networks that traffic in persons,
and improve the humanitarian situation. We hope that
all members will fully and accurately implement all the
Security Council resolutions on Libya and trafficking
in persons and work to effectively address the issues
related to refugees and migrants in the Mediterranean.

Thirdly, it is also important to emphasize the
significance of treating both the symptoms and root
causes of the issues and promoting inclusive and
balanced development that benefits everyone. We
must increase support for countries hosting refugees,
work to end xenophobia and discrimination and, most
important, make efforts to tackle the underlying causes
of social instability and development imbalances
if we are to put an end to turmoil and poverty. The
international community should deal with the issue
of development head-on, implement appropriate
remedies, provide aid to developing countries,
support their efforts to implement the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development, enhance their capacity
to alleviate poverty and related problems, foster
homegrown development and promote the achievement
of shared development and lasting peace in countries
of origin. China is ready to work with the international
community in continuing to contribute actively to
ensuring an early end to the conflict in Libya and
achieving stability and restoring prosperity there.

