Mr. Ryan (Ireland): I agree with Ambassador
Cunningham that the presence here today of Secretary-
General Annan marks the importance for the United
Nations of recent developments in East Timor. We are
grateful for today's briefing from Under-Secretary-
General Guehenno and for the opportunity provided by
this meeting to review those developments, particularly
the handling of recent elections there.

The representative of Belgium will shortly deliver
a statement on behalf of the European Union. As
Ireland subscribes fully to the views described in it, I
will therefore make only a few specific comments.

Ireland warmly welcomes the fact that elections
on 30 August took place in a calm and peaceful
atmosphere. The impeccable character and conduct of
the elections are indeed very heartening. We are
encouraged by the extremely high voter turnout, which
is a clear sign of the determination of the East
Timorese people to establish full control over their own
political destiny. We congratulate them and their
leaders for the courage and vision they have displayed
over the past two years in preparing for this important
event.

We encourage the various political parties to
continue to demonstrate the responsibility they
displayed in the run-up to the elections. We also
congratulate the staff of the United Nations
Transitional Administration in East Timor (UNTAET)
for their continuing commitment, their hard work and
their professionalism.

We welcome the cooperation extended by the
Government of Indonesia during the election period,
and we are greatly encouraged by the information
provided by Mr. Guehenno about the meeting to be
held in Jakarta on Wednesday among President
Megawati Sukarnoputri, Special Representative Sergio
Vieira de Mello and members of the East Timorese
Transitional Administration.

The holding of elections represents a crucial step
in the complex and lengthy process of transition
towards independence. We wish those elected every
success in the difficult task of drafting a constitution.
We continue to believe that a substantial international
presence will be necessary after independence, and in
this regard we look forward to the recommendations of
the Secretary-General in his October report, and to
further discussions on the matter.

For its part, Ireland remains committed to
supporting East Timor up to and beyond independence.
I agree very strongly with Under-Secretary-General
Guehenno's statement this morning in this regard.

Finally, Ireland supports the presidential
statement, which we believe provides a balanced View
of Security Council policy towards East Timor and
fully reflects the tone of discussions here today.

