The Secretary-General: I thank you,
Mr. President, for this opportunity to bring to the
Security Council's attention recent developments in
Kosovo. I would like to start, Sir, by joining you in
extending a welcome to His Excellency Mr. Boris
Tadie, President of the Republic of Serbia.

Yesterday, my Special Representative for Kosovo
informed me that the Assembly of Kosovo's
Provisional Institutions of Self-Government held a
session during which it adopted a declaration of
independence, which declares Kosovo an independent
and sovereign State. All of the 109 deputies present
voted in favour of that declaration. The 10 Kosovo
Serb deputies of the Kosovo Assembly did not attend
the session. The declaration states that Kosovo fully
accepts the obligations contained in the comprehensive
proposal for a Kosovo status settlement prepared by
my Special Envoy, Marti Ahtisaari. In his address to
the Assembly, Prime Minister Thaci stated that there
would be equal opportunities for all of Kosovo's
inhabitants and that any discriminatory practices
against members of any of Kosovo's communities
would be eliminated. The declaration pledges
continued adherence to resolution 1244 (1999),
commits Kosovo to continue to work constructively
with the United Nations and expresses gratitude to the
United Nations for what it has done for Kosovo.

In much of Kosovo, there have been peaceful
celebrations by tens of thousands welcoming the
declaration. Today, in northern Mitrovica, up to 9,000
08-24256
people peacefully protested against the declaration of
independence. The Kosovo Police Service, including
Kosovo Serb members, provided security.

The situation has remained calm throughout
Kosovo. Two incidents of note have occurred in
northern Kosovo. In northern Mitrovica yesterday, a
hand grenade exploded near a court building of the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK), causing damage to UNMIK and
Kosovo Police Service vehicles. Later in the day, two
UNMIK police vehicles were damaged by grenades in
the town of Zubin Potok in northern Kosovo. No
injuries were reported in either incident. Visits by
Serbian Government officials, including the Serbian
Minister for Kosovo, Mr. Samardzic, took place
throughout the day in a number of locations throughout
Kosovo without incident and were facilitated by
UNMIK.

Yesterday, I received a letter from the President
of the Republic of Serbia informing me that the
Republic of Serbia has adopted a decision stating that
the declaration of independence by Kosovo represents
a forceful and unilateral secession of a part of the
territory of the Republic of Serbia, and does not
produce any legal effect, either in the Republic of
Serbia or in the international legal order.

Today I have received a letter from Mr. Javier
Solana, the European Union High Representative for
the Common Foreign and Security Policy, informing
me of the decision by the European Union to deploy a
rule of law mission within the framework provided by
resolution 1244 (1999) and to appoint a European
Union Special Representative for Kosovo, who will,
among other functions, coordinate the work of the
European Union in Kosovo. In his letter, Mr. Solana
indicates that he will continue to keep me regularly
informed about the implementation of these decisions,
so that I can discharge my responsibilities under
resolution 1244 (1999), and with the goal of ensuring
close cooperation with UNMIK.

It is my view that these recent developments are
likely to have significant operational implications for
UNMIK. Pending guidance from the Security Council,
UNMIK will continue to consider Council resolution
1244 (1999) as the legal framework for its mandate and
will continue to implement its mandate in the light of
the evolving circumstances. I have instructed my
Special Representative to continue to report to me on
08-24256

the situation on the ground, so that the Security
Council can be fully apprised of any further
developments accordingly.

It is my intention to act in an effective, realistic
and concrete manner. In doing so, pending Security
Council guidance, I might have to adjust to
developments and changes on the ground. My efforts,
and those of my Special Representative for Kosovo,
are aimed at ensuring that the political and security
situation in Kosovo remains stable and that the
population of Kosovo, and in particular the minority
communities, are protected. In that connection, I urge
all to reaffirm and act upon their commitment to refrain
from any actions or statements that could endanger
peace, incite Violence or jeopardize security in Kosovo
and the region.

During the early emergency phase in 1999, the
United Nations facilitated the return of hundreds of
thousands of refugees and internally displaced persons
to Kosovo, coordinated a massive effort to reconstruct
damaged or destroyed housing and infrastructure, and
provided basic services to the population.

The United Nations has been instrumental in
moving Kosovo away from the humanitarian and
emergency phase to peace consolidation and the
establishment of functional local self-government and
administration. Since 1999, the United Nations has
overseen the creation and consolidation of Provisional
Institutions of Self-Government at the central and
municipal levels, with minority representation. The
United Nations has created a functional justice system
and a multi-ethnic police force, and has successfully
organized and overseen five elections. Kosovo now has
a vibrant and diversified political party scene. Freedom
of movement has improved, and inter-ethnic crimes
have been reduced. Kosovo has made considerable
progress through the years on the implementation of
standards, and the standards implementation process is
now fully integrated into the European approximation
process.

My overriding objective in addressing the
situation in Kosovo is to uphold international peace
and security, while ensuring Kosovo's overall stability
and the safety and security of its population. In doing
so, my efforts will continue to be aimed at
safeguarding and consolidating the significant
achievements and the legacy of the United Nations in
Kosovo and the Balkans.
