Mr. Boukadoum (Algeria): Let me begin by saying
that we are deeply shocked by the cowardly, horrendous
attack that targeted a site of the Operational Coordination
Mechanism. It is no coincidence that the terrorist
attack occurred at this time and against Malian forces
and elements of the Coordination des mouvements de
l'Azawad (CMA) and the Platform coalition of armed
groups, which are all signatories of the Agreement
on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali. They are being
regrouped to train for the long-awaited deployment of
the joint patrols. We extend our sincerest condolences
to the families of the victims, the Malian authorities
represented here by His Excellency Mr. Abdoulaye Diop,
Minister for Foreign Affairs, International Cooperation
and African Integration. This attack should be seen as a
cruel reminder that our resolve must not waver. On the
contrary, our resolve and the support of the Security
Council for the implementation of the peace Agreement
should further grow.

Let me also add that Sweden has brilliantly begun
its mandate in the Security Council with a presidency
replete with inspired initiatives. I congratulate the
Swedish presidency for everything that it has done in
the Security Council since the beginning ofthe year and
thank it for inviting Algeria to share with members our
thoughts concerning the mediation efforts and notably
the follow-up of the implementation of the Agreement
on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali, known as the
Algiers Agreement, signed more than 18 months ago.

This meeting is a timely opportunity to take stock of
all that has been done and all that is being done at this very
moment - continuously and intensively - and inform
one another on how to impact our common endeavour
in the most positive spirit and way. And in that regard,
I thank Under-Secretary-General Herve' Ladsous. The
ultimate goal is the sustainable establishment of peace
and reconciliation in our brotherly country of Mali.

I will begin by underlying several elements
that should not to be set aside in difficult times.
Everyone, including the Malian authorities and all
other parties to the Algiers Agreement, have regularly
and constantly - no matter the trying times that we
have faced and are facing - stated their complete
and unequivocal support and commitment to the full
implementation of the Algiers Agreement. It is of the
utmost importance that all stakeholders, including the
Security Council and the Secretariat, which took full
part in the mediation process and are part of the follow-
up mechanism, continue to show their vital support and
confidence in every circumstance, and, more precisely,
to the follow-up mechanism of the Agreement. That
particular aspect of the process shows that we are all on
board and that we must remain together.

The following are questions that should be asked at
this juncture: How can we help parties and stake holders
fulfil their obligations under the Algiers Agreement?
What kind of positive input can we add for the sake of
fulfilling our goals? How can we improve the general
atmosphere to be conducive to those goals. Lastly, how
can we help the Malian authorities while knowing that
delays or power vacuums will be exploited by outcasts
and outlaws - as happened earlier this morning - for
which not only Malian citizens but also the Blue Helmets
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) are paying
too high a price?

I should emphasize once again that the strategic
goal - and our very raison d'etre * is peace and
reconciliation, and that the means to it is mediation.
It is true that we have not yet reached that destination,
but we cannot and must not give up in the face of the
adversities we encounter on the way. We all knew that
the task would not be easy and that as time went on and
expectations continued unfulfilled, that would fuel the
challenges, frustrations and doubts. Clearly, that means
that we must work hard to try to achieve our shared
goals faster, but at the same time we should be very
cautious about any move that could derail a process that
has been so difficult to build.

For all those reasons, we believe it is important to
be frank about the fact that in the context, it is vital
that the Security Council reaffirm its encouragement
and support to the Algiers Agreement and the follow-up
mechanism. As leader of the mechanism, Algeria will
reliably and faithfully relay to the Council whatever
action may be considered necessary, including between
scheduled meetings. Obviously, we assume that
the sustained collaboration and exchanges with the
Secretariat and MINUSMA - everyone is on board, as
we know - will hold up.

There are clearly obstacles and difficulties to the
speedy implementation of what has been agreed to
and defined in the Algiers Agreement, and which we
and all of the stakeholders have called for. I should
note - and Mr. Diop confirmed just now - that
the Malian authorities have repeatedly assured us of
their willingness to work to achieve it. I should add
that so far our impression is that the other Malian
parties to the Algiers Agreement are not contesting its
implementation. It is therefore crucial that we continue
with the persuasion needed to convince and encourage
them to stand by their commitment and ensure that
they understand that there will be only positive gains
if they stick to the wisdom of positive engagement
and reconciliation. It is also crucial to ensure that no
gaps or misunderstandings that might emerge in the
implementation of the Agreement - and such things
do naturally occur in complex situations - are used
as a pretext either for backing out of or unnecessarily
threatening the whole process. No one has the right to
put the process at risk through unjustified action or
constant questioning of things that have already been
fully agreed on.

In that regard, we find it highly commendable
that the Malian authorities have agreed that the High
Representative of Mali's President Keita should
be designated to foster the implementation of the
Agreement by chairing an ad hoc committee created by
the Comite de suivi de l'accord in order to smooth out
the problems raised recently by one of the signatories
to the Agreement. We have high hopes that this
recent initiative will help to clear the way for all the
other measures to be taken, including disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration, joint patrols and, of
course, interim administration. We note that the issues
that have been raised are about the modalities of the
implementation rather than its substance, so we should
continue to encourage everyone to act on this in a spirit
of good will.

We are also very pleased that the top-level Malian
authorities have committed to holding a national
reconciliation conference in the near future that would
definitely pave the way for full reconciliation. I should
point out that reconciliation is Mali's business and it is
Malians, using the appropriate mechanisms, who should
decide it by and for themselves. Our responsibility and
that of the Mechanism, the United Nations and all other
stakeholders is solely to stand by them.

Through the way it was conceived - with
inclusiveness, international support, commitment on
the part of Mali's neighbours and the backing of the
African Union and the United Nations - the mediation
process has proved its uniqueness and will stand as a
role model for other crisis situations. Ifit is to succeed,
is vital to ensure that it is fully supported. Mr. Antonio
Guterres, our new Secretary-General, said in his first
address to the General Assembly (see A/71/PV.60)
that he envisions his efforts to promote prevention and
resolve crises as relying on the parties involved and on
the help and commitment of neighbouring States and
regional mechanisms and organizations.

The peace and reconciliation process in Mali fits
that vision exactly. If Mali is to be a success story, it
must first be a success story for Malians; then for all
Mali's neighbours, including Algeria, because of our
naturally interlinked relations; and ultimately for the
international community as a whole with, at its heart,
the United Nations, which has also invested so much
in terms of sacrifices as well as deployment. Needless
to say, in a region - the whole of the Sahel and
beyond - where terrorism and transnational crime go
hand in hand and are growing in size and impact in their
pursuit of their evil objectives, failure cannot be an
option. It is vital that we restore the legitimate Malian
authorities' command over their entire territory, which
also requires strengthening Mali's security forces, as
well as ensuring reconciliation between all Malians
through bold mechanisms that they will freely choose
for themselves.

Those are the issues that we wanted to share with
the Security Council. As I ask for the Council's renewed
support, I would like to assure members that as leader
of the follow-up mechanism, Algeria has committed
huge human and material resources in the cause of
peace and reconciliation in our brotherly neighbour
Mali and will not back away from its responsibilities
towards all Malians and their leaders. We will always
be on their side, because it is the side of righteousness,
justice and peace.

