Mr. Jovanovic: First of all, I should like to express
my satisfaction at seeing you, Ambassador Lavrov,
presiding over the Security Council. Knowing your high

 

professionalism, diplomatic skill and integrity, I have no
doubt that you will discharge your duties in an exemplary
fashion.

I should also like to extend my appreciation to your
predecessor, the Permanent Representative of Oman,
Ambassador Al-Khussaiby, for the objective and
professional manner in which he presided over the
Council during the month of November.
Yesterday in Paris the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia signed the Peace Agreement on Bosnia and
Herzegovina, fully convinced that it establishes the
equality of the constituent peoples of that country -
Muslims, Serbs and Croats - and of its two entities, the
Republic of Srpska and the Muslim-Croat Federation,
thereby creating the conditions for a long-sought, lasting
and stable peace.

Following the signing of the Peace Agreement at
Paris, which officially put an end to the civil war in
Bosnia and Herzegovina, and the successful conclusion of
the London Conference, the basic task that now lies ahead
is full implementation of the achieved Agreement. The
responsibility lies, not only with the Republic of Srpska
and the Muslim-Croat Federation and other interested
parties, but with the key international factors as well,
particularly those assigned major tasks in the
implementation.

It was not an easy task to have this comprehensive
Agreement signed. All sides were compelled to make
concessions. Consequently, there were no winners or
losers. The essential thing is that peace finally prevailed
and that full implementation of the Agreement will
contribute to the strengthening of stability, not only in
Bosnia and Herzegovina but further beyond, in the
Balkans and Europe.

For its part, Yugoslavia stands ready to honour and
implement fully all the commitments it has undertaken
under the Agreement. After the signing of the Agreement,
the peoples of Bosnia and Herzegovina and the
international community as a whole are confronted with
the difficult challenges of the implementation of peace
and the normalization of life. For success to be achieved,
it is imperative that the military and civilian components
of the international presence in Bosnia and Herzegovina
take an impartial and objective position towards all
parties.

 

During the negotiation process many difficult and
painful compromises had to be made in order for peace to
be achieved. One of the most sensitive issues is, without a
doubt, the status of the Serbian population of Sarajevo. It
is imperative that the Serbs of Sarajevo receive concrete
and reliable guarantees that their freedom, security, equality
and human rights will be fully and unconditionally
respected. Throughout the Whole process, the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia, and President Milosevic in
particular, steadfastly invested their efforts towards finding
a peaceful solution. In so doing, the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia has repeatedly affirmed its peaceful and
principled policy and commitment that all peoples in the
region should be treated equally, which has been
acknowledged by the international community.

The Federal Republic of Yugoslavia welcomes the
appointment of Mr. Carl Bildt as the High Representative
in Bosnia and Herzegovina. The balanced and serious
approach that he has embraced during his involvement in
the crisis in the former Yugoslavia up to now will serve
him in good stead in the challenges that will confront him
in the future.

We rightfully expect that, in accordance with the
Agreement, the Security Council will soon undertake
measures totally to lift all sanctions against the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia.

Economic reconstruction and cooperation are of vital
importance, and all parts of the former Yugoslavia should
receive their equal share.

Crippled by international sanctions and isolated from
the international community, the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia is eagerly seeking to restore its rightful place in
the family of nations. The Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
believes that by pursuing a constructive policy geared to the
establishment of peace in the whole territory of the former
Yugoslavia it has earned the right to normalize its status in
all international organizations, especially in the United
Nations, the International Monetary Fund and the World
Bank and to normalize relations with the European Union.

We do appreciate the efforts made in the Contact
Group with relation to normalizing the status of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia in the General Assembly and the
Economic and Social Council, particularly those made by
the Russian Federation and France, as well as by the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and Italy.

 

The Government of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia expresses its dissatisfaction over the fact that
the Security Council did not take a decision to restore
Yugoslavia's status in the United Nations. That is even
more surprising in view of the fact that the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia is expected to cooperate fully
with the international organizations which play a specific
role in the implementation of the peace agreement while
the decision to suspend Yugoslavia from such cooperation
is still kept in place.

The Federal Republic of Yugoslavia certainly cannot
be responsible for unavoidable negative consequences. We
consider that the new spirit of Dayton and Paris should
not be burdened with the old approach to problems.

We had rightfully expected that the Security Council
would, after the Dayton Agreement, the London
Conference and the signing in Paris, take such a decision
on the full restoration of Yugoslavia's rights in the United
Nations, without any problems. This would have been a
normal continuation of the whole process, based on the
landmark Dayton Agreement, which should create a
favourable climate for the resolution of the problem as a
whole.

It is surprising that the decision to restore
Yugoslavia's rights in the United Nations has not been
taken, in view of the recognition that the Federal Republic
of Yugoslavia has received for its peaceful policy and
engagement in achieving the peace accord.

As a founding Member, the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia requests the Security Council to allow it to
resume its rightful place in the United Nations without
delay, on the basis of continuity and in accordance with
the Charter of the United Nations and international law.

The Security Council once again has succumbed to
the pressures of some of its members. This negatively
affects the credibility of this organ, whose task is the
maintenance of international peace and security. The
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia can accept neither this
nor the constant attempts to impose new conditions,
contrary to the Agreement or any of its basic
principles regarding the equality of all sides and an
objective and impartial stance towards all of them.

It is particularly unacceptable that additional
conditions are now being set for the normalization of the
status of Yugoslavia in the United Nations. The exclusion
of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia from the work of

 

the General Assembly and of the Economic and Social
Council has been directly linked to the crisis and war in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. With the signing of the Peace
Agreement and its implementation, it is only logical that
Yugoslavia's rights should be fully restored. Any delay in
that regard would weaken rather than strengthen the peace
process as a whole, and may be wrongly understood by
some as a signal to take advantage of an uneven-handed
and discriminatory approach.

The Federal Republic of Yugoslavia considers that it
is not entitled to more than the others - that is to say, that
its rights and duties should be equal to those of the other
Member States of the United Nations. We cannot agree to
fulfil our duties and at the same time have no rights, or to
have more duties than other Members.

It is regrettable that Croatia has tacitly placed the
burden and blame on the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
for the fact that the draft accord on normalization of
relations and mutual recognition between the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia and Croatia was not reached in
Paris yesterday. For the sake of truth, it should be noted
that it was in fact Croatia that reneged on the draft
agreement that it reached with our delegation in Dayton on
the conditions for mutual recognition. Croatia voluntarily
accepted these commitments and, according to the letter and
the spirit of the draft agreement on the normalization of
relations, was obliged to fulfil them.

The Federal Republic of Yugoslavia fully implemented
its commitments. It is open to the normalization of
relations, including mutual recognition in the sense of the
draft agreement, as soon as Croatia fulfils its obligations.

