Mr. Listre (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
Mrs. Ogata's leadership at the head of the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR) will come to an end in a few days' time. Her
work has been crowned with success. Argentina would
like to express its profound gratitude to her for all of
her energy, dedication and skill and for the efficiency
with which she has carried out this task. The quality of
the work of UNHCR personnel is one of the greatest
concrete benefits that the United Nations can offer to
humanity today.

I should like to comment on a specific theme
closely related to the protection of refugees. I refer to
the security of humanitarian personnel - a subject
with which Mrs. Ogata also dealt in her statement, and
one that has been mentioned by the other speakers,
especially the representatives of the United States and
of France.

The work of UNHCR, like that of all those
involved in carrying out international functions in the
field, has always entailed risks - sometimes great
risks. Unfortunately, at present these risks are greater
than before, because those who provide humanitarian
assistance are increasingly being identified as targets
by warring factions in a large number of current
conflicts. We continue to see United Nations personnel
fall in the line of duty as they attempt to bring aid to
those who need it. On 6 September last, three new
victims from UNHCR were added to the long list of the
fallen. We would like to pay tribute to those innocent
victims and express our condolences to their families.

It is clear to us that providing adequate protection
to United Nations and associated personnel is a
priority. As one of the largest troop-contributing
countries and a leader of the humanitarian aid initiative
known as the "White Helmets", the Argentine Republic
is very much involved in providing such protection.
That is why Argentina invited members to hold an open
debate on this question when we presided over the
Security Council in February this year.

We support the immediate adoption of the
transitional budgetary measures suggested by the
Secretary-General in his recent report (A/55/494) on
the security of United Nations personnel. Those
measures aim to meet the most immediate needs to
bolster the security of personnel of the United Nations
system in the biennium 2000-2001. At the same time,
we commit ourselves to giving due consideration to the
proposals that the Secretary-General will present to
establish a stable financial structure for the security of
United Nations personnel starting in the biennium
2002-2003.

The report mentions the trust fund for the security
of United Nations system personnel, which was created
last year, and points out that, unfortunately,
contributions have so far been meagre. Our country has
made a commitment to contribute to this fund. We
reiterate this commitment, and we urge other States to
try to make contributions to the fund.

Another aspect that we must address, in parallel
with the practical measures proposed, is the
improvement of legal instruments for the security of
personnel. The entry into force of the Rome Statute
establishing the International Criminal Court, an
instrument that my country will shortly ratify, will be a
significant step forward for the defence of personnel.

Above all, it is essential to focus our attention on
the 1994 Convention on the Safety of United Nations
and Associated Personnel, which entered into force
early last year, and now has 45 States parties. Our
country supported the development of this instrument
from its inception, because it is one of the principal
norms for legal protection for personnel.

Efforts must urgently continue to ensure that
those countries in which humanitarian or other
assistance missions are being carried out respect the
legal standards that are in full conformity with the
1994 Convention and do everything within their power
to become parties to the Convention. The States
Members of the United Nations must continue to work
so that all mission personnel working in the field or
carrying out humanitarian assistance tasks are fully
protected.

The General Assembly has asked the Secretary-
General to present a report on the legal situation of
United Nations and associated personnel and, in
particular, to examine the scope of the application of
the 1994 Convention and propose alternative measures
to improve the coverage afforded by its provisions. We
understand that the Secretary-General will present the
report very soon, and we should like to thank him in
advance for his work and the ideas that he will
propose.

Our country will continue to honour our
commitment to ensuring the protection of personnel.
We will examine with an open mind all the proposals
of the Secretary-General and work actively for the
adoption of any measure that will prevent and
prosecute any systematic aggressive acts against
United Nations personnel, associated personnel and
humanitarian personnel, such as those staff members of
UNHCR who, unfortunately, suffered in the recent
past.

