Mr. J agne (Gambia): Mr. President, we are honoured
and pleased to have you with us today. I would like to
thank you, on behalf of my delegation, for organizing this
open meeting on a subject to which we all attach a great
deal of importance. Many thanks also to Mr. Olara Otunnu,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict, for his thought-provoking
briefing. We also commend him for the energy and
enthusiasm that he has continued to demonstrate in his
advocacy to raise international public awareness of a
problem that deserves the undivided attention of all of us.

Now that we know what the problems are, the next
step is to move from the realm of rhetoric to the domain of
deeds. The Special Representative has outlined a series of
selected measures geared towards the alleviation of the
suffering of children. My delegation is of the firm view that
the Council should draw inspiration from these measures to
formulate a programme of action. In this way, we are
confident that the matter will be dealt with effectively and
efficiently to produce the desired results. The first step in
this direction is to keep the question of children and armed
conflict on top of the agenda of the Security Council by
including it in reports to the Council on peacemaking,
peace-building and peacekeeping operations.

It is distressful to learn that in most recent conflicts,
civilians, in particular children, have suffered greatly and
that 90 per cent of the casualties of today's conflicts are
civilians, of which the vast majority are women and
children. The magnitude of the problem is overwhelming.
We have been told that from the mid-1980's to the
mid-1990's, 2 million children were killed, 1 million
orphaned, 6 million seriously injured or permanently
disabled, 2 million made homeless and 10 million left with
serious psychological trauma.

In many conflicts, the lofty values regarding the
protection of children seem to be forgotten completely.
Children have been deliberately or indiscriminately targeted.
Many of them have been conscripted as soldiers, sometimes
at gunpoint. Not even young girls are spared. The plight of
young girls is particularly worrisome. In many instances,
they have been subjected to rape and other sexual and
physical violence. The use of children as instruments of war
is now commonplace in many conflict situations.

Caught between the devil and the deep blue sea, those
who are able to escape the horrors of conflict situations are
either internally displaced or go elsewhere as refugees, or
are separated from their families.

The situation is sometimes further exacerbated by
the exposure of children to landmines and small arms.
Notwithstanding the many regimes of international
humanitarian and human rights instruments, violence
against civilians, in particular children, goes on with
indescribable impunity. This signals a complete
breakdown of value systems and an utter disregard for
values governing the conduct of war.

Concerted international effort is necessary to address
seriously this deplorable state of affairs. We must not
relent in our collective endeavour to stamp out the
systematic targeting of children in situations of armed
conflict. As a first step, the international community
should ensure that there is respect for international
humanitarian and human rights law. The ratification of
the Statute of the International Criminal Court and
International Labour Organization Convention N o. 182 of
1999, concerning the Prohibition and Immediate Action
for the Elimination of the Worst Forms of Child Labour
would constitute steps in the right direction.

Grave violations of international humanitarian and
human rights law often occur in communities which are
cut off from the outside world. The presence of the
international community in such places would be vital for
the purpose of producing witnesses to such violations. It
is therefore important that the international community
gain access to places engulfed in armed conflict.

While not trying to find a justification for the
violations of international humanitarian and human rights
law, it is clear that in many conflict situations, many
belligerents do not know the rules governing armed
conflict. It is therefore important that the attention of
warring parties be continuously drawn to international
standards governing armed conflict and their obligations
to observe them. As the French saying goes: Nul ne
censer ignorer la loi.

This is why we support the advocacy role being
played by the Secretary-General's Special Representative
for Children and Armed Conflict and encourage him and
others concerned to continue to play this most vital role.
Prominent in this advocacy work is the concept of
children as zones of peace. We must also insist that
places that usually have a significant presence of children
be treated as battle-free zones. In the same vein, it is
important to obtain humanitarian ceasefires or days of
tranquillity for the purposes of delivering humanitarian
aid or carrying out vaccination campaigns to inoculate
children. The international community should, whenever

 
appropriate, seek to obtain the commitment of belligerents
to such causes.

There are many more measures the international
community may take to alleviate the plight of children
caught up in armed conflict. The Secretary-General's
Special Representative for Children and Armed Conflict is
showing the way forward.

In many post-conflict situations, the special needs of
children affected by conflict are not addressed. Children are
the future of any nation. Their concerns and needs should
therefore be included in any post-conflict rehabilitation
process at an early stage. In this regard, the example of
Sierra Leone is worthy of note.

We note with satisfaction that the Security Council
continues to treat this issue with all the seriousness that
it deserves. There is a clear commitment in the Council
to continue to take the necessary steps to promote the
protection of civilians, particularly children, in situations of
armed conflict and to cater for their needs in a post-
conflict rehabilitation process. The draft resolution on
children and armed conflict, that we hope will be adopted
soon, constitutes an ample demonstration of this
commitment.

Finally, I would be remiss in my duty if I concluded
this statement without thanking the international
humanitarian and human rights community who work so
hard, most of the time putting their own lives at risk, to
make a difference in the lives of children affected by
armed conflict. We salute and support them in their work
and encourage them to continue to render their much
appreciated services for the benefit of less fortunate
children, where ever they may be on this planet. In this
way, life for many of these poor and innocent souls
would, at long last, be worth living.

