Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I
thank you, Madam President, for convening today's
important open debate to discuss progress towards the
full implementation of the children and armed conflict
agenda. I also thank Foreign Minister Asselborn for his
personal presence in the Council and for Luxembourg's
strong and consistent leadership on this issue,
including through its chairmanship of the Working
Group on Children and Armed Conflict. Let me also
warmly thank the Secretary-General, his Special
Representative Leila Zerrougui and the other briefers
for their statements. I was particularly struck by the
testimony of Mr. Sawanah, which brought to life for all
of us why this issue is so important.

Fifteen years ago, the Security Council recognized
children and armed conflict as an issue of international
peace and security with the adoption of resolution
1261 (1999). While we have since seen the release,
reintegration and protection of thousands of children,
nonetheless Violations continue: in Syria, where well
over 10,000 children have been killed, 3,000 schools
damaged or destroyed and 3 million children are in dire
need of humanitarian assistance, and in Africa, where
the Lord's Resistance Army has blighted the lives of
thousands of children, terrorizing and displacing them
from their homes as well as recruiting them to torture
and kill. As long as children's lives continue to be torn
apart by conflict, our work and commitment must also
continue. We therefore welcome the adoption of today's
resolution 2143 (2014), which adopts practical steps for
combating violations against children. The resolution
draws attention to devastating attacks on schools in
armed conflict. Schools are protected civilian objects
under international humanitarian law, and yet the
Council has heard in briefings by Valerie Amos of
the continued militarization of schools in conflict,
especially in Syria. Schools should be a place of safety,
learning and peace, not violence and conflict.

It is high time that Member States upheld their
responsibility to protect children. We warmly welcome
the campaign "Children, not soldiers", aimed at ending
the recruitment and use of children by Government
armed forces in conflict by 2016. The United Kingdom
recognizes that this is an ambitious undertaking.
Special Representative Zerrougui and UNICEF
Executive Director Tony Lake have led the campaign,
but that is not enough. We ask the Secretary-General to
ensure that the campaign is mainstreamed throughout
the United Nations work, from peace processes to
peacebuilding, including in the work of country teams.
We look to Mr. Ladsous and Mr. Feltman to empower
child protection advisers in United Nations field
missions.

When it comes to children's lives, no effort can
be spared. It is also in our hands as Member States
to support the implementation of the United Nations
framework on children and armed conflict. The United
Kingdom is doing its part. Foreign Office Minister Mark
Simmonds has personally committed himself to work
to release child soldiers in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, Somalia, South Sudan, Chad and Burma. He
has urged those Governments to implement their action
plans with the United Nations to end the recruitment
and use of child soldiers. He has also highlighted the
need to prevent and protect children from other grave
violations, including sexual Violence.

The United Kingdom believes that regional
organizations can also make important contributions,
as we have just heard from my Nigerian colleague. That
is why we are funding a child protection adviser in
the African Union (AU), who will help implement the
AU-Special Representative joint declaration.

All parties to armed conflict, State and non-State
parties alike, must abide by international law. Those
who violate international law must be prosecuted. With
verified information on Violations against children from
United Nations country task forces and Ms. Zerrougui's
commitment to concluding action plans, compliance
with international law can now be measured. We call
on all parties to sign action plans, and we call on those
that have already signed to honour their commitments
in full. We urge the Secretary-General to strengthen
monitoring, reporting and response, and the Working
Group on Children and Armed Conflict to increase
pressure on persistent perpetrators.

Iwant to highlight today the invaluable contribution
of the International Criminal Court (ICC) in the fight
against impunity for crimes against children. Two years
ago, the ICC found Thomas Lubanga guilty of the war
crime of using children to participate in hostilities.
Today, the ICC found Germain Katanga guilty of
war crimes. Although he was acquitted of using child
soldiers, the Trial Chamber found that children were
used as combatants. No matter who is responsible, that
is an appalling violation of those children's rights. The
fight against impunity must continue. We also welcome
the fact that Bosco Ntaganda will be held to account by
the ICC for the alleged recruitment of child soldiers in
the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo.

We have an obligation to the next generation in
countries affected by conflict. It is no exaggeration to
say that violations of children's rights compromise a
country's future prosperity and ability to build lasting
peace. We must commit to doing everything we can to
prevent abhorrent violations and rise to the challenges
to protecting the world's children.

