Mr. Pak Gil Yon (Democratic People's Republic of Korea): The delegation of the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea totally rejects the unjustifiable
resolution 1718 (2006), adopted by the Security
Council just now. It is gangster-like for the Security
Council to have adopted today a coercive resolution,

while neglecting the nuclear threat, moves for
sanctions and pressure of the United States against the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea. This clearly
testifies that the Security Council has completely lost
its impartiality and persists in applying double
standards in its work.

The delegation of the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea expresses its disappointment over
the fact that the Security Council finds itself incapable
of saying even a word of concern to the United States,
which threatens the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea with nuclear pre-emptive attack and aggravates
tension by reinforcing armed forces and conducting
large-scale joint military exercises near the Korean
peninsula.

As was already declared, the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea successfully conducted an
underground nuclear test under secure conditions on
9 October as a new measure for bolstering its war
deterrent for self-defence. The Democratic People's
Republic of Korea's nuclear test was entirely
attributable to the United States nuclear threat,
sanctions and pressure.

The Democratic People's Republic of Korea has
exerted every possible effort to settle the nuclear issue
through dialogue and negotiations, prompted by its
sincere desire to realize the denuclearization of the
Korean peninsula. The Bush Administration, however,
responded to the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea's patient and sincere effort and magnanimity
with a policy of sanctions and blockade. The
Democratic People's Republic of Korea was compelled
to substantially prove its possession of nukes to protect
its sovereignty and the right to existence from the daily
increasing danger of war from the United States.

Although the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea conducted the nuclear test due to the United
States, it remains unchanged in its will to denuclearize
the peninsula through dialogue and negotiations. The
denuclearization of the entire peninsula was President
Kim Il Sung's last instruction and is the ultimate goal
of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea.

The Democratic People's Republic of Korea's
nuclear test does not contradict the 19 September Joint
Statement, under which it committed itself to
dismantling its nuclear weapons and to abandoning its
existing nuclear programme. On the contrary, it
constitutes a positive measure for its implementation.

The Democratic People's Republic of Korea has
clarified more than once that it would feel no need to
possess even a single nuclear weapon once it was no
longer exposed to the United States threat and after that
country had dropped its hostile policy towards the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea and confidence
had been built between the two countries.

The United States has sought to impose collective
sanctions upon the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea by manipulating the Security Council to adopt a
resolution pressuring Pyongyang. The Democratic
People's Republic of Korea is ready for both dialogue
and confrontation. If the United States persistently
increases pressure upon the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea, my country will continue to take
physical countermeasures, considering such pressure to
be a declaration of war.

