Ms. Stiglic (Slovenia): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union (EU). The candidate
countries Turkey, Croatia and the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, the countries of the
Stabilization and Association Process and potential
candidates Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Montenegro and Serbia, as well as the Republic of
Moldova, Armenia and Ukraine, align themselves with
this declaration.

First of all, let me thank you, Mr. President, for
convening this debate. I would like also to thank
Under-Secretary-General Guehenno for his briefing as
well for his frank assessment of the situation. The
European Union highly appreciates the valuable work
of the United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-
Leste (UNMIT) and in particular that of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Timor-
Leste, Mr. Atul Khare. I wish further to thank the
Permanent Representative of Timor-Leste for his
statement today.

The European Union is following the situation in
Timor-Leste with deep concern. The EU firmly
condemns the assassination attempt on Timor-Leste's
President, Jose Ramos-Horta, and the attack on the
convoy of Prime Minister Xanana Gusmao. Those
actions only strengthen the EU's firm determination to
support Timor-Leste's democratically elected leaders,
its institutions and its sustainable development in order
to protect its future.

There can be no doubt that the perpetrators of the
attacks of 11 February aimed at the core of the
legitimate institutions of Timor-Leste and sought to
create a highly volatile security situation that would
endanger the achievements that Timor-Leste has made
since its independence. It is encouraging and therefore

a sign of progress in Timor-Leste's post-conflict
transition that the Government, the parliament and
major political parties, including the opposition
leadership, responded appropriately to that crisis and
fulfilled their constitutional obligations. It is vital that
Government and opposition stay in close dialogue and
that all Timorese set aside any differences and work
together to address the challenges the country faces
and to create a stable and prosperous future for all the
people of Timor-Leste.

The situation further underlines the importance of
the continued supporting role performed by UNMIT,
and the United Nations police contingent in particular.
The EU also commends the efforts of The International
Stabilisation Force, including its swift action to
provide emergency treatment to President Ramos-
Horta.

As the report of the Secretary-General underlines,
some progress has been observed in terms of a
functioning parliament and other State institutions, but
many critical challenges remain, as a number of the
root causes of the May 2006 crisis have not been fully
addressed. Those include political divisions; weak
institutions, particularly the security forces;
widespread poverty and unemployment, which is
especially high among the youth; and the key issue of
internally displaced persons.

In his report the Secretary-General mentions
positively the role the international community has
played in supporting Timor-Leste. For its part, the
European Union is determined to continue its active
support to Timor-Leste in facing those critical
challenges, notably through European Community
assistance of over €200 million of ongoing
commitments. The imminent upgrade of our presence
in Dili through a fully fledged European Community
delegation is another sign of the determination of the
European Union.

The European Union supports in particular the
continued work on a review of the future role and the
needs of the security sector and, given the sector's
importance for long-term stability, encourages the
Government, in close cooperation with UNMIT and the
relevant donors, to implement the security sector
reform plan.
The EU stresses the importance of ongoing
efforts to reach accountability and justice for the events
of 1999 and April and May 2006, and calls upon the
Government of Timor-Leste to implement the
recommendations of the Special Commission of
Inquiry report.

The European Union fully supports the extension
of the UNMIT mandate for a further 12 months, as
recommended in the report of the Secretary-General.
Such an extension would help ensure continuity in
stabilizing the country further.

While Timor-Leste's transition is continuing on
the right path, the situation will remain fragile and
volatile if specific challenges are left unaddressed.
There are immediate challenges to face: bringing the
perpetrators of the 11 February attacks to justice;
resolving the petitioners issue; ensuring reconciliation,
accountability and justice for the victims of past
Violence, notably for the events of 1999 and the crisis
of 2006; and alleviating the situation faced by
internally displaced persons. There are longer-term
challenges: for the Timorese leadership to agree on a
shared vision of the way ahead; and to build the
capacity of Timorese governance institutions, including
in budget performance, poverty alleviation and jobs
creation.

Ultimately, success in Timor-Leste is for the
people of Timor-Leste to achieve. The European
Union, along with the United Nations and other
international partners, stands ready to assist the
Timorese Government and its people in the critical
challenges they face in building the capacity of State
institutions, in order to further consolidate peace and
democracy in Timor-Leste.

