Mr. Mahmadaminov (Tajikistan): At the outset, I
would like to congratulate Kuwait on its assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council and express my
appreciation for the convening of today's debate on the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan. I
would also like to thank the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Afghanistan, Mr. Tadamichi
Yamamoto, for his efforts and valuable observations,
Ms. Sima Samar for her detailed briefing and my
colleague the Ambassador of Afghanistan for
her statement.

Among the countries of the region, Tajikistan has a
special relationship with Afghanistan. It is based on our
common historical, spiritual and cultural values.

With regard to the current political situation in
Afghanistan, we all equally feel the growing security
deficit in the region and beyond. That is due primarily to
the continuing threat of international terrorism, religious
extremism and illicit drug trafficking. Our particular
concern is the trend of the propaganda activities and
subversion being carried out by representatives and
supporters of the Islamic State in Afghanistan. The
activation of the supporters and militants of the Islamic
State of Iraq and the Levant-Khorasan Province is
happening against the backdrop of a significant flow
of drugs, weapons and human resources. The further
aggravation of the political situation in Afghanistan
poses a real threat to the security of the entire region
and will affect the functioning of the main transit routes
through Afghanistan in the direction of Central Asia.

The world community has been making substantial
efforts to free Afghanistan of terrorism and extremism
and to help it launch the phase of sustainable
development. In that context, Tajikistan supports the
implementation of the international strategy for the
comprehensive solution and further reconstruction of
Afghanistan. It is necessary to support the Government
of Afghanistan, especially during the decade of
reconstruction of Afghanistan, from 2015 to 2024.

It is our view that international assistance should
first and foremost meet the most basic needs of the
people of Afghanistan to enjoy a decent life, education,
their rights, social security and employment. That
assistance should bring hope and constructive power
to the people of Afghanistan so that they themselves
become more committed to ensuring peace and stability
and the socioeconomic revival of their country. In our
view, the United Nations could play a stronger and more
effective role in making further progress in that regard.

We support the Afghan Government in its efforts to
start an effective peace process as soon as possible. At
the same time, we emphasize the need to stop the armed
opposition groups from committing violence and break
their ties with Al-Qaida and the Islamic State. The peace
process is a key factor for the long-term stability and
unity of Afghanistan. The security of Afghanistan and
the region as a whole cannot be achieved without the
eradication of terrorism and radicalism. The countries
of the region need to restrict the physical movement of
terrorists in their territories and destroy their sources
of financing.

To tackle the issue of countering terrorism and its
financing, Tajikistan, in cooperation with the United
Nations, the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe and the European Union, hosted a high-
level conference entitled "International and Regional
Cooperation on Countering Terrorism and its Financing
Through Illicit Drug Trafficking and Organized
Crime" in Dushanbe on 16 and 17 May. More than 500
participants from 52 countries and 29 international
and regional organizations, as well as representatives
of the diplomatic corps, civil society and academia,
attended the conference. The objective of the Dushanbe
conference was to promote strengthened international
and regional cooperation and identify effective methods
of countering the current challenges and threats.

Last week, on 14 and 15 June, the capital city
of Dushanbe hosted another significant event: the
fifth Summit of the Conference on Interaction and
Confidence-building Measures in Asia (CICA).
Speaking at the opening ceremony of the Summit, the
President of my Republic, His Excellency Mr. Emomali
Rahmon, expressed concern over the difficult situation
in neighbouring Afghanistan and called for taking
effective measures and the further coordination of the
efforts of the international community, including CICA
member States, in that area.
One of the lessons we learned from the history
of Afghanistan over the past two decades is that
terrorism and extremism cannot be eradicated through
military means alone. Socioeconomic expansion and
Afghanistan's integration into the regional economy are
therefore one of the ways to eliminate the foundations
of terrorism and extremist phenomena.

In conclusion, let me reiterate Tajikistan's long-
standing support for the constructive initiatives of
the world community to ensure sustainable peace and
the economic revival of Afghanistan, as well as its
willingness to further strengthen cooperation with the
Government of Afghanistan and international partners
in the future. Moreover, we wish Afghanistan every
success in holding peaceful, inclusive and transparent
presidential elections this year.

