Mr. Al-Qaysi (Iraq): I wish to thank you, Mr.
President, for granting my request to be the last
speaker.

First of all, I should like to extend my
congratulations to you on the manner in which you
have presided over the work of the Council for this
month.

(spoke in Arabic)

The Security Council is meeting this week to
discuss my country's situation in relation to the
Security Council. I wish at the outset to reaffirm that
the obligations imposed on Iraq under relevant Security
Council resolutions are extremely harsh and go beyond
customary legal measures to restore international peace
and security.

In spite of this, Iraq has implemented all the
obligations enshrined in the relevant Security Council
resolutions. The provisions of the principal
resolution - resolution 687 (1991) - have been fully
implemented, as required. Iraq has recognized Kuwait's
sovereignty and territorial integrity, its independence,
and its borders as delineated by the United Nations.

Iraq has cooperated with the United Nations and
fully implemented its commitments concerning the
deployment of United Nations observer units. It has
also implemented all the requirements of paragraphs 7
to 13 concerning disarmament, in addition to other
relevant resolutions, especially resolutions relating to
ongoing monitoring and to the import-export
mechanism. This was recognized by a number of
reports of the Special Commission (UNSCOM) and
some of its principal elements after the unmasking of
the subversive role played by this Commission,
especially during the chairmanship of Richard Butler.

Iraq has returned all the Kuwaiti properties that it
could find, and has pledged to return any other material
that may be found in the future. A reparations regime
has been imposed on Iraq, from which compensation
sums are deducted. Iraq has returned all prisoners of
war and has fulfilled and continues to fulfil the duty of
cooperating in investigating the fate of missing
persons. Finally, Iraq has implemented the special
demand to condemn all forms of international
terrorism.

In addition to the harsh nature of the obligations
imposed on Iraq, which has been manifested in many
situations by flagrant violations of international law
and of precedents in relation between States, another
important fact appears in the context of the
implementation of the above-mentioned obligations.
Iraq has faced all forms of unusual measures, including
very perverse changes in the rules and the scope of
work; indeed, changes in the very obligations imposed
on Iraq as they appear in resolution 687 (1991).

For example, the Security Council has involved
itself in an unprecedented manner in the question ofthe
borders between Iraq and Kuwait, not only through the
formula for the delimitation of boundaries, but also
through the imposition of the principles and manner of
the demarcation of borders. This did not suffice. The
Secretariat has been used as an instrument of pressure
on the Chairman of the Demarcation Commission so as
to attain the result sought by the United States and the
United Kingdom: the injection of the borders question
into resolution 687 (1991).

The evidence, in the form of the records of the
Demarcation Commission, is within the Secretariat and
is mentioned in the paper submitted to the Secretary-
General in the February session. This document has
been circulated to the Council.

With regard to the question of reparations, the
Security Council has, in paragraph 16 of resolution 687
(1991), admitted that international law is the sole
criterion for paying compensation. However, the
Council has established for this purpose an
unprecedented and astoundingly punitive mechanism
based on administrative principles and rules that lack
equality or respect for the correct application of law.
The Security Council as a political body, according to
this mechanism approved by resolution 687 (1991), has
decided to replace the judicial function with an
administrative, political process controlled by the
Council, in addition to its legislative function, which is
to legislate the mechanism of reparations. Thereby, the
Council has totally disregarded the well-entrenched
criterion of defining State liability in international law.

I said that international law has been approved as
the sole criterion for the question of reparations in
resolution 687 (1991). This has occurred in spite of the
fact that the Council does not possess this power
pursuant to the United Nations Charter. The Security
Council does not have the power to intervene in the
implementation of the liability principle according to
the Charter. Those who wish to go back and study this
matter can look at the work and deliberations of the
International Law Commission. This is a United
Nations commission, and thus a reparations regime has
been established upon political bases, not on the basis
of legal considerations and the necessary way of
dealing with matters in keeping with natural justice.
The United States has and continues to be - and this
has been declared by its responsible spokesman - the
driving force behind this legally illegitimate regime.

Among the flagrant examples of this is the
comprehensive package agreed upon by the five
permanent members, which was approved by the
Council on 27 September 2000. This package granted
the Kuwait Oil Company a compensation of
approximately $16 billion. I assume that this
transaction and its results are well known to you,
because you are all members of the Bureau of the
sanctions Committee. This is not the sole example of
the injustice inflicted on Iraq by the reparations regime.
Allow me to add two more examples, noting that
we had submitted a larger number of examples in our
dialogue with the Secretary-General last February. The
Bureau, in the case of Government claim number 41,
which was submitted by the Kuwaiti Prisoners of War
and Missing Persons Committee, has approved
compensation in the amount of $153.5 million, whereas
the Kuwait Committee, that is, the claimant, has
claimed compensation of about $58.5 million. This
means that the sum of the compensation decided by the
Compensation Commission is equal to $37 million
above and beyond double the amount claimed by the
claimant. Is this natural? A claimant calls for a certain
sum, whereas that body gives him double the amount
and an additional $37 million.

Another example among many concerns the
failure of the secretariat of the Compensation
Commission to verify these claims. Certain United
Nations Member States, such as Sri Lanka, India,
Yugoslavia and Bosnia and Herzegovina, have noticed
that in 575 cases the Commission has compensated
claimants twice for the very same claim.

These are some examples of the political nature
of the reparations regime imposed on Iraq, which, we
believe, is a vindictive punitive measure whose whole
purpose is financial gain and not the administration of
justice.

In addition to the foregoing, I wish to mention -
based on official information available to us, thanks to
our contacts - that the sum total that was deducted
from our oil revenues for the reparations fund, from the
start of the oil-for-food programme in 1996 to 30 May
2000, has reached 12.6 billion dollars, whereas the
amount received by Iraq from the resources for
humanitarian goods, which we have actually received,
is 12.8 billion dollars. Is this reasonable? In the light of
the criteria for deduction, which were spelled out in
paragraph 19 of resolution 687 (1991) as being the
needs of the people of Iraq, Iraq's payment capacity,
taking into account foreign debt service and the needs
of the Iraqi economy. Is this deduction just?

In light of the fact that it takes place within the
framework of a humanitarian programme, which was
adopted as mentioned by resolution 986 (1995) and
subsequent resolutions on this matter, this has been
adopted as a temporary measure out of concern for the
serious nutritional and health situation of the Iraqi
people and the danger of its further deterioration. Is
such deduction in this programme, whose nature is
spelled out in Security Council resolutions- just?
Why did these deductions reach that magnitude?
Because certain influential members of the Security
Council have imposed the highest possible level of
deductions for this purpose.

In the field of disarmament, whose various
subjects have gained special importance, Iraq had to
grapple with problems that are not related to the
requirements of implementing the obligations spelled
out in resolution 687 (1991). As events unfolded over
eight years, it became clear that the two bodies charged
with this task- that is, UNSCOM. and the IAEA-
have served as an instrument to realize United States
and United Kingdom policies. In the former UNSCOM
there was a large number of persons which for years
went about their work on instructions from the United
States and not according to the requirements of
Security Council resolutions. The register is long,
detailed and complicated.

Suffice it to say on this occasion that the Special
Commission has, in a very clear and unequivocal
fashion, adopted a conduct that is translated into
placing obstacles, fomenting crises, distorting the
concepts of work and emphasizing matters that have
nothing to do with weapons dossiers or with those
questions that were either secondary or complete, in
addition to politicizing technical matters and
continuously changing the tasks, thereby prolonging
the process by creating all sorts of different
considerations.

I wish to state that detailed explanations of these
indications can be found in the document that we have
submitted. There is no doubt that the United States-
United Kingdom objective was clear. Perhaps today it
is even more clear, after the admission of certain
elements of UNSCOM, which began to come out in the
autumn of 1998. The purpose is to perpetuate the
blockade imposed on Iraq, in spite of Iraq's tremendous
efforts, through which Iraq has essentially and
qualitatively implemented its obligations. This has
been recognized by elements of UNSCOM. who were
the basic driving force behind the impediments and the
crises. This has been published since the autumn of
1998.

It is regrettable that the Security Council has
totally neglected the application of paragraph 14 of
resolution 687 (1991). The Council did not take any
measure of any sort to implement this paragraph.

Disarmament cannot take place in a vacuum.
Unless the Council in due seriousness takes all
necessary measures to deal with weapons of mass
destruction possessed by Israel and with programmes
for possessing such weapons by Iran, the Council will
remain guilty of using double standards and selectivity
that run counter to the United Nations Charter. There
are many detailed examples.

The point which I want to emphasize from the
beginning is that Iraq did not spare any effort to
implement the obligations imposed on it, in the hope
that this would lead to the Security Council taking a
position that would be in keeping with its clear
obligations vis-a-vis Iraq, just as has been spelled out
in the Council's own resolutions. I have emphasized
that Iraq has implemented all the obligations imposed
on it by Council resolutions. However - and whatever
may be the position of certain members of the Council
concerning Iraq's implementation of its obligations -
this is a question on which we do not have identical
views in the Council. The fact remains that what Iraq
has implemented, and with whatever reasonable
percentage, is large enough to prompt the Council to
have adopted, many years ago, a clear-cut resolution
that would at least reduce the embargo on the basis of
paragraph 21 of resolution 687 (1991), or implement at
least paragraph 22 of the same resolution.

In view of paragraph 21, which refers to the two
concepts of imposing or lifting the embargo, it is not
imaginable that those who authored this resolution did
not aim at a certain specific meaning of the term
"reducing" the embargo. Therefore, the mention of this
term is futile. Through this position, the Security
Council could have demonstrated to Iraq and the
international community respect for its own resolutions
and not for a position vis-a-vis the Iraqi Government.
However, this still has not occurred.

The Security Council continues to adopt a static
and extreme position, and from time to time it imposes
new obligations on Iraq as a result of the positions of
the United States and the United Kingdom, which stem
from political objectives of their own and have no
relation to the objectives and common interests of the
international community. The United Nations Charter
assumes that the Council would cherish this collective
interest because the Council works on behalf of
Member States, in keeping with the purposes and
principles of the Charter.

I wish to say to the Ambassador of Canada that
when he referred to the concept behind Article 24 -
that the Security Council acts on behalf of the
Members of the United Nations - he omitted to say
that that particular commitment on the part of the
Council has to be performed in accordance with the
purposes and principles of the Charter. In other words,
the Security Council is not an absolute authority. It is
an authority bound by the purposes and principles of
the Charter. This condition is the underlying foundation
of the concept of entrusting the Security Council with
the task of the maintenance of international peace and
security on behalf of the collective membership.

What is the final result? Continuing the embargo
against Iraq at a time when the causes for imposing this
embargo have been absent for years. Thus, a temporary
measure has been transformed into a permanent
measure, despite the absence of causes, in a manner
unprecedented in the annals of this Organization. There
is no doubt that this state of affairs could not have
lasted this long without American hegemony over this
world Organization, particularly the Security Council,
as has been attested by various circles within and
outside the United Nations - official and unofficial,
political or otherwise- including United States and
United Kingdom circles. I will come back to this point
later on.

In addition to the above, there are aspects of the
relationship between Iraq and the Security Council that
have arisen outside the purview of Security Council
resolutions. However, these aspects have been
completely neglected by the Council, despite the fact
that it is the duty of the Council, according to the
Charter, to take steps in this regard.

The no-fly zone in northern Iraq was imposed in
1991 and in southern Iraq in 1992. The latter zone was
expanded in 1996. In addition, since the official
declaration of the ceasefire under resolution 687
(1991), the United States of America has perpetrated
three acts of aggression against Iraq: in January 1993,
in June 1993 and in September 1996. The United States
and the United Kingdom have carried out two attacks:
one in December 1998 and one in February 2001.
Indeed, since December 1998, Anglo-American
aggressive operations have continued without cease,
including supporting, financing and training terrorist
groups in a bid to destabilize Iraq and threaten its
territorial integrity.

In this regard, there is a basic contradiction. The
Security Council continues calling on Iraq to comply
with its resolutions. Despite that, the Security Council
has shown no reaction to the coercive no-fly zones
imposed by the United Kingdom and the United States
on Iraq without any Security Council resolution
authorizing these two countries to carry out these
aggressive operations. These aggressive acts of the
United States and the United Kingdom contradict the
official ceasefire stipulated by resolution 687 (1991).
The Security Council also remains silent concerning
the aggression that is committed against Iraq. This is
attributed also to the policies of two permanent
members of the Security Council - the United States
and the United Kingdom. This constitutes a flagrant
violation of the official ceasefire under resolution 687
(1991).

In the final analysis, this can be considered the
destruction of the basis for the resolution and all that
ensues from it. Did the Council rectify this serious
situation? This is a gross violation of the fundamental
concepts of the Charter. Is it not a strange contradiction
that Iraq would be asked to abide by Security Council
resolutions at a time when two permanent members of
the Council do not abide by resolutions adopted by the
Council vis-a-vis Iraq, despite the fact that those two
countries were the two main promoters of the above-
mentioned resolutions?

The main conclusion, in this context, is that the
Council has not fulfilled its obligations towards Iraq. It
does not respect its powers and functions as spelled out
in the Charter, which have been entrusted to it by the
Member States on their behalf, in keeping with the
purposes and principles of the Charter. This has all
resulted from the policies of the United States and the
United Kingdom aimed at my country - policies that
run counter to the principles and provisions of Security
Council resolutions. Therefore, action is required by
the Security Council, not by Iraq.

It should be recalled that the Security Council has
not disregarded the negative impact of the continuing
embargo against Iraq. They refer to the adoption of the
humanitarian programme adopted by the Council,
according to Security Council resolution 986 (1995).
This is the position of United States and the United
Kingdom officials who constantly ask, "Why does Iraq
complain? It has the humanitarian programme." Much
has been said about that, including during the first part
of this meeting, on Tuesday, 26 June; I shall return to
this point later. It was repeated by a number of
representatives following Tuesday's statement by the
representative of the United States.

Let me address this question by retracing its
background, for it appears that we live in an age when
people forget things - or pretend to forget them if it
suits their interests at any given moment. Resolution
986 (1995) was adopted on 14 April 1995, on the basis
of a United States effort cloaked in the guise of a draft
resolution submitted by Argentina. My Government
considered its conditions and provisions to be
completely unbalanced, which led us to reject it. As a
result of contacts begun by the previous Secretary-
General, Mr. Boutros Boutros-Ghali, on 6 February
1996, lengthy negotiations ensued between Iraq and the
Secretariat with a view to reaching an agreement on
implementation of the provisions of the programme set
out in that resolution in a balanced manner that would
preserve Iraq's sovereignty, security and dignity.

The required memorandum of understanding was
signed on 20 May 1996, in spite of United States
objections and obstacles to negotiations. I know what I
am talking about here: the United States has submitted
32 amendments to the final text of the memorandum of
understanding since my Government came to an
agreement with the Secretariat. The arrangements set
out in the memorandum of understanding have passed
through nine phases as of the end of June 2001. The
Iraqi Government has complied with its provisions as a
provisional measure, as stipulated in resolution 986
(1995), to ease the suffering of the Iraqi people, which
is caused by the blockade. But it must not be forgotten
that the Iraqi Government has continued to call for the
total lifting of the blockade.

In that context, the Iraqi Government has
cooperated with United Nations agencies in discussing
and identifying the needs of the sectors covered in the
distribution plans, in the hope that those urgent needs
of the Iraqi people would be met, at the proper time
within each phase.

But many things have prevented the attainment of
the humanitarian objectives of the oil-for-food
programme. The representatives of the United States
and of the United Kingdom, along with some other
representatives who spoke after them, accused the Iraqi
Government of being the principal reason for the
failure to achieve the programme's desired goal. They
claim that we are the cause. I shall later revert to this
point as well.

As I said, many things have prevented the
attainment of the humanitarian objectives of the oil-for-
food programme. These include the complexity of the
measures adopted by the Security Council for the
implementation of the memorandum of understanding,
and interference by the United Kingdom and the United
States in its implementation. We have seen unfairness
in the distribution of revenues from the sale of Iraqi
oil. We have seen the United States and the United
Kingdom persist in their policy of putting contracts on
hold on imaginary pretexts. We have seen contracts
dealt with in a selective manner, objectionable
bureaucracy in the way that contracts are submitted,
delays in preparing letters of credit, late arrival of
goods, and an accumulation of moneys allocated for
operational and administrative costs of United Nations
operations and for covering the expenses of the former
United Nations Special Commission (UNSCOM) - even
though there are currently no operation costs to be
covered. Vast sums are removed for the reparations
fund. The principle of good performance in
international commercial transactions has been
disallowed. We have seen inadequate financial
management, as revealed in the report of the report of
the Office of Internal Oversight Services on just part of
the Programme (A/55/436). We have also seen the
failure of the demining programme and of the
electricity sector programme in the three northern
governorates. The Programme's officers and other
United Nations officials have also violated their
obligations under the memorandum of understanding.

Those examples, with full details, were submitted
during the first round of the dialogue with the
Secretary-General last February. The relevant
documents have been distributed to members of the
Council.

In addition to all that I have mentioned, I want
also to refer to some grossly inadequate conditions
surrounding the implementation of the so-called
humanitarian programme of which not all members
may be aware.

Is it reasonable that disbursement under a
programme whose revenues total billions of dollars,
billions of euros, should be subject to no external audit
by neutral certified auditors from outside the United
Nations system? Is it conceivable that the agencies
responsible for implementing the Programme should be
permitted to charge a commission in return for that
implementation, and then use that commission to cover
all their activities, both those related to the Programme
and those totally unrelated to it? Is it acceptable to
members of the Council that that greed knows no
limits: buying vehicles, paying administrative costs,
purchasing equipment? Is it acceptable to members of
the Council that Iraq should be forbidden to make use
of administrative material and equipment used by the
Programme - purchased with Iraqi money -
including vehicles and computers, even after the
Programme no longer uses them, and even though the
computers are destroyed on orders from New York
when they have been replaced with new systems?
Iraq's request to use the old computers has been
rejected.

Could you accept the fact that the resources of the
programme are utilized to rent personal housing for
some of the directors of the agencies in Iraq? Can any
Government in the world accept the non-informing of
the Iraqi Central Bank or provide it with any
information concerning the banking operations relating
to Iraq's resources - to the tune of billions of dollars?
The Iraqi Central Bank has no inkling of what happens
in United Nations banking operations concerning Iraqi
resources, even though the Memorandum of
Understanding stipulates the appointment of a liaison
official from the Central Bank to be apprised of this
information and coordination. We did this. That person
goes to the Bank, where they tell him he is not allowed
to enter. They say he has to come back with United
Nations approval. So then he goes to the United
Nations, which tells him that it is not permitted
because it is a question within the purview of the
Secretary-General. That same person remained in New
York without work for six months.

Is it fair that purchases are imported and that
purchasing offices are established abroad at a time
when those materials can be provided at lower cost in
Iraq? And you are speaking about the cash component?
Is it acceptable that the procurements handled by some
of the agencies responsible for northern Iraq are less
efficient and more costly than their counterparts in the
Iraqi Government working on acquisitions for the
southern and central provinces? Is it acceptable that the
policies of personnel interest are subject to no
monetary control which is what occurred over the
Easter holidays this year when the financial officers of
the Programme and the agencies in Iraq were
dispatched to Geneva. For what purpose? Merely to
explain a financial sheet form, an accountancy
application form. This was the purpose of sending all
of the financial officers of the agencies who work in
Iraq.

As Governments or as members of the United
Nations, can you accept the fact that a secretary from
Paris was dispatched to Baghdad to replace a secretary
who was granted a one-month holiday abroad? This
happens in the so-called humanitarian programme.
Have you not noticed that the reports of the
Programme's office in Iraq have not mentioned, since
1999, any detailed schedules concerning the various
financial transactions in different phases and how these
sums are disbursed? Why have they not been
mentioned? Could the reason be perhaps that we and
others concerned have begun to refer to their contents
and to the many shortcomings of the Programme? Why
do these reports not refer to the field reports? Why are
they not mentioned in the reports of the Secretary-
General? These detailed examples upon which we
stumbled, either by analysing documents or by hearing
the flapping ofa loose tongue, deserve denunciation, at
the very least. Undoubtedly, many such examples are
institutionally covered up in order to keep us in the
dark about our financial revenues.

Our purpose in raising these few examples is not,
frankly, to cause controversy. Rather, the objective is to
reveal the facts that we have discovered in our
experience with the humanitarian programme, a
programme that we expected at least to put an end to
the deterioration in the living conditions of our peoples
under the unjust embargo. It is worth stressing that we
certainly did not fail to refer to many of these aspects
in dozens - indeed, hundreds - of letters to the
Secretaries-General and in many contacts with the
office of the coordinator of the Programme in Iraq and
the oil-for-food programme in New York; so far, we
have not seen any serious move to bridge these
discrepancies.

We formally call on the Security Council today to
undertake an appropriate investigation into these
matters. We call for the results to be published, so that
they may be available to the members of this
Organization and international public opinion. We
formally call on the Security Council to undertake, as
expeditiously as possible, an external audit of the
accounts of the Iraq Programme, as well as the
agencies, offices and committees linked to the oil-for-
food programme since its inception. Such an audit
should be undertaken by an external financial auditing
organization known to be qualified and neutral, chosen
in consultation with my Government. In a letter dated 3
April 2001 from my Government's Minister for
Foreign Affairs to the Secretary-General (S/2001/324),
my Government called for such an audit. To date, we
have received no reply. Therefore, we are calling
formally on the Security Council to do so.

Such a programme, with the shortcomings to
which I have referred, cannot possibly create an
effective regime that would satisfy the humanitarian
needs of the Iraqi people. I would like to remind, in
detail, all those who have blamed my Government as
the cause for the failures to achieve the humanitarian
objectives to recall the opinion expressed by the second
of those groups created by the Security Council under
Ambassador Celso Amorim to take up the humanitarian
situation in Iraq in 1999. He said:

"the humanitarian situation in Iraq will continue

to be a dire one in the absence of a sustained
revival of the Iraqi economy, which in turn cannot
be achieved solely through remedial humanitarian
efforts."

You may find the exact text in Security Council
document S/1999/356, annex II, paragraph 58. That
was the very last paragraph of the Amorim report. This
clearly means that the cure is the lifting of the
embargo.

Let us take up how the Security Council has acted
since then. I must again go back to the background of
the issue. It seems that some choose to forget and
others to ignore the background. It may be recalled that
when the Security Council was taking up the reports of
the Secretary-General and the former United Nations
Special Commission (UNSCOM) and the reports of the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) on 16
December 1998, the United States and the United
Kingdom surprised the Council and the entire world by
waging aggression against Iraq. Thus ended the
Security Council's deliberations on the comprehensive
review of Iraq's compliance, aimed at certifying that
Iraq had been effectively disarmed in order to then lift
the sanctions, which was the very proposal submitted
by the Secretary-General on 6 August 1998. The
Council remained for a while unable to act in any way
whatsoever, and the United Kingdom and the United
States were exonerated of any responsibility. At the
same time, Iraq's rights were being totally ignored.
And efforts quickly resumed to cover up the
illegitimacy of the Anglo-American acts and to address
the situation.

Let me recall the Canadian proposal to create
bodies. The Amorim groups were created to undertake
an initial review of the two dossiers - disarmament
and the humanitarian situation. Then a third group was
added by a Kuwaiti effort, supported by the United
Kingdom and the United States, on the issue of missing
persons and the return of property. Following the end
of the activities of the Amorim groups and the debate
on their reports, the United Kingdom, clearly supported
by the United States, made strong efforts to submit a
new draft resolution, and that took several months. As
a result, resolution 1284 (1999) was adopted on 17
December of that year. On 19 December 1999 Iraq
declared that it would not deal with that resolution
because it did not respond to Iraq's legitimate call for
the lifting of the embargo, and it made no mention
whatsoever of the aggression against Iraq and the daily
breach of its sovereignty by the imposition of no-fly
zones by the United Kingdom and the United States.
Iraq stated that the true objective of the United
States and the United Kingdom in the resolution was
not to lift the embargo. Indeed, it was an attempt to
mislead international public opinion, because the
concept of suspension in the resolution was new - a
concept that required a long and complicated series of
new and unclear conditions, which could have been
interpreted in many ways. So the resolution had no
guarantee that suspension would in fact take place.

Furthermore, the timelines in the resolution were
very long, artificially long. These timelines, the
Council may recall, were laid down to follow the
progress and development of elections in the United
States of America. The timelines show the intention of
the United Kingdom and the United States to
perpetuate the illegal no-fly zones in northern and
southern Iraq, acts of military aggression, the
illegitimate American intervention in internal affairs
and the overt attempts to change the national political
system in Iraq.

We also made it clear that in substance and in
form that resolution is a mere illegal rewriting of
resolution 687 (1991). We also made it clear at the time
that the stringent, vague conditions surrounding the
concept of suspension - a new and rather illusory
concept, as I have stated - were new conditions not
stipulated in previous resolutions. They were placed
there to ensure that any suspension, if it ever took
place, would have no substance and no benefit for Iraq,
as well as being an arbitrary restriction of Iraq's
sovereignty over its economy and resources. Again, the
situation remained unchanged.

However, the international campaign to lift the
sanctions on Iraq and to end the crime of genocide
being perpetrated against the people of Iraq continued
and escalated. With the coming to power of the new
United States Administration at the beginning of this
year, American officials began to state that the
sanctions regime against my country was faltering, that
it was full of holes, like Swiss cheese. They also stated
that one of the major concerns of the new
Administration was to revitalize the sanctions against
Iraq. This concept of revitalization began to take form
shortly thereafter, when talk began on so-called smart
sanctions, which were claimed to be a lessening of
sanctions on people and a strengthening of sanctions on
the Iraqi Government. Kindly do not forget that the
new United States Administration opened its file in
dealing with Iraq with an act of aggression on the night
of 16 February 2001. In May, during the United States
presidency of the Security Council, as usual, the United
Kingdom expressed the United States position in the
form of a draft resolution in the guise of the
humanitarian oil-for-food programme, whose ninth
cycle was to end on 3 June.

Since then, draft resolutions and proposed
amendments have come and gone in the Security
Council and the permanent five have been working
essentially to find an acceptable formula. When the
ninth cycle of the oil-for-food programme was almost
complete and it had become clear that agreement on an
acceptable draft resolution, as proposed by the United
Kingdom and the United States, was impossible, the
Security Council adopted resolution 1352 (2001) on 1
June 2001, extending the oil-for-food programme for
one month. A paragraph was inserted that was to be a
foothold for new arrangements, based on the concept of
the Anglo-American draft, to be implemented for 190
days following the end of the first period.

Iraq has refused to deal with that resolution for
two fundamental reasons. The first is that it uses the
oil-for-food programme as a cover to push through the
Anglo-American formula on smart sanctions. The
second is that extending the programme for one month
is hardly sufficient to implement its two wings: the
export of oil and the import of civilian goods.

Iraq's stance is not new; in the past, it rejected
resolutions 1275 (1999) and 1280 (1999). Resolution
1275 (1999) extended the programme for two weeks,
while resolution 1280 (1999) extended it for one week
in order to give the Security Council the opportunity to
achieve consensus on resolution 1284 (1999). As a
result of our position vis-a-vis resolution 1352 (2001),
we ceased exporting oil under new contracts as of 4
June. Nevertheless, the United Kingdom and the
United States did not abandon their attempts to ensure
the implementation of the new smart sanctions regime.
On many previous occasions, Iraq has declared that it
will not deal with such measures in any form whatever.

The United Kingdom and United States circles
that advocate this new regime claim that the objective
is to free trade with Iraq from all restrictions, and even
to expand it, and to prohibit only illegal trade in dual-
use materials. However, the details show the
misleading nature of that claim. I shall address that
point later.

The fundamental content of these drafts entails a
de facto new regime for blockading Iraq. There is no
easing of sanctions. The so-called free trade with Iraq
claimed for civilian goods has been subject to many
restrictions and conditions, as well as oversight by a
number of bodies - including UNMOVIC, the
Committee established under resolution 661 (1990), the
Office of the Iraq Programme and the Security Council
as a whole - in a way that rewrites the conditions and
mechanisms of the Memorandum of Understanding
between Iraq and the Secretary-General, which has
been implemented for nine full cycles.

The new regime pushed by the United States and
the United Kingdom rewrites Security Council
resolutions, in particular paragraph 24 of resolution
687 (1990), resolution 700 (1991) and resolution 1051
(1996). Furthermore, this new regime takes control of
all Iraq's financial resources, places them under United
Nations control and disburses them without any role
for the Iraqi Government. Moreover, this does not
affect Iraq alone. The regime attempts to control all the
dealings of Iraq's neighbours and subjects them to
many restrictions in order to close the vise around Iraq.

The new regime is overtly misleading because it
contains measures relating to civilian flights and to the
payment of Iraqi contributions to international
organizations. The first issue was imposed on Iraq on
the basis of the principle of force - the simple might
of force. The other is related to a legitimate right of
Iraq as a member of international organizations, the
denial of which right by the United States and its allies
seeks to isolate Iraq politically from the work of those
organizations. Resolution 661 (1990) does not cover
the payment of those contributions.

(spoke in English)

Such payments are a financial transaction that
was not prohibited under resolution 661 (1990) so as to
enable Iraq to pay it in the first place. It is an
obligation that accrues as a result of Iraq's membership
of the United Nations. If anyone should be concerned
about this, it is first and foremost the Secretary-General
and his Legal Counsel. Now, it is being given to us as
if it were a donation or a gift. "You see, you have a
benefit."

(spoke in Arabic)

Finally, confusing the new punitive regime of
smart sanctions with the oil-for-food programme means
that the Security Council's commitment to Iraq to lift
the embargo imposed under resolution 687 (1991) has
been replaced by an ongoing programme that is
claimed to be humanitarian and of help to the Iraqi
people. We totally reject any such formula. There must
be no illusion whatsoever concerning the firmness of
our position on smart sanctions. We do not believe that
any State or any sane person can expect another State
to participate in a project, the ultimate objective of
which is to end its existence as a sovereign entity. The
Anglo-American plan, the French ideas and proposals
and any attendant concepts will entail a full
expropriation of the fate of the Iraqi State and people
in all fields - politics, economics, development, trade,
industry, finance and society.

Therefore, our rejection of such plans and their
ultimate objectives rises, in our view, to the level of
struggle for national independence, whatever the
sacrifices involved. The so-called smart sanctions are
but a new facet of neo-colonialism. We utterly refuse to
be transformed into a mere consumer society - a
society that eats but does not think, enjoys but does not
produce - and for whom? For foreigners.

This position of ours, I can assure the Council, is
not just rhetorical. It is a genuine position. The
Security Council has from the very beginning dealt
with the Iraqi people in an unfair manner with respect
to food, medicine and some civilian humanitarian
requirements.

(spoke in English)

Resolution 661 (1990) seemingly talks about
exceptions to sanctions. What were these exceptions?
Let me remind the Council: medicine and food, in
special humanitarian circumstances - food, in special
humanitarian circumstances. When the Legal Counsel
was requested to provide a legal opinion on the
meaning of the term "special humanitarian
circumstances", so that the Security Council and the
Committee established by resolution 661 (1990) would
know what that entails, the Legal Counsel at the time,
Mr. Fleischhauer, produced a mind-boggling three-page
legal opinion. If anyone reads it, and I invite members
to do so, would they be so kind as to tell me whether
they understood any of it? It is just a whirlwind.

So when I say that right from the very beginning,
sanctions were imposed in a way that is not sincere and
honest, I mean what I say. Education was under
sanctions. Information was under sanctions. Has such a
thing ever been heard of in the annals of the United
Nations? This was not done even in the case of
Rhodesia or South Africa. Why was it done in the case
of Iraq?

Nothing for the brain - only medicine and food,
in special humanitarian circumstances. Even under the
humanitarian programme, no allowance is made for the
brain, for culture, for information, for the fabric of
society, for industrial, agricultural and scientific
advancement - for what is needed to run a State.

Of course, the reason behind all of this is not
difficult to comprehend.

(spoke in Arabic)

From the very beginning, the goal of imposing
and perpetuating such a harsh and unjust embargo
against Iraq was political - simply put, the goal was
to change the national political regime in Iraq. Every
single person in this Chamber is aware of this.

That goal is not the collective objective of the
members of the international community, as
represented in the United Nations.

(spoke in English)

Those who speak on behalf of the international
community are simply uttering a falsehood here. They
do not represent the international community in this
policy. Toppling the Government of Iraq is not the
collective interest of the membership of the United
Nations. It is not in the resolutions of the Security
Council.

No sooner was resolution 687 (1991) adopted
than Sir David Hannay made a statement to the press
saying that this would help topple Sadaam's regime.
Similar statements were made by President Bush
senior.

If one reads Ian Johnston's study, which was
published by the United Nations Institute for Training
and Research (UNITAR), on this very question- on
how resolution 687 (1991) was brought about- one
can find it there, in black and white. But perhaps the
Council does not have time to follow these things. It is
so busy in that small room, consulting separately from
those who should be working with it as its main
partners.

(spoke in Arabic)

The United States, its Zionist ally and those who
follow them and are influenced by the old colonial
mindset are promoting all of these games. Those who
shift the blame onto the national Government of Iraq
must remember that this regime is the very same one
that brought to the country the highest level of
development ever, as acknowledged by the
international organizations concerned.

They must also recognize that what they refer to
as the faltering of the sanctions regime represents in
reality a concrete reflection of the lack of conviction of
the majority of the international community. This does
not represent their collective goal.

We are confident that the old imperialist, Zionist
and colonial schemes to contain the situation are bound
to fail. It is no secret that the issue as a whole has
nothing to do with the implementation of Security
Council resolutions. It is not that Iraq continues to be a
threat to its neighbours, or that the problem stems from
the policies and practices of the Government of Iraq.

The powers and functions under the Charter are
clear and are fully explained in jurisprudential and
judicial references. International legality, as
represented by Security Council resolutions on many
issues, has become the subject of ludicrous comments
in many reference books. Those reference books talk
about

(spoke in English)

the appropriation of international legitimacy by the
United States and the privatization of the Security
Council by the United States. Those who are using
such terminology are eminent American international
lawyers from the very respectable University of
Michigan.

This is the arrogance of power.
(spoke in Arabic)

What is required now, therefore, is to rectify the
dangerous situation affecting Iraq, so that Iraq can
indeed feel that the Security Council is dealing with it
in a just, balanced and evenhanded fashion instead of
fighting with it and issuing orders to it, so that those
who have a hidden agenda against Iraq can take a
particular course of action. The siege imposed against
Iraq must be lifted, and indeed it will. The sovereignty
of Iraq must be respected and all interference in the
domestic affairs of Iraq must come to an end. The
grievances of Iraq must be addressed fairly. These
elements will ensure security, peace and stability in the
region.

The Council must pay attention to the
hypocritical policy of double standards pursued by the
United States and the United Kingdom by comparing
its role in supporting the Zionist entity against the
Palestinian people, starting with the settlements on the
Palestinian territory then continuing with the
suppression of the glorious Palestinian uprising. The
uprising and Iraq's steadfastness against the hegemony
of the United States have become the motto of all Arab
peoples. I am not talking about Arab Governments, but
they, too, have started to feel that this is the only means
that would advance their nations in order to join the
mainstream of human civilization.

Yesterday we heard much from the
representatives of the United States of America and the
United Kingdom, and a long list of speakers followed.
We heard what any fair-minded person would not let
pass without reply.

(spoke in English)

From these two representatives collectively - I
realize that I am taking too much of the Council's
precious time, but allow me with your indulgence, Mr.
President - we heard - according to the United
States - that a better name for the "oil for food" is
"oil for development", because such a term more
accurately reflects that even today the Iraqi regime
could redevelop the country using the oil-for-food
programme. Similar notions were also propagated by
the representative of the United Kingdom. We heard
that it is the Government of Iraq that is responsible for
not getting that programme to its ultimate objective,
and I have been addressed, personally or as
representative of my Government, by speakers blaming
my Government and calling on it to cooperate. Some
even went to the extent of quoting from reports of the
Secretary-General to that effect, and they mentioned
the question of the visas, the question of opening
letters of credit, the question of delays in concluding
contracts and whatnot. Do they really know the facts?
When someone speaks in this Council on behalf of a
Government, they have to be relatively sure of what
they say, not be ill-informed and just speak in alliance
to produce a statement for God knows what ulterior
motives or reasons of personal interest. I am sure that
everyone here understands what I mean by reasons of
personal interest.

We are being told that these new arrangements
have to be finalized by 3 July because they represent
the bridge between the humanitarian programme and
resolution 1284 (1999); and that resolution 1284 (1999)
had a humanitarian component but it was not enough,
so we have to improve it. We have heard so many
Ambassadors here today and talking about the
improvements introduced by the Council in resolutions
1302 (2000), 1330 (2000), etc. Thank you very much
for the improvement. On what? Let us see what
improvement was made in those resolutions and in
resolution 1284 (1999).

Iraq has to comply with resolution 1284 (1999)
on weapons and has to cooperate on the oil-for-food
programme. Once that is done sanctions will be
suspended, then lifted. So easy. Why has the
suspension on Libya not yet become a lifting? We have
to wonder why; or are we even prevented from
wondering?

When we consider resolution 1284 (1999), our
position in that respect and with respect to smart
sanctions, the one that I am outlining today, is not an
emotional position that is coming out of an irrational
mind, an accusation those with ill will against Iraq try
to vilify us with. It was a well-considered position
based on objective analysis as to what it has entailed
and what it will entail. I will give just one example in
order not to take too much of the Council's time. That
resolution requires inspectors to return. To do what? To
carry out enhanced and ongoing monitoring and
verification regimes to be implemented by Iraq and to
settle remaining disarmament issues; and ultimately if
the new Commission and the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA) report that Iraq has cooperated
in all respects and made progress on all the outstanding
issues then we get suspension.

I say "Welcome". Let us see on the basis of the
record how this works out, on the basis of your own
entities' records.

The Council will recall that when Butler and his
team and the IAEA were readmitted to Iraq to do
certain inspections in order to report to the Security
Council on whether Iraq was cooperating so that the
Council could get under way with the comprehensive
review, the two combined teams carried out 300
inspections of a total of 427 sites. When the report was
submitted to the Security Council, Butler reported that
Iraq did not cooperate fully, whereas the IAEA
reported that Iraq provided the highest possible level of
cooperation. Why did Butler report that Iraq did not
cooperate fully? Because of five incidents out of 427.
By any calculation, the five incidents out of 427
represent 1.17 per cent; that is to say, cooperation was
provided to Butler 98.83 per cent of the time. By any
standard that should have at least been considered to be
quite sufficient to say "Thank you, Iraq", and for the
comprehensive review to get under way. What we got
in return was five days of intensive bombing by the
United States and the United Kingdom to derail the
whole process. So what guarantee is there, when you
have resolution 1284 (1999) formally like this -
cooperation in all respects in order to achieve progress.
What progress is that when the resolution contains the
provision that if even a minor official in the field says
that there is no progress, then the suspension is
suspended.

Renewing the suspension needs discussion and
approval in the Security Council; yet one report of
even a petty official automatically cuts it off. So how
do we deal with that? Is it not a fact that some
members around this table consider that there are many
ambiguities in that resolution that need to be clarified?
Some of them are permanent members.

Is this going to bridge the gap, really?

An allegation has been made, that found in the
statements by the representatives of the United States,
the United Kingdom and those who followed suit, that
it is the Iraqi Government who prefers to have the
status quo continue at the expense of the suffering of
its own people. What if that is so?

Why have we been working with the United
Nations since 1991? Regardless of judgements as to
how hard we have been working, what we have
achieved, et cetera? Why have we not stopped working
throughout those years I am referring to?

On the question of granting visas, people have
been talking a lot in favour of that but, let us not
forget: the distinguished representative of the United
Kingdom tells us that his approach is really being
presented in good faith. 'In good faith' in the sense that
these proposals are being presented within the
framework of resolution 1284 (1999), and that this
approach is in response to calls made by the
international community to alleviate the plight of the
Iraqi people. And they say it is only the Government of
Iraq that is responsible for achieving that particular
goal, the alleviation of the plight of its people.

Before he said that, he talked about the cash
component in the oil sector and how the intention
really was to help Iraq take it up, but Iraq did not. Iraq
did not take the cash component in other sectors. As
you know, the cash component in the oil sector was
approved by the Security Council. Paragraph 50 of
Security Council resolution 1330 (2000) allowed funds
of up to 600 million euros to be used to cover the costs
of the local expenses of the Iraqi oil sector. A team
visited Iraq during the period March 18 to April 2. Our
experts worked with the team, and they conducted
extensive site visits. The team presented its report to
the Secretary-General at the end of last May. The
Secretary-General presented that report to you, and it is
now in the document S/2001/566 of June 6. In that
particular report, there is a recommendation that 600
million euros should be transferred to the Iraqi
Ministry of Oil via the Rafidayn Bank in Jordan from
funds accumulated during the ninth phase of the
Memorandum of Understanding, and that a further 600
million euros should be transferred in a similar manner
in the following phase, making the total allocation
equivalent to 1200 million euros.

First, the British ambassador tells us they are
ready to agree to this proposal, but notes with regret
that Iraq continues to block the implementation of the
cash component elsewhere in the Iraqi economy. Now,
what is the connection between the oil industry and the
rest of the Iraqi economy?

Why did you not clear it for the oil industry?
Why is it not cleared yet by the United Kingdom? Have
you? I may be wrong, my information says you have
not.

Second, in the draft that is being discussed and
proposed, and in the ideas going around this table,
there is no reference whatsoever to this particular
question. What does that mean? What we see in the
draft, drafted to improve Iraq's trade with the outside
world, provided no money goes to the Iraqi
Government, is that it is the lot of the Iraqi people,
which is the concern of the Security Council, the
British, and the Americans. They are so paternal. All of
a sudden they turned in favour of the Iraqi people. We
are grateful. So they brought forth the idea that they
will select the companies, according to certain criteria,
which will be able to deal in Iraqi oil. No other
companies are allowed. In the present system under the
memorandum of understanding, there are oil companies
that register with the United Nations and those
companies are the ones that buy. Paragraph seven of
the United Kingdom's draft is very vague, but at least it
is clear that companies will be selected according to
certain criteria, and they are the only ones who are
allowed to deal in Iraq's oil. Do we have any guarantee
that those companies are not going to be fat cats of
Western origin and be the only ones allowed to buy
Iraqi oil? Do we have any guarantee that those
companies, Mr. Ambassador, are not going to be the
ones who will employ that particular facility you give
them under the resolution to play havoc with oil prices
at the international level, and even to the extent of
possibly intimidating the Organization of the
Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC) with regard to
their pricing policies. You do not have such guarantees.
You are not providing any flexibility to Iraq to choose
its customers. And you know, with oil, it is a specific
and specialized industry, it is not any customer that
counts.

How do we sell oil now under the Memorandum
of Understanding? Specifically with regard to the
price? Around the end of each month, Mr. President,
the Iraqi State Oil Marketing Organization (SOMO)
communicates with the United Nations oil overseers by
fax and telephone. The oil market is discussed in
general, and the prices of Iraqi crude oil are evaluated
in the light of the values of the other crude oils. Iraqi
crude oil prices are set in relation to price of crude oil
in other markets, such as Brent, West Texas
Intermediate, Oman, and Dubai. Then, after taking into
consideration transportation costs, quality deferentials,
and other relevant factors, the price is set.

What the British proposal would lead to is an
intervention in the pricing of Iraqi crude oil, which
would entail the complete destruction of the
relationship between supplier and buyer. The end
result, which is not mentioned in the resolution, is to
use Iraqi oil as leverage, because it will be under tight
control, and to transform the oil market and maintain it
at all times as a buyer's market rather than a seller's
market. This is the alleviation of the suffering of the
Iraqi people.

Regarding the talk about the cash components in
other sectors, such an arrangement would place Iraqis
into two categories: a category in the north and a
category in the south. Any local production, when
bought, and any cash component being spent in that
particular field, would be used to remunerate and to
punish, by taxing all Government policies, whatever
objective they may have. We are not the only ones who
are saying that that particular provision is ill-advised.
My information is that even some United Nations
officials find that provision ill-advised.

We are being told that the list that is going to be
attached to the resolution is really not a denial list; that
it is just a review list. So the Security Council really
has to accept it. What guarantee do we have that at the
end of the day the policy of putting contracts on hold is
not going to continue?

I have a paper here - not an Iraqi paper - a
United Nations paper. It is a weekly update from the
Office of the Iraq Programme, covering the period 16-
22 June 2001. I quote from that paper:

"Despite the 661 Committee's further
release from hold of four additional humanitarian
supplies contracts on the condition of close end-
use monitoring by United Nations observers in
Iraq, which contain '1051' list items, the total
value of contracts placed on hold by the
Committee rose slightly last week. It now stands
at $3.2 billion, still representing 14.7 per cent of
the value of all contracts circulated to the
Committee. The release contracts were for
sewage pipes, foot-and-mouth disease vaccine
and intelligent pigging.

"All together during the week, the
Committee released from hold 24 contracts worth
$45.5 million, while placing holds on 37 new
contracts valued at $98.6 million."

So the Council releases $45 million. The Council
holds $90 million. What guarantee do we have that this
is not going to happen? How will Iraqi trade be free in
the interest of alleviating the suffering of the Iraqi
people, as the proponents of the smart sanctions draft
say they are so keen to achieve?

There is really one good thing about this whole
proposal submitted by the United Kingdom and pushed
by the United States. Not a word about the no-fly zone?
Why the no-fly zone? I know what they will say: It is
to protect your neighbours from your threats. It is to
contain you because you have a tendency to renew
weapons of mass destruction. It is no good for them
now; even their own officers, whom they used to
employ in the United Nations Special Commission,
said that Iraq is qualitatively disarmed, it is no good
now. Now there is another direction.

The British Ambassador said in his statement that
they have worrying evidence that the Iraqis are re-
arming. Show it, Mr. Ambassador. Where is that
worrying evidence from? Put it on the table. Let the
Council discuss it with Iraq. Do you want us to forget
how, in 1998, when we were discussing the proposal
for a comprehensive review with the Secretary-General
and we cooperated fully, and when the Secretary-
General sent a paper to the Council on how the
arrangements for that comprehensive review were
going to be conducted, the British Ambassador jumped
into the arena and used the Council and pushed it to
write a letter to the Secretary-General, putting terms
and conditions on the comprehensive review - for one
reason only. Because Kofi Annan's paper put the
burden of proof on any side that alleges that Iraq still
has weapons of mass destruction. The British letter that
was sent and approved by the Council switched the
burden of proof.

Even that was not enough. They had to strike at
Iraq in December 1998 to kill it completely. So now we
hear about worrying evidence. What worrying evidence
is there? An article pops up in the press talking about
Iraq rearming in this field and that field, only to be
discredited about three or four weeks later. If we are
going to go into a cycle of allegations followed by the
disproof of allegations, will there be any end in sight to
this whole exercise? If Mr. Butler goes to the extent of
saying that even antiperspirants contain certain
ingredients that can be extracted and mixed with a
certain chemical that exists in hairspray and you can
produce biological weapons in your bathtub, to that
extent of audacity I say no.

Oh yes. Some are concerned about visas. The
Secretary-General's report is concerned with visas and
obstructing visas. Well, I am not going to belabour that
point because we have fully addressed that question in
a letter sent by us to the Secretary-General, and it was
circulated as a document of the Security Council in
document S/2001/324. In that letter we gave the
Council in detail the numbers of visas that we have
granted and the numbers of visas that the Office of the
Iraq Programme sometimes requests from Iraq,
including those requested for irrational purposes, as if
giving and requesting visas were the only
consideration, and that were the only way to achieve
the objectives of the humanitarian programme.

One hundred forty visas are requested for so-
called international experts to work in the electricity
programme in the North, and 103 visas are requested
for so-called international experts to work in the
demining programme in the North. If members read the
letter, they will see that the demining programme
would make taking out any mine the most expensive
venture in the world, because the paraphernalia that
surrounds the location and demining process causes it
to be so. We are not against demining in the North, but
the world standard relating to the cost of demining, as
estimated by disarmament bodies, is around $2,000 per
mine, while the cost of demining through the United
Nations project is around $21,000 per mine. The
figures speak for themselves.

The quantity of food imported for 28 dogs
utilized in the demining programme in the North for
the period July 1999 to June 2000 was 11 tons. The
price was around $33,000. As the number of dogs was
28, the value of each dog's share was $1,143. By
extrapolating that share on an annual basis, it comes to
$1,248 per dog per year. Every three dogs have the
services of a pickup truck, a trainer and two guides,
and every five dogs have a veterinarian. Lately, we
heard, the dogs have been suffering from some sort of
inertia, so they brought bitches to them so that they
could allay their sexual desires. But the puppies are
being sold on the market in the North.

What is an individual Iraqi's share of the
humanitarian programme, calculated on the basis of the
value of goods received? The value of that share
includes not only food, but also health services and
everything else. That share is $125. So a dog's food is
10 times the share of a human Iraqi, on the basis of
goods received.

There has been talk with reference to the
Secretary-General's report that Iraq has not speedily
concluded the contracts for phase IX, and that that has
prevented the Programme from getting so many
billions of dollars. According to paragraph 15 of the
report of the Secretary-General, document S/2001/505,
not a single application under the health, water and
sanitation, and oil sectors has been received.

Before I came to this meeting, I lunched with the
Minister of Health of Iraq, who was here for the special
session of the General Assembly on HIV/AIDS. He
confirmed to me that before the end of phase IX,
perhaps before the preparation of the report - and the
Secretariat did not rectify this - he had signed
contracts in the health sector not merely for the amount
allocated to it in the memorandum of understanding or
the distribution plan, but had even gone over and above
that amount. I am sure that, if I checked with other
Iraqi authorities, they would tell me what I know for a
fact: that they have done the same thing. So that
criticism is not in order.

But if members are interested in the health of the
Iraqis - and we have heard so many noble
representatives speak here about the health of the
Iraqis, and we thank them - let us look at some facts.
The Minister of Health provided me with a table, which
I shall circulate to members of the Council as soon as
possible. The list is entitled "Status of arrived articles
for the eight phases, until 19 June 2001". It is done in
terms of percentages or ratios. The total amounts of
items received are as follows: phase I, 85.73 per cent;
phase 11, 89.21 per cent; phase 111, 81.79 per cent;
phase IV, 80.88 per cent; phase V, 79.67 per cent; phase
VI, 58.24 per cent; phase VII, 41.02 per cent; and
phase VIII, 1.09 per cent. That is the value of items for
the health sector, the status of the goods received.

I also have other charts copies of which I shall
provide members, concerning deaths due to the
embargo, whether of children or of mothers. I shall
further circulate charts on the effect of the embargo on
the nutritional status of children, on infectious diseases
and on communicable diseases.

What is the reason for this situation? It is the
policy of putting contracts on hold, and the
tendentious - or I should say the dirty -
interventions on certain occasions causing goods not to
reach Iraq. I shall provide just one example. There was
a contract for the supply to Iraq of a blood-gas
analyser. The seller is the French branch of Bayer. That
contract was put on hold for a year and a half. We
needed the analyser badly for heart operations and for
children who were suffering from diarrhoea.

Consequently, contacts were initiated with the
Secretary-General. The Office of the Iraq Programme
was approached. The Coordinator was approached.
That collective approach got the contract released from
the hold that had been put on it. Did we get it? No.
Why not? After the release of the contract, the
Committee sent a letter to the Ministry of Health and
said that the contract was thereby cancelled.

This is the worrying health situation in Iraq: a
blood gas analyser to be used for the services I have
outlined. If pressure is employed to release contracts,
some are released, while others are put on hold. If one
is released, outside pressures are applied to cancel
contracts. And so on and so forth. You get a dentist's
chair, but you do not get the other equipment needed to
use it. When you leave it in storage while waiting for
the rest, because the other contracts are not yet

released- ah! - Iraq is not carrying out the
distribution. Along comes the suggestion of an
integrated approach - batches of contracts put

together - and then other problems appear. And so
forth and so on.

Now I will discuss a recent event, one that should
be really fresh in the minds of Security Council
members. Correct me, please, ifI am wrong. There was
a meeting of informal consultations which was held a
few days ago in which Mr. Zarif and Ms. Davis of
UNMOVIC were requested to present a report to the
Council on whether some of the items that I mentioned
in the lists being discussed by the Council were the
subject matter of contracts that had been allowed in the
past by the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 661 (1990). They did not present that report.
Why? The Council has clout with States; it does not
have clout with international civil servants?

I do not want to go any further with this. But, if I
am forced to, I will name names. All members of the
Council have in their Missions the Blue Book
published by the United Nations on the situation
between Iraq and Kuwait. That book has a ISO-page
introduction. Go to paragraph 100 of that particular
document. You will see an argument very fitting to the
American and British case, regarding the false claim
that the no-fly zones are legal under Security Council
resolution 687 (1991). The way this was done was,
instead of putting in paragraph 1 of resolution 687
(1991) in full, it was chopped in half. The half that
serves Iraq is not mentioned. Such is the impartiality of
international civil servants. I have nothing against
international civil servants, by the way. But it is also
true that any international organization is a reflection
of the state of international relations at any particular
moment. When there is a balance of power in the
world, it is reflected in the work of organizations.
When the world loses the balance of power, it is
reflected in international organizations. But if we are
not prepared to recognize at least that power politics
and arrogance of power are not reflective of the
Charter as our forefathers envisaged it, and if we go on
just simply repeating like parrots, "international
legitimacy, international legitimacy, international
community, international community", we will not be
doing a disservice to the United Nations as an
Organization - we will mainly be doing a disservice
to our own respective nations, States, Governments,
backgrounds, futures and hopes.

Having said this, I cannot consider that
international civil servants are immune at all times
from pressures, from personal interest, from wanting to
live better or from just wanting to survive and keep
their jobs. So in United Nations resolutions, when so
many matters are put in the hands of international civil
servants, and when you do not have control over them,
and the main party is not even allowed to get into the
business of clarifying the situation to the Council
formally on the record, Council members will end up
committing grave acts of injustice in the name of
international legitimacy at a time when you will be far
off the mark.

I know for a fact - and I will name names if
need be 4 that a report was written by the Coordinator
and all of the directors of the specialized agencies,
offices and programmes in Iraq, signed collectively,
outlining an assessment of an in-the-field view of the
humanitarian situation in Iraq, and was sent via the
Secretariat to Ambassador Celso Amorim. We recently
learned that he did not receive that report. Yes, Mr.
Sevan. Just raise your head in disagreement. You have
no other option but to do so. I am willing to cross
swords with you in public. Incidentally, you are not the
one who embargoed that report. So do not be rash in
disagreeing.

Why do I speak with this intensity, for which I
apologize? Because it is my job to deal with this on a
daily basis. These are the facts as I see them. I am
talking about the transfer of Iraqi funds from one
account to another by the banks entrusted by the United
Nations with these tasks - and the Iraqi Central Bank
does not know a thing about these transfers? About
when the transfers were made, to whom, to which
branch, on what value date so as to calculate whether
the money has gone and where?

A supplier concludes a contract, and the contract
is approved and he ships his goods, and the goods
arrive, and he is supposed to be paid. These are the
rules of the Memorandum of Understanding. Why is
payment not made promptly? Why are there delays in
payments by the banks that go on, in certain cases, up
to thirty days? Take thirty days of funds withdrawn and
put in another account? Calculate the interest. Where
does that go? We have around us so many Garfields, it
seems, and they are getting even fatter.

So it is facile to blame Iraq. The Ambassador of
Canada even blamed my President for the non-
achievement of the humanitarian objectives of oil for
food - the oil for food which has come to be the fat
pot for so many parasites.

I hear from my United Nations colleagues that a
mission to Iraq is one of the most cherished and
sought-after assignments by United Nations Secretariat
staff. Why? Is Iraq the French Riviera? Or is it the
beautiful seashores of Jamaica? It is hot now. Is that
why?

It is the money, gentlemen. Could commissions
be taken by United Nations officers? Are they not
being used to renovate buildings? Why are there
requests for visas for carpenters and mechanics? Do we
not have them locally?

Well, the story is long. I have taken more than
two hours. I thank you very much, Mr. President, for
your patience, and I thank the members for their
patience. But I reserve my right to respond to any right
of reply that might be exercised, because I am well
equipped to go ahead even with further details,
revealing even more names, regardless of what the
impact will be.

